<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa021)  [Next](psa023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 22:0</span></span>

I. "The author of the psalm." This psalm is said to have been composed
by David: "A Psalm of David;" compare the notes at the title of [Psa
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001). It cannot be absolutely
demonstrated that these titles to the psalms are all of them correct, as
it cannot be supposed that they were affixed to them by the authors of
the psalms themselves; and it is not absolutely known by whom they were
prefixed. Of course there is no certain evidence that they were attached
to the psalms by an inspired writer. Still they are to be presumed to be
correct unless there is some clear evidence to the contrary. In this
case there seems to be none. There is nothing in the psalm itself that
is inconsistent with the supposition, and there are no historical
evidences in the case which would make it necessary for us to set the
title aside. The affixing of this title to the psalm undoubtedly implies
that it wits the prevailing opinion, at the time when the collection of
Psalms was made, that this was a psalm of David. Rosenmuller indeed
doubts this; but he assigns no historical reasons for the doubt. Hitzig
supposes that the author was Jeremiah, on the ground, as he says, that
it is "in the broad and flowing style" of Jeremiah, but this is mere
conjecture.

It is not necessary, however, to suppose that David, though he was the
author of the psalm, refers to himself. If it be admitted that he was
inspired, or even if "this" should be doubted, it would still be an open
question to whom the psalm refers - whether to himself as an individual;
- whether to an "imaginary" sufferer, designing to illustrate the
feelings of piety in a time of sorrow; whether to the people of God,
considered collectively; or whether to the Messiah. The mere fact of the
"authorship" of the psalm determines none of these questions.

It is not known, and it cannot now be determined, on what occasion the
psalm was written. It is expressive of the feelings of a pious sufferer,
- of one who appears to be forsaken by God and by man. Perhaps there may
have been occasions in the life of David to which the expressions in the
psalm may have been applicable; but if so, it is impossible now to
determine on which "one" of these trials of his life the psalm was
composed. There is no one period in which, from the historical records
of his life, we could be able to make out all the circumstances which
are mentioned in the psalm. There are, however, expressions in it which
in their intensity, as expressing wretchedness and woe, seem to go
beyond anything that occurred in his experience, and which lead
naturally to the question whether he did not refer to some other than
himself.

II\. "The contents of the psalm." Various divisions of the psalm have
been proposed, but there are no "marked" and "prominent" divisions in
the psalm itself. Hengstenberg, and after him Prof. Alexander, divide it
into three parts, or strophes,

\(1\) [Psa 22:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001);

\(2\) [Psa 22:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012);

\(3\) [Psa 22:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022).

According to this, each strophe, as Hengstenberg remarks, would consist
of ten verses - with an intermediate verse between the 10th and the 12th
[Psa 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011) connecting the first and
second parts. Prof. Alexander supposes that [Psa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021) is a connecting link also
between the second and third parts.

This division, however, seems fanciful and arbitrary; and it will
present a more simple and clear view of the psalm to regard it as
embracing two main things: I. The condition of the sufferer; and II. His
consolations or supports in his travels.

I. The condition of the sufferer. This consists of two parts:

\(1\) His sufferings as derived from God, or as they spring from God;

\(2\) as they are derived from men, or as they spring from the treatment
which he receives from men.

\(1\) As they are derived from God, [Psa
22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001).

\(a\) He is forsaken of God, [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001).

\(b\) He cries to him day and night (or continually), and receives no
answer, [Psa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002).

His prayer seems not to be heard, and he is left to suffer apparently
unpitied and alone.

\(2\) his sufferings as derived front men, as produced by the treatment
which he received from men.

Here there are "five" specifications; "five" sources of his affliction
and sorrow.

"First." He was despised, reproached, derided by them in the midst of
his other sufferings, [Psa 22:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006);
especially his piety, or confidence in God was ridiculed, for it now
seemed as if God had abandoned him.

"Second." His enemies were fierce and ravenous as strong bulls of
Bashan, or as a ravening and roaring lion, [Psa
22:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012).

"Third." His sufferings were intense, so that his whole frame was
relaxed and prostrated and crushed; he seemed to be poured out like
water, and all his bones were out of joint; his heart was melted like
wax; his strength was dried up like a potsherd; his tongue clave to his
jaws, and he was brought into the dust of death, [Psa
22:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014).

"Fourth." His enemies pierced his hands and his feet, [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016).

"Fifth." They stripped him of his raiment, and parted his garments among
themselves, [Psa 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018).

II\. His consolations or supports in his trials. These are scattered
through the psalm, and consist of the following things:

\(l\) His unshaken confidence in God as holy, [Psa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003).

\(2\) his faith in God as the hearer of prayer, and especially on the
ground that he "had" heard prayer in times past, [Psa
22:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004).

\(3\) The fact that he had been himself early devoted to God, and cast
upon him as his Protector from very childhood, and trained up for him,
[Psa 22:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009).

\(4\) The anticipated cricket or result of what he was then suffering,
or the things to be accomplished "by" his sufferings, [Psa
22:19-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019). There are mainly "two"
things implied here as to the anticipated result of his sufferings:

\(a\) The establishment of a great principle that would "encourage" the
friends of God, or those whom the sufferer calls his "brethren," [Psa
22:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022).

\(b\) The world would be converted as the result of his sufferings, and
the kingdom of God would be set up everywhere among men, [Psa
22:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027),

These views of the psalm are apparent on its time, or are such as are
suggested by the analysis without reference to the inquiry who was the
author, or to whom it refers. The analysis of the psalm, however,
necessarily leads:

III\. To the inquiry "to whom the psalm refers:"

\(1\) It refers to a sufferer, and it is designed to describe his
condition and his feelings, when apparently forsaken by God and man. At
the same time, he is a "pious" sufferer, or one who has real trust in
God, though God "appears" to have forsaken him.

\(2\) There seems to be no reason to suppose that the psalm refers to
David himself, or that he means to describe his own feelings and
condition. He was indeed a sufferer; and he often refers to his own
sufferings in the Psalms. It is true, also, that there are expressions
in this psalm which would be applicable to him, or which might refer to
his condition. But there are none which can be regarded as "exclusively"
applicable to him, and there are some which could "not" be applied to
him. Of the latter class are the expressions, "They pierced my hands and
my feet," [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016); "They part my
garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture," [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018). We know of no circumstances in
the life of David to which these expressions would be applicable; we
have no reason to suppose that there were any in which what is here said
would have been literally true of him. On the other hand, this language
cannot with propriety be regarded as "figurative," for we cannot
conceive of any circumstances which would be described by such figures
of speech. The whole east of the psalm, moreover, is different from
those in which David refers to his own sufferings.

\(3\) The psalm refers to a case not then actually before the psalmist,
but to some case that might or would occur, as an individual or as a
representative case. So far as the mere "language" of the psalm is
concerned, this might have been a case purely imaginary, and the design
might have been to describe a pious sufferer who seemed to be forsaken
both by God and man, or to illustrate the nature of true submission to
God "in" such trials. In other words, it might have been a "supposed"
case intended to show the nature of real religion under the severest
forms of suffering; and, as a poet, the author of the psalm may have
pictured to himself such an instance in order to show what the feelings
of true piety would suggest in such circumstances, or what would be the
effect of true religion then. It is true that this interpretation would
not be quite obvious and natural, for we usually find such descriptions
connected with real cases; but I am merely saying that "so far as the
language of the psalm is concerned," if we had no other way to ascertain
its meaning, this interpretation would be allowable - and if we could
not attach the psalm properly to any real person, this explanation would
be admissible. But in this case such an interpretation is unnecessary,
for there "is" a real person to whom the language is applicable, and one
to whom we may properly suppose an inspired writer would refer in the
language which is used here.

\(4\) The psalm refers, therefore, I apprehend, originally and
exclusively, to the Messiah. The proof of this is to be found in such
circumstances as the following:

\(a\) Portions of it are expressly applied to him in the New Testament.
The cry in [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), "My God, my God,
why hast thou forsaken me?" is the very one used by the Redeemer when on
the cross, [Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046). The language
[Psa 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008), "He trusted in the Lord
that he would deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in
him," is the taunt which his enemies used as they passed by the cross,
[Mat 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043). The language [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018), "They part my garments among
them, and cast lots upon my vesture," is more than once expressly
applied to him; and, in one instance, with the unequivocal statement
that it was done "that the Scripture might be fulfilled," [Joh
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024). Compare [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034).

\(b\) We have evidence derived from the early Jewish interpreters. The
modern Jews, indeed, affirm that it has no reference to the Messiah, for
they reject the idea of a suffering Messiah altogether. Some of them
suppose that it refers to David, and endeavor to find a fulfillment of
it in his persecutions and trials. Others, as Kimchi and Jarchi, suppose
that the psalm is applicable to the suffering Jewish people, and apply
it to them in their trials and dispersions, as if "they" were forsaken
of God. Some have supposed that it refers to the condition of the Jews
in Babylon. But this was not the prevailing interpretation among the
ancient Jewish interpreters. See Jo. H. Michaelis, Com. in Ps., p. 138;
and Schottgen de Messia, pp. 232ff. It is true that the opinion of the
ancient Jews does not "demonstrate" that the psalm refers to the
Messiah; but the fact that they "held" that opinion is an important
circumstance in showing what is its fair and obvious interpretation, for
there was everything to induce "them" to reject this explanation. In
general, the Jews who lived in the times referred to here were opposed
to the idea of a suffering Messiah; and the fact that they admitted the
applicability of the psalm to the Messiah must have embarrassed them not
a little in their early controversies with Christians, for the carly
Christians with one voice maintained that it referred to the Messiah,
and that it was fulfilled in Jesus of Nazareth. The correspondence
between the psalm and his sufferings was one of the arguments on which
they relied in proving that he was the Christ; and if the Jews admitted
that the psalm had reference to the Messiah, they would find it hard to
meet the force of this argument. Their admission, therefore, under these
circumstances, that it referred to the Messiah, could have arisen only
from the fair and obvious interpretation of the psalm which it was not
easy to set aside.

\(c\) The internal character of the psalm shows that it refers to the
Messiah. This will appear more conclusively in the course of the
exposition, in the entire correspondence as will be seen there between
the psalm and the sufferings of the Redeemer. It will be found that
really of the expressions in the psalm are as applicable to him as they
would be if they were "history" instead of "prophecy;" if they had been
penned "after," instead of having been penned "before" his sufferings
occurred. It is sufficient here to refer to the expressions in [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), note; [Psa
22:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007), note; [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016), note; and [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018), note.

\(d\) There is no improbability in supposing that David here refers to
the Messiah. It cannot be denied that there is, in the Old Testament,
from some cause, a frequent reference to a personage who was expected to
appear in future time, and who was called "the Messiah." And it cannot
be denied that he is often represented as a sufferer, and that his
humiliation and sufferings are often described. "Somehow," beyond all
question, the Jewish writers had formed the conception of such a
personage, and they exhaust the powers of their native tongue in their
description of his person and his work. He was, in fact, their "hero;"
he to whom they always looked, and on whom their descriptions usually
terminated, wherever they began. Compare [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), notes; and Dan. 9, notes.
Now, if it be admitted that the Jewish writers were "inspired," and that
this view of the Messiah had been furnished by the Spirit of
inspiration, nothing is more natural than to expect to find such
descriptions of the Messiah as occur in this psalm; and if it should be
said that they were "not" inspired, and that this anticipation was
wholly a poetic fiction - a matter of national vanity, - a mere favorite
"idea" of the nation - nothing would even then be more natural than that
there should be a frequent reference to this imaginary person in their
writings; and nothing would be more probable than that we should find
frequent reference to him in the writings of one who was so deeply
imbued with the national spirit, and who occupied so high a position
among the poets of the nation, as David. Inspired or uninspired, then,
there is the strongest probability that there would be in their poetic
writings such allusions to the Messiah as we have in this psalm.

An examination of the objections to the interpretation which refers the
psalm to the Messiah, may be found in Hengstenberg's Christology, vol.
i, pp. 145-147.

The title of the psalm is, "To the chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar."
On the meaning of the expression "chief Musician," see the notes at the
title to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). The expression
"Aijeleth Shahar" is rendered in the margin, "the hind of the morning."
The word "Aijeleth" - אילת 'ayĕlĕth - means a "hind," and is used as a
term of endearment toward a female, [Pro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019). It is found in [Gen
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021), "Naphtali is a "hind" let
loose." Also in [Sa2 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#034); [Job
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001); [Psa
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033); [Sol
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007); [Sol
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005); [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019); in each of which places it is
rendered in the singular "hind," and in the plural "hinds." The word
"Shahar" - שׁחר shachar - means "the aurora, the dawn, the morning."
"The phrase 'hind of the dawn' probably stands for the morning sun
scattering his first rays upon the earth, as the Arabian poets call the
rising sun "the gazelle," comparing his rays with the horns of that
animal."

Gesenius, Lexicon - The image is one of gladness, "as if" the rays of
the sun leaped and bounded over the hills with joyousness as the hart or
hind does. But why such a title is given to this psalm can be only a
matter of conjecture. It would seem most probable that these words were
the beginning of some other psalm or hymn that was sung to a set piece
of music, and that the design was, as indicated by this title, that this
psalm was to be sung to the same tune. A tune might not improbably be
known then, as it is in fact sometimes now, by the first or opening
words of the piece which was commonly sung in that measure. Thus we have
hynms so constantly sung to certain tunes that the mention of the first
line would be a sufficient suggestion of the strain of music in which it
was to be sung. It would be, for example, sufficient to say that it was
to be sung to the same tune as "From Greenland's icy mountains;" or,
"All hail the power of Jesus' name;" or, "I would not live alway." Other
views of the meaning of the phrase may be seen in Rosenmuller, "Com. in
loc." Rosenmuller himself adopts the views here expressed, and sustains
his opinion by the authority of Bochart.

[Psalms 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 22:1</span></span>

My God, my God - These are the very words uttered by the Saviour when on
the cross [Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046); and he evidently
used them as best adapted of all the words that could have been chosen
to express the extremity of his sorrow. The fact that he employed them
may be referred to as "some" evidence that the psalm was designed to
refer to him; though it must be admitted that this circumstance is no
conclusive proof of such a design, since he might have used words having
originally another reference, as best fitted to express his own
sufferings. The language is abrupt, and is uttered without any previous
intimation of what would produce or cause it. It comes from the midst of
suffering - from one enduring intense agony - as if a new form of sorrow
suddenly came upon him which he was unable to endure. That new form of
suffering was the feeling that now he was forsaken by the last friend of
the wretched - God himself. We may suppose that he had patiently borne
all the other forms of trial, but the moment the thought strikes him
that he is forsaken of God, he cries out in the bitterness of his soul,
under the pressure of anguish which is no longer to be borne. All other
forms of suffering he could bear. All others he had borne. But this
crushes him; overpowers him; is beyond all that the soul can sustain -
for the soul may bear all else but this. It is to be observed, however,
that the sufferer himself still has confidence in God. He addresses him
as his God, though he seems to have forsaken him: "My God; My God."

Why hast thou forsaken me? - Why hast thou abandoned me, or left me to
myself, to suffer unaided and alone? As applicable to the Saviour, this
refers to those dreadful moments on the cross when, forsaken by people,
he seemed also to be forsaken by God Himself. God did not interpose to
rescue him, but left him to bear those dreadful agonies alone. He bore
the burden of the world's atonement by himself. He was overwhelmed with
grief, and crushed with pain, for the sins of the world, as well as the
agonies of the cross, had come upon him. But there was evidently more
than this; "what" more we are unable fully to understand! There was a
higher sense in which he was forsaken of God, for no mere physical
sufferings, no pains of dying even on the cross, would have extorted
this cry. If he had enjoyed the light of his Father's countenance; if
these had been merely physical sufferings; if there was nothing else
than what is apparent to our view in the record of those sufferings, we
cannot suppose that this cry would have been heard even on the cross.

There is evidently some sense in which it was true that the dying
Saviour was given up to darkness - to mental trouble, to despair, "as
if" He who is the last hope of the suffering and the dying - the Father
of mercies - had withdrawn from him; as if he were personally; a sinner;
as if he were himself guilty or blameworthy on account of the sins for
which he was making an expiation. In some sense he experienced what the
sinner will himself experience when, for his own sins, he will be at
last forsaken of God, and abandoned to despair. Every word in this
wonderful exclamation may be supposed to be emphatic. "Why." What is the
cause? How is it to be accounted for? What end is to be answered by it?
"Hast thou." Thou, my Father; thou, the comforter of those in trouble;
thou, to whom the suffering and the dying may look when all else fails.
"Forsaken." Left me to suffer alone; withdrawn the light of thy
countenance - the comfort of thy presence - the joy of thy manifested
favor. "Me." Thy well-beloved Son; me. whom thou hast sent into the
world to accomplish thine own work in redeeming man; me, against whom no
sin can be charged, whose life has been perfectly pure and holy; why,
now, in the extremity of these sufferings, hast thou forsaken me, and
added to the agony of the cross the deeper agony of being abandoned by
the God whom I love, the Father who loved me before the foundation of
the world, [Joh 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024). There is a
reason why God should forsake the wicked; but why should he forsake his
own pure and holy Son in the agonies of death?

Why art thou so far from helping me? - Margin, from my salvation. So the
Hebrew. The idea is that of one who stood so far off that he could not
hear the cry, or that he could not reach out the hand to deliver.
Compare [Psa 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001).

And from the words of my roaring - The word used here properly denotes
the roaring of a lion, [Job 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010); [Isa
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#029); [Zac
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003); and then the outcry or the
groaning of a person in great pain, [Job
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#024); [Psa
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003). It refers here to a loud cry for
help or deliverance, and is descriptive of the intense suffering of the
Redeemer on the cross. Compare [Mat
27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050); [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046).

[Psalms 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 22:2</span></span>

O my God, I cry in the daytime - This, in connection with what is said
at the close of the verse, "and in the night-season," means that his cry
was incessant or constant. See the notes at [Psa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002). The whole expression denotes that
his prayer or cry was continuous, but that it was not heard. As
applicable to the Redeemer it refers not merely to the moment when he
uttered the cry as stated in [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001), but to the continuous sufferings
which he endured as if forsaken by God and men. His life in general was
of that description. The whole series of sorrows and trials through
which he passed was as if he were forsaken by God; as if he uttered a
long continuous cry, day and night, and was not heard.

But thou hearest not - Thou dost not "answer" me. It is as if my prayers
were not heard. God "hears" every cry; but the answer to a prayer is
sometimes withheld or delayed, as if he did not hear the voice of the
suppliant. Compare the notes at [Dan
10:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012). So it was with the Redeemer.
He was permitted to suffer without being rescued by divine power, as if
his prayers had not been heard. God seemed to disregard his
supplications.

And in the night-season - As explained above, this means "constantly."
It was literally true, however, that the Redeemer's most intense and
earnest prayer was uttered in the night-season, in the garden of
Gethsemane.

And am not silent - Margin, "there is no silence to me." Hebrew: "There
is not silence to me." The idea is, that he prayed or cried incessantly.
He was never silent. All this denotes intense and continuous
supplication, supplication that came from the deepest anguish of the
soul, but which was unheard and unanswered. If Christ experienced this,
who may not?

[Psalms 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 22:3</span></span>

But thou art holy - Thou art righteous and blameless. This indicates
that the sufferer had still unwavering confidence in God. Though his
prayer seemed not to be heard, and though he was not delivered, he was
not disposed to blame God. He believed that God was righteous, though he
received no answer; he doubted not that there was some sufficient reason
why he was not answered. This is applicable, not only to the Redeemer,
in whom it was most fully illustrated, but also to the people of God
everywhere. It expresses a state of mind such as all true believers in
God have - confidence in him, whatever may be their trials; confidence
in him, though the answer to their prayers may be long delayed;
confidence in him, though their prayers should seem to be unanswered.
Compare the notes at [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015).

O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel - That dwellest where
praise is celebrated; that seemest to dwell in the midst of praises. The
language here refers to the praises offered in the tabernacle or temple.
God was supposed to dwell there, and he was surrounded by those who
praised him. The sufferer looks upon him as worshipped by the multitude
of his people; and the feeling of his heart is, that though he was
himself a sufferer - a great and apparently unpitied sufferer - though
he, by his afflictions, was not permitted to unite in those lofty
praises, yet he could own that God was worthy of all those songs, and
that it was proper that they should be addressed to him.

[Psalms 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 22:4</span></span>

Our fathers trusted in thee - This is a plea of the sufferer as drawn
from the character which God had manifested in former times. The
argument is, that he had interposed in those times when his people in
trouble had called upon him; and he now pleads with God that he would
manifest himself to him in the same way. The argument derives additional
force also from the idea that he who now pleads was descended from them,
or was of the same nation and people, and that he might call them his
ancestors. As applicable to the Redeemer, the argument is that he was
descended from those holy and suffering men who had trusted in God, and
in whose behalf God had so often interposed. He identifies himself with
that people; he regards himself as one of their number; and he makes
mention of God's merciful interposition in their behalf, and of the fact
that he had not forsaken them in their troubles, as a reason why he
should now interpose in his behalf and save him. As applicable to
others, it is an argument which the people of God may always use in
their trials - that God has thus interposed in behalf of his people of
former times who trusted in him, and who called upon him. God is always
the same. We may strengthen our faith in our trials by the assurance
that he never changes; and, in pleading with him, we may urge it as an
argument that he has often interposed when the tried and the afflicted
of his people have called upon him.

They trusted, and thou didst deliver them - They confided in thee; they
called on thee; thou didst not spurn their prayer; thou didst not
forsake them.

[Psalms 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 22:5</span></span>

They cried unto thee - They offered earnest prayer and supplication.

And were delivered - From dangers and trials.

They trusted in thee, and were not confounded - They were not
disappointed. Literally, "they were not ashamed." That is, they had not
the confusion which those have who are disappointed. The idea in the
word is, that when men put their trust in anything and are disappointed,
they are conscious of a species of "shame" as if they had been foolish
in relying on that which proved to be insufficient to help them; as if
they had manifested a want of wisdom in not being more cautious, or in
supposing that they could derive help from that which has proved to be
fallacious. So in [Jer 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003), "Their
nobles have sent their little ones to the waters; they came to the pits,
and found no water; they returned with their vessels empty; "they were
ashamed and confounded," and covered their heads." That is, they felt as
if they had acted "foolishly" or "unwisely" in expecting to find water
there. Compare the notes at [Job 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#020).
In the expression here, "they trusted in thee, and were not confounded,"
it is meant that men who confide in God are never disappointed, or never
have occasion for shame as if herein they had acted foolishly. They are
never left to feel that they had put their trust where no help was to be
found; that they had confided in one who had deceived them, or that they
had reason to be ashamed of their act as an act of foolishness.

[Psalms 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 22:6</span></span>

But I am a worm, and no man - In contrast with the fathers who trusted
in thee. They prayed, and were heard; they confided in God, and were
treated as men. I am left and forsaken, as if I were not worth
regarding; as if I were a grovelling worm beneath the notice of the
great God. In other words, I am treated as if I were the most
insignificant, the most despicable, of all objects - alike unworthy the
attention of God or man. By the one my prayers are unheard; by the other
I am cast out and despised. Compare [Job
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#006). As applicable to the Redeemer,
this means that he was forsaken alike by God and men, as if he had no
claims to the treatment due to a "man."

A reproach of men - Reproached by men. Compare [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003), and the notes at that verse.

Despised of the people - That is, of the people who witnessed his
sufferings. It is not necessary to say how completely this had a
fulfillment in the sufferings of the Saviour.

[Psalms 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 22:7</span></span>

All they that see me laugh me to scorn - They deride or mock me. On the
word used here - לעג lâ‛ag - see the notes at [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004). The meaning here is to mock, to
deride, to treat with scorn. The idea of laughing is not properly in the
word, nor would that necessarily occur in the treatment here referred
to. How completely this was fulfilled in the case of the Saviour, it is
not necessary to say. Compare [Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039), "And they that passed by,
reviled him." There is no evidence that this literally occurred in the
life of David.

They shoot out the lip - Margin, "open." The Hebrew word - פטר pâṭar -
means properly "to split, to burst open;" then, as in this place, it
means to open wide the mouth; to stretch the mouth in derision and
scorn. See [Psa 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#021), "They opened
their mouth wide against me." [Job
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#010), "they have gaped upon me with
their mouth."

They shake the head - In contempt and derision. See [Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039), "Wagging their heads."

[Psalms 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 22:8</span></span>

He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him - Margin, "He rolled
himself on the Lord." The margin expresses the true sense of the Hebrew
word. The idea is that of being under the pressure of a heavy burden,
and of rolling it off, or casting it on another. Hence, the word is
often used in the sense of committing to another; entrusting anything to
another; confiding in another. [Psa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005), "commit thy way unto the Lord;"
Margin, as in Hebrew: "Roll thy way upon the Lord." [Pro
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003), "commit thy works unto the
Lord," Margin, as in Hebrew: "Roll." The language here is the taunting
language of his enemies, and the meaning is that he had professed to
commit himself to the Lord as if he were his friend; he had expressed
confidence in God, and he believed that his cause was sate in His hand.
This, too, was actually fulfilled in the ease of the Saviour. [Mat
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043), "he trusted in God; let him
deliver him now, if he will have him." It is one of the most remarkable
instances of blindness and infatuation that has ever occurred in the
world, that the Jews should have used this language in taunting the
dying Redeemer, without even suspecting that they were fulfilling the
prophecies, and demonstrating at the very time when they were reviling
him that he was the true Messiah.

Let him deliver him - Let him come and save him. Since he professes to
belong to God; since he claims that God loves him and regards him as his
friend, let him come now and rescue one so dear to him. He is hopelessly
abandoned by men. If God chooses to have one so abject, so despised, so
forsaken, so helpless, let him come now and take him as his own. We will
not rescue him; we will do nothing to save him, for we do not need him.
If God wants him, let him come and save him. What blasphemy! What an
exhibition of the dreadful depravity of the human heart was manifested
in the crucifixion of the Redeemer!

Seeing he delighted in him - Margin, "if he delight in him." The correct
rendering is," for he delighted in him." That is, it was claimed by the
sufferer that God delighted in him. If this is so, say they, let him
come and rescue one so dear to himself. Let him show his friendship for
this vagrant, this impostor, this despised and worthless man

[Psalms 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 22:9</span></span>

But thou art he that took me out of the womb - I owe my life to thee.
This is urged by the sufferer as a reason why God should now interpose
and protect him. God had brought him into the world, guarding him in the
perils of the earliest moments of his being, and he now pleads that in
the day of trouble God will interpose and save him. There is nothing
improper in applying this to the Messiah. He was a man, with all the
innocent propensities and feelings of a man; and no one can say but that
when on the cross - and perhaps with special fitness we may say when he
saw his mother standing near him [Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025) - these thoughts may have passed
through his mind. In the remembrance of the care bestowed on his early
years, he may now have looked with an eye of earnest pleading to God,
that, if it were possible, he might deliver him.

Thou didst make me hope - Margin, "Keptest me in safety." The phrase in
the Hebrew means, Thou didst cause me to trust or to hope. It may mean
here either that he was made to cherish a hope of the divine favor "in
very early life," as it were when an infant at the breast; or it may
mean that he had cause then to hope, or to trust in God. The former, it
seems to me, is probably the meaning; and the idea is, that frown his
earliest years he had been lea to trust in God; and he now pleads this
fact as a reason why he should interpose to save him. Applied to the
Redeemer as a man, it means that in his earliest childhood he had
trusted in God. His first breathings were those of piety. His first
aspirations were for the divine favor. His first love was the love of
God. This he now calls to remembrance; this he now urges as a reason why
God should not with. draw the light of his countenance, and leave him to
suffer alone. No one can prove that these thoughts did not pass through
the mind of the Redeemer when he was enduring the agonies of desertion
on the cross; no one can show that they would have been improper.

Upon my mother's breast - In my earliest infancy. This does not mean
that he literally cherished hope then, but that he had done it in the
earliest period of his life, as the first act of his conscious being.

[Psalms 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 22:10</span></span>

I was cast upon thee from the womb - Upon thy protection and care. This,
too, is an argument for the divine interposition. He had been, as it
were, thrown early in life upon the protecting care of God. In some
special sense he had been more unprotected and defenseless than is
common at that period of life, and he owed his preservation then
entirely to God. This, too, may have passed through the mind of the
Redeemer on the cross. In those sad and desolate moments he may have
recalled the scenes of his early life - the events which had occurred in
regard to him in his early years; the poverty of his mother, the manger,
the persecution by Herod, the flight into Egypt, the return, the safety
which he then enjoyed from persecution in a distant part of the land of
Palestine, in the obscure and unknown village of Nazareth. This too may
have occurred to his mind as a reason why God should interpose and
deliver him from the dreadful darkness which had come over him now.

Thou art my God from my mother's belly - Thou hast been my God from my
very childhood. He had loved God as such; be had obeyed him as such; he
had trusted him as such; and he now pleads this as a reason why God
should interpose for him.

[Psalms 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 22:11</span></span>

Be not far from me - Do not withdraw from me; do not leave or forsake
me.

For trouble is near - Near, in the sense that deep sorrow has come upon
me; near, in the sense that I am approaching a dreadful death.

For there is none to help - Margin, as in Hebrew, "not a helper." There
were those who would have helped, but they could not; there were those
who could have helped, but they would not. His friends that stood around
the cross were unable to aid him; his foes were unwilling to do it; and
he was left to suffer unhelped.

[Psalms 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 22:12</span></span>

Many bulls have compassed me - Men with the fierceness and fury of
bulls. Compare [Isa 51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020); [Psa
68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030).

Strong bulls of Bashan - The country of Bashan embraced the territory
which was on the east of the Jordan, north of Gilead, which was given to
the half tribe of Manasseh: compare [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005) with [Jos
12:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#004). It was distinguished as
pasture land for its richness. Its trees and its breed of cattle are
frequently referred to in the Scriptures. Thus in [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014), "rams of the breed of Bashan"
are mentioned; in [Isa 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013), [Zac
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002), "oaks of Bashan" are mentioned
in connection with the cedars of Lebanon; in [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001), "the kine of Bashan" are
mentioned. The bulls of Bashan are here alluded to as remarkable for
their size, their strength, and their fierceness; and are designed to
represent men that were fierce, savage, and violent. As applied to the
Redeemer, the allusion is to the fierce and cruel men that persecuted
him and sought his life. No one can doubt that the allusion is
applicable to his persecutors and murderers; and no one can show that
the thought indicated by this phrase also may not have passed through
the mind of the Redeemer when on the cross.

[Psalms 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 22:13</span></span>

They gaped upon me with their mouths - Margin, as in Hebrew, "opened
their mouths against me." That is, they opened their mouths wide as if
they would devour me, as a lion does when he seizes upon his prey. In
[Psa 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007) they are represented as
"opening" the mouth for another purpose - that of derision or scorn;
here they are described as if they were fierce and wild beasts ready to
fall upon their prey.

As a ravening and roaring lion - The word "ravening" means "voraciously
devouring," and the allusion in the Hebrew word is to the lion as he
tears his prey - טרף ṭâraph - rending it in pieces to devour it. All
this is designed to denote the greediness with which the enemies of the
Redeemer sought his life.

[Psalms 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 22:14</span></span>

I am poured out like water - The sufferer now turns from his enemies,
and describes the effect of all these outward persecutions and trials on
himself. The meaning in this expression is, that all his strength was
gone. It is remarkable that we have a similar expression, which is not
easily accounted for, when we say of ourselves that "we are as weak as
water." An expression similar to this occurs in [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005) : "The hearts of the people
melted, and became as water." Compare [Lam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019); [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007). "My bones are out of joint."
Margin, "sundered." The Hebrew word - פרד pârad - means "to break off,
to break in pieces, to separate by breaking;" and then, to be separated,
or divided. It is not necessary to suppose here that his bones were
literally dislocated or "put out of joint," anymore than it is necessary
to suppose that he was literally "poured out like water," or that his
heart was literally "melted like wax" within him. The meaning is that he
was utterly prostrated and powerless; he was as if his bones had been
dislocated, and he was unable to use his limbs.

My heart is like wax - The idea here also is that of debility. His
strength seemed all to be gone. His heart was no longer firm; his vigour
was exhausted.

It is melted in the midst of my bowels - Or, within me. The word bowels
in the Scriptures is not restricted in its signification as it is with
us. It embraces the upper parts of the viscera as well as the lower, and
consequently would include that part in which the heart is situated. See
the notes at [Isa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011). The meaning
here is that his heart was no longer firm and strong. As applied to the
Redeemer, this would refer to the prostration of his strength in his
last struggle; and no one can prove that these thoughts did not pass
through his mind when on the cross.

[Psalms 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 22:15</span></span>

My strength is dried up like a potsherd, - A "potsherd" is a fragment of
a broken pot, or a piece of earthenware. See [Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009), note; and [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008), note. The meaning here is, that
his strength was not vigorous like a green tree that was growing, and
that was full of sap, but it was like a brittle piece of earthenware, so
dry and fragile that it could be easily crumbled to pieces.

And my tongue cleaveth to my jaws - See the notes at [Job
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#010). The meaning here is, that his
mouth was dry, and he could not speak. His tongue adhered to the roof of
his mouth so that he could not use it - another description of the
effects of intense thirst. Compare [Joh
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028).

And thou hast brought me into the dust of death - Or, as we should say,
"to dust" - "to the grave" - to the dust where death reigns. See the
notes at [Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002). The meaning is,
that he was near death; or, was just ready to die. Who can show that the
Redeemer when on the cross may not in his own meditations have gone over
these very expressions in the psalm as applicable to himself?

[Psalms 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 22:16</span></span>

For dogs have compassed me - Men who resemble dogs; harsh, snarling,
fierce, ferocious. See [Phi 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002), note;
and [Rev 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015), note. No one can doubt
that this is applicable to the Redeemer.

The assembly of the wicked have enclosed me - That is, they have
surrounded me; they have come around me on all sides so that I might not
escape. So they surrounded the Redeemer in the garden of Gethsemane when
they arrested him and bound him; so they surrounded him when on his
trial before the Sanhedrin and before Pilate; and so they surrounded him
on the cross.

They pierced my hands and my feet - This passage is attended with more
difficulty than perhaps any other part of the psalm. It is remarkable
that it is nowhere quoted or referred to in the New Testament as
applicable to the Saviour; and it is no less remarkable that there is no
express statement in the actual history of the crucifixion that either
the hands or the feet of the Saviour were pierced, or that he was nailed
to the cross at all. This was not necessarily implied in the idea of
crucifixion, for the hands and the feet were sometimes merely bound to
the cross by cords, and the sufferer was allowed to linger on the cross
thus suspended until he died from mere exhaustion. There can be no
doubt, however, that the common mode of crucifixion was to nail the
hands to the transverse beam of the cross, and the feet to the upright
part of it. See the description of the crucifixion in the notes at [Mat
27:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#031). Thus, Tertullian, speaking
of the sufferings of Christ, and applying this passage to his death,
says that "this was the special or proper - "propria" - severity of the
cross." Adv. Marcionem, iii. 19, ed. Wurtz, I. p. 403. See
Hengstenberg's Christology, 1,139. The great difficulty in this passage
is in the word rendered in our version, "they pierced" - כארי kâ'ăriy.
It occurs only in one other place, [Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013), where it means as a lion. This
would undoubtedly be the most natural interpretation of the word here,
unless there were good reasons for setting it aside; and not a few have
endeavored to show that this is the true rendering. According to this
interpretation, the passage would mean, "As lions, they (that is, my
enemies) surround (gape upon) my hands and my feet; that is, they
threaten to tear my limbs to pieces." Gesenius, Lexicon. This
interpretation is also that of Aben Ezra, Ewald, Paulus, and others.
But, whatever may be the true explanation, there are very serious
objections to this one.

\(a\) It is difficult to make sense of the passage if this is adopted.
The preceding word, rendered in our version "enclosed," can mean only
"surrounded" or "encompassed," and it is difficult to see how it could
be said that a lion could "surround" or "encompass" "the hands and the
feet." At all events, such an interpretation would be harsh and unusual.

\(b\) According to this interpretation the word "me" - "enclosed me" -
would be superfluous; since the idea would be, "they enclose or surround
my hands and my feet."

\(c\) All the ancient interpreters have taken the word here to be a
verb, and in all the ancient versions it is rendered as if it were a
verb.

Even in the Masorah Parva it is said that the word here is to be taken
in a different sense from what it has in [Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013), where it plainly means a lion.
Gesenius admits that all the ancient interpreters have taken this as a
verb, and says that it is "certainly possible" that it may be so. He
says that it may be regarded as a participle formed in the Aramaic
manner (from כוּר kûr), and in the plural number for כארים kâ'ăriym, and
says that in this way it would be properly rendered, "piercing, my hands
and my feet;" that is, as he says, "my enemies, who are understood in
the dogs." From such high authority, and from the uniform mode of
interpreting the word among the ancients, it may be regarded as morally
certain that the word is a verb, and that it is not to be rendered, as
in [Isa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013), "as a lion." The
material question is, What does the verb mean? The verb - כוּר kûr -
properly means "to dig, to bore through, to pierce."

Thus used, according to Gesenius, it would mean "piercing;" and if the
word used here is a verb, he supposes that it would refer to the enemies
of David as wounding him, or piercing him, "with darts and weapons." He
maintains that it is applicable to David literally, and he sees no
reason to refer it to the Messiah. But, if so, it is natural to ask why
"the hands" and "the feet" are mentioned. Certainly it is not usual for
darts and spears thrown by an enemy to injure the hands or the feet
particularly; nor is it customary to refer to the hands or the feet when
describing the effects produced by the use of those weapons. If the
reference were to the enemies of David as wounding him with darts and
spears, it would be much more natural to refer to the body in general,
without specifying any of the particular members of the body. DeWette
renders it "fesseln" - "they bind my hands and my feet."

He remarks, however, in a note, that according to the ancient versions,
and the codices of Kennicott and DeRossi, it means durchbohren - bore
through. Aquila, Symmachus, and Jerome in five codices, says he, render
it bind. The Septuagint renders it ὥρυξαν ōruxan - "they pierced." The
Latin Vulgate the same, "foderunt." See the Syriac. For these reasons it
seems to me that the common rendering is the true one, and that the
meaning is, that, in some proper sense, the enemies here referred to
"pierced or bored through" the hands and the feet of the sufferer.
Evidently this could not be literally applied to David, for there is not
the least authority for supposing that this ever happened to him; nor,
as has been shown, was such a thing probable. A casual dart, or the
stroke of a spear, might indeed strike the hand or the foot; but it
would be unusual and remarkable if they should strike those members of
the body and leave the other parts uninjured, so as to make this a
matter for special notice; and even if they did strike those parts, it
would be every way unlikely that they would "pierce them, or bore them
through."

Such an event would be so improbable that we may assume that it did not
occur, unless there was the most decisive evidence of the fact. Nor is
there the least probability that the enemies of David would pierce his
hands and feet deliberately and of design. I say nothing in regard to
the fact that they never had him in their possession so that they could
do it; it is sufficient to say that this was not a mode of punishing one
who was taken captive in war. Conquerors killed their captives; they
made them pass under yokes; they put them under saws and harrows of iron
(compare [Sa2 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031); [Ch1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003)); but there is not the slightest
evidence that they ever tortured captives in war by piercing the hands
and the feet. But, as has been remarked above, there is every reason to
believe that this was the ordinary mode of crucifixion. I conclude,
therefore, that this must have had original reference to the Messiah. It
is no objection to the interpretation that this passage is not expressly
referred to as having been fulfilled in the Redeemer, for there are
undoubtedly many passages in the prophets which refer to the Messiah,
which are not formally applied to him in the New Testament. To make it
certain that the prophecy referred to him, and was fulfilled in him, it
is not necessary that we should find on record an actual application of
the passage to him. All that is necessary in the case is, that it should
be a prophecy; that it should have been spoken before the event; and
that to him it should be fairly applicable.

[Psalms 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 22:17</span></span>

I may tell all my bones - That is, I may count them. They are so
prominent, so bare, that I can see them and count their number. The idea
here is that of emaciation from continued suffering or from some other
cause. As applied to the Redeemer, it would denote the effect of long
protracted suffering and anxiety on his frame, as rendering it crushed,
weakened, emaciated. Compare the notes at [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014); [Isa
53:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002). No one can prove that an
effect such as is here referred to may not have been produced by the
sufferings of the Redeemer.

They look and stare upon me - That is, either my bones - or, my enemies
that stand around me. The most obvious construction would refer it to
the former - to his bones - as if they stood out prominently and stared
him in the face. Rosenmuller understands it in the latter sense, as
meaning that his enemies gazed with wonder on such an object. Perhaps
this, on the whole, furnishes the best interpretation, as there is
something unnatural in speaking of a man's own bones staring or gazing
upon him, and as the image of his enemies standing and looking with
wonder on one so wretched, so crushed, so broken, is a very striking
one. This, too, will better agree with the statement in [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014), "Many were astonished at thee;"
and [Isa 53:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002), "He hath no form nor
comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him;" "we hid, as it were, our faces from him; he was despised,
and we esteemed him not." It accords also better with the statement in
the following verse; "they," that is, the same persons referred to,
"part my garments amoung them."

[Psalms 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 22:18</span></span>

They part my garments among them - They divide; they apportion. This
refers merely to the fact that they made such a division or distribution
of his garments; the manner in which it was done, is specified in the
other part of the verse. The word "garments" is a general term, and
would be applicable to any part of the raiment.

And cast lots upon my vesture - That is, upon the part here represented
by the word "vesture," "they cast lots." There was a general division of
his garments by agreement, or in some other mode not involving the use
of the lot; on some particular portion, here indicated by the word
vesture, the lot was cast to determine whose it should be. The word thus
rendered vesture - לבושׁ lebûsh - does not necessarily denote any
particular article of raiment, as distinguished from what is meant by
the word rendered "garments." Both are general terms denoting clothing,
raiment, vestment; and either of the terms might be applied to any
article of apparel. The original words used here would not necessarily
designate one article of raiment as disposed of without the lot and
another specified portion by the lot. But although it could not be
argued beforehand from the mere use of the language that such would be
the case, yet if that should occur, it would be natural and not improper
to apply the language in that sense, and as therein completely
fulfilled.

As a matter of fact this was literally fulfilled in the crucifixion of
the Saviour. By remarkable circumstances which no human sagacity could
have foreseen or anticipated, there occurred a general division of a
portion of his raiment, without an appeal to the lot, among the soldiers
who were engaged in crucifying him, and a specific disposal of one
article of his raiment by the lot, [Mat
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035); [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034); [Joh
19:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023). It never occurred in the
life of David, as far as we know, or have reason to believe, that his
enemies stripped him, and divided his garments among themselves; and the
description here, therefore, could be applicable only to some one else.
It was completely fulfilled in the Saviour; and this verse, therefore,
furnishes the fullest proof that the psalm refers to him. At the same
time it should be observed that these circumstances are such that an
impostor could not have secured the correspondence of the events with
the prediction. The events referred to were not under the control of him
whose garments were thus divided. They depended wholly on others; and by
no art or plan could an impostor have so arranged matters that all these
things should have appeared to be fulfilled in himself.

[Psalms 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 22:19</span></span>

But be not thou far from me, O Lord - "O Yahweh." Others - all others -
have forsaken me, and left me to perish. Now, in the day of my desertion
and my peril, be thou near to me. See [Psa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#011). This is the burden of the
prayer in the whole psalm, that God would not leave him, but sustain and
deliver him. Compare [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001).

O my strength - Source of my strength; thou on whom I rely for support
and deliverance.

Haste thee to help me - Help me speedily. Come to support me; come to
deliver me from these dreadful sorrows. This is not necessarily a prayer
to be rescued from death, but it would be applicable to deliverance from
those deep mental sorrows that had come upon him - from this abandonment
to unutterable woes.

[Psalms 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 22:20</span></span>

Deliver my soul from the sword - The word soul here means life, and
denotes a living person. It is equivalent to "deliver me." "The sword"
is used to denote an instrument of death, or anything that pierces like
a sword. Compare [Sa2 11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#024). As
applied to the Saviour here, it may mean those extreme mental sufferings
that were like the piercing of a sword.

My darling - Margin, "my only one." Prof. Alexander, "my lonely one."
DeWette, my life. The Hebrew word - יחיד yâchı̂yd - means "one alone,
only," as of an only child; then one alone, as forsaken, solitary,
wretched, [Psa 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016); [Psa
68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006); then it means one only, the only
one, in the sense of "most dear, darling." Here, according to Gesenius
(Lexicon), it is used poetically for life, as being something most dear,
or as denoting all that we have, and, therefore, most precious. Compare
[Job 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#004). This is the most probable
interpretation here, as it would thus correspond with the expression in
the first part of the verse, "deliver my soul."

From the power of the dog - Margin, as in Hebrew, from the hand. The
enemy is represented, as in [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016), as a "dog" (see the notes on
that verse); and then that enemy is spoken of as inflicting death by his
hand. There is a little incongruity in speaking of a "dog" as having
hands, but the image before the mind is that of the enemy with the
character of a dog, and thus there is no impropriety in using in
reference to him the language which is commonly applied to a man.

[Psalms 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 22:21</span></span>

Save me from the lion's mouth - His enemies represented as fierce and
ravening lions, compare [Psa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013),

For thou hast heard me - The word "heard" in this place is equivalent to
"saved" - or saved in answer to prayer. The fact of "hearing" the
prayer, and answering it, is regarded as so identical, or the one as so
certainly following from the other, that they may be spoken of as the
same thing.

From the horns of the unicorns - The idea here is, that he cried to God
when exposed to what is here called "the horns of the unicorns." That
is, when surrounded by enemies as fierce and violent as wild beasts - as
if he were among "unicorns" seeking his life - he had called upon God,
and God had heard him. This would refer to some former period of his
life, when surrounded by dangers, or exposed to the attacks of wicked
men, and when he had called upon God, and had been heard. There were not
a few occasions alike in the life of David and in the life of the
Saviour, to which this would be applicable. The fact that he had thus
been delivered from danger, is now urged as an argument why God was to
be regarded as able to deliver him again, and why the prayer might be
offered that he would do it; compare [Psa
22:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009). To see the force of this it
is not necessary to be able to determine with accuracy what is meant
here by the word rendered unicorn, or whether the psalmist referred to
the animal now denoted by that term. The existence of such an animal was
long regarded as fabulous; but though it has been proved that there is
such an animal, it is not necessary to suppose that the psalmist
referred to it. Gesenius renders the word - ראם re'êm - "buffalo"
(Lexicon) So also DeWette. See the notes at [Job
39:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009), where the meaning of the word
is fully considered. The word occurs elsewhere only in [Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022); [Num
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#008); [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006); [Psa
92:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010); [Isa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007), in all which places it is
rendered "unicorn," or "unicorns."

[Psalms 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 22:22</span></span>

I will declare thy name - I will make thee known; that is, thine
existence; thy perfections; thy law; thy method of salvation. As the
result or effect of the interposition which he desired, and for which he
prayed, he says that he would diffuse a knowledge of God. This is an
expression of true piety, and is a statement of what in a pure mind will
always be consequent on a gracious divine interposition - a purpose to
make the character of the benefactor known. Compare [Psa
51:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012); [Psa
18:48-49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#048). As applicable to the
Redeemer, it means that he would make the name of God known to people,
or that "through him" that name would be made known.

Unto my brethren - Compare [Joh 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017);
[Rom 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029). The word "brethren" would
embrace literally brothers; kinsfolk; countrymen; then, those of the
same opinion, profession, or religion; then, in a still larger sense,
the human race as descended from a common parent. As having reference to
the Redeemer, it would embrace here not only those who were his
immediate followers and whom he called brethren - not only those of his
own nation, - but the human family in general, toward whom he consented
to sustain this relation. Compare the notes at [Heb
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010), where this passage is quoted
and expressly applied to our Saviour.

In the midst of the congregation - Among the people assembled to worship
there. See the notes at [Heb 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#012).
This is the place where praise is commonly celebrated, and he says that
there he would make known the goodness of God. Compare [Isa
38:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019). It is not necessary to show
that this was literally done by the Redeemer. It is enough to observe
that this is the usual language of piety, and that the effect of his
work has been to cause the praises of God to be celebrated in tens of
thousands of the congregations of his saints.

[Psalms 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 22:23</span></span>

Ye that fear the Lord - A phrase denoting those who are pious.

Praise him - This is language which may be supposed to be addressed by
the speaker in the great congregation. In the previous verse he had said
that he would praise God "in the midst of the congregation;" he here
speaks as if he were in that congregation, and addressing them. He,
therefore, calls on them to praise and honor God.

All ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him - The descendants of Jacob; that
is, all who are true worshippers of God.

And fear him - Honour him, worship him. See the notes at [Psa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007).

All ye the seed of Israel - Another name for Jacob [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028), and designed to denote also all
who are true worshippers of Yahweh.

[Psalms 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 22:24</span></span>

For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted -
This expresses the belief that his prayer had been heard. The fact that
he had been thus heard is here assigned to be the ground or reason for
the exhortation in the previous verse, addressed to all the pious. The
Lord had heard his prayer, and this was a reason why others should also
confide in the Lord, and feel assured that he would likewise hear their
prayers.

Neither hath he hid his face from him - That is, "permanently,
constantly, finally, completely." He has not wholly abandoned me, but
though he seemed to forsake me, it was for a time only; and his
friendship has not been ultimately and forever withdrawn. It was indeed
the foundation of all the petitions in this psalm that the Lord had hid
his face from the sufferer [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001);
but, from this verse, it seems that it was only for a time. That which
he passed through was a temporary darkness, succeeded by the clear
manifestations of the divine favor. The Lord heard his prayer; the Lord
showed that he had not utterly forsaken him.

But when he cried unto him, he heard - Showing that now he had the
evidence and the assurance that his prayer had been heard. As applicable
to the Redeemer on the cross, this means that though the darkness seemed
to continue until death, yet it was not an utter forsaking. His prayer
was heard; his work was accepted; the great object for which he came
into the world would be accomplished; he himself would rise triumphantly
from his sufferings; and the cause which he came to establish, and for
which he died, would finally prevail in the world. Compare [Heb
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007); [Joh
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042); [Isa
53:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011).

[Psalms 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 22:25</span></span>

My praise shall be of thee - That is, I will praise thee. I will call to
remembrance thy goodness, and will unite with others in celebrating thy
faithfulness and lovingkindness.

In the great congregation - See the notes at [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027).

I will pay my vows before them that fear him - In the presence of his
worshippers. That is, he would keep the vows which in his afflictions he
had made, that he would praise and serve God. These vows or promises
were of the nature of a "debt" which he says he would remember to pay.
Of the Redeemer, this need not be understood personally, but it means
that as the result of his prayer having been heard, the worship of God
would be celebrated by those who feared him. The solemn worship of the
people of God - the praises which they offer to the Most High - may be
regarded as worship paid by the Redeemer himself, for he does it in the
persons and services of those whom he redeemed. All the praises which
proceed from their hearts and lips are the fruit of his "vows," of his
fidelity, and his prayers.

[Psalms 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 22:26</span></span>

The meek shall eat and be satisfied - The word "meek" - ענוים ‛ănâviym -
means here rather "afflicted, distressed, miserable." This is its usual
meaning. It is employed sometimes in the sense of mild or meek (compare
[Num 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#003)); but it here manifestly
denotes the afflicted; the poor; the distressed. When it is said that
they would "eat and be satisfied," the idea is that of prosperity or
abundance; and the statement is, that, as the result of the Redeemer's
work, blessings in abundance would be imparted to the poor and the
distressed - those who had been destitute, forsaken, and friendless.

They shall praise the Lord that seek him - Those that worship God, or
the pious, shall see abundant cause to praise God. They will not merely
call upon him by earnest prayer, but they will render him thanks for his
mercies.

Your heart shall live for ever - The hearts of those that worship God.
Their hearts would not faint or be discouraged. They would exult and
rejoice continually. In other words, their joy and their praise would
never die away.

[Psalms 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 22:27</span></span>

All the ends of the world - All parts of the earth; all nations. The
earth is frequently represented in the Scriptures as having limits or
boundaries; as spread out; as having corners, etc. Compare [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026); [Jer
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023); [Jer
49:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#032); [Rev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001). This language is in accordance
with the prevailing modes of thinking, in the same way as we say, "the
sun rises;" "the sun sets," etc.

Shall remember - The nations are often represented as "forgetting" God;
that is, they act as if they had once known him, and had then forgotten
him. See [Job 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013); [Psa
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017); [Psa
50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022); [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021). Here it is said that they would
again call God to remembrance; that is, they would worship him as the
true God.

And turn unto the Lord - Turn away from their idols to worship the
living God.

And all the kindreds of the nations - All the families. The numerous
families upon the earth that constitute the one great family of mankind.

Shall worship before thee - Shall worship in thy presence; that is,
shall worship thee. The language is derived from the act of worshipping
God in the tabernacle or the temple, before the visible symbol of his
presence there. As applicable to the Redeemer, this language is in
accordance with what is uniformly said of him and his work, that the
world would be converted to the living and true God. Compare the notes
at [Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008).

[Psalms 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 22:28</span></span>

For the kingdom is the Lord's - The dominion belongs of right to Yahweh,
the true God. See [Mat 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013); [Psa
47:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#007).

And he is the governor among the nations - He is the rightful governor
or ruler among the nations. This is an assertion of the absolute right
of Yahweh to reign over the nations of the earth, and the expression of
an assurance on the part of the Messiah that, as the consequence of his
work, this empire of Yahweh over the nations would be actually
established. Compare [Dan 7:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013),
note; [Dan 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027), note; and [Co1
15:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024), notes.

[Psalms 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 22:29</span></span>

All they that be fat upon the earth - The general meaning of this verse
is, that "all classes of persons" will come and worship the true God;
not the poor and needy only, the afflicted, and the oppressed, but the
rich and the prosperous. There are three classes mentioned as
representing all:

\(1\) the rich and prosperous;

\(2\) they who bow down to the dust, or the crushed and the oppressed;

\(3\) those who are approaching the grave, and have no power to keep
themselves alive.

The first class comprises those who are mentioned here as being fat.
This image is often used to denote prosperity: [Jdg
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029); [Job
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027); [Psa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010); [Psa
73:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004) (Hebrew); [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020); [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015). The meaning is, that the rich,
the great, the prosperous would be among the multitudes who would be
converted to the living God.

Shall eat and worship - This expression is derived from the custom of
offering sacrifices, and of feasting upon portions of the animal that
was slain. In accordance with this, the blessings of salvation are often
represented as a "feast" to which all are invited. See the notes at [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006). Compare [Luk
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016).

All they that go down to the dust - All those descending to the dust.
Those who are bowed down to the dust; who are crushed, broken, and
oppressed; the poor, the sad, the sorrowful. Salvation is for them, as
well as for the rich and the great.

Shall bow before him - Shall worship before the true God.

And none can keep alive his own soul - Or rather, and he who cannot keep
his soul (that is, himself) alive. So the Hebrew properly means, and
this accords better with the connection. The class here represented is
composed of those who are ready to perish, who are about to die - the
aged - the infirm - the sick - the dying. These, thus helpless, feeble,
and sad, shall also become interested in the great plan of salvation,
and shall turn unto the Lord. These classes would represent all the
dwellers on the earth; and the affirmation is equivalent to a statement
that men of all classes would be converted, and would partake of the
blessings of salvation.

[Psalms 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 22:30</span></span>

A seed shall serve him - A people; a race. The word used here, and
rendered "seed" - זרע zera‛ - means properly "a sowing;" then, a
planting, a plantation; then. seed sown - of plants, trees, or grain;
and then, a generation of men - children, offspring, posterity: [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); [Gen
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#016); [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005), [Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013); et al. Hence, it means a race,
stock, or family. It is used here as denoting those who belong to the
family of God; his children. Compare [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013); [Isa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009), [Isa
65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023). The meaning here is, that, as
the result of the work performed by the sufferer, many would be brought
to serve God.

It - To wit, the seed mentioned; the people referred to.

Shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation - The word here rendered
"Lord" is not יהוה Yahweh, but אדני 'Âdônay, a word which is often used
as a name of God - and should not be printed here in small capitals.
Prof. Alexander renders this, it seems to me improperly, "It shall be
related of the Lord to the next generation." So DeWette and
Hengstenberg. But the common rendering appears to me to furnish a better
signification, and to be more in accordance with the meaning of the
original. According to this the idea is, that the seed - the people
referred to - would be reckoned to the Lord as a generation of his own
people, a race, a tribe, a family pertaining to him. They would be
regarded as such by him; they would be so estimated by mankind. They
would not be a generation of aliens and strangers, but a generation of
his people and friends. Compare [Psa
87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006).

[Psalms 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 22:31</span></span>

They shall come - That is, there were those who would thus come. Who
these would be is not specified. The obvious sense is, that some would
rise up to do this; that the succession of such men would be kept up
from age to age, making known these great facts and truths to succeeding
generations. The language would be applicable to a class of men called,
from age to age, to proclaim these truths, and set apart to this work.
It is a fair application of the verse to refer it to those who have been
actually designated for such an office - the ministers of religion
appointed to keep up the memory of the great work of redemption in the
world. Thus understood, the passage is a proper carrying out of the
great truths stated in the psalm - that, in virtue of the sufferings of
the Redeemer, God would be made known to men; that his worship would be
kept up in the earth; that distant generations would serve him.

And shall declare his righteousness - No language could better describe
the actual office of the ministers of the Gospel as appointed to set
forth the "righteousness" of God, to vindicate his government and laws,
and to state the way in which men may be made righteous, or may be
justified. Compare [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026).

Unto a people that shall be born - To future generations.

That he hath done this - That God has done or accomplished what is
stated in this psalm; that is, on the supposition that it refers to the
Messiah, that he has caused an atonement to be made for mankind, or that
redemption has been provided through the sufferings of the Messiah.

I have given what seems to me to be a fair exposition of this psalm,
referring it wholly to the Messiah. No part of the interpretation, on
this view of the psalm, seems to me to be forced or unnatural, and as
thus interpreted it seems to me to have as fair and obvious an
applicability to him as even [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), or any other portion of the
prophecies. The scene in the psalm is the cross, the Redeemer suffering
for the sins of man. The main features of the psalm relate to the course
of thoughts which then passed through the mind of the Redeemer; his
sorrow at the idea of being abandoned by God; his confidence in God; the
remembrance of his early hopes; his emotions at the taunts and revilings
of his enemies; his consciousness of prostrated strength; his feelings
as the soldiers pierced his hands and his feet, and as they proceeded to
divide his raiment; his prayer that his enemies might not be suffered to
accomplish their design, or to defeat the work of redemption; his
purpose to make God known to men; his assurance that the effect of his
sufferings would be to bring the dwellers on the earth to serve God, and
to make his name and his righteousness known to far distant times. I
regard the whole psalm, therefore, as applicable to the Messiah alone;
and believing it to be inspired, I cannot but feel that we have here a
most interesting and affecting account, given long before it occurred,
of what actually passed through the mind of the Redeemer when on the
cross - an account more full than we have anywhere else in the Bible.
Other statements pertain more particularly to the external events of the
crucifixion; here we have a record in anticipation of what actually
passed through his own mind in those hours of unspeakable anguish when
he made an atonement for the sins of the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 23](psa023)

</div>
