<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa098)  [Next](psa100) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 99](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 99:0</span></span>

This psalm is closely linked in its general character and design with
those which have gone before Ps. 95-98, and with the one following [Psa
100:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001) - forming a connected group or
series. The general subject is the kingship of Yahweh, or the
foundations of praise derived from the fact that he reigns, or is king.
As the foundation of praise on this account, reference is made in this
group of psalms to his attributes; to what he has done in the works of
creation; to what he has done for his people; and to the certainty that
he will come ultimately to rule over all the earth, and to exercise just
judgment among people.

This psalm consists of the following parts:

I. A statement of the fact that Yahweh reigns, and that this should make
a deep impression on the world; that the people should tremble; that the
earth should be moved, [Psa 99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001).

II\. Reasons for this, or reasons why he should be reverenced and adored
by mankind, [Psa 99:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#002). These reasons
are two:

\(1\) The first is derived from the fact that he is a holy and a
righteous God, and is therefore worthy of universal adoration, [Psa
99:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#002).

\(2\) The second is derived from what he has done for his people: for
his merciful interposition in times of trouble, when Moses, and Aaron,
and Samuel called upon his name; and from the fact that he answered his
people when they cried unto him; and from the manner in which it was
done, [Psa 99:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006). He had shown
himself ready to hear their protection in the cloudy pillar, he had
answered their supplications, and had forgiven them. He had not swept
them wholly away, or cut them off, but had spared them, and had shown
mercy to them.

[Psalms 99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 99:1</span></span>

The Lord reigneth - The Lord, Yahweh, is king. See [Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001).

Let the people tremble - The Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate render
this, "Let the people rage" - or, be angry: as if the idea were that God
reigned, although the people were enraged, and were opposed to him. The
true meaning of the word used here, however, is "tremble," properly
signifying to be moved, disturbed, disquieted, thrown into commotion;
and then it may mean to be moved with anger, [Pro
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#009); [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021); or with grief, [Sa2
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033) : or with fear, [Psa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004); or with joy, [Jer
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#009). Hence, it means to be agitated
or moved with fear or reverence; and it refers here to the reverence or
awe which one has in the conscious presence of God.

He sitteth between the cherubims - See the notes at [Psa
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001).

Let the earth be moved - Margin, "stagger." The word means to move or
quake. It occurs nowhere else. Compare the notes at [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007). See also [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006), [Hab
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010).

[Psalms 99:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 99:2</span></span>

The Lord is great in Zion - Compare [Psa
95:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#003). The meaning here is, not that
God is "absolutely" great - which is indeed true - but that there is a
sense in which he has shown himself great "in Zion;" that is, in his
manifestations toward his own people. He has evinced power in their
behalf; he has interposed for them in times of danger; he has so
discomfited their enemies as to show that he is a great God - a God
worthy to be adored.

And he is high above all the people - Above all the nations. He has them
under his control. He rules over all. The God who rules in Zion also
rules all the nations of the earth; and his people, therefore, have
special occasion to praise him.

[Psalms 99:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 99:3</span></span>

Let them praise thy great and terrible name - The word rendered
"terrible" means "to be feared or reverenced;" that is, his name - his
being - he himself - is suited to inspire awe and reverence. The word
"them" here refers to the nations over whom God reigns. It is a call on
them to praise their king and their God.

For it is holy - See the notes at [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003); notes at [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008). The fact that God "is" holy -
that he is pure and righteous - that he cannot look upon sin but with
abhorrence - is a just foundation for universal praise. Who could
worship or honor a God who was not pure and holy?

[Psalms 99:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 99:4</span></span>

The king's strength - The word king here undoubtedly refers to God as a
king, [Psa 99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001). The word rendered
"strength," means power, force; and the reference here is to what
constitutes the main strength or power of his character and government.
It is rendered in the Septuagint, τιμή timē - "honor." So in the Latin
Vulgate - "honor." DeWette renders it, "The praise of the king who loves
judgment." So Rosenmuller, "Let them praise the strength - the power -
of the king who loves judgment." But perhaps our common version best
expresses the sense, that whatever there is in the character of the
"king," that is God, which constitutes strength, or gives power to his
administration, is favorable to justice, or will be exerted in the cause
of right. God's essential character; all the acts of his power; all the
demonstrations of his authority, will be in favor of justice, and may be
relied on as sustaining the righteous cause. It is not the "mere"
exertion of power - it is power that is always exercised in favor of
right; and this lays the foundation of praise. We could not praise a
being of "mere" power, or one who was merely "almighty," without respect
to his moral character. It is only when the character is such that power
will be exerted in favor of that which is right and just that it becomes
the proper subject of praise.

Loveth judgment - Is always on the side of justice and right. He so
loves justice that his power will be put forth only in behalf of that
which is right. God shows this by his law, and by all the acts of his
administration.

Thou dost establish equity - That which is equal and just; alike by thy
law, and by thine interpositions. All that thou doest, and all that thou
dost appoint, is in favor of that which is equal and just.

Thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob - That which is just;
that which ought to be done. Thou doest this among thy people; thou
doest it in their relation to the surrounding nations. All the acts of
thy administration tend to the establishment of that which is right.

[Psalms 99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 99:5</span></span>

Exalt ye the Lord our God - See the notes at [Psa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001). The meaning is, Let his name be,
as it were, lifted up on high, so as to be conspicuous or seen from
afar. Let it be done with a lofty voice; let it be with ascriptions of
praise.

And worship at his footstool - By humble prostration at his feet. The
footstool is that on which the feet rest when one is sitting, and the
reference here is to the footstool on which the feet of a king rested
when he sat on his throne or chair of state. To worship at his footstool
- compare [Ch1 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002); [Psa
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007) - denotes the deepest humility
and the profoundest prostration and reverence. It is as if we could not
look on his face, or on his throne, or on his gorgeous and magnificent
robes, but bowed our heads in lowly reverence, and deemed it sufficient
honor to lie low before that on which his feet rested. To show the
dignity and majesty of God, the earth itself is represented as being
merely his footstool; as being, in comparison with the heaven - the
place of his seat - his "throne," only as the footstool is as compared
with the splendid chair of state. [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001); [Mat
5:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034).

For he is holy - See [Psa 99:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#003).
Margin, "it is holy." The translation in the text best expresses the
sense. The fact that God is "holy" is a reason for lowly and profound
prostration before him.

[Psalms 99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 99:6</span></span>

Moses and Aaron among his priests - Among the ministers of religion; or,
as officiating in the service of God. Let them come as representatives
of their order - as representing those who conduct the public worship of
God, and join in his praise. The idea is, that all mankind should join
in his praise, and those mentioned here as among the most eminent of
those who were engaged in directing the public worship of God. Moses
could be called a "priest" only in the most general sense of the term,
as having been employed in directing and arranging for public worship,
and as being of the original tribe of Levi, from whom the whole
sacerdotal order sprang.

And Samuel among them that call upon his name - Among those who are true
worshippers, in distinction from the priests who were specially
appointed to the public service of God. The idea is, that praise should
be offered by "all" classes: by priests and by people. As Moses and
Aaron were among the most eminent of the former class, so Samuel was
among the most distinguished of those who were not of the priestly
order. These were "representative men;" and the meaning is, that all who
were of their order or rank - priests and people - should unite in the
worship of God.

They called upon the Lord - They did call upon the Lord; they worshipped
Yahweh. They gave the influence of their names and of their position to
his public service. They thus showed their sense of the propriety of
praising God; they gave the countenance of their example to public
worship and praise; and the benefits which they received in answer to
prayer showed the propriety and advantage of thus publicly acknowledging
God.

And he answered them - They did not call upon him in vain. He heard
their prayers. He bestowed blessings on them in connection with their
worship. It was not a useless thing to praise and worship him. The
worship of God is thus commended to us not merely from the propriety of
the act itself, but from its advantages. It is unnecessary to refer to
particular instances in the history of these people when their prayers
were answered. Their lives were full of such instances - as the lives of
all who truly call upon God are now. If a man who prays could "see" all
that comes to him every day in answer to prayer - all the things
bestowed which he had "desired" in prayer, and which would not have been
conferred on him if he had not prayed, there would no longer be any
doubt on the question whether God answers prayer.

[Psalms 99:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 99:7</span></span>

He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar - He spake to the men of other
times; to those who called upon his name. It cannot be meant literally
that he spake to "Samuel" from the "cloudy pillar" - the pillar which
guided the Israelites in the wilderness, unless that term be understood
in the general sense as denoting the "Shechinah" - the visible symbol of
the divine presence - the cloud that rested on the ark. The idea is,
that God his people in ancient times from the cloud - the symbol of his
presence; that he communed with them; that he heard their prayers; that
he gave them his commandments; that he interposed in their behalf, and
that it was not a vain thing that they worshipped him. All this was as
true of Samuel - it is as true now of those who call upon God - as it
was of Moses and Aaron.

They kept his testimonies ... - They obeyed his laws, and he thus heard
and answered them.

[Psalms 99:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 99:8</span></span>

Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God - The reference here is to God as
"our" God; that is, the language used by those who now worship him is
designed to give encouragement in approaching his throne. The God that
"we" worship is the same that "they" worshipped; and as he answered
them, we may feel assured that he will answer us.

Thou wast a God that forgavest them - They were not perfect; they were
sinners; they often offended thee, and yet thou didst answer them, and
show them mercy.

Though thou tookest vengeance - Though thou didst manifest thy
displeasure at their misconduct; though thou in thy judgments didst show
that thou wast displeased with them; nevertheless thou didst answer
them. Sinners as they were, and often as thou didst show thy displeasure
at their conduct, yet thou didst hear their prayers and bless them.

Of their inventions - The Hebrew word denotes work, deed, doing,
conduct. It means here what they did - their sins. There is no allusion
to any special art or "cunning" in what they did - as if they had
"invented" or found out some new form of sin.

[Psalms 99:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 99:9</span></span>

Exalt the Lord our God - See the notes at [Psa
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005).

And worship at his holy hill - In [Psa
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005), this is, "at his footstool." The
"holy hill" refers to Zion, as the seat of the national worship.

For the Lord our God is holy - See [Psa
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005). This appropriately closes the
psalm, by a distinct and solemn statement that the fact that Yahweh is a
holy God is a reason for worshipping him. This is at all times the
highest reason for adoration and praise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 100](psa100)

</div>
