<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa059)  [Next](psa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 60:0</span></span>

In the title, this psalm is ascribed to David. The occasion on which it
is said to have been composed was after he had been engaged in wars in
the East - in Aramea - and when he was meditating the completion of his
conquests in the subjugation of Idumea. The time of its composition,
according to the title, was that referred to in 2 Sam. 8, compare 1 Chr.
18. The occasion will be best understood by an explanation of the title.

On the phrase "To the chief Musician," see the notes at the introduction
to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).

The phrase "upon Shushan-eduth" means properly "Lily of Testimony." The
word שׁושׁן shôshân means properly lily. See the notes at the title to
Ps. 45, where, as in the titles to Ps. 69; 80, the plural form of the
word occurs. This is the only instance in which it is found in the
singular number, when in the title to a psalm. The word עדות ‛êdûth
means properly testimony; law; precept; revelation. It is applied to the
law of God, as a testimony which God bears to the truth, [Psa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007); [Kg2
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012); and especially to the ark,
called "the ark of the testimony," as containing the law or the divine
testimony to the truth. [Exo 25:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021)
(compare [Exo 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#034)); [Exo
26:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#033); [Exo
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006), [Exo
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#026); [Exo
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#007). The word occurs frequently, and
is uniformly translated testimony. [Exo
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021); [Exo
30:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#036); [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018), et saepe. See the notes at [Psa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007). The lily of the law would
properly express the meaning of the phrase here, and it may have been
the name of a musical instrument having a resemblance to a lily -
open-mouthed like the lily; perhaps some form of the trumpet.

Why the term earth - testimony or law - was connected with this, it is
not easy to determine. Gesenius (Lexicon) supposes that the word means
revelation, and that the term was used in these inscriptions because the
authors of the psalms wrote by revelation. But if this was the reason,
it would not explain why the title was prefixed to these psalms rather
than others, since all were composed by revelation. Prof. Alexander,
somewhat fancifully, supposes that the name lily is used in this title
to denote beauty; that the reference is to the beauty of the law, and
that the psalm is designed to celebrate that beauty. But it is
sufficient to say in reply to this that there is no particular mention
of the law in this psalm, and no special commemoration of its beauty. If
the title had been prefixed to [Psa
19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001), or to Ps. 119, there would
then have been some foundation for the remark. On the whole, it seems
impossible to determine the reason of the use of the term here. It would
seem most probable that the allusion is to a musical instrument, or to
some classes of musical instruments to which the term had been
originally applied with reference to the use of those instruments in the
services connected with the "ark of the testimony," or the celebration
of the law of God; but on what occasion such instruments were first
used, or why the term was applied, we cannot hope now to understand.

On the word Michtan, see the notes at the Introduction to [Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001). It indicates nothing here in
regard to the character of the psalm to which it is prefixed. It may be
merely one form of denoting that it was a composition of David.

The word rendered "to teach," means here that the psalm was adapted to
impart instruction, and in this sense it is not unlike the word Maschil
(Title to [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)), as being a
psalm suited to impart valuable information on the subject referred to,
or perhaps to be learned and treasured up in the memory. It is not
possible for us, however, to understand why the language was applied to
this psalm rather than to others.

The psalm is said to have been composed when David "strove with
Aramnaharaim and with Aram-zobah, when Joab returned and smote in the
valley of salt twelve thousand." The allusion is to the transactions
referred to in 2 Sam. 8 and 1 Chr. 18. In those chapters we learn that
David made extensive conquests in the East, extending his victories over
Moab, Syria, and Hamath, and subduing the country as far as the
Euphrates. It is to these victories that the psalm refers, see [Psa
60:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007). The words rendered Aram-nahaim
mean properly Aram (or Aramea) of the two rivers, and the reference is
to Syria or Mesopotamia. The compound word occurs elsewhere in the
following places, in all of which it is rendered Mesopotamia, [Gen
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#010); [Deu
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004); [Jdg
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008); [Ch1
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#006). The word Aram is of frequent
occurrence, and properly refers to Syria. The name comprehended more
than Syria proper, and the term Aram-naharaim, or Aram of the two
rivers, was used to designate that part of the general country of Aramea
which was between the Tigris and the Euphrates. The compound term
Aram-zobah refers also to a part of Aramea or Syria. This kingdom was in
the neighborhood of Damascus, and perhaps comprehended Hamath, and
probably extended as far as the Euphrates. The king of this country is
represented as making war with Saul [Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), and with David [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003); [Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006). In [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), David is represented as having
smitten "Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to
recover his border at the river Euphrates." It is to these wars, and to
this conquest, that the title of the psalm alludes.

The language in the title "when Joab returned," would seem to imply that
these conquests were achieved not by David in person, but by Joab - a
circumstance not at all improbable, as he was the leader of the armies
of David; [Sa2 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023), "Now Joab was
over all the host of Israel." David had thus subdued Syria, and Moab,
and the children of Ammon, and the Philistines, and the Amalekites, and
Hadadezer, king of Zobah, and had dedicated to the Lord the silver and
the gold which he had taken in these conquests [Sa2
8:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011); but it would seem probable
that Edom or Idumea stilt held out, or that at the time of composing the
psalm that country had not been subdued. But the subjugation of that
land was necessary to complete the conquests of David, and to make his
kingdom safe. It was at this time probably, in the interval between [Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012) and [Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014), that the psalm was composed, or
in view of the strong desire of David to subdue Edom; see [Psa
60:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008), "Over Edom will I cast out my
shoe,"..."Who will lead me into Edom?" It would seem that there were
some special difficulties in the conquest of that country; or that there
had been some partial discomfiture in attempting it [Psa
60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), and David was now fearful that
he had in some way incurred the divine displeasure after all his
conquests, and that Edom - a place so strong and so important - was
likely to remain unsubdued. And yet the conquest was made, for it is
said in the title "that Joab smote of Edom in the valley of salt twelve
thousand." Compare [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013).

The phrase "the Valley of Salt" is explained by the fact that not a few
valleys are found in Arabia and Syria, which are at certain periods - in
the wet seasons - stagnant pools; but which, when they are dried up,
leave an incrustation of salt, or a saline deposit on the sand.
Travelers make mention of such pools, from which they obtain their
supplies of salt. Van Hamelsveld, Bib. Geog., i. p. 402. What valley is
here referred to is not certain. It would seem most probable that it was
the valley in which the Dead Sea is situated, as being eminently the
valley of salt, or the valley in which such deposits abounded. Dr.
Robinson (Researches in Palestine, vol. ii. p. 483), supposes that this
"valley of salt" is situated at the southern end of the Dead Sea - the
Ghor south of the Dead Sea; and adjacent to the Mountain of Salt - "the
whole body of the mountain being a solid mass of rock-salt" p. 482. This
valley separates the ancient territories of Judah and Edom, and would,
therefore, be the place where the battle would naturally be fought.

This victory is said in the title of the psalm to have been achieved by
Joab; in [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013), it is attributed
to David; in the parallel place in [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012), it is said to have been
achieved by Abishai - in the margin, Abshai. There is no discrepancy
between the account in 2 Samuel, where the victory is ascribed to David,
and that in the title to the psalm where it is ascribed to Joab, for
though the battle may have been fought by Joab, yet it was really one of
the victories of David, as Joab acted under him and by his orders - as
we speak of the conquests of Napoleon, attributing to him the conquests
which were secured by the armies under his command. There is greater
difficulty in reconciling the account in 1 Chronicles with the title to
the psalm, where one ascribes the victory to Joab, and the other to
Aibishai. Some have supposed that either in the title to the psalm or in
1 Chronicles there has been an error in transcribing. But such an error
could hardly have occurred. The most probable opinion seems to be that
the victory was achieved by the joint action of the forces under Joab
and his brother Abishai, and that with propriety it may be spoken of as
the victory of either of them. We know that on one occasion Joab thus
divided his forces, retaining the command of a portion of the army to
himself, and assigning the other portion to his brother Abishai [Sa2
10:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#009), and it is possible that there
may have been such a division of the army here, and that the victory may
have been so connected with the skill and valor of Abishai that it might
without impropriety be spoken of as his victory, while there was no
impropriety also in ascribing it to Joab, as entrusted with the general
command, or to David who had planned and directed the expedition.

There is, also, a discrepancy in the numbers mentioned as slain, in the
title to the psalm, and in the account in Samuel and Chronicles. In [Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013), and in [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012), the number is "eighteen
thousand;" in the title to the psalm, it is "twelve thousand." Why the
statement varies, it is impossible to determine with certainty. We
cannot suppose that the author of the psalm was ignorant of the usual
estimate of the number, and we have no evidence that there is an error
in the transcription. The probability is, that there may have been, as
is often the case, in the account of battles, two estimates. The common
and more moderate estimate may have been that the number was twelve
thousand - and this was adopted by the author of the psalm. The more
accurate and well-ascertained estimate may have been that which was
placed in the regular history, in the Books of Samuel and the
Chronicles. If the actual number was in fact as great as eighteen
thousand, then there is no contradiction - for the greater number
includes the less. If eighteen thousand were actually slain, there was
no falsehood in the assertion, according to the first estimate, that
twelve thousand had fallen in the battle, for that statement was in fact
true, though a subsequent and more accurate "return" from the army made
the number larger. Both statements were true. In saying that three men
were drowned in a flood, or lost at sea in a storm, I do not falsify a
declaration which may be made subsequently that not only three perished
but six or more.

There is no reference, in the accounts in Samuel and the Chronicles, to
the partial discomfiture referred to in the psalm [Psa
60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001); and the impression from those
historical narratives would probably be that the armies of David had
been uniformly successful. Yet it is possible that some things may have
been omitted in the rapid survey of the conquests of David in Samuel and
the Chronicles. The design of the authors of those books may have been
to give a general summary of the wars or series of wars by which David
obtained a final victory over his enemies, and brought into subjection
all that he regarded as properly his territory, or all that had been
included in the general promise to Abraham and his posterity, without
noticing the reverses or disasters that may have occurred in securing
those triumphs. Perhaps the most probable supposition in the case is,
that during the absence of the armies in the east the Edomites had taken
occasion to invade the land of Palestine from the south, and that in
endeavoring to repel them, there had been some defeats and losses in the
comparatively small forces which David was then able to employ. He now
summoned his armies on their return, and made a vigorous and decided
effort to expel the Edomites from the land, to carry the warfare into
their own country, and to add their territory to that which he had
already brought under subjection. In this he was entirely successful.
[Sa2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014); [Ch1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#013).

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. A statement of the disaster which had occurred, as if God had cast
his people off, and as if, after all, they might be given up into the
hands of their enemies, [Psa 60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001).

II\. A statement of the object for which God now summoned his people to
war - that of carrying forth the banner of truth, or of bringing nations
into subjection to the true religion, [Psa
60:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004).

III\. A reference to the conquests already made, or to the dominion
which David had set up over Shechem, Succoth, Gilead, Manasseh, Ephraim,
Judah, Moab, and Philistia, [Psa
60:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006).

IV\. The expression of a strong desire to complete the series of
conquests by subduing Edom or Idumea, [Psa
60:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008). That alone remained. That
offered formidable resistance to the armies of David. The conquest of
that seemed difficult, if not hopeless, and the psalmist, therefore,
asks with deep solicitude who would aid him in this war; who would bring
him successfully into the strong city - the strong fortifications of
Edom, [Psa 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009).

V. An appeal to God to do it; to that God who had cast them off; to him
who had left their armies to go forth alone. David now calls on him to
return to those forces, and to render aid - expressing the confident
assurance that he would thus return, and that the victory would be
secured, [Psa 60:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010).

[Psalms 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 60:1</span></span>

O God, thou hast cast us off - The word used here means properly to be
foul, rancid, offensive; and then, to treat anything as if it were foul
or rancid; to repel, to spurn, to cast away. See the notes at [Psa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002). It is strong language, meaning
that God had seemed to treat them as if they were loathsome or offensive
to him. The allusion, according to the view taken in the introduction to
the psalm, is to some defeat or disaster which had occurred after the
conquests in the East, or during the absence of the armies of David in
the East 2 Sam. 8; 1 Chr. 18; probably to the fact that the Edomites had
taken occasion to invade the southern part of Palestine, and that the
forces employed to expel them had been unsuccessful.

Thou hast scattered us - Margin, broken. So the Hebrew. The word is
applied to the forces of war which are broken and scattered by defeat,
[Sa2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020).

Thou hast been displeased - The word used here means "to breathe"; to
breathe hard; and then, to be angry. See the notes at [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012). God had treated them as if he
was displeased or angry. He had suffered them to be defeated.

O turn thyself to us again - Return to our armies, and give us success.
This might be rendered, "Thou wilt turn to us;" that is, thou wilt favor
us - expressing a confident belief that God would do this, as in [Psa
60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012). It is more in accordance,
however, with the usual structure of the Psalms to regard this as a
prayer. Many of the psalms begin with a prayer, and end with the
expression of a confident assurance that the prayer has been, or would
certainly be heard.

[Psalms 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 60:2</span></span>

Thou hast made the earth to tremble - This refers, doubtless, to some
calamity that might be compared with an earthquake - some disaster,
discomfiture, or defeat that had shaken their hopes, as a city is shaken
by an earthquake. Such comparisons are common in the Scriptures.

Thou hast broken it - As if it were broken up, or convulsed.

Heal the breaches thereof - That is, Appear for thy people, and repair
their disasters, as if after an earthquake thou shouldst appear and fill
up the rents which it had made. The prayer is that he would place things
in their former condition of prosperity and success.

For it shaketh - It is convulsed or agitated. That is, there is still
commotion. Things are unsettled and disturbed. The prayer is, that there
might be stability or continued success.

[Psalms 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 60:3</span></span>

Thou hast showed thy people hard things - Thou hast caused them to see
reverses, disappointments, and trials. This refers, according to the
supposition in the Introduction to the psalm, to some calamitous events
which had occurred. The probability seems to be that the Edomites may
have spread desolation over the land.

Thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment - The word rendered
"astonishment" - תרעלה tar‛êlâh - occurs only here and in [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), [Isa
51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022) - in both of which verses in
Isaiah it is rendered trembling. It means properly reeling, drunkenness;
and the idea here is, that it was as if he had given them a cup - that
is, an intoxicating drink - which had caused them to reel as a drunken
man; or, in other words, their efforts had been unsuccessful. Compare
[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006), note; [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), note.

[Psalms 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 60:4</span></span>

Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee - The word rendered
"banner" - נס nês - means properly anything elevated or lifted up, and
hence, a standard, a flag, a sign, or a signal. It may refer to a
standard reared on lofty mountains or high places during an invasion of
a country, to point out to the people a place of rendezvous or a
rallying place [Isa 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026); [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012); [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003); or it may refer to a standard or
ensign borne by an army; or it may refer to the flag of a ship, [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007); [Isa
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#023). Here it doubtless refers to the
flag, the banner, the standard of an army; and the idea is that God had
committed such a standard to his people that they might go forth as
soldiers in his cause. They were enlisted in his service, and were
fighting his battles.

That it may be displayed because of the truth - In the cause of truth;
or, in the defense of justice and right. It was not to be displayed for
vain parade or ostentation; it was not to be unfolded in an unrighteous
or unjust cause; it was not to be waved for the mere purpose of carrying
desolation, or of securing victory; it was that a righteous cause might
be vindicated, and that the honor of God might be promoted. This was the
reason which the psalmist now urges why (God should interpose and repair
their disasters - that it was his cause, and that they were appointed to
maintain and defend it. What was true then of the people of God, is true
of the church now. God has given to his church a banner or a standard
that it may wage a war of justice, righteousness, and truth; that it may
be employed in resisting and overcoming his enemies; that it may carry
the weapons of truth and right against all injustice, falsehood, error,
oppression, and wrong; that it may ever be found on the side of humanity
and benevolence - of virtue, temperance, liberty, and equality; and that
it may bear the great principles of the true religion to every territory
of the enemy, until the whole world shall be subdued to God.

[Psalms 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 60:5</span></span>

That thy beloved may be delivered - The word beloved is in the plural
number, and might be rendered beloved ones. It refers not merely to
David as his servant and friend, but to those associated with him. The
reference is to the calamities and dangers then existing, to which
allusion has been made above. The prayer is, that the enemy might be
driven back, and the land delivered from their invasion.

Save with thy right hand - The right hand is that by which the sword is
handled, the spear hurled, the arrow drawn on the bow. The prayer is,
that God would put forth his power and deliver his people.

And hear me - literally, Answer me. The answer which he desired was that
God would lead his armies successfully into Edom, [Psa
60:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008).

[Psalms 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 60:6</span></span>

God hath spoken in his holiness - That is, as a holy God; a God who is
true; a God whose promises are always fulfilled. The idea is, that the
holiness of God was the public pledge or assurance that what he had
promised he would certainly perform. God had made promises in regard to
the land of Canaan or Palestine, as a country to be put into the
possession of Abraham and his posterity. [Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007); [Gen
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015); [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008); [Psa
105:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#008). The original promise of the
gift of that land, made to Abraham under the general name of Canaan [Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007), embraced the whole territory
from the river (that divided the land from Egypt) to the Euphrates:
"Unto thy seed, addressed to Abraham, have I given this land, from the
river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates," [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018). This would embrace the country
of Edom, as well as the other countries which are specified in the
psalm. The natural and proper boundary of the land on the east,
therefore, according to the promise, was the river Euphrates; on the
west, Egypt and the Mediterranean sea; on the south, the outer limit of
Edom. It was the object of David to carry out what was implied in this
promise, and to secure the possession of all that had been thus granted
to the Hebrews as the descendants of Abraham. Hence, he had been engaged
in carrying his conquests to the east, with a view to make the Euphrates
the eastern border or boundary of the land: "David smote also Hadarezer,
the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the
river Euphrates," [Sa2 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003). Compare
[Ch1 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#003). In the prosecution of the
same purpose he was anxious also to subdue Edom, that the entire
territory thus promised to Abraham might be put in possession of the
Hebrews, and that he might transmit the kingdom in the fullness of the
original grant to his posterity. It is to this promise made to Abraham
that he doubtless refers in the passage before us.

I will rejoice - I, David, will exult or rejoice in the prospect of
success. I will find my happiness, or my confidence in what I now
undertake, in the promise which God has made. The meaning is, that since
God had made this promise, he would certainly triumph.

I will divide Shechem - That is, I will divide up the whole land
according to the promise. The language here is taken from that which was
employed when the country of Canaan was conquered by Joshua, and when it
was divided among the tribes: "Be strong and of a good courage: for unto
this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land which I sware
unto their fathers to give them," [Jos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006). Compare [Jos
13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006); [Jos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#005); [Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010); [Jos
19:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#051); [Jos
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#004); [Psa
78:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#055); [Act
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#019). David here applies the same
language to Shechem, "and the valley of Succoth," as portions of the
land, meaning that he would accomplish the original purpose in regard to
the land by placing it in possession of the people of God. Shechem or
Sichem was a city within the limits of the tribe of Ephraim, between
Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim, called by the Romans Neapolis, and now
Nablus. It is about two hours, or eight miles, south of Samaria. It
seems to be mentioned here as being the spot where the law of Moses was
read to the people of Israel, and especially the blessings and curses
recorded in Deut. 27; Deut. 28, which Moses commanded to be read to the
different tribes on the above-named mountains, [Deu
27:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011). This was actually done, [Jos
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033). Shechem, therefore, as lying
between these mountains, and as being the place where the great mass of
the people were assembled to hear what was read, became a central place,
a representative spot of the whole land, and to say that that was
conquered or subdued, was to speak of that which implied a victory over
the land. David speaks of having secured this, as significant of the
fact that the central point of influence and power had been brought
under subjection, and as in fact implying that the land was subdued. The
importance of that place, and the allusion to it here, will justify a
more extended reference to it, which I copy from "The Land and the
Book," by Dr. Thomson, vol. ii. p. 203, 204.

"Nablus is a queer old place. The streets are narrow, and vaulted over;
and in the winter time it is difficult to pass along many of them on
account of brooks which rush over the pavement with deafening roar. In
this respect, I know no city with which to compare it except Brusa; and,
like that city, it has mulberry, orange, pomegranate, and other trees,
mingled in with the houses, whose odoriferous flowers lead the air with
delicious perfume during the months of April and May. Here the billbul
delights to sit and sing, and thousands of other birds unite to swell
the chorus. The inhabitants maintain that theirs is the most musical
vale in Palestine, and my experience does not enable me to contradict
them.

"Imagine that the lofty range of mountains running north and south was
cleft open to its base by some tremendous convulsion of nature, at right
angles to its own line of extension, and the broad fissure thus made is
the vale of Nablus, as it appears to one coming up the plain of Mukhna
from Jerusalem. Mount Ebal is on the north, Gerizim on the south, and
the city between. Near the eastern end, the vale is not more than sixty
rods wide; and just there, I suppose, the tribes assembled to hear the
'blessings and the curses' read by the Levites. We have them in extenso
in Deut. 27 and Deut. 28; and in Josh. 8 we are informed that it was
actually done, and how. Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and
Joseph, and Benjamin, stood on Gerizim; and Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulon,
Dan, and Naphtali, on Ebal; while all Israel, and their elders, and
officers, and their judges, stood on this side of the ark and on that
side before the priests which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord;
the whole nation of Israel, with the women and little ones, were there.
And Joshua read all the words of the law, the blessings and the
cursings; there was not a word of all that Moses commanded which Joshua
read not before all the congregation of Israel. This was, beyond
question or comparison, the most august assembly the sun has ever shone
upon; and I never stand in the narrow plain, with Ebal and Gerizim
rising on either hand to the sky, without involuntarily recalling and
reproducing the scene. I have shouted to hear the echo, and then fancied
how it must have been when the loud-voiced Levites proclaimed from the
naked cliffs of Ebal, 'Cursed be the man that maketh any graven image,
an abomination unto Jehovah.' And then the tremendous amen! tenfold
louder, from the mighty congregation, rising, and swelling, and
re-echoing from Ebal to Gerizim, and from Gerizim to Ebal. amen! even so
let him be accursed. No, there never was an assembly to compare with
this."

And mete out the valley of Succoth - Measure out; that is, measure or
survey for the purpose of "dividing" it, or assigning it to the
conquerors, to the people of God, according to the promise. There is the
same allusion here, as in the former clause, to the dividing of the land
in the time of Joshua. Succoth, in the division of the land by Joshua,
fell to the tribe of Gad; [Jos 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027).
It was on the east side of the river Jordan, and is now called Sakut. It
is first mentioned in [Gen 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017), in
the account of the journey which Jacob took on returning from the East
to the land of Canaan. At this place he paused in his journey, and made
booths for his cattle; and hence, the name Succoth, or booths. Why this
place is referred to here by David, as representing his conquests,
cannot now be ascertained. It seems most probable that it was because it
was a place east of the Jordan, as Shechem was west of the Jordan, and
that the two might, therefore, represent the conquest of the whole
country. Succoth, too, though not more prominent than many other places,
and though in itself of no special importance, was well known as among
the places mentioned in history. It is possible, also, though no such
fact is mentioned, that there may have been some transaction of special
importance there in connection with David's conquests in the East, which
was well understood at the time, and which justified this special
reference to it.

[Psalms 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 60:7</span></span>

Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine - That is, My dominion or authority
is extended over these regions - Gilead, Manasseh, Ephraim, and Judah.
The idea here is substantially the same as in the former verse, that his
dominion extended over the country on both sides of the Jordan; or that
in the direction of east and west it embraced all that had been promised
- "from the great sea to the river Euphrates." In verse 6, this idea is
expressed by selecting two spots or towns as representatives of the
whole country - Shechem on the west, and Succoth on the east; in this
verse, the same idea is expressed by a reference to the two regions so
situated - Gilead and Manasseh on the east, and Ephraim and Judah on the
west. Gilead was on the east of the river Jordan, properly embracing the
mountainous region south of the river Jabbok, Gen. 31:21-48; [Sol
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001). The word has sometimes, however,
a wider signification, including the whole mountainous tract between the
rivers Arnon and Bashan, and thus including the region occupied by the
tribes of Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh, [Num
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#026), [Num
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029), [Num
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039). Hence, in this place, it is put
for the region occupied by the tribes of Reuben and Gad. "Manasseh"
refers to the district or region occupied by the half tribe of Manasseh,
on the east of the Jordan. These two portions - Gilead and Manasseh -
or, Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh - would, therefore, embrace the whole of
the land of promise, north and south, on the east of the Jordan. The
limits of these regions to the east were properly the banks of the
Euphrates; that is, the original promise would embrace this. David had
gone to carry the boundaries of his country to those assigned limits
[Sa2 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), and he now says that he had
completed that undertaking.

Ephraim also - Ephraim and Judah were the principal tribes on the west
of the Jordan, and they would well represent that part of Canaan. The
idea is, that the whole of the promised land, east and west, was now
under his control. There needed only the territory of Edom, on the
south, to complete the conquest, and place the whole of the promised
land under his dominion, [Psa 60:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008).

Is the strength of my head - This means that Ephraim constituted his
chief strength, or was that on which he mainly relied. It was that which
protected him, as the helmet does the head; that on which his very life
in battle depended. This honor is given to the tribe of Ephraim because
it was one of the largest tribes, and because it was situated in the
very center of the land.

Judah is my lawgiver - This means that the tribe of Judah, by its
position, its numbers, and the prominence given to it in the prophecies
[Gen 49:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008), actually gave law to the
nation. Its influence was felt in all the institutions of the land. The
controlling influence went out from that tribe in the time of David; and
its authority in this respect was recognized, perhaps partly in
anticipation of what it had been said would be its importance in future
times: "The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
between his feet until Shiloh come." [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010).

[Psalms 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 60:8</span></span>

Moab is my washpot - Moab was a region of country on the east of the
Dead Sea, extending as far north as the river Arnon. See the notes at
[Isa 15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001). The words rendered
wash-pot mean properly a pot or basin for washing, a wash-basin; and the
expression is used here as one of contempt, as if he would use it as the
meanest vessel is used. It implies that Moab was already subdued, and
that the author of the psalm could make any use of it he pleased. It
also implies that Moab was not regarded as adding much to his strength,
or to the value of his dominions; but that, compared with other portions
of his kingdom, it was of as little value as a wash-basin compared with
the more valuable vessels in a house.

Over Edom will I cast out my shoe - Edom or Idumea was the country which
still remained unsubdued. This David was anxious to possess, though the
conquest had been delayed and prevented by the adverse circumstances to
which allusion has already been made in the notes at the psalm. On the
situation of Idumea, see the notes at Isa. 34. It was a region whose
possession was necessary to complete the acquisition of territory that
properly pertained to the promised land; and David was now intent on
acquiring it. He here expresses the utmost confidence that he would
succeed in this, notwithstanding the adverse events which had occurred.
It is supposed that there is allusion in the expression "I will cast out
my shoe," to the custom, when transferring a possession, of throwing
down a shoe on the ground as a symbol of occupancy. Compare [Rut
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007). In the middle ages this was
expressed by throwing down a glove; in the time of Columbus, by solemnly
taking possession and setting up a cross; in other times, by erecting a
standard, or by building a fort. Compare Rosenmuller, Das alte und neue
Morgenland, No. 483. The idea is, that he would take possession of it,
or would make it his own.

Philistia, triumph thou because of me - On the situation of Philistia,
see the notes at [Isa 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014). In the
margin this is, "triumph thou over me, by an irony." It may be regarded
as irony, or as a taunt, meaning that Philistia was no longer now in a
situation to triumph over him; or it may be understood as referring to
the exultation and shouting which would ensue on the reception of its
sovereign. The former seems to be the most probable interpretation, as
the language is undoubtedly intended to denote absolute subjection, and
not the voluntary reception of a king. The language in the entire
passage is that of triumph over foes.

[Psalms 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 60:9</span></span>

Who will bring me into the strong city? - The strong city - the fenced,
the fortified city - referred to here is doubtless the capital of
Idumea. This was the celebrated city Petra, situated in the rocks, and
so difficult to be taken by an enemy. For a description of it, see the
notes at [Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001). It was this city,
as the capital of the land of Edom, which David was now so anxious to
secure; and he asks, therefore, with interest, who among his captains,
his mighty men, would undertake the task of conducting his armies there.

Who will lead me into Edom? - Into the capital, and thence into the
whole land to subdue it. This was done under the combined command of
Joab and Abishai his brother. See the notes at the title to the psalm.

[Psalms 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 60:10</span></span>

Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst east us off? - See the notes at [Psa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001). The meaning is, that although
God had seemed to reject and forsake them, they had no other resource,
and the appeal might be still made to him. The psalmist hoped that he
would again be favorable to his people, and would not forsake them
altogether. It is still true that although God may seem to forsake us,
that although he may leave us for a time to discouragement and darkness,
yet we have no other resource but himself; it is still true that we may
hope in his mercy, and plead for his return.

And thou, O God, which didst not go out with our armies? - Who didst
suffer us to be defeated. See the notes at [Psa
60:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002).

[Psalms 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 60:11</span></span>

Give us help from trouble - From the troubles which have now come upon
us and overwhelmed us.

For vain is the help of man - Margin, salvation. The idea is, that they
would look in vain to man to assist them in their present difficulties.
They must depend on God alone. What is here said of temporal troubles is
true as absolutely in the matter of salvation. When we are burdened with
the consciousness of guilt, and trembling under the apprehension of the
wrath to come, it is not man that can aid us. Our help is in God alone.
Man can neither guide, comfort, pardon, nor save; and in vain should we
look to any man, or to all people, for aid. We must look to God alone:
to God as the only one who can remove guilt from the soul; who can give
peace to the troubled heart; who can deliver us - from condemnation and
ruin.

[Psalms 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 60:12</span></span>

Through God - By the help of God.

We shall do valiantly - literally, we shall make strength. That is, we
shall gain or gather strength; we shall go forth with spirit and with
courage to the war. This expresses the confident assurance that they
would secure the aid of God, and that under him they would achieve the
victory.

For he it is that shall tread down our enemies - He will himself tread
or trample them down; that is, he will enable us to do it. The psalm,
therefore, though begun in despondency and sadness, closes, as the
Psalms often do, with confident hope; with the assurance of the favor of
God; and with the firm belief that the object sought in the psalm would
be obtained. The history shows that the prayer was answered; that the
armies of David were successful; that Edom was subdued; and that thus
the territories of the Hebrew people had, in fact, in the time of David,
the boundaries promised to Abraham.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 61](psa061)

</div>
