<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa049)  [Next](psa051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 50:0</span></span>

This psalm purports to be a "psalm of Asaph." This is the first of the
psalms ascribed to him. twelve in all are attributed to him, namely, Ps.
50; 73-83. Asaph was a Levite, a son of Berachiah, [Ch1
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#039); [Ch1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#017). He was eminent as a musician,
[Neh 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#046); [Ch1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007), and was appointed by "the chief
of the Levites," at the command of David, with two others, Heman and
Ethan, to preside over a part of the sacred choral services of public
worship, [Ch1 15:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016). They had
charge particularly of the worship as conducted with "cymbals of brass,"
[Ch1 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#019). The "sons of Asaph" are
afterward mentioned among the choristers of the temple [Ch1
25:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001); [Ch2
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#014); [Ch2
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#013); [Ezr
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#041); [Ezr
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010); [Neh
7:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#044); [Neh
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#022); and this office appears to have
been hereditary in his family, [Ch1
25:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001). Asaph was celebrated in after
times as a prophet and a poet, [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030); [Neh
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#046). The title, rendered in the
margin, "for Asaph," "may" mean either that the psalm was composed "by"
Asaph himself, or that it was composed especially "for" him, by David or
by someone else, and that it was committed to him to be set to music, or
to be sung by that band of musicians over which he was appointed to
preside. Compare the notes at the title to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). The presumption is, that it
was composed "by" Asaph, as this is the most natural explanation of the
title, and as there is nothing in the circumstances of the case to
render this improbable.

Of the "occasion" on which the psalm was composed we have no
information. There is nothing in the title to indicate this, nor is
there anything in the psalm itself which would connect it with any known
events in the Jewish history. There are no local allusions, there are no
names mentioned, there are no circumstances referred to, which enable us
to determine the time of its composition.

The "object" of the psalm seems to be to set forth "the value and
importance of spiritual religion as compared with a mere religion of
forms." It is one among numerous portions of the Old Testament which
show that the Jewish religion "contemplated" and "required" spirituality
in its worshippers, and that it was not designed to be merely formal.
There was, indeed, great tendency among the Jewish people to rely on the
forms of religion, and it must be admitted that there was not a little
in their modes of worship which went to foster this unless there was
constant vigilance on the part of the worshipper, and on the part of the
public teachers of religion. At the time when this psalm was composed,
it would seem that there was a general reliance on the mere ceremonies
of public worship; that much of the spirituality of religion had
vanished; and that under the forms of religion, and connected with a
decent and even scrupulous attention to them, there was a great, if not
general, prevalence, of moral corruption among the people. See [Psa
50:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016).

In the composition of the psalm, therefore, the author represents a
scene of solemn judgment; describes God as coming with pomp, and amidst
fire and tempests, to pronounce a sentence on man; and then, as in his
presence, and as amidst these solemn scenes, shows what will be found to
be true piety; what will meet with theapprobation, and what will incur
the disapprobation, of God.

The psalm may be regarded as composed of the following parts.

I. A solemn representation of the scenes of judgment; of God as coming
to judge his professed people, assembling together those who had avowed
themselves to be his friends, and who had pledged themselves to be his
amidst the solemn scenes of sacrifice, [Psa
50:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001).

In this part of the psalm there are the following things:

\(a\) A general summons to the world, from the rising to the setting
sun, [Psa 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001).

\(b\) The statement that the great principles on which all would be
determined would proceed out of Zion, or would be such as were
inculcated there in the worship of God, [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002).

\(c\) A description of God as coming to judgment amidst fire and
tempest, [Psa 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003).

\(d\) A general call to the heavens and the earth, that His people might
be summoned from all quarters with reference to the final sentence, [Psa
50:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004).

\(e\) A statement that perfect justice would be done, which the very
heavens would reveal, for that God was himself the judge, [Psa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#006).

II\. A declaration of the great principles on which the judgment would
proceed, and by which the issue would be determined. It would not be by
an observance of the mere external forms of devotion, but by spiritual
religion; by a sincere worship of God; by a holy life, Ps. 50:7-23.

This portion of the psalm is divided into two parts: the "first,"
showing that it is not by mere outward forms that acceptance can be
found with God, but that there must be, under these forms, pure and
spiritual religion, [Psa 50:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007); and
the "second," that the wicked cannot hope to meet with the favor of God,
though they do observe these forms, [Psa
50:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016).

First. It is not by mere external forms that acceptance can be found
with God, [Psa 50:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007).

\(a\) A statement of the fact, and of the grounds of the fact, that God
will testify against them, [Psa
50:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007).

\(b\) The mere offering of sacrifices cannot be acceptable to Him. He
does not "need" their sacrifices, as all the beasts of the world are
His, [Psa 50:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009).

\(c\) Only praise - spiritual worship - humble trust in him - can be
admitted as true righteousness; as that which will be acceptable to him,
[Psa 50:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014).

Second. The wicked cannot be accepted and approved though they do
observe the forms of religion, [Psa
50:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016).

\(a\) Such men, though in the priestly office, cannot be regarded as
appointed by God to declare his will, or to represent him on earth, [Psa
50:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016),

\(b\) A description of the actual conduct of many of those who professed
to be His friend; who were rigid in their observances of the external
forms of religion, and who were even in the priestly office, [Psa
50:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018).

\(c\) As before [Psa 50:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014); only
the righteous - the spiritually minded - the upright - can in such a
solemn trial meet with the approbation of God, [Psa
50:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022).

This psalm, therefore, is one of the most instructive portions of the
Old Testament, as setting forth the necessity of spiritual religion, and
the fact that a mere observance of forms can never constitute that
righteousness which will make people acceptable to God.

[Psalms 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 50:1</span></span>

The mighty God, even the Lord - Even "Yahweh," for this is the original
word. The Septuagint and Vulgate render this "The God of gods, the
Lord." DeWette renders it, "God, God Jehovah, speaks." Prof. Alexander,
"The Almighty, God, Jehovah, speaks;" and remarks that the word "mighty"
is not an adjective agreeing with the next word ("the mighty God"), but
a substantive in apposition with it. The idea is, that he who speaks is
the true God; the Supreme Ruler of the universe. It is "that" God who
has a right to call the world to judgment, and who has power to execute
his will.

Hath spoken - Or rather, "speaks." That is, the psalmist represents him
as now speaking, and as calling the world to judgment.

And called the earth - Addressed all the inhabitants of the world; all
dwellers on the earth.

From the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof - From the place
where the sun seems to rise, to the place where it seems to set; that
is, all the world. Compare the notes at [Isa
59:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019). See also [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011); [Psa
113:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#003). The call is made to all the
earth; to all the human race. The scene is imaginary as represented by
the psalmist, but it is founded on a true representation of what will
occur - of the universal judgment, when all nations shall be summoned to
appear before the final Judge. See [Mat
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032); [Rev
20:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011).

[Psalms 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 50:2</span></span>

Out of Zion - The place where God was worshipped, and where he dwelt.
Compare the notes at [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003).

The perfection of beauty - See the notes at [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002).

God hath shined - Has shined forth, or has caused light and splendor to
appear. Compare [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002); [Psa
94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001) (see the margin) The meaning here
is, that the great principles which are to determine the destiny of
mankind in the final judgment are those which proceed from Zion; or,
those which are taught in the religion of Zion; they are those which are
inculcated through the church of God. God has there made known his law;
he has stated the principles on which he governs, and on which he will
judge the world.

[Psalms 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 50:3</span></span>

Our God shall come - That is, he will come to judgment. This language is
derived from the supposition that God "will" judge the world, and it
shows that this doctrine was understood and believed by the Hebrews. The
New Testament has stated the fact that this will be done by the coming
of his Son Jesus Christ to gather the nations before him, and to
pronounce tile final sentence on mankind: [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031); [Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031); [Act
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042); [Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022).

And shall not keep silence - That is, the will come forth and "express"
his judgment on the conduct of mankind. See the notes at [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001). He "seems" now to be silent. No
voice is heard. No sentence is pronounced. But this will not always be
the case. The time is coming when he will manifest himself, and will no
longer be silent as to the conduct and character of people, but will
pronounce a sentence, fixing their destiny according to their character.

A fire shall devour before him - Compare the notes at [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008); notes at [Heb
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027). The "language" here is
undoubtedly taken from the representation of God as he manifested
himself at Mount Sinai. Thus, in [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018), it is said, "And it came to
pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and
lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of a trumpet
exceeding loud; and Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the
Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the
smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

And it shall be very tempestuous round about him - The word used here -
שׂער śa‛ar - means properly to shudder; to shiver; and then it is
employed to denote the commotion and raging of a tempest. The allusion
is doubtless to the descent on Mount Sinai [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), and to the storm accompanied by
thunder and lightning which beat upon the mountain when God descended on
it to give his law. The whole is designed to represent God as clothed
with appropriate majesty when judgment is to be pronounced upon the
world.

[Psalms 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 50:4</span></span>

He shall call to the heavens from above - He will call on all the
universe; he will summon all worlds. The meaning here is, not that he
will gather those who are in heaven to be judged, but that he will call
on the inhabitants of all worlds to be his witnesses; to bear their
attestation to the justice of his sentence. See [Psa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#006). The phrase "from above" does
not, of course, refer to the heavens as being above God, but to the
heavens as they appear to human beings to be above themselves.

And to the earth - To all the dwellers upon the earth; "to the whole
universe." He makes this universal appeal with the confident assurance
that his final sentence will be approved; that the universe will see and
admit that it is just. See [Rev 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003);
[Rev 19:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001). There can be no doubt
that the universe, as such, will approve the ultimate sentence that will
be pronounced on mankind.

That he may judge his people - That is, all these arrangements - this
coming with fire and tempest, and this universal appeal - will be
prepatory to the judging of his people, or in order that the judgment
may be conducted with due solemnity and propriety. The idea is, that an
event so momentous should be conducted in a way suited to produce an
appropriate impression; so conducted, that there would be a universal
conviction of the justice and impartiality of the sentence. The
reference here is particularly to his professed "people," that is, to
determine whether they were truly his, for that is the main subject of
the psalm, though the "language" is derived from the solemnities
appropriate to the universal judgment.

[Psalms 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 50:5</span></span>

Gather my saints together unto me - This is an address to the messengers
employed for assembling those who are to be judged. Similar language is
used by the Saviour [Mat 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031) : "And
he (the Son of Man) shall send his angels with a great sound of a
trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds,
from one end of heaven to the other." The idea is, that God will bring
them, or assemble them together. All this is language derived froth the
notion of a universal judgment, "as if" the scattered people of God were
thus gathered together by special messengers sent out for this purpose.
The word "saints" here refers to those who are truly his people. The
object - the purpose - of the judgment is to assemble in heaven those
who are sincerely his friends; or, as the Saviour expresses it [Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031), his "elect." Yet in order to
this, or in order to determine who "are" his true people, there will be
a larger gathering - an assembling of all the dwellers on the earth.

Those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice - [Exo
24:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006). Compare the notes at [Heb
9:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019). The idea here is, that they
are the professed people of God; that they have entered into a solemn
covenant-relation to him, or have bound themselves in the most solemn
manner to be his; that they have done this in connection with the
sacrifices which accompany their worship; that they have brought their
sacrifices or bloody offerings as a pledge that they mean to be his, and
will be his. Over these solemn sacrifices made to him, they have bound
themselves to be the Lord's; and the purpose of the judgment now is, to
determine whether this was sincere, and whether they have been faithful
to their vows. As applied to professed believers under the Christian
system, the "idea" here presented would be, that the vow to be the
Lord's has been made over the body and blood of the Redeemer once
offered as a sacrifice, and that by partaking of the memorials of that
sacrifice they have entered into a solemn "covenant" to be his. Nothing
more solemn can be conceived than a "covenant" or pledge entered into in
such a manner; and yet nothing is more painfully certain than that the
process of a judgment will be necessary to determine in what cases it is
genuine, for the mere outward act, no matter how solemn, does not of
necessity decide the question whether he who performs it will enter into
heaven.

[Psalms 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 50:6</span></span>

And the heavens shall declare his righteousness - Shall make it known,
or announce it. That is, the heavens - the heavenly inhabitants - will
bear witness to the justness of the sentence, or will approve the
sentence. See the notes at [Psa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004).
Compare [Psa 97:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#006).

For God is judge himself - The judgment is not committed to mortal men,
or even to angels. Creatures, even the most exalted and pure, might err
in such a work as that of judging the world. That judgment, to be
correct, must be founded on a perfect knowledge of the heart, and on a
clear and complete understanding of all the thoughts, the motives, the
words, the deeds of all people. It cannot be supposed that any created
being, however exalted, could possess all this knowledge, and it cannot
be supposed that any created being, however pure, could be so endowed as
to be secure against error in pronouncing a judgment on the countless
millions of people. But God combines all these in himself; a perfect
knowledge of all that has ever occurred on earth, and of the motives and
feelings of every creature - and, at the same time, absolute purity and
impartiality; therefore his judgment must be such that the universe will
see that it is just. It may be added here that as the New Testament has
stated (see the notes at [Psa 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003))
that the judgment of the world in the last day will be committed to the
Lord Jesus Christ, the considerations just suggested prove that he is
Divine. The immediate point in the passage before us is, that the fact
that "God" will preside in the judgment, demonstrates that the acts of
judgment will be "right," and will be such as the "heavens" - the
universe - will approve; such, that all worlds will proclaim them to be
right. There is no higher evidence that a thing is right, and that it
ought to be done, than the fact that God has done it. Compare [Gen
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025); [Psa
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009).

[Psalms 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 50:7</span></span>

Hear, O my people, and I will speak - God himself is now introduced as
speaking, and as stating the principles on which the judgment will
proceed. The previous verses are introductory, or are designed to bring
the scene of the judgment before the mind. The solemn scene now opens,
and God himself speaks, especially as rebuking the disposition to rely
on the mere forms of religion, while its spirituality and its power are
denied. The purpose of the whole is, by asking how these things will
appear in the judgment, to imply the vanity of "mere" forms of religion
now. The particular address is made to the "people" of God, or to
"Israel," because the purpose of the psalmist was to rebuke the
prevailing tendency to rely on outward forms.

O Israel, and I will testify against thee - In the judgment. In view of
those scenes, and as "at" that time, I will "now" bear this solemn
testimony against the views which you entertain on the subject of
religion, and the practices which prevail in your worship.

I am God, even thy God - I am the true God, and therefore I have a right
to speak; I am "thy" God - the God who has been the Protector of thy
people - acknowledged as the God of the nation - and therefore I claim
the right to declare the great principles which pertain to true worship,
and which constitute true religion.

[Psalms 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 50:8</span></span>

I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt-offerings - On
the words "sacrifices" and "burnt-offerings" here used, see the notes at
[Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011). The meaning is, "I do not
reprove or rebuke you in respect to the withholding of sacrifices. I do
not charge you with neglecting the offering of such sacrifices. I do not
accuse the nation of indifference in regard to the external rites or
duties of religion. It is not on this ground that you are to be blamed
or condemned, for that duty is outwardly and publicly performed. I do
not say that such offerings are wrong; I do not say that there has been
any failure in the external duties of worship. The charge - the reproof
- relates to other matters; to the want of a proper spirit, to the
withholding of the heart, in connection with such offerings."

To have been continually before me - The words "to have been" are
inserted by the translators, and weaken the sense. The simple idea is,
that their offerings "were" continually before him; that is, they were
constantly made. He had no charge of neglect in this respect to bring
against them. The insertion of the words "to have been" would seem to
imply that though they had neglected this external rite, it was a matter
of no consequence; whereas the simple meaning is, that they were "not"
chargeable with this neglect, or that there was "no" cause of complaint
on this point. It was on other grounds altogether that a charge was
brought against them. It was, as the following verses show, because they
supposed there was special "merit" in such offerings; because they
supposed that they laid God under obligation by so constant and so
expensive offerings, as if they did not already belong to him, or as if
he needed them; and because, while they did this, they withheld the very
offering which he required, and without which all other sacrifices would
be vain and worthless - a sincere, humble, thankful heart.

[Psalms 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 50:9</span></span>

I will take no bullock out of thy house - Bullocks were offered
regularly in the Hebrew service and sacrifice [Exo
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#011), [Exo
29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036); [Lev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004); [Kg1
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#023), [Kg1
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033); and it is with reference to
this that the language is used here. In obedience to the law it was
right and proper to offer such sacrifices; and the design here is not to
express disapprobation of these offerings in themselves considered. On
this subject - on the external compliance with the law in this respect -
God says [Psa 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008) that he had no
cause to complain against them. It was only with respect to the design
and the spirit with which they did this, that the language in this verse
and the following verses is used. The idea which it is the purpose of
these verses to suggest is, that God did not "need" such offerings; that
they were not to be made "as if" he needed them; and that if he needed
such he was not "dependent" on them, for all the beasts of the earth and
all the fowls of the mountains were his, and could be taken for that
purpose; and that if he took what was claimed to be theirs - the
bullocks and the goats - he did not wrong them, for all were his, and he
claimed only his own.

Nor he-goats out of thy folds - Goats were also offered in sacrifice.
[Lev 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012); [Lev
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#024); [Lev
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016) : [Num
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#027).

[Psalms 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 50:10</span></span>

For every beast of the forest is mine - All the beasts that roam at
large in the wilderness; all that are untamed and unclaimed by man. The
idea is, that even if God "needed" such offerings, he was not dependent
on them - for the numberless beasts that roamed at large as his own
would yield an ample supply.

And the cattle upon a thousand hills - This may mean either the cattle
that roamed by thousands on the hills, or the cattle on numberless
hills. The Hebrew will bear either construction. The former is most
likely to be the meaning. The allusion is probably to the animals that
were pastured in great numbers on the hills, and that were claimed by
men. The idea is, that all - whether wild or tame - belonged to God, and
he had a right to them, to dispose of them as he pleased. He was not,
therefore, in any way dependent on sacrifices. It is a beautiful and
impressive thought, that the "property" in all these animals - in all
living things on the earth - is in God, and that he has a right to
dispose of them as he pleases. What man owns, he owns under God, and has
no right to complain when God comes and asserts his superior claim to
dispose of it at his pleasure. God has never given to man the absolute
proprietorship in "any" thing; nor does he invade our rights when he
comes and claims what we possess, or when in any way he removes what is
most valuable to us. Compare [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021).

[Psalms 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 50:11</span></span>

I know all the fowls of the mountains - That is, I am fully acquainted
with their numbers; their nature; their habits; their residence. I have
such a knowledge of them that I could appropriate them to my own use if
I were in need of them. I am not, therefore, dependent on people to
offer them, for I can use them as I please.

And the wild beasts of the field are mine - Margin, "with me." That is,
they are before me. They are never out of my presence. At any time,
therefore, I could use them as I might need them. The word rendered
"wild beasts" - זיז zı̂yz - means any moving thing; and the idea here is,
whatever moves in the field, or roams abroad. Everything is his -
whether on the mountains, in the forest, or in the cultivated field.

[Psalms 50:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 50:12</span></span>

If I were hungry, I would not tell thee - I should not have occasion to
apply to you; I should not be dependent on you.

For the world is mine - The earth; all that has been created.

And the fulness thereof - All that fills the world; all that exists upon
it. The whole is at his disposal; to all that the earth produces he has
a right. This language is used to show the absurdity of the supposition
that he was in any way dependent on man, or that the offering of
sacrifice could be supposed in any way to lay him under obligation.

[Psalms 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 50:13</span></span>

Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? - This is
said to show still further the absurdity of the views which seem to have
prevailed among those who offered sacrifices. They offered them "as if"
they were needed by God; "as if" they laid him under obligation; "as if"
in some way they contributed to his happiness, or were essential to his
welfare. The only supposition on which this could be true was, that he
needed the flesh of the one for food, and the blood of the other for
drink; or that he was sustained as creatures are. Yet this was a
supposition, which, when it was stated in a formal manner, must be at
once seen to be absurd; and hence the emphatic question in this verse.
It may serve to illustrate this, also, to remark, that, among the pagan,
the opinion did undoubtedly prevail that the gods ate and drank what was
offered to them in sacrifice; whereas the truth was, that these things
were consumed by the priests who attended on pagan altars, and conducted
the devotions of pagan temples, and who found that it contributed much
to their own support, and did much to secure the liberality of the
people, to keep up the impression that what was thus offered was
consumed by the gods. God appeals here to his own people in this earnest
manner because it was to be presumed that "they" had higher conceptions
of him than the pagan had; and that, enlightened as they were, they
could not for a moment suppose these offerings necessary for him. This
is one of the passages in the Old Testament which imply that God is a
Spirit, and that, as such, he is to be worshipped in spirit and in
truth. Compare [Joh 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024).

[Psalms 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 50:14</span></span>

Offer unto God thanksgiving - The word rendered "offer" in this place -
זבח zâbach - means properly "sacrifice." So it is rendered by the
Septuagint, θῦσον thuson - and by the Vulgate, "immola." The word is
used, doubtless, with design - to show what was the "kind" of sacrifice
with which God would be pleased, and which he would approve. It was not
the mere "sacrifice" of animals, as they commonly understood the term;
it was not the mere presentation of the bodies and the blood of slain
beasts; it was an offering which proceeded from the heart, and which was
expressive of gratitude and praise. This is not to be understood as
implying that God did not require or approve of the offering of bloody
sacrifices, but as implying that a higher sacrifice was necessary; that
these would be vain and worthless unless they were accompanied with the
offerings of the heart; and that his worship, even amidst outward forms,
was to be a spiritual worship.

And pay thy vows unto the Most High - To the true God, the most exalted
Being in the universe. The word "vows" here - נדר neder - means properly
a vow or promise; and then, a thing vowed; a votive offering, a
sacrifice. The idea seems to be, that the true notion to be attached to
the sacrifices which were prescribed and required was, that they were to
be regarded as expressions of internal feelings and purposes; of
penitence; of a deep sense of sin; of gratitude and love; and that the
design of such sacrifices was not fulfilled unless the "vows" or pious
purposes implied in the very nature of sacrifices and offerings were
carried out in the life and conduct. They were not, therefore, to come
merely with these offerings, and then feel that all the purpose of
worship was accomplished. They were to carry out the true design of them
by lives corresponding with the idea intended by such sacrifices - lives
full of penitence, gratitude, love, obedience, submission, devotion.
This only could be acceptable worship. Compare the notes at [Isa
1:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011). See also [Psa
76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011); [Ecc
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#005).

[Psalms 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 50:15</span></span>

And call upon me in the day of trouble - This is a part of real religion
as truly as praise is, [Psa 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014).
This is also the duty and the privilege of all the true worshippers of
God. To do this shows where the heart is, as really as direct acts of
praise and thanksgiving. The purpose of all that is said here is to show
that true religion - the proper service of God - does not consist in the
mere offering of sacrifice, but that it is of a spiritual nature, and
that the offering of sacrifice is of no value unless it is accompanied
by corresponding acts of spiritual religion, showing that the heart has
a proper appreciation of the mercies of God, and that it truly confides
in him. Such spirituality in religion is expressed by acts of praise
[Psa 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014); but it is also as clearly
expressed [Psa 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015) by going to God
in times of trouble, and rolling the burdens of life on his arm, and
seeking consolation in him.

I will deliver thee - I will deliver thee from trouble. This will occur

\(a\) either in this life, in accordance with the frequent promises of
his word (compare the notes at [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)); or

\(b\) wholly in the future world, where all who love God will be
completely and forever delivered from all forms of sorrow.

And thou shalt glorify me - That is, Thou wilt honor me, or do me honor,
by thus coming to me with confidence in the day of calamity. There is no
way in which we can honor God more, or show more clearly that we truly
confide in him, than by going to him when everything seems to be dark;
when his own ways and dealings are wholly incomprehensible to us, and
committing all into his hands.

[Psalms 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 50:16</span></span>

But unto the wicked God saith - This commences a second part of the
subject. See the introduction. Thus far the psalm had reference to those
who were merely external worshippers, or mere formalists, as showing
that such could not be approved and accepted in the day of judgment;
that spiritual religion - the offering of the "heart" - was necessary in
order to acceptance with God. In this part of the psalm the same
principles are applied to those who actually "violate" the law which
they profess to receive as prescribing the rules of true religion, and
which they profess to teach to others. The design of the psalm is not
merely to reprove the mass of the people as mere formalists in religion,
but especially to reprove the leaders and teachers of the people, who,
under the form of religion, gave themselves up to a course of life
wholly inconsistent with the true service of God. The address here,
therefore, is to those who, while they professed to be teachers of
religion, and to lead the devotions of others, gave themselves up to
abandoned lives.

What hast thou to do - What right hast thou to do this? How can people,
who lead such lives, consistently and properly do this? The idea is,
that they who profess to declare the law of a holy God should be
themselves holy; that they who profess to teach the principles and
doctrines of true religion should themselves be examples of purity and
holiness.

To declare my statutes - My laws. This evidently refers rather to the
teaching of others than to the profession of their own faith. The
language would be applicable to the priests under the Jewish system, who
were expected not only to conduct the outward services of religion, but
also to instruct the people; to explain the principles of religion; to
be the guides and teachers of others. Compare [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). There is a striking resemblance
between the language used in this part of the psalm [Psa
50:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016) and the language of the
apostle Paul in [Rom 2:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017); and it
would seem probable that the apostle in that passage had this portion of
the psalm in his eye. See the notes at that passage.

Or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth - Either as
professing faith in it, and a purpose to be governed by it - or, more
probably, as explaining it to others. The ""covenant"" here is
equivalent to the "law" of God, or the principles of his religion; and
the idea is, that he who undertakes to explain that to others, should
himself be a holy man. He can have no "right" to attempt to explain it,
if he is otherwise; he cannot hope to be "able" to explain it, unless he
himself sees and appreciates its truth and beauty. This is as true now
of the Gospel as it was of the law. A wicked man can have no right to
undertake the work of the Christian ministry, nor can he be able to
explain to others what he himself does not understand.

[Psalms 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 50:17</span></span>

Seeing thou hatest instruction - That is, He is unwilling himself to be
taught. He will not learn the true nature of religion, and yet he
presumes to instruct others. Compare the notes at [Rom
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021).

And castest my words behind thee - He treated them with contempt, or as
unworthy of attention. He did not regard them as worthy of being
"retained," but threw them contemptuously away.

[Psalms 50:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 50:18</span></span>

When thou sawest a thief - When you have seen or found one who was
intending to commit theft, then (instead of rebuking or exposing him)
you have been willing to act with him, and to divide the profits. The
words "when thou sawest" would seem to imply readiness and willingness
to engage with them, as "at first sight." Whenever there was an
opportunity to share in the results of theft, they were ready to engage
in it. The main "point" in this is, that they were willing to do so even
when observing the outward duties of religion, and when professing to be
the true worshippers of God. A similar sentiment occurs in [Rom
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021). See the notes at that passage.

Then thou consentedst with him - literally, Thou didst delight in him,
or hadst pleasure in him. He was a man after thine own heart. Thou wast
at once on good terms with him.

And hast been partaker with adulterers - Margin, as in Hebrew, "thy
portion was with adulterers." This was a common vice among the Jewish
people. See the notes at [Rom 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#022).
The idea here is, that they were associated in practice with adulterers;
they were guilty of that crime as others were. The point of the remark
here is, that they did this under the cloak of piety, and when they were
scrupulous and faithful in offering sacrifices, and in performing all
the external rites of religion.

[Psalms 50:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 50:19</span></span>

Thou givest thy mouth to evil - Margin, as in Hebrew, "thou sendest."
That is, they gave it up to evil; they employed it in evil: in
falsehood, malice, deceit, slander, deception, detraction.

And thy tongue frameth deceit - The word rendered "frameth" means
properly to bind, to fasten; and then, to contrive, to frame. The
meaning is, that it was employed in the work of deceit; that is, it was
employed in devising and executing purposes of fraud and falsehood.

[Psalms 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 50:20</span></span>

Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother - To the general character
of falsehood and slander there is now added the fact that they were
guilty of this in the most aggravated manner conceivable - against their
nearest relations, the members of their own families. They were not only
guilty of the crime against neighbors - against strangers - against
persons to whom they sustained no near relationship; but against those
of their own households - those whose characters, on that account, ought
to have been especially dear to them. The words ""thou sittest""
probably refer to the fact that they would do this when enjoying social
contact with them; in confidential conversation; when words of peace,
and not of slander, might be properly expected. The word "brother"
"might" be used as denoting any other man, or any one of the same
nation; but the phrase which is added, "thine own mother's son," shows
that it is here to be taken in the strictest sense.

Thou slanderest - literally, "Thou givest to ruin." Prof. Alexander
renders it, "Thou wilt aim a blow." The Septuagint, the Vulgate, Luther,
and DeWette understand it of slander.

Thine own mother's son - It is to be remembered that where polygamy
prevailed there would be many children in the same family who had the
same father, but not the same mother. The nearest relationship,
therefore, was where there was the same mother as well as the same
father. To speak of a brother, in the strictest sense, and as implying
the nearest relationship, it would be natural to speak of one as having
the same mother. The idea here is, that while professing religion, and
performing its external rites with the most scrupulous care, they were
guilty of the basest crimes, and showed an entire want of moral
principle and of natural affection. External worship, however zealously
performed, could not be acceptable in such circumstances to a holy God.

[Psalms 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 50:21</span></span>

These things hast thou done, and I kept silence - Compare the notes at
[Isa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004). The meaning is, that while
they did these things - while they committed these abominations - he did
not interfere. He did not come forth in his anger to destroy them. He
had borne all this with patience. He had borne this until it was now
time that he should interpose [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003), and state the true principles of
his government, and warn then of the consequences of such a course of
sin and hypocrisy. Compare the notes at [Act
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030).

Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself - The idea
here is, that they thought or imagined that God was just like themselves
in the matter under consideration, and they acted under this impression;
or, in other words, the fair interpretation of their conduct was that
they thus regarded God. That is, they supposed that "God" would be
satisfied with the "forms" of religion, as "they" were; that all he
required was the proper offering of sacrifice, according to "their"
views of the nature of religion; that he did not regard principle,
justice, pure morality, sincerity, even as they themselves did not; and
that he would not be strict to punish sin, or to reprove them for it, if
these forms were kept up, even as "they" were not disposed to be rigid
on the subject of sin.

But I will reprove thee - I will rebuke thee alike for thy sins, and for
this view of the nature of religion.

And set them in order - literally, I will "array" them; that is, I will
draw them out to view in their appropriate ranks and orders, as soldiers
are drawn up in martial array. They shall be so arranged and classified
that they may be seen distinctly.

Before thine eyes - So that they may be plainly seen. The meaning is,
that they would have a clear and impressive view of them: they would be
made to see them as they were. This might be done then, as it is done
now, either

\(a\) by their being set before their minds and hearts, so that they
would see and feel the enormity of sin, to wit, by conviction for it; or

\(b\) by sending such punishment on them for their sins that they might
"measure" the guilt and the number of their transgressions by the
penalties which would be inflicted.

In some way all sinners will yet be made to see the nature and the
extent of their guilt before God.

[Psalms 50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 50:22</span></span>

Now consider this - Understand this; give attention to this. The word
"now" does not well express the force of the original. The Hebrew word
is not an adverb of "time," but a particle denoting "entreaty," and
would be better rendered by, "Oh, consider this;" or, "Consider this, I
beseech you." The matter is presented to them as that which deserved
their most solemn attention.

Ye that forget God - Who really forget him though you are professedly
engaged in his worship; who, amidst the forms of religion, are actually
living in entire forgetfulness of the just claims and of the true
character of God.

Lest I tear you in pieces - Language derived from the fury of a ravenous
beast tearing his victim from limb to limb.

And there be none to deliver - As none can do when God rises up in his
wrath to inflict vengeance. None would "venture" to Interpose; none
"could" rescue from his hand. There "is" a point of time in relation to
all sinners when no one, not even the Redeemer - the great and merciful
Mediator - will interpose to save; when the sinner will be left to be
dealt with by simple, pure, unmixed and unmitigated "justice;" when
mercy and kindness will have done their work in regard to them in vain;
and when they will be left to the "mere desert" of their sins. At that
point there is no power that can deliver them.

[Psalms 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 50:23</span></span>

Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me - That is, he truly honors me; he is
a true worshipper; he meets with my approbation. The word here rendered
""offereth"" is the same which is used in [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014), and means "he that sacrifices:"
here meaning, he that presents the sacrifice of praise. So the
Septuagint: "the sacrifice of praise glorifies me." So the Vulgate. The
idea is, that the worship which God requires is "praise;" it is not the
mere external act of homage; it is not the presentation of a bloody
sacrifice; it is not the mere bending of the knee; it is not a mere
outward form: it is that which proceeds from the heart, and which shows
that there is there a spirit of true thankfulness, adoration, and love.

And to him that ordereth his conversation aright - Margin, as in Hebrew,
"that disposeth his way." Or, more literally, "To him that "prepares" or
"plans" his way;" that is, to him who is attentive to his going; who
seeks to walk in the right path; who is anxious to go in the road that
leads to a happier world; who is careful that all his conduct shall be
in accordance with the rules which God has prescribed.

Will I show the salvation of God - This may mean either, "I, the author
of the psalm as a teacher" (compare [Psa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)); or, "I" as referring to God -
as a promise that "He" would instruct such an one. The latter is the
probable meaning, as it is God that has been speaking in the previous
verse. The "salvation of God" is the salvation of which God is the
author; or, which he alone can give. The "idea" here is, that where
there is a true desire to find the way of truth and salvation, God will
impart needful instruction. He will not suffer such an one to wander
away and be lost. See the notes at [Psa
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#009).

The general ideas in the psalm, therefore, are

\(1\) that there is to be a solemn judgment of mankind;

\(2\) that the issues of that judgment will not be determined by the
observance of the external forms of religion;

\(3\) that God will judge people impartially for their sins, though they
observe those forms of religion; and

\(4\) that no worship of God can be acceptable which does not spring
from the heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 51](psa051)

</div>
