<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa027)  [Next](psa029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 28:0</span></span>

This psalm is entitled "A Psalm of David;" and there is no reason for
doubting the correctness of the inscription. But, as in some of the
previous psalms, neither the title nor the contents contain any
intimation as to the time or the circumstances of its composition.

It has, in some respects, a strong resemblance to [Psa
26:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001). The leading idea in this, as
in that, is the strong affection of the author for those who revered and
loved God; his strong desire to be associated with them in character and
destiny; his earnest wish that he might not be drawn away from them, and
that his lot might not be with the wicked. It would seem from the psalm
itself, especially from [Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003),
that it was composed when its author was under some powerful temptation
from the wicked, or when there were strong allurements offered by them
which tended to lead him into the society of those who were strangers to
God; and, under this temptation, he urges this earnest prayer, and seeks
to bring before his own mind considerations why he should not yield to
these influences.

The contents of the psalm, therefore, may be presented in the following
analysis:

I. The consciousness of danger so pressing upon him as to lead him to
break out in an earnest cry to God, [Psa
28:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001).

II\. The source of his anxiety or his danger; and his earnest prayer
that he might not be left to the powerful temptation, and be drawn into
the society of the wicked, [Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003).

III\. Considerations which occurred to the mind of the psalmist himself
why he should not yield to the temptation, or why he should not be
associated with the wicked. These considerations are stated in [Psa
28:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003). They are drawn from the
character and the certain destiny of the wicked.

IV\. A sense of relief, or a feeling that God had answered his prayer,
and that he was safe from the danger, [Psa
28:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006).

The psalm is especially appropriate to those who are in danger of being
led away by the acts of the ungodly - or who are under strong
temptations to be associated with the frivolous, the sensual, and the
worldly - or to whom strong inducements are offered to mingle in their
pleasures, their vices, and their follies. They who before their
conversion were the companions of the ungodly; they who were devoted to
guilty pleasures but have been rescued from them; they who have
contracted habits of intemperance or sensuality in the society of the
dissolute, and who feel the power of the habit returning upon them, and
are invited by their former associates to join them again - are in the
condition contemplated in the psalm, and will find its sentiments
appropriate to their experience.

[Psalms 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 28:1</span></span>

Unto thee will I cry - That is, under the consciousness of the danger to
which I am exposed - the danger of being drawn away into the society of
the wicked. In such circumstances his reliance was not on his own
strength; or on his own resolutions; on his own heart; or on his
fellowmen. He felt that he was safe only in God, and he appeals to Him,
therefore, in this earnest manner, to save him.

O Lord my rock - See the notes at [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002).

Be not silent to me - Margin, "from me." So the Hebrew. The idea is that
of one who will not speak to us, or who will not attend to us. We pray,
and we look for an "answer" to our prayers, or, as it were, we expect
God to "speak" to us; to utter words of kindness; to assure us of His
favor; to declare our sins forgiven.

Lest, if thou be silent to me - If thou dost not answer my
supplications.

I become like unto them that go down into the pit - Like those who die;
or, lest I be crushed by anxiety and distress, and die. The word "pit"
here refers to the grave. So it is used in [Psa
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003); [Psa
88:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004); [Isa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018); [Isa
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#015), [Isa
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019). The meaning is, that if he did
not obtain help from God he despaired of life. His troubles would
overwhelm and crush him. He could not bear up under them.

[Psalms 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 28:2</span></span>

Hear the voice of my supplications - It was not mental prayer which he
offered; it was a petition uttered audibly.

When I lift up my hands - To lift up the hands denotes supplication, as
this was a common attitude in prayer. See the notes at [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008).

Toward thy holy oracle - Margin, as in Hebrew, "toward the oracle of thy
holiness." The word "oracle" as used here denotes the place where the
answer to prayer is given. The Hebrew word - דביר debı̂yr - means
properly the inner sanctuary of the tabernacle or the temple, the place
where God was supposed to reside, and where He gave responses to the
prayers of His people: the same place which is elsewhere called the holy
of holies. See the notes at [Heb
9:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003). The Hebrew word is found only
here and in [Kg1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005), [Kg1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#016), [Kg1
6:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#019), [Kg1
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031); [Kg1
7:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#049); [Kg1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#006), [Kg1
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#008); [Ch2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#016); [Ch2
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#020); [Ch2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#007), [Ch2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#009). The idea here is that he who
prayed stretched out his hands toward that sacred place where God was
supposed to dwell. So we stretch out our hands toward heaven - the
sacred dwelling-place of God. Compare the notes at [Psa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007). The Hebrew word is probably
derived from the verb to "speak;" and, according to this derivation, the
idea is that God spoke to His people; that he "communed" with them; that
He answered their prayers from that sacred recess - His special
dwelling-place. See [Exo 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022); [Num
7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089).

[Psalms 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 28:3</span></span>

Draw me not away with the wicked - See the notes at [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009). The prayer here, as well as the
prayer in [Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009), expresses a
strong desire not to be united with wicked people in feeling or in
destiny - in life or in death - on earth or in the future world. The
reason of the prayer seems to have been that the psalmist, being at this
time under a strong temptation to associate with wicked persons, and
feeling the force of the temptation, was apprehensive that he should be
left to "yield" to it, and to become associated with them. Deeply
conscious of this danger, he earnestly prays that he may not be left to
yield to the power of the temptation, and fall into sin. So the Saviour
[Mat 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013) has taught us to pray, "And
lead us not into temptation." None who desire to serve God can be
insensible to the propriety of this prayer. The temptations of the world
are so strong; the amusements in which the world indulges are so
brilliant and fascinating; they who invite us to partake of their
pleasures are often so elevated in their social position, so refined in
their manners, and so cultivated by education; the propensities of our
hearts for such indulgences are so strong by nature; habits formed
before our conversion are still so powerful; and the prospect of worldly
advantages from compliance with the customs of those around us are often
so great - that we cannot but feel that it is proper for us to go to the
throne of grace, and to plead earnestly with God that he will keep us
and not suffer us to fall into the snare.

Especially is this true of those who before they were converted had
indulged in habits of intemperance, or in sensual pleasures of any kind,
and who are invited by their old companions in sin again to unite with
them in their pursuits. Here all the power of the former habit returns;
here often there is a most fierce struggle between conscience and the
old habit for victory; here especially those who are thus tempted need
the grace of God to keep them; here there is special appropriateness in
the prayer, "Draw me not away with the wicked."

And with the workers of iniquity - In any form. With those who do evil.

Which speak peace to their neighbours - Who speak words of friendliness.
Who "seem" to be persuading you to do that which is for your good. Who
put on plausible pretexts. They appear to be your friends; they profess
to be so. They use flattering words while they tempt you to go astray.

But mischief is in their hearts - They are secretly plotting your ruin.
They wish to lead you into such courses of life in order that you may
fall into sin; that you may dishonor religion; that you may disgrace
your profession; or that they may in some way profit by your compliance
with their counsels. So the wicked, under plausible pretences, would
allure the good; so the corrupt would seduce the innocent; so the
enemies of God would entice his friends, that they may bring shame and
reproach upon the cause of religion.

[Psalms 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 28:4</span></span>

Give them according to their deeds - Deal righteously with them.
Recompense them as they deserve.

And according to the wickedness of their endeavours - Their designs;
their works; their plans.

Give them after the work of their hands - Reward them according to what
they do.

Render to them their desert - A just recompense. This whole verse is a
prayer that God would deal "justly" with them. There is no evidence that
there is anything of vindictiveness or malice in the prayer. In itself
considered, there is no impropriety in praying that "justice" may be
done to the violators of law. See the general introduction, section 6.

[Psalms 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 28:5</span></span>

Because they regard not the works of the Lord - What the Lord does in
creation; in his providence; through His commands and laws; and by His
Spirit. They do not find pleasure in His works; they do not give heed to
the intimations of His will in His providential dealings; they do not
listen to His commands; they do not yield to the influences of His
Spirit. "Nor the operation of his hands." What He is now doing. The
sense is essentially the same as in the former member of the sentence.

He shall destroy them - He will pull them down, instead of building them
up. They expose themselves to His displeasure, and He will bring
deserved punishment upon them.

And not build them up - He will not favor them; He will not give them
prosperity. Health, happiness, salvation are to be found only in
conformity with the laws which God has ordained. Neither can be found in
violating those laws, or in any other method than that which He has
ordained. Sooner or later the violation of law, in regard to these
things, and in regard to everything, must lead to calamity and ruin.

[Psalms 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 28:6</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my supplications
- This is one of those passages which frequently occur in the Psalms,
when there has been an earnest and anxious prayer offered to God, and
when the answer to the prayer seems to be immediate. The mind of the
anxious and troubled pleader becomes calm; the promises of God are
brought directly to the soul; the peace which was sought is obtained;
and he who began the psalm with deep anxiety and trouble of mind,
rejoices at the close of it in the evidences of the divine favor and
love. What thus happened to the psalmist frequently occurs now. The
answer to prayer, so far as giving calmness and assurance to the mind is
concerned, is often immediate. The troubled spirit becomes calm; and
whatever may be the result in other respects, the heart is made peaceful
and confiding, and feels the assurance that all will be well. It is
sufficient for us to feel that God hears us, for if this is so, we have
the assurance that all is right. In this sense, certainly, it is right
to look for an immediate answer to our prayers. See [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024), note; [Dan
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021), note.

[Psalms 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 28:7</span></span>

The Lord is my strength - See the notes at [Psa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001).

And my shield - See the notes at [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003). Compare [Psa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020); [Psa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011); [Psa
84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009); [Psa
89:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#018); [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001).

My heart trusted in him - I trusted or confided in him. See [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005).

And I am helped - I have found the assistance which I desired.

Therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth - I greatly rejoice. I am happy. He
had found the assurance of the divine favor which he desired, and his
heart was glad.

And with my song will I praise him - I will sing praises to Him. Compare
[Psa 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025).

[Psalms 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 28:8</span></span>

The Lord is their strength - Margin, "his strength." The Hebrew is,
"their strength," or "strength to them." The allusion is to the people
of God. The course of thought seems to be, that the psalmist, having
derived in his own case assistance from God, or having found God a
strength to him, his mind turns from this fact to the general idea that
God was the strength of "all" who were in similar circumstancaes; or
that all His people might confide in Him as he had done.

And he is the saving strength - Margin, as in Hebrew, "strength of
salvations." That is, In Him is found the strength which produces
salvation. See the notes at [Psa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001).

Of his anointed - See [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002), note;
[Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006), note. The primary reference
here is doubtless to the psalmist himself, as one who had been annointed
or set apaart to the kingly office; but the connection shows that he
intended to include all the people of God, as those whom He had
consecrated or set apart to His service. See [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005), [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009).

[Psalms 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 28:9</span></span>

Save thy people - All thy people. The psalm appropriately closes with a
prayer for all the people of God. The prayer is offered in view of the
deliverance which the psalmist had himself experienced, and he prays
that all the people of God might experience similar deliverance and
mercy.

And bless thine inheritance - Thy heritage; Thy people. The Hebrew word
properly means "taking possession of anything; occupation." Then it
comes to mean "possession; domain; estate:" Num, [Psa
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021). Thus it is used as applied to
the territory assigned to each tribe in the promised land: [Jos
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#023). Thus also it is applied to the
people of Israel - the Jewish nation - as the "possession" or "property"
of Yahweh; as a people whom he regarded as His own, and whom, as such,
He protected: [Deu 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020); [Deu
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026), [Deu
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#029). In this place the people of God
are thus spoken of as His special possession or property on earth; as
that which He regards as of most value to Him; as that which belongs to
Him, or to which He has a claim; as that which cannot without injustice
to Him be alienated from Him.

Feed them also - Margin, "rule." The Hebrew word refers to the care
which a shepherd extends over his flock. See [Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001), where the same word, under
another form - "shepherd" - is used. The prayer is, that God would take
the same care of His people that a shepherd takes of his flock.

And lift them up for ever - The word used here may mean "sustain" them,
or "support" them; but it more properly means "bear," and would be best
expressed by a reference to the fact that the shepherd carries the
feeble, the young, and the sickly of his flock in his arms, or that he
lifts them up when unable themselves to rise. See [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011), note; [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009), note. The word "forever" here
means simply "always" - in all circumstances; at all times. In other
words, the psalmist prays that God would "always" manifest Himself as
the Friend and Helper of His people, as He had done to him. It may be
added here, that what the psalmist thus prays for God's "will" to be
done. God "will" save His people; He will bless His heritage; He will be
to them a kind and faithful shepherd; He will sustain, comfort, uphold,
and cherish them always - in affliction; in temptation; in death,
forever. They have only to trust in Him, and they will find Him to be
more kind and faithful than the most tender shepherd ever was to his
flock.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 29](psa029)

</div>
