<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa043)  [Next](psa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 44:0</span></span>

The title of this psalm, "To the chief Musician for the sons of Korah,
Maschil," is the same as the title prefixed to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001), except with a slight
transposition. See the notes at the title to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). This does not, however, prove
that the psalm was by the same author; or that it was composed on the
same occasion; or that the design and the contents of the two resemble
each other; but merely that they were alike submitted, for the same
purpose, to those descendants of the family of Korah who were employed
in regulating the music of the sanctuary. It may be true, indeed, that
the psalm was composed by one of the descendants of Korah, or one who
had the charge of the music, but that is not made certain by the title.

There is no way in which the authorship can be determined. It does not
belong to the general division of the book of Psalms which is ascribed
to David Ps. 1-41; and though there can be no doubt that a large number
of the psalms in the other portions of the book were composed by him,
yet it is impossible now to ascertain which were his, except as his name
is prefixed to a psalm; while the fact that his name is not so prefixed
may be regarded as a proof that, in the belief of those who arranged the
collection, it was not his composition. That he may have been the author
of some of those which are ascribed to no particular writer is
unquestionable, but there is nothing in this psalm which would indicate
particularly that it was a psalm of David. We cannot hope, therefore,
now to ascertain the name of the author.

The occasion on which the psalm was composed is also wholly unknown, and
conjecture is useless. There are no circumstances mentioned in the psalm
which will enable us to determine with certainty when it was composed.
Many occasions, however, occurred in the history of the Jews to which
the sentiments contained in it are applicable; but there is no one of
those occasions to which the psalm is so uniquely and exclusively
applicable that it can be assigned to that with undoubted certainty. The
consequence is, that different expositors have assigned the composition
of it to very different occasions. Not a few have referred it to the
time of Antiochus Epiphanes, and to the persecutions which occurred
under him. Calvin, Venema, Dathe, and Rosenmuller adopt this view.
DeWette supposes that the reference is to the time before the Babylonian
exile, either in the reign of Jehoiakim, when Nebuchadnezzar first
invaded the land [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001), or in the
reign of Jehoiachin, when the land was again invaded by him, [Kg2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010). Tholuck supposes that it refers
either to the time of Jehoiachin [Ch2
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009), or to the time of Zedekiah [Ch2
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#011), when the land was invaded by
the Babylonians, and when the captivity commenced. Prof. Alexander
supposes that there is nothing in the psalm which makes it necessary to
suppose that it refers to a later period than the time of David.

What is manifest in the psalm itself in regard to the occasion of its
composition is,

\(1\) that it was a season of defeat and disaster, when the armies of
Israel were discomfited, [Psa 44:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009);

\(2\) that their armies and people were scattered among the pagan, and
that the people were "sold" among them, [Psa
44:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011);

\(3\) that they were made a reproach and a by-word among surrounding
nations, [Psa 44:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#013);

\(4\) that this discomfiture and disgrace had befallen them in some
place which might be called "the place of dragons," [Psa
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019); and

\(5\) that this had occurred at some time when the author of the psalm,
speaking in the name of the people, could say that it was not on account
of prevailing idolatry, or because, as a people, they had "stretched out
their hands to a strange god," [Psa
44:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017), [Psa
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020).

Perhaps it will be found, on an ex amination of the psalm, that all the
circumstances accord better with the time of Josiah, and especially the
close of his reign [Kg2 23:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026); [Ch2
35:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020), and the commencement of the
reign following [Kg2 23:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031); [Kg2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001), than with any other period of
the history of the Hebrew people. This was the beginning of the
calamities that came upon the nation in the period immediately preceding
the Babylonian captivity; it was a time when the nation was free, as far
as the efforts of a pious king could accomplish it, from prevailing
idolatry; and yet it was a time when that series of disasters commenced
which resulted in the entire removal of the nation to Babylon. There is
not the slightest internal evidence that the psalm has reference to the
times of the Maccabees; there were no historical facts in the time of
David to which it can be easily applied; but all the circumstances in
the psalm would find a fulfillment in the events which just preceded the
Babylonian captivity, and in the series of national disasters which
commenced with the defeat and death of Josiah.

The psalm is an earnest appeal to God to interpose amid the calamities
of the nation, and to arise for their defense and deliverance. It
consists of the following parts:

I. An allusion to former national blessings in the tradition which had
come down from ancient times respecting the divine interposition in
behalf of the nation when it was in danger, and when God delivered it
from its foes, [Psa 44:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001). This
reference to the past is evidently designed to be an argument or a
reason for expecting and imploring the divine interposition in the
present period of national darkness and calamity. The fact that God had
interposed in similar circumstances was an argument which might be urged
why he should do so again.

II\. The condition of the nation described, [Psa
44:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009). It was a time of national
calamity. God had cast the nation off, and went forth no more with their
hosts. Their armies were turned back and plundered; the people were sold
into slavery, they were made a reproach and a by-word among the nations
of the earth.

III\. The statement that whatever might be the reason why all this had
come upon them, it was not on account of national defection, or the
prevalence of idolatry, or because they had forgotten God, [Psa
44:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017). The idea is that there was a
prevailing desire in the nation to serve God, and that this was to be
regarded as a calamity coming upon the people of God as such; their
sufferings were endured in the cause of true religion, or because they
were the people of God. This furnishes a ground of appeal that God would
interpose in their behalf; or that he would vindicate them and his own
cause.

IV\. An earnest appeal to God to aid and save them, [Psa
44:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023).

[Psalms 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 44:1</span></span>

We have heard with our ears - That is, it has been handed down by
tradition.

Our fathers have told us - Our ancestors. They have delivered it down
from generation to generation. The word rendered "told" means properly
to grave, or to insculp on a stone; and thence, to write. Then it comes
to mean to number, to count, to recount, to tell, to declare. The word
would be applicable to any method of making the thing known, either by
hieroglyphic figures in sculpture, by writing, or by oral tradition,
though it seems probable that the latter mode is particularly referred
to here. Compare [Exo 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#002); [Exo
12:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#026).

What work thou didst in their days - The great work which thou didst
accomplish for them; or, how thou didst interpose in their behalf. The
reference is to what God accomplished for them in delivering them from
Egyptian bondage, and bringing them into the land of Canaan.

In the times of old - In ancient times; in the beginning of our history.
The idea here is, that we may properly appeal to the past - to what God
has done in former ages - as an argument for his interposition in
similar circumstances now, for,

\(a\) His former interposition showed his power to save;

\(b\) it was such an illustration of his character that we may appeal to
that as a reason for asking him to interpose again.

[Psalms 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 44:2</span></span>

How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand - The word rendered
"heathen" means simply nations without necessarily conveying the idea of
paganism, as that word is now understood. It means the nations, to wit,
of the land of Canaan, or the Canaanites; and as these nations were in
fact idolaters, or strangers to the true religion, the word came in time
to have that idea attached to it. It is in that sense that we use the
term now, though the word nations would accurately express the meaning
of the original. The word rendered "drive out" - ירשׁ yârash - means
properly to take, seize, or take possession of; and then, in the form
here used (Hiphil), it means to cause to possess; to give possession of;
and then, to take possession of, to drive out of a possession, to
dispossess, to disinherit. The meaning here is, he dispossessed them of
their country; he disinherited them. This, the psalmist says, God had
done "by his hand;" that is, it was by his own power.

And plantedst them - That is, planted his people - the children of
Israel. He put them in the place of those whom he had disinherited or
dispossessed. The word is properly applicable to a tree, but it is also
used with reference to a nation, and means that he assigned them a fixed
and permanent residence. Thus we say in English, "to plant a colony."
Compare [Amo 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#015); [Jer
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#006); [Jer
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041); [Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008); [Sa2
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#010).

How thou didst afflict the people - That is, the people of the land of
Canaan; the nations that dwelt there. The word means to bring evil or
calamity upon anyone.

And cast them out - The word used here may be taken in the sense of
sending out or expelling, as in [Gen
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#023); [Kg1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#007) - and then it would be applicable
to the Canaanites, as meaning that God had expelled or driven them out -
as it is understood by our translators; or it may be used to denote the
sending out of shoots or branches by a tree or vine, as in [Psa
80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011); [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008); [Eze
17:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006) - and then it would refer here
to the Israelites, and would mean that God caused them to increase;
multiplied them; spread them over the land, as a vine spreads, [Psa
80:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008). The parallelism here clearly
demands the latter interpretation. So it is understood by Luther,
DeWette, Tholuck, and Prof. Alexander.

[Psalms 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 44:3</span></span>

For they got not the land in possession - The land of Canaan. The design
of this verse is to illustrate the sentiment in the previous verse, that
they owed their establishment in the promised land wholly to God. The
fact that He had interposed in their behalf; that He had shown that he
was able to discomfit their enemies, is appealed to as a reason why he
should now interpose in a time of national danger and calamity. He who
had driven out the nations in the days of their fathers; he who had
established his people peaceably in the land from which the former
inhabitants had been expelled, was able to interpose now and save them.
The prominent thought in all this is, that it was God who had
accomplished all that had been done. That same God was able to save them
again.

By their own sword - That is, it was not owing to their valor, but to
the divine power: [Deu 8:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010); [Deu
9:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003); [Jos
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#012).

Neither did their own arm save them - Not their own strength or prowess.

But thy right hand - The right hand is mentioned because it is that
which is employed in wielding the sword or the spear in battle.

And the light of thy countenance - Thy favor. It was because thou didst
lift upon them the light of thy countenance, or because thou didst favor
them. See the notes at [Psa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006).

Because thou hadst a favor unto them - Thou didst desire to show them
favor; thou hadst pleasure in them. The idea in the Hebrew word is that
of delighting in anything, or having pleasure in it.

[Psalms 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 44:4</span></span>

Thou art my King, O God - literally, "Thou art He, my King, O God;" that
is, Thou art the same: the same King, and the same God, who didst
interpose in the time of the fathers, and thou art he whom I recognize
as King, as the Sovereign Ruler of thy people. The psalmist here uses
the singular number, "my King," as expressive of his own feelings,
though he doubtless means also to speak in the name of the people. It
would seem not improbable from this, that the author of the psalm was
the reigning monarch in the time of the troubles referred to. If not, it
was evidently one who personated him, and who meant to represent his
feelings. The language shows the strong confidence of the author of the
psalm in God, and perhaps also is designed to express his personal
responsibility at the time, and his consciousness that his only refuge
in conducting the troubled affairs of the nation was God.

Command deliverances for Jacob - As if all was under His command, and He
had only to give direction, and salvation would come. The word "Jacob"
here is used to denote the descendants of Jacob, or the people of God.
See the notes at [Psa 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006).

[Psalms 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 44:5</span></span>

Through thee - By thy help. "Will we push down our enemies." The word
here rendered "push down" means literally to strike or push with the
horns, spoken of horned animals, [Exo
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#028), [Exo
21:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#031). Then it is applied to a
conqueror prostrating nations before him: [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Kg1
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011).

Through thy name - That is, acting under thine authority and by thy
help. If he gave the commandment [Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004), it would be certain that they
would be able to overcome their adversaries.

Will we tread them under - Will we conquer or subdue them. The language
is taken from the custom of treading on a prostrate foe. See [Psa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005), note; [Psa
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040), note; compare [Job
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#012), note; [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006), note; [Isa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003), note; [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023), note.

That rise up against us - Our enemies that have mustered their strength
for war. The language would properly denote those who had rebelled
against a government; but it seems here to be used in a more general
sense, as referring to those who had waged war against them. See [Psa
18:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#039),

[Psalms 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 44:6</span></span>

For I will not trust in my bow - The author of the psalm himself again
speaks as expressing his own feelings, and stating the grounds of his
confidence and hope. Compare [Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004). At the same time he doubtless
expresses the feelings of the people, and speaks in their name. He had
said [Psa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003) that the ancestors of
the Jewish people had not obtained possession of the promised land by
any strength or skill of their own, and he now says that he, and those
who were connected with him, did not depend on their own strength, or on
the weapons of war which they might employ, but that their only ground
of trust was God.

[Psalms 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 44:7</span></span>

But thou hast saved us from our enemies - That is, Thou hast done it in
times past. Thou hast interposed in behalf of our nation in periods of
danger and trial, and hast delivered us. This is stated as a reason for
what is said by the psalmist in [Psa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006) - that he would not trust in his
sword and in iris bow - and for the earnest appeal which he now makes to
God. He and his people did not rely on their own strength and prowess,
but on that God who had often interposed to save the nation.

And hast put them to shame that hated us - In former times. That is, he
had caused them to be discomfited. He had turned them back. He had
covered them with confusion. On the meaning of the words "shame" and
"ashamed," see [Job 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#020), note; [Psa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005), note.

[Psalms 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 44:8</span></span>

In God we boast all the day long - That is, continually or constantly.
It is not a momentary or temporary expression of our feelings, but it is
our habitual and constant employment. We have no other ground of
reliance, and we express that reliance constantly. The word rendered
"boast" here rather more literally means praise: "In God we praise all
the day long." The idea is, that he was their only ground of confidence.
They ascribed all their former successes to him; they had no other
reliance now.

And praise thy name for ever - We do it now; we shall never cease to do
it.

Selah - On the meaning of this word, see the notes at [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 44:9</span></span>

But thou hast cast off - The author of the psalm now commences a
description of the existing circumstances of the nation, so strongly in
contrast with what had existed in former times when God interposed in
their behalf, and when he gave them success. This is properly the
commencement of the second part of the psalm, and the description is
continued to [Psa 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#016). The Hebrew
word here rendered "hast cast off" implies disgust and abhorrence, as
the casting away of that which is loathsome. See the word explained in
the notes at [Psa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002). The reference
is to what had occurred at the time when the psalm was written. See
introduction to this psalm. The allusion is to the invasion of the land
by foreigners; their own discomfiture in their wars; and the calamities
consequent on these invasions and defeats.

And put us to shame - By defeat and disgrace. See the word explained
above, [Psa 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#007). For the defeat and
discomfiture supposed to be referred to, see [Ch2
35:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020); [Ch2
36:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#005).

And goest not forth with our armies - See the places referred to above.
Thus Josiah was defeated and slain; and thus the land was conquered by
the invaders.

[Psalms 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 44:10</span></span>

Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy - Instead of giving us the
victory. That is, we are defeated.

And they which hate us spoil for themselves - They plunder us; they take
our property as spoil, and carry it away. That this was done at the time
referred to in the introduction as the time of the composition of the
psalm, is apparent from the narrative in the Book of Chronicles. [Ch2
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007), "Nebuchadnezzar also carried of
the vessels of the house of the Lord to Babylon, and put them in his
temple at Babylon." Compare [Kg2
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033); [Kg2
24:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013); [Kg2
25:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013).

[Psalms 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 44:11</span></span>

Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat - Margin, as in Hebrew,
"as sheep of meat." That is, as sheep are killed for food, so thou hast
allowed us to be put to death.

And hast scattered us among the heathen - Among the surrounding nations.
See the notes at [Psa 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002). That is,
they had been discomfited in war; many had fled into surrounding
countries; many had been carried away captive. All this undoubtedly
occurred at the time at which I have supposed that the psalm was written
- the time immediately preceding the Babylonian captivity.

[Psalms 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 44:12</span></span>

Thou sellest thy people for nought - Margin, without riches. Without
gain, or advantage; that is, for no price that would be an equivalent.
The people were given up to their enemies, but there was nothing in
return that would be of equal value. The loss was in no way made up.
They were taken away from their country and their homes. They were
withdrawn from useful labor in the land; there was a great diminution of
the national strength and of the national wealth; but there was no
return to the land, no advantage, no valuable result, that would be an
equivalent for thus withdrawing them from their country and their homes.
It was as though they had been given away. A case may be supposed where
the exile of a part of a people might be an advantage to a land, or
where there would be a full equivalent for the loss sustained, as when
soldiers go forth to defend their country, and to repel a foe, rendering
a higher service than they could by remaining at home; or as when
colonists go forth and settle in a new region, producing valuable
returns in commerce; or as when missionaries go forth among the pagan,
often producing, by a reflex influence, effects on the piety and
prosperity of the churches at home, more important, and more widely
diffused, than would have been produced by their remaining to labor in
their own country.

But no such valuable results occurred here. The idea is that they were
lost to their homes; to their country; to the cause of religion. It is
not necessary to suppose that the psalmist here means to say that the
people had been literally sold into slavery, although it is not in
itself improbable that this had occurred. All that the words necessarily
imply would be that the effect was as if they were sold into bondage. In
[Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030); [Jdg
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014); [Jdg
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008); [Jdg
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002), [Jdg
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#009); [Jdg
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007), the word used here is employed
to express the fact that God delivered his people into the hand of their
enemies. Any removal into the territories of the pagan would be a fact
corresponding with all that is conveyed by the language used. There call
be little doubt, however, that (at the time referred to) those who were
made captives in war were literally sold as slaves. This was a common
custom. Compare the notes at [Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003).

And dost not increase thy wealth by their price - The words "thy wealth"
are supplied by the translators; but the idea of the psalmist is
undoubtedly expressed with accuracy. The meaning is, that no good result
to the cause of religion, no corresponding returns had been the
consequence of thus giving up the people into the hand of their enemies.
This may however, be rendered, as DeWette translates it, "thou hast not
enhanced their price;" that is, God had not set a high price on them,
but had sold them for too little, or had given them away for nothing.
But the former idea seems better to suit the connection and to convey
more exactly the meaning of the original. So it is rendered in the
Chaldee, and by Luther.

[Psalms 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 44:13</span></span>

Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbors - Compare the notes at [Psa
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008). The word neighbors here refers
to surrounding people or nations. They were reproached, scorned, and
derided as forsaken by God, and given up to their foes. They no longer
commanded the admiration of mankind as a prosperous, favored, happy
people. Surrounding nations treated them with contempt as inspiring no
fear, and as having nothing to entitle them to respect.

[Psalms 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 44:14</span></span>

Thou makest us a byword among heathen - The word rendered "by-word" -
משׁל mâshâl - means properly a similitude or parable; then, a
sententious saying, and apophthegm; then, a proverb; then, a song or
verse, particularly a satirical song, or a song of derision. The idea
here is, that they were made a proverb, or were referred to as a
striking instance of the divine abandonment, or as something marked to
which the nations might and did refer as an example of calamity,
judgment, misfortune, failure; a warning to all. See [Deu
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037).

A shaking of the head among the people - An occasion for the shaking of
the head, in derision and scorn. Compare the notes at [Psa
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007).

[Psalms 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 44:15</span></span>

My confusion is continually before me - My shame; the conviction and the
evidence of my disgrace is constantly present with me. Literally, "all
the day my shame is before me." That is, the evidences of disgrace,
defeat, and disaster; render everywhere around him, and he could not
conceal them from himself. The psalmist here is represented as the head
of the people, and expresses the sense of disgrace which the sovereign
era people would feel in a time of national calamity; identifying
himself with the people, he speaks of the national disgrace as his own.

And the shame of my face - The shame that is manifested on the
countenance when we blush.

Hath covered me - That is, I am suffused with the evidence of my shame;
or, as we sometimes say, "he blushed all over." The blush, however -
that special rush of blood manifesting itself through the skin - which
constitutes the evidence of shame, is confined to the face and the neck;
an arrangement which none can explain, except on the supposition that
there is a God; that he is a moral governor; and that, as it was
designed that the body should be covered or clothed, he meant that the
evidence of guilt should manifest itself on the parts of the person
which are most exposed to view, or where others could see it. The idea
here is, that he could not conceal the proofs of his shame and disgrace;
he was compelled to exhibit them to all around.

[Psalms 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 44:16</span></span>

For the voice of him ... - That is, Because I hear the voice of him that
reproaches and blasphemes. The word rendered blasphemeth, means properly
to use cutting words; then, to reproach or revile. It may be applied
either to people or to God. In the former case, it means reproach or
reviling; in the latter, blasphemy in the usual sense of that term,
denoting reproachful words concerning God. The word may be used here in
both these senses, as it is evident that not only were the people the
subject of reproach, but that God was also.

By reason of the enemy - That is, the foreign enemies, or those who had
invaded the land.

And avenger - Of him who had come to take vengeance. Here the word
refers to the foreign enemies of the nation, and to the spirit by which
they were actuated; their purposes to avenge themselves of what they
regarded as wrongs, or take vengeance on a nation which they had long
hated. Compare the notes at [Psa 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002).

[Psalms 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 44:17</span></span>

All this is come upon us - All these calamities. The connecting thought
here is, that although all these things had come upon them, yet they
could not be traced to their own infidelity or unfaithfulness to God.
There was nothing in the national character, there were no circumstances
at that time existing, there was no special unfaithfulness among the
people, there was no such general forgetfulness of God, and no such
general prevalence of idolatry as would account for what had occurred,
or as would explain it. The nation was not then more deeply depraved
than it had been at other times; but, on the contrary, there was among
the people a prevalent regard for God and for his service. It was,
therefore, a mystery to the author of the psalm, that these calamities
had been suffered to come upon them at that time; it was an event the
cause of which he desired to search out, [Psa
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021).

Yet have we not forgotten thee - As a nation. That is, there was nothing
special in the circumstances of the nation at that time which would call
down the divine displeasure. We cannot suppose that the psalmist means
to claim for the nation entire perfection, but only to affirm that the
nation at that time was not characterized by any special forgetfulness
of God, or prevalence of wickedness. All that is here said was true at
the time when, as I have supposed, the psalm was written - the closing
part of the reign of Josiah, or the period immeditely following.

Neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant - We have not been
unfaithful to thy covenant; to the covenant which thou didst make with
our fathers; to the commandments which thou hast given us. This can only
mean that there was no such prevailing departure from the principles of
that covenant as could account for this. The psalmist could not connect
the existing state of things - the awful and unique discomfitures and
calamities which had come upon the nation - with anything special in the
character of the people, or in the religious condition of the nation.

[Psalms 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 44:18</span></span>

Our heart is not turned back - That is, We have not turned away from thy
service; we have not apostatized from thee; we have not fallen into
idolatry. This must mean that such was not at that time the
characteristic of the nation; it was not a prominent thing among the
people; there was no such general and pervading iniquity as to explain
the fact that these calamities had come upon them, or to be properly the
cause of these troubles.

Neither have our steps declined from thy way - Margin, goings. The idea
as expressed by our translators is, that the people had not departed
from the path prescribed by God; that is, from what he required in his
law. The Septuagint and the Vulgate render it, "Thou hast turned our
steps from thy way;" that is, though our heart is not turned back, and
we have not revolted from thee, yet thou hast turned our steps from thy
way, or hast turned us from the way of thy favor and from prosperity.
The rendering in the common version, however, is more in conformity with
the idea in the original.

[Psalms 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 44:19</span></span>

Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons - Or rather,
"That thou hast crushed us in the place of dragons." The connection is
continued from the previous verse: "Our heart is not so turned back, nor
have our steps so declined from thy path, that thou shouldst crush us in
the place of dragons." That is, we have been guilty of no such apostasy
and infidelity as to account for the fact that thou hast dealt with us
in this manner, or make it necessary and proper that we should thus be
crushed and overthrown The word rendered "dragons" - תנין tannı̂yn -
means either a great fish; a sea monster; a serpent; a dragon; or a
crocodile. See the notes at [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022). It may also mean a jackal, a
fox, or a wolf. DeWette renders it here, jackals. The idea in the
passage is essentially the same, whichever interpretation of the word is
adopted. The "place of dragons" would denote the place where such
monsters are found, or where they had their abode; that is to say, in
desolate places; wastes; deserts; old ruins; depopulated towns. See the
notes, as above, at [Isa 13:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019);
compare [Jer 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011). The meaning here
would be, therefore, that they had been vanquished; that their cities
and towns had been reduced to ruins; that their land had been laid
waste; that the place where they had been "sore broken" was in fact a
fit abode for wild beasts and monsters.

And covered us with the shadow of death - Our land has been covered with
a dark and dismal shade, as if Death had cast his image or shadow over
it. See [Job 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005), note; and [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004), note. There could be no more
striking illustration of calamity and ruin.

[Psalms 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 44:20</span></span>

If we have forgotten the name of our God - That is, if we have
apostatized from him.

Or stretched out our hands to a strange god - Or have been guilty of
idolatry. The act of stretching out the hands, or spreading forth the
hands, was significant of worship or prayer: [Kg1
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022); [Ch2
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#012); see the notes at [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015). The idea here is, that this was
not the cause or reason of their calamities; that if this had occurred,
it would have been a sufficient reason for what had taken place; but
that no such cause actually existed, and therefore the reason must be
found in something else. It was the fact of such calamities having come
upon the nation when no such cause existed, that perplexed the author of
the psalm, and led to the conclusion in his own mind [Psa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022) that these calamities were
produced by the malignant designs of the enemies of the true religion,
and that, instead of their suffering for their national sins, they were
really martyrs in the cause of God, and were suffering for his sake.

[Psalms 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 44:21</span></span>

Shall not God search this out? - That is, If this had been the case, it
would be known to God. If, as a nation, we had been given to idolatry,
or if our hearts had been secretly alienated from the true God, though
there had been no open manifestation of apostasy, yet that could not
have been concealed from him. The question here asked implies a solemn
declaration on the part of the psalmist that this was not so; or that
there was no such national apostasy from God, and no such prevalence of
idolatry in the land as to account for what had occurred. The reason for
the calamities which had come upon them, therefore, must be found in
something else.

For he knoweth the secrets of the heart - What is in the heart: what is
concealed from the world. If there were any such alienation from him in
the hearts of the people, he would know it. The fact that God knows the
heart, or that he understands all the secret thoughts, purposes, and
motives of people, is one that is everywhere affirmed in the Scriptures.
See [Ch1 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#009); [Rom
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027); compare the notes at [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023).

[Psalms 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 44:22</span></span>

Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long - That is, we are
continually or constantly subjected to these calamities. It is not a
single defeat, but it is a continued slaughter. This verse contains, in
the apprehension of the psalmist, the true cause of the calamities which
had come upon the nation. The emphasis in the passage lies in the phrase
"for thy sake." The meaning is, It is on thy account; it is in thy
cause; it is because we are thy friends, and because we worship thee. It
is not on account of our national sins; it is not because there is any
prevalent idolatry, but it is because we are the worshippers of the true
God, and we are, therefore, martyrs. All these calamities have come upon
us in consequence of our attachment to thee. There is no evidence that
there was any self-glorying in this, or any intention to blame God as if
he were unjust or severe, but it is the feeling of martyrs as suffering
in the cause of religion. This passage is applied by the apostle Paul to
Christians in his time, as fitly describing their sufferings, and the
cause of the calamities which came upon them. See the notes at [Rom
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036).

We are counted as sheep for the slaughter - We are reckoned like sheep
designed for the slaughter. That is, It is not because we are guilty,
but we are regarded and treated as innocent sheep who are driven to be
slaughtered. See the notes at [Rom
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036). Their attachment to the true
religion - their devotion to Yahweh as the true God - was the secret
cause of all the calamities which had come upon them. As a nation they
were his friends, and as such they were opposed by the worshippers of
other gods.

[Psalms 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 44:23</span></span>

Awake, why sleepest thou? - This is a solemn and earnest appeal to God
to interpose in their behalf, as if he were "asleep," or were regardless
of their sufferings. Compare [Psa 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007),
note; [Psa 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006), note; [Psa
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023), note.

Arise, cast us not off for ever - Do not forsake us always. Compare [Psa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009). He had seemed to have cast them
off; to have forgotten them; to have forsaken them utterly, and the
psalmist, in the name of the people, calls on him not entirely to
abandon them.

[Psalms 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 44:24</span></span>

Wherefore hidest thou thy face? - See the notes at [Psa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001). Why dost thou turn away from us,
and refuse to aid us, and leave us to these unpitied sufferings?

And forgettest our affliction and our oppression - Our trials, and the
wrongs that are committed against us. These are earnest appeals. They
are the pleadings of the oppressed and the wronged. The language is such
as man would use in addressing his fellow-men; and, when applied to God,
it must be understood as such language. As used in the Psalms, it
denotes earnestness, but not irreverence; it is solemn petition, not
dictation; it is affectionate pleading, not complaint. It indicates
depth of suffering and distress, and is the strongest language which
could be employed to denote entire helplessness and dependence. At the
same time, it is language which implies that the cause for which they
suffered was the cause of God, and that they might properly call on him
to interfere in behalf of his own friends.

[Psalms 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 44:25</span></span>

For our soul is bowed down to the dust - That is, We are overborne with
calamity, so that we sink to the earth. The expression is one that
denotes great affliction.

Our belly cleaveth unto the earth - We are like animals that are prone
upon the earth, and that cannot rise. The allusion may be to reptiles
that cannot stand erect. The figure is intended to denote great
prostration and affliction.

[Psalms 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 44:26</span></span>

Arise for our help - Margin, as in Hebrew, "a help for us." That is,
Deliver us from our present calamities and troubles.

And redeem us - Save us; deliver us. See [Psa
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#022), note; [Psa
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005), note; [Isa
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027), note; [Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003), note.

For thy mercies' sake - On account of thy mercies. That is, in order
that thy mercy may be manifested; or that thy character, as a God of
mercy, may be made known. It was not primarily or mainly on their own
account that the psalmist urges this prayer; it was that the character
of God might be made known, or that it might be seen that he was a
merciful Being. The proper manifestation of the divine character, as
showing what God is, is in itself of more importance than our personal
salvation - for the welfare of the universe depends on that; and the
highest ground of appeal and of hope which we can have, as sinners, when
we come before him, is that he would glorify himself in his mercy. To
that we may appeal, and on that we may rely. When that is urged as an
argument for our salvation, and when that is the sole ground of our
confidence, we may be assured that he is ready to hear and to save us.
In the New Testament he has told us how that mercy has been manifested,
and how it may be made available to us - to wit, through the Lord Jesus,
the great Mediator; and hence, we are directed to come in his name, and
to make mention of what he has done and suffered in order that the
divine mercy may be consistently manifested to mankind. From the
beginning of the world - from the time when man apostatized from God, -
through all dispensations, and in all ages and lands, the only hope of
men for salvation has been the fact that God is a merciful Being; the
true ground of successful appeal to him has been, is, and ever will be,
that his own name might be glorified and honored in the salvation of
lost and ruined sinners - in the displays of his mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 45](psa045)

</div>
