<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa042)  [Next](psa044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 43:0</span></span>

This psalm is without a title. The name of the author is unknown, and,
of course, it is not known on what occasion the psalm was composed. It
bears, however, a very strong resemblance, in its general spirit and in
its structure, to [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001), and
was, beyond doubt, composed by the same author, and in reference to the
same occasion. The resemblance between the two psalms is so striking
that many have supposed that they are parts of the same psalm, and as
this one terminates with the same language [Psa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005) as that which occurs at the close
of the two parts of [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001) [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011), it has been conjectured by many
that this is the third part or strophe of the psalm, and that they have
been separated by mistake of the transcribers. See introduction to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). It would be impossible to
account for the fact that they had become separated in the majority
Hebrew manuscripts if they had originally constituted one psalm; while
the fact of their being found united in a small number of Hebrew
manuscripts is easily accounted for, as the resemblance of the two may
have led the transcribers to suppose that they were parts of one
composition. The probability is, that this psalm was composed by the
same author, as a kind of supplement to the former psalm, or as
expressing, in a slightly different form, the emotions which passed
through his mind on that same occasion.

The psalm contains

\(1\) an earnest appeal to God to assist the suffering author, and to
protect him from the efforts of an ungodly nation, and from the designs
of the deceitful and unjust man, [Psa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001);

\(2\) an appeal to God as his strength, with the language of anxious
inquiry why he had cast him off, and had suffered him to go mourning
because of the oppression of his enemy, [Psa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002);

\(3\) an earnest prayer that God would interpose, and would send out his
light and his truth, and would permit him to go again to his holy hill,
to the tabernacles, and to the altar, [Psa
43:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003); and

(4), as in [Psa 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011), self-reproach that he is thus
dejected and dispirited, and an appeal to his own soul to arouse itself,
and to put its trust in God. It is a psalm, like the former, of great
practical value to those who, in affliction, are sad and desponding.

[Psalms 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 43:1</span></span>

Judge me, O God - This does not mean, Pronounce sentence upon me; but,
Undertake my cause; interpose in my behalf; do justice in the case. He
regarded his own cause as right; he felt that he was greatly wronged by
the treatment which he received from people, and he asks to have it
shown that he was not guilty of what his enemies charged on him; that he
was an upright man, and a friend of God. See [Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008), note; [Psa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001), note.

And plead my cause - See the notes at [Psa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001). "Against an ungodly nation."
Margin, unmerciful. Literally, "from a nation not merciful," or not;
religious. The idea is, that the nation or people referred to manifested
none of the spirit of religion in their conduct toward him; that he was
treated with severity and injustice. This entire description would agree
well with the state of things in the time of the rebellion of Absalom,
when David was driven from his home and his throne: 2 Sam. 15,
following.

O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man - Margin, as in Hebrew,
from a man of deceit and iniquity. This would apply well to the case and
character of Absalom, or perhaps more directly and properly to the
character and counsel of Ahithophel, among the leading conspirators in
the rebellion of Absalom, to whose counsels much of the rebellion was
owing: [Sa2 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#031); compare [Sa2
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023); [Sa2
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014), [Sa2
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023).

[Psalms 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 43:2</span></span>

For thou art the God of my strength - See [Psa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002), note; [Psa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007), note.

Why dost thou cast me off? - As if I were none of thine; as if I were
wholly abandoned. Compare the notes at [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001). The word rendered "cast off" -
זנח zânach - is a word which implies strong disgust or loathing: "Why
dost thou cast me off as a loathsome or disgusting object?" Compare [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016). The Hebrew word means properly
to be foul, to be rancid, to stink: then, to be loathsome or abominable;
and then, to treat or regard anything as such. Compare [Hos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#003), [Hos
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005); [Isa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006).

Why go I mourning ... - See the notes at [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009). This expression, with others of
a similar character, renders it morally certain that this psalm was
composed by the same person, and with reference to the same
circumstances, as the former.

[Psalms 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 43:3</span></span>

O send out thy light and thy truth - Send them forth as from thy
presence; or, let them be made manifest. The word light here is
equivalent to favor or mercy, as when one prays for the "light of God's
countenance" (see the notes at [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)); and the idea is, that now, in
the time of darkness and trouble, when the light of God's countenance
seemed to be withdrawn or hidden, he prays that God would impart light;
that he would restore his favor; that he would conduct him back again to
his former privileges. The word truth here is equivalent to truthfulness
or faithfulness; and the prayer is, that God would manifest his
faithfulness to him as one of his own people, by restoring him to the
privileges and blessings from which he had been unjustly driven. Compare
the notesat [Psa 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#005).

Let them lead me - That is, Let them lead me back to my accustomed
privileges; let me go under their guidance to the enjoyment of the
blessings connected with the place of public worship.

Let them bring me unto thy holy hill - Mount Zion; the place where the
worship of God was then celebrated, and hence called the "holy hill" of
God.

And to thy tabernacles - The tabernacle was the sacred tent erected for
the worship of God (see the notes at [Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)), and was regarded as the place
where Yahweh had his abode. The tabernacle was divided, as the temple
was afterward, into two parts or rooms, the holy and the most holy place
(see the notes at [Heb 9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001)); and
hence the plural term, tabernacles, might be employed in speaking of it.
The language here implies, as in [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001), that the author of the psalm
was now exiled or banished from this, and hence, also it may be inferred
that the two psalms were composed by the same author, and with reference
to the same occasion. If the reference here, moreover, is to Mount Zion
as the "holy hill," it may be observed that this would fix the
composition of the psalm to the time of David, as before his time that
was not the place of the worship of God, but was made "holy" by his
removing the ark there. After his time the place of worship was removed
to Mount Moriah, where the temple was built. It cannot be demonstrated,
however, with absolute certainty that the reference here is to Mount
Zion, though that seems in every way probable. Compare [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), note; [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004), note; compare [Sa2
5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007); [Sa2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017).

[Psalms 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 43:4</span></span>

Then will I go unto the altar of God - The altar on Mount Zion, where
sacrifices were offered: [Sa2 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017).
The meaning is, that he would again unite with others in the public and
customary worship of God. Compare the notes at [Psa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004).

Unto God - Into the immediate presence of God; the place where he was
worshipped.

My exceeding joy - Margin, the gladness of my joy. The Septuagint
renders this, "who makes my youth joyous:" or, "the joy of my youth,"
(Thompson) The Hebrew is, the gladness of my joy; meaning, that God was
the source of his joy, so that he found all his happiness in Him.

Yea, upon the harp will I praise thee - Compare the notes at [Psa
33:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002). Instruments of music were
commonly used in the worship of God, and David is represented as
excelling in the music of the harp. Compare [Sa1
16:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016).

O God, my God - It was not merely God as such that he desired to
worship, or to whom he now appealed, but God as his God, the God to whom
he had devoted himself, and whom he regarded as his God even in
affliction and trouble. Compare the notes at [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001).

[Psalms 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 43:5</span></span>

Why art thou cast down?... - See [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), note; [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011), note. The sameness of this
verse with [Psa 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005), [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011) proves, as has been already
remarked, that this psalm was composed by the same writer, and with
reference to the same subject as the former. The doctrine which is
taught is the same - that we should not be dejected or cast down in the
troubles of life, but should hope in God, and look forward to better
times, if not in this world, certainly in the world to come. If we are
his children, we shall "yet praise him;" we shall acknowledge him as the
"health" or the salvation (Hebrew) of our countenance; as one who by
giving "salvation" diffuses joy over our countenance; as one who will
manifest himself as our God. He who has an eternity of blessedness
before him - he who is to dwell forever in a world of peace and joy - he
who is soon to enter an abode where there will be no sin, no sadness, no
tears, no death - he who is to commence a career of glory which is never
to terminate and never to change - should not be cast down - should not
be overwhelmed with sorrow.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 44](psa044)

</div>
