<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa082)  [Next](psa084) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 83](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 83:0</span></span>

This is another of the psalms of Asaph, the last of the group or
collection that is found under his name. Compare the Introduction to Ps.
73. The occasion on which this was composed is not certainly known, and
cannot now be ascertained. Grotius supposes that it relates to the time
of David, and especially to the first war with the Syrians referred to
in 2 Sam. 8, or to the second war with the Syrians referred to in 2 Sam.
10, and 1 Chr. 19. Kimchi, DeWette, and others, suppose that it relates
to the time of Jehoshaphat, and to the war with the Ammonites and
Moabites, referred to in 2 Chr. 20. Hengstenberg and Prof. Alexander
concur in this opinion, and suppose that it was written on the same
occasion as [Psa 47:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001); [Psa
48:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001); the first, composed and sung
on the field of battle; the second, on the triumphant return to
Jerusalem; the third - the one before us - in confident anticipation of
victory. This is, perhaps, rather fanciful, and it certainly cannot be
demonstrated that this is the correct opinion. It would seem, at least,
to be hardly probable that a psalm would be composed and sung in a
battlefield.

All that is certain in regard to the psalm is, that it was written in
view of a threatened invasion by combined armies, and the prayer is,
that God would give help, as he had done when the nation had been
threatened on other occasions. The nations which were combined, or which
had formed an alliance for this purpose, are specified in [Psa
83:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006); Edom; Ishmael; Moab; the
Hagarenes; Gebal; Ammon; Amalek; the Philistines; the Tyrians, Assur,
and the children of Lot.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. A prayer that God would no longer keep still, or be silent, [Psa
83:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#001).

II\. A statement of the occasion for the prayer, to wit, the conspiracy
or combination formed against his people, [Psa
83:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#002).

III\. An enumeration of the nations thus combined, [Psa
83:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006).

IV\. A prayer that God would interpose as he had done in former times,
in critical periods of the Jewish history - as in the case of the
Midianites; as in the time of Sisera, and Jabin; and as in the wars
waged with Oreb and Zeeb, Zebah and Zalmunna, [Psa
83:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009).

V. A prayer that these enemies might be utterly overthrown and
confounded; that God would promote his own glory; and that his people
might be secure and happy, [Psa
83:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#013).

[Psalms 83:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 83:1</span></span>

Keep not thou silence, O God - See the notes at [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001). The prayer here is that in the
existing emergency God would not seem to be indifferent to the needs and
dangers of his people, and to the purposes of their enemies, but that he
would speak with a voice of command, and break up their designs.

Hold not thy peace - That is, Speak. Give commaud. Disperse them by
thine own authority.

And be not still, O God - Awake; arouse; be not indifferent to the needs
and dangers of thy people. All this is the language of petition; not of
command. Its rapidity, its repetition, its tone, all denote that the
danger was imminent, and that the necessity for the divine interposition
was urgent.

[Psalms 83:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 83:2</span></span>

For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult - Are excited; are aroused; are
moving in a wild, furious, tumultuous manner, rushing on to the
accomplishment of their designs. They come like rolling waves of the
sea. See the word used here explained in the notes at [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), where it is rendered, in the
text, "rage;" in the margin, "tumultuously assemble."

And they that hate thee - Thine enemies; the enemies of thy cause, and
of thy people. Who they were is specified in [Psa
83:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006).

Have lifted up the head - Have become proud; bold; confident of success,
all of which is indicated by the phrase "lifted up the head." The head
is bowed down in penitence and trouble; pride lifts it up; boldness,
confidence, and wickedness, are indicated by its being thus lifted up.

[Psalms 83:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 83:3</span></span>

They have taken crafty counsel - The one word translated "have taken
crafty" - ערם ‛âram - means properly to make naked; and then, to be
crafty, cunning, malignant, [Sa1
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#022). It is well rendered here, they
have taken crafty counsel. The meaning is, they have made their counsel
or their consultations crafty, cunning, artful, malignant. Instead of
pursuing a course in their deliberations that would be just, true,
honorable, they have followed the reverse. On the word rendered
"counsel" - סוד sôd - which means a couch or cushion, and hence, a divan
- see [Job 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#008), note; [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014), note; [Psa
64:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#002), note. The idea here is, that the
persons referred to in the subsequent part of the psalm ([Psa
83:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006)) had been assembled in a divan,
or for consultation, and that they had there formed a malignant plan -
against God and his people - which they were now proceeding to execute.

Against thy people - For the purpose of destroying them.

And consulted against thy hidden ones - The word rendered "hidden ones"
- from the verb צפן tsâphan, to hide, to conceal - properly denotes that
which is secret, private, inaccessible [Eze
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#022); and then, anything protected or
hidden so as to be secure. Compare the notes at [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005). It would seem here to refer to
those who were so protected by Yahweh - so inaccessible to others by
reason of his guardian care - that they would be safe.

[Psalms 83:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 83:4</span></span>

They have said, Come, and let us cut them off ... - Let us utterly
destroy them, and root them out from among the nations. Let us combine
against them, and overpower them; let us divide their land among
ourselves, attaching it to our own. The nations referred to [Psa
83:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006) were those which surrounded the
land of Israel; and the proposal seems to have been to partition the
land of the Hebrews among themselves, as has been done in modern times
in regard to Poland. On what principles, and in what proportions, they
proposed thus to divide the land is not intimated, nor is it said that
the project had gone so far that they had agreed on the terms of such a
division. The formation of such a purpose, however, was in itself by no
means improbable. The Hebrew people were offensive to all the
surrounding nations by their religion, their prosperity, and the
constant rebuke of tyranny and idolatry by their religious and their
social institutions. There had been enough, also, in their past history
- in the remembrance of the successful wars of the Hebrews with those
very nations - to keep up a constant irritation on their part. We are
not to be surprised, therefore, that there was a deeply-cherished desire
to blot out the name and the nation altogether.

That the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance - That the nation
as such may be utterly extinct and forgotten; that the former triumphs
of that nation over us may be avenged; that we may no longer have in our
very midst this painful memorial of the existence of one God, and of the
demands of his law; that we may pursue our own plans without the silent
or the open admonition derived from a religion so pure and holy. For the
same reason the world has often endeavored to destroy the church; to
cause it to be extinct; to blot out its name; to make the very names
Christ and Christian forgotten among mankind. Hence, the fiery
persecutions under the Roman government in the time of the Emperors; and
hence, in every age, and in every land, the church has been exposed to
persecution - originated with a purpose to destroy it as long as there
was any hope of accomplishing that end. That purpose has been abandoned
by Satan and his friends only because the result has shown that the
persecution of the church served but to spread its principles and
doctrines, and to fix it more firmly in the affections and confidence of
mankind, so that the tendency of persecution is rather to overthrow the
persecutor than the persecuted. Whether it can be destroyed by
prosperity and corruption - by science - by error - seems now to be the
great problem before the mind of Satan.

[Psalms 83:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 83:5</span></span>

For they have consulted together with one consent - Margin, as in
Hebrew, heart. There is no division in their counsels on this subject.
They have one desire - one purpose - in regard to the matter. Pilate and
Herod were made friends together against Christ [Luk
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#012); and the world, divided and
hostile on other matters, has been habitually united in its opposition
to Christ and to a pure and spiritual religion.

They are confederate against thee - literally, "They cut a covenant
against thee;" that is, they ratify such a covenant, compact, league -
referring to the manner in which bargains and agreements were ratified
by cutting in pieces a victim sacrificed on such occasions; that is, by
giving to such a transaction the solemnity of a religious sanction. [Gen
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010); [Jer
34:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018). See Bochart, Hieroz. i. 35.
The meaning here is, that they had entered into this agreement in the
most solemn manner, under the sanctions of religion.

[Psalms 83:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 83:6</span></span>

The tabernacles of Edom - The tents of Edom; meaning here, the dwellers
in those tents, that is, the Edomites. The word tabernacles or tents
does not necessarily imply that the nation then led a wandering life,
for the word came to signify in process of time a dwelling-place, or a
habitation. The Edomites were not, in fact, a roving and wandering
people, but a people of fixed boundaries. In early periods, however,
like most ancient people, they doubtless dwelt in tents. Edom, or
Idumea, was south of Palestine. See the notes at [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014).

And the Ishmaelites - The descendants of Ishmael. They dwelt in Arabia
Deserta.

Of Moab - On the situation of Moab, see the notes at [Isa
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001). It was on the southeast of
Palestine.

And the Hagarenes - The Hagarenes were properly Arabs, so called from
Hagar, the handmaid of Abraham, the mother of Ishmael. [Gen
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001); [Gen
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#012). As connected with the
Ishmaelites they would naturally join in this alliance.

[Psalms 83:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 83:7</span></span>

Gebal - The Gebal here referred to was probably the same as Gebalene,
the mountainous tract inhabited by the Edomites, extending from the Dead
Sea southward toward Petra, and still called by the Arabs Djebal.
(Gesenius, Lexicon) The word means mountain. Those who are here referred
to were a part of the people of Edom.

And Ammon - The word Ammon means son of my people. Ammon was the son of
Lot by his youngest daughter, [Gen
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#038). The Ammonites, descended from
him, dwelt beyond the Jordan in the tract of country between the streams
of Jabbok and Arnon. These also would be naturally associated in such a
confederacy. [Sa1 11:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001).

And Amalek - The Amalekites were a very ancient people: In the
traditions of the Arabians they are reckoned among the aboriginal
inhabitants of that country. They inhabited the regions on the south of
Palestine, between Idumea and Egypt. Compare [Exo
17:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008); [Num
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029); [Sa1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#007). They also extended eastward of
the Dead Sea and Mount Seir [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020); [Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013); [Jdg
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003), [Jdg
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033); and they appear also to have
settled down in Palestine itself, whence the name the Mount of the
Amalekites, in the territory of Ephraim, [Jdg
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#015).

The Philistines - Often mentioned in the Scriptures. They were the
ancient inhabitants of Palestine, whence the name Philistia or
Palestine. The word is supposed to mean the land of sojourners or
strangers; hence, in the Septuagint they are uniformly called ἀλλοφύλοι
allophuloi, those of another tribe, strangers, and their country is
called γῆ ἀλλοφύλων gē allophulōn. They were constant enemies of the
Hebrews, and it was natural that they should be engaged in such an
alliance as this.

With the inhabitants of Tyre - On the situation of Tyre, see the
Introduction to Isa. 23. Why Tyre should unite in this confederacy is
not known. The purpose seems to have been to combine as many nations as
possible against the Hebrew people, and - as far as it could be done -
all those that were adjacent to it, so that it might be surrounded by
enemies, and so that its destruction might be certain. It would not
probably be difficult to find some pretext for inducing any of the kings
of the surrounding nations to unite in such an unholy alliance. Kings,
in general, have not been unwilling to form alliances against liberty.

[Psalms 83:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 83:8</span></span>

Assur also is joined with them - Assyria. Assyria was on the northeast
of Palestine. The conspirators had secured, it seems, the aid of this
powerful kingdom, and they felt confident of success.

They have holpen the children of Lot - The sons, or the descendants of
Lot. The margin is, as the Hebrew, "been an arm to." That is, they were
an aid, or help; in other words, the sons of Lot were permitted, as it
were, to make use of the arm of these powerful nations in accomplishing
their purposes. The sons of Lot were Moab and Ammon, the ancestors of
the Moabites and the Ammonites, [Gen
19:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037). It would appear from this,
that the purpose of destroying the Hebrew people had been originated by
the Moabites and Ammonites, and that they had called in the aid of the
surrounding nations to enable them to carry out their plan. The
enumeration of those who had joined in the alliance shows that all the
nations adjacent to Palestine, on every side, had entered into the
agreement, so that the land was completely encompassed, or hemmed in, by
enemies. In these circumstances, the conspirators felt secure; in these
circumstances, the Hebrew people had no resource but to call upon God.
Thus it often occurs that the people of God are so surrounded by
enemies, or are so hemmed in by troubles and trials, that they have no
other resource than this: they are shut up to the necessity of prayer.
Often God so orders, or permits things to occur, as to cut off his
people from every other dependence, and to make them feel that there is
no help for them but in Him.

[Psalms 83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 83:9</span></span>

Do unto them as unto the Midianites - That is, Let them be overthrown
and destroyed as the Midianites were. The reference here is to the
complete overthrow of the Midianites, as related in Num. 31.

As to Sisera - The captain or commander of the army of Jabin, king of
Canaan. He was conquered by the Hebrew armies under the direction of the
prophetess Deborah, by the instrumentality of Barak [Jdg
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004), [Jdg
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006),[Jdg
4:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#014), and was slain by Jael, the
wife of Heber the Kenite, [Jdg
4:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017).

As to Jabin - The king of Canaan, in whose service Sisera was.

At the brook of Kison - [Jdg 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#013).
This is a stream which rises near Mount Tabor, and empties itself into
the Bay of Ptolemais. In [Jdg 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#021), in
the song of Deborah on occasion of this victory, it is mentioned as
"that ancient river, the river Kishon;" that is, it was a stream which
was well known; which had been referred to in ancient tales and poetry;
not a newly discovered river, but a river whose name and locality were
familiar to all.

[Psalms 83:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 83:10</span></span>

Which perished at En-dor - Endor is not particularly mentioned in the
history of the transaction in the book of Judges, but it is known that
Endor was in the vicinity of Mount Tabor, and there is no improbability
in the tradition which has fixed the site of the battle at or near
Endor. The word or name "En-dor" means properly fount of the dwelling
(or, habitation), and was probably given at first to a spring or
fountain near to which some distinguished or well-known person dwelt. It
is mentioned in [Jos 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011); [Sa1
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007).

They became as dung for the earth - The land was enriched or made
fertile by their flesh, their blood, and their bones, as the field of
Waterloo was by that of the slain, or as fields of battle commonly are.

[Psalms 83:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 83:11</span></span>

Make their nobles like Oreb and like Zeeb - These were princes or rulers
of the Midianites, slain by Gideon, the one on the rock Oreb, and the
other at the wine-press of Zeeb. [Jdg
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025). The prayer here is, that the
enemies who had conspired against the land of Israel might be utterly
destroyed.

Yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna - The word here
rendered princes means properly anointed, and was given to princes,
kings, prophets, and priests, as anointed, or as set apart by anointing
to their office. Zebah and Zalmunna were kings of Midian, slain also by
Gideon. See [Jdg 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#005), [Jdg
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#021).

[Psalms 83:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 83:12</span></span>

Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession - The
houses of God here mean the habitations of God, or the places where he
dwelt among the people. As there was but one ark, one tabernacle, and
one temple, or one place of constituted public worship, this must refer
to other places where God was worshipped, or where he might be supposed
to reside; either to synagogues (see the notes at [Psa
74:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#008)), or to the private dwellings of
the people regarded as a holy people, or as a people among whom God
dwelt. This may, therefore, imply that their dwellings - their private
abodes - were also dwelling-places of God, as now the house of a
religious family - a place where God is regularly worshipped - may be
regarded as an abode of God on the earth. The language here is not to be
understood as that of Oreb and Zeeb, of Zebah and Zalmunna, but of the
enemies referred to in the psalm, who had entered into the conspiracy to
destroy the Hebrew nation. They had said, "Let us inherit the houses of
God;" that is, Let us take to ourselves, and for our possession, the
dwellings of the land where God is supposed to reside.

[Psalms 83:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 83:13</span></span>

O my God, make them like a wheel ... - Or rather, like a rolling thing -
something that the wind rolls along. The word גלגל galgal - means
properly a wheel, as of a chariot, [Eze
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002), [Eze
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#006); or a wheel for drawing water
from a well, [Ecc 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006); then, a
whirlwind, [Psa 77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019); and then,
anything driven before a whirlwind, as chaff, or stubble, [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013). Compare the notes at [Isa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#018). The prayer here is, that they
might be utterly destroyed, or driven away.

[Psalms 83:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 83:14</span></span>

As the fire burneth a wood ... - The same idea is here presented under
another form. No image of desolation is more fearful than that of fire
raging in a forest; or of fire on the mountains. As trees and shrubs and
grass fall before such a flame, so the prayer is, that they who had
combined against the people of God might be swept away by his just
displeasure.

[Psalms 83:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 83:15</span></span>

So persecute them - So pursue them; so follow them up. The word
"persecute" is now used in a somewhat different sense, as denoting pain
or suffering inflicted on account of religious opinion. It means here
simply to pursue.

With thy tempest - With the expressions of thy displeasure; with
punishment which may be compared with the fury of a storm.

And make them afraid with thy storm - Or, Make them afraid, terrify
them, so that they will flee away. As all that is here sought by prayer
is what people endeavor to do when an enemy invades their country - as
they make arrangements for repelling those enemies, and overthrowing
them, and as they feel that it is right to do so - there is no
impropriety in making this the subject of prayer to God. What it is
right for men to attempt, it is right to pray for; what it would be
right for them to do if they had the power, it is right to ask God to
accomplish; what is free from malignity in the act, and in the design,
may be free from malignity in the desire and the prayer; and if men can
carry with them the idea that what they are endeavoring to do is right,
whether as magistrates, judges, rulers, defenders of their country, or
as private men, they will have very little difficulty in regard to the
so-called "imprecatory psalms." See this subject treated in the General
Introduction

[Psalms 83:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 83:16</span></span>

Fill their faces with shame - As those who are disappointed and foiled
in their plans - such disappointment and confusion commonly manifesting
itself in the face. The prayer here is, that their enemies might be so
baffled in their designs - that they might be made so to feel how vain
and hopeless were all their plans - that there might be such a manifest
interposition of God in the case, as that they should be led to see that
Yahweh reigned; that it was in vain to contend with him, and that his
people were under his protection.

That they may seek thy name, O Lord - That they may be led to seek thee.
This explains the drift and design of the whole prayer in the psalm. It
is not a malignant prayer for the destruction of their enemies; it is
not a wish that they might be made to suffer; but it is a prayer that
the divine dealing might be such as to lead them to the acknowledgment
of the true God. It is a benevolent thing to desire that men may be
brought to the knowledge of the true God, though it be through the
discomfiture of their own plans, by defeat, or by suffering. Anything
that leads people to an acquaintance with God, and results in securing
his friendship and favor, is a gain, and will be cause of thankfulness
in the end.

[Psalms 83:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 83:17</span></span>

Let them be confounded - Let them be ashamed. That is, Let them have
that kind of shame and confusion which results from the fact that their
plans have not been successful, or that they have been foiled and
baffled in their schemes.

And troubled - Disturbed; put to confusion. Let them be troubled as men
are who are unsuccessful in their projects.

Forever - As a people; as confederated nations; as united in such an
unholy alliance. Let them never again be able thus to combine, or to
form a compact for the destruction of thy people. This does not refer to
them as individuals, but as nations. It is a prayer that they may be so
discomfited now that they may see the wickedness and folly of all such
efforts, and that they may never again form such a combination.

Yea, let them be put to shame - By utter failure in their schemes.

And perish - Not individually, but as combined - as an alliance. Let
there be a complete end to such a confederacy, so that it shall never be
seen again.

[Psalms 83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 83:18</span></span>

That men may know - That all people may be impressed with the belief
that thou art the true and only God. This was the design and aim of the
prayer in the psalm. It was that there might be such a manifestation of
the power of God; that it might be so evident that the events which had
occurred could be traced to no other source than God himself, that all
people might be led to honor him.

That thou whose name alone is Jehovah - To whom alone this name belongs;
to whom alone it can be properly ascribed. This was the special name by
which God chose to be known. [Exo 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003).
Compare the notes at [Isa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008). On the
word Jehovah - יהוה Yahweh - see the notes at [Psa
68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004). It is found in combination, in
[Gen 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014); [Exo
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015); [Jdg
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#024); [Eze
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035); [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006); [Jer
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016).

Art the Most High over all the earth - Thou art the Supreme God, ruling
over all people. Thy dominion is so absolute over nations, even when
combined together, and thy power is so complete in foiling their plans,
and disconcerting their purposes, that it is clear that thou dost reign
over them. He that could break up such a combination - he that could
rescue his people from such an allied force - must have all power over
the nations - must be the true God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 84](psa084)

</div>
