<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa064)  [Next](psa066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 65:0</span></span>

This also purports to be a psalm of David. It is dedicated to "the chief
Musician," or committed to him to be set to appropriate music for the
public worship of God. See the notes at the Introduction to [Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). It is described as both "a
psalm," and "a song." It is not easy to account for this double
appellation, or to distinguish between the meaning of these words,
though probably the real distinction is that the former word - psalm -
refers to that to which it is applied, considered merely as a poem or
composition; the latter - song - is applied with reference to its being
sung in public worship. See Introduction to [Psa
48:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001).

Though the psalm is ascribed to David, and though there is nothing in
its general character which is inconsistent with this supposition, yet
it has been maintained by DeWette and some others that the expressions
in [Psa 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004) demonstrate that the
psalm was composed after the temple was erected. The ground of this
supposition is, that the words "courts," "house," and "holy temple,"
occurring in that verse, are applicable only to the temple. This,
however, is not decisive, for all these words may have been used in
reference to the tabernacle, or to the tent which David erected on Mount
Zion [Ch2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#004), and where he was
accustomed to worship. Compare the notes at [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004). If this is so, then there is
nothing to forbid the supposition that the psalm was composed by David.
Compare also the notes at [Psa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001).

The occasion on which it was written is not indicated in the title, and
it is impossible now to determine it. It would seem from the psalm
itself to have been composed after a copious and much-needed rain,
perhaps after a long drought, when the earth was again refreshed by
showers from heaven. The language, however, is of so general character
that it may have had no particular reference to any recent event in the
time of the psalmist, but may have been suggested, like Ps. 104, by a
general contemplation of the power and the beneficence of God as
manifested in his providential dealings. Possibly it may have been a
song composed for some annual occasion, recounting the acts of God in
the revolving seasons of the year - the general reasons which his people
had to praise him. It evidently refers to some public solemnity - some
acts of praise to be rendered to God in his house [Psa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001), [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004), and would be eminently
appropriate when his people approached him in an annual thanksgiving.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. The blessedness of praising God, or of coming before him, in his
house, with the language of prayer and praise, [Psa
65:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001).

\(a\) Praise "waits" for God;

\(b\) he is the hearer of prayer;

\(c\) he alone can cleanse the soul from sin;

\(d\) it is a blessed privilege to be permitted to come before him, and
to dwell in his courts.

II\. The things for which he is to be praised, [Psa
65:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005).

\(1\) he is to be praised for the exhibitions of his power, or as the
Almighty God; as one who answers the prayers of his people by heavy
judgments; as one who shows that all may have confidence in him, on the
earth and on the sea; as one who makes the mountains firm, who stills
the noise of the waves, who calms the tumults of the people, who
displays the tokens of his power everywhere, and makes the outgoings of
the morning and evening to rejoice, [Psa
65:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005).

\(2\) for his beneficence, especially in sending down refreshing rains
upon the earth, and causing the grain to spring up, the grass to grow,
and the hills to rejoice on every side, [Psa
65:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009).

[Psalms 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 65:1</span></span>

Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion - That is, all the arrangements
are made; the people are assembled; their hearts are prepared to praise
thee. The fact that Zion is mentioned here as the seat of praise would
seem to imply that this psalm was composed before the building of the
temple, contrary to the opinion of DeWette and others, as noticed in the
Introduction to the psalm, for after the building of the temple the seat
of worship was transferred from Mount Zion, where David had placed the
ark and prepared a tent for it [Ch1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001); [Ch1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#001); [Ch2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#004), to Mount Moriah. It is true that
the general name Zion was given familiarly to Jerusalem as a city, but
it is also true that the particular place for the worship of God in the
time of David was Mount Zion strictly so called. See the notes at [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006). The margin in this place is,
"Praise is silent." The Hebrew is, "To thee is silence-praise," - a kind
of compound phrase, not meaning "silent praise," but referring to a
condition where everything is ready; where the preparations have been
entirely made; where the noise usually attendant on preparation has
ceased, and all is in readiness as if waiting for that for which the
arrangements had been carried forward. The noise of building - of
preparation - was now hushed, and all was calm. The language here would
also denote the state of feeling in an individual or an assembly, when
the heart was prepared for praise; when it was filled with a deep sense
of the majesty and goodness of God; when all feelings of anxiety were
calmed down, or were in a state of rest; when the soul was ready to
burst forth in expressions of thanksgiving, and nothing would meet its
needs but praise.

And unto thee shall the vow be performed - See [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025), note; [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014), note; [Psa
56:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012), note. The reference here is to
the vows or promises which the people had made in view of the manifested
judgments of God and the proofs of his goodness. Those vows they were
now ready to carry out in expressions of praise.

[Psalms 65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 65:2</span></span>

O thou that hearest prayer - Who hast revealed thyself as a God hearing
prayer - one of the leading characteristics of whose nature it is that
thou dost hear prayer. Literally, "Hearer of prayer, to thee shall all
flesh come." Nothing as applied even to God is more sublime and
beautiful than the appellative "Hearer of prayer." Nothing in his
attributes is of more interest and importance to man. Nothing more
indicates his condescension and goodness; nothing so much encourages us
in the endeavor to overcome our sins, to do good, to save our souls, and
to save the souls of others. Dark and dismal would this world be, if God
did not hear prayer; gloomy, inexpressibly gloomy, would be the
prospects of man, if he had not the assurance that God is a
prayer-hearing God - if he might not come to God at all times with the
assurance that it is his very nature to hear prayer, and that his ear is
ever open to the cries of the guilty, the suffering, the sad, the
troubled, the dying.

Unto thee shall all flesh come - That is, all people - for the word is
here used evidently to denote mankind. The idea is, that there is no
other resource for man, no other help, no other refuge, but the God that
hears prayer. No other being can meet his actual needs; and those needs
are to be met only in connection with prayer. All people are permitted
to come thus to God; all have need of his favor; all must perish unless,
in answer to prayer, he interposes and saves the soul. It is also true
that the period will arrive on earth when all flesh - all people - will
come to God and worship him; when, instead of the scattered few who now
approach him, all nations, all the dwellers on continents and islands,
will worship him; will look to him in trouble; will acknowledge him as
God; will supplicate his favor.

[Psalms 65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 65:3</span></span>

Iniquities prevail against me - Margin, as in Hebrew, Words, or matters
of iniquities. The literal meaning is words; and the idea may be that
words spoken in iniquity, or slanderous words spoken by others,
prevailed against him. The phrase, however, is susceptible of the
interpretation which refers it to iniquity itself; meaning the matter of
iniquity - the thing - iniquity itself - as if that overcame him, or got
the mastery of him. The psalmist here, in his own name, seems to
represent the people who thus approached God, for the psalm refers to
the worship of an assembly or a congregation. The idea is, that when
they thus came before God; when they had prepared all things for his
praise [Psa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001); when they approached
him in an attitude of prayer, they were so bowed down under a load of
transgression - a weight of sin - as to hinder their easy access to his
throne. They were so conscious of unworthiness; their sin had such an
effect on their minds; it rendered them so dull, cold, and stupid, that
they could not find access to the throne of God. How often do the people
of God find this to be the case!

As for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away - That is, In
reference to these very transgressions or iniquities that now press us
down, thou wilt remove them. The language expresses the rising
confidence and hope of the worshippers that God would not allow those
transgressions so to prevail as to prevent their worshipping God
acceptably. Heavy as was the burden of sin, and much as the
consciousness of guilt tended to impede their worship, yet they felt
assured that God would so remove their transgressions that they might
have access to his mercy-seat. The word rendered "purge away" - כפר
kâphar - is the word which is commonly rendered "to atone for," or which
is used to represent the idea of atonement. See the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). The word has here the sense of
cleansing or purifying, but it always carries with it, in the
Scriptures, a reference to that through which the heart is cleansed -
the atonement, or the expiatory offering made for sin. The language here
expresses the feeling which all may have, and should have, and which
very many do have, when they approach God, that, although they are
deeply conscious of sin, God will so graciously remove the guilt of sin,
and lift off the burden, cleansing the soul by his grace, as to make it
not improper that we should approach him, and that he will enable us to
do it with peace, and joy, and hope. Compare the notes at [Psa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#002).

[Psalms 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 65:4</span></span>

Blessed is the man whom thou choosest - That is, Happy is the man; or,
"Oh, the happiness of the man whom thou dost thus permit to approach
thee." The construction here in the Hebrew is the same as in [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001). See the notes at that passage.
The word choosest refers to the fact that true piety regards all such
blessings as the result of the divine favor; the fruit of his electing
grace and love. Compare the notes at [Eph
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003); notes at [Pe1
1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002). We approach God with
confidence, with the spirit of true worshippers, with the spirit of his
children, only as he inclines us to him, and calls us to partake of his
favor. Compare [Joh 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044).

And causest to approach unto thee - That is, that he may worship thee.
The idea is here recognized in the word "causest," that it is only by a
divine influence that people are led to worship God. The cause - the
efficient reason - why any man worships his Maker at all, is to be found
in God himself. This idea is fairly implied in the form of the word as
it is used in the Hebrew.

That he may dwell in thy courts - That is, either temporarily for the
purpose of worship; or permanently, that he may serve thee in the
sanctuary. See [Psa 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006), note; [Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004), note. Compare [Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001). The word "courts" refers
properly to the area around the tabernacle or the temple, and not to the
tabernacle or temple itself. The worship of the people was offered in
those courts, and not in the tabernacle or temple. See the notes at [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).

We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house - Our souls will
find thus what they need; what they long for. See the notes at [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008). It is the nature of religion to
satisfy the mind; that is, the soul finds in religion what meets its
needs, for religion leaves no necessity of its nature unsupplied. It may
be added that nothing else will do this but religion. The word "house"
here denotes a place where God dwells, and it might be applied to the
temple, as it often is in the Scriptures (compare [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007); [Mat
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013); [Mar
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#017); Luke 19:443; [Joh
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#016); et al.); or to the tabernacle,
before the temple was reared. [Psa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004); [Mat
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004); [Jdg
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031); [Jdg
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018), [Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026), [Jdg
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#031). The reference here is to the
tabernacle or tent which David reared on Mount Zion, and where the
worship of God was celebrated before the temple was built. "Even of thy
holy temple." The word "temple" is most commonly applied in the
Scriptures to the structure which Solomon built for the worship of God;
and it is on the ground that the Word is usually so applied, that
DeWette and others have argued that this psalm could not have been
written by David, but that it was composed after the temple was reared.
But the word rendered "temple" - היכל hêykâl - is a word of so general a
character that it may be applied to any house erected for the worship of
God. It is not unfrequently applied to the tabernacle. See the notes at
[Psa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007). This psalm, therefore, may
have been composed while the tabernacle was standing, and before the
temple was built, and hence, may have been composed by David, as the
title intimates.

[Psalms 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 65:5</span></span>

By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us - That is, By
things suited to inspire us and all people with awe, or with a deep
sense of thy majesty, thy power, and thy glory. The answer to their
prayers would be in such a manner as deeply to impress their minds and
hearts. God's judgments on his foes, and the manner of his manifesting
his favor to his people, would be such as to impress the mind with a
deep sense of his own greatness. Yet all this would be in righteousness;
in the infliction of a just sentence on the wicked; in direct
interposition in favor of the righteous. The judgments of God on guilty
people have been always such as to keep the world in awe; such as were
adapted deeply to impress mankind with a sense of his own majesty and
glory.

O God of our salvation - The God on whom our salvation, or our safety
depends.

Who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth - Of all parts of
the earth, the word "ends" being used on the supposition that the earth
is a plain having appropriate limits. This allusion is often found in
the Scriptures, the sacred writers speaking, as all men do, as things
appear to be. Thus all philosophers, as well as other people, speak of
the sun as rising and setting, which is, in itself, no more strictly
accurate than it is to speak of the earth as if it had limits or
boundaries. The word confidence as used here means that God is the
source of trust, or, that all proper reliance, by all people, in all
parts of the earth and on the sea, must be in him; that is, that there
is no other on whom people can properly rely. It does not mean that all
people actually repose such confidence in him, which would not be true -
but that he is the only true source of confidence.

And of them that are afar off upon the sea - That is, of all men on sea
and land. The seaman has no other source of security amidst the dangers
of the deep than God. Compare [Psa
107:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023). The language does not mean
that all mariners actually do put their trust in God, but that they
cannot confide in the winds and the waves - in the strength of their
vessel - or their own power or skill in managing it - but that the true
and only ground of trust is God.

[Psalms 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 65:6</span></span>

Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains - Fixing them firm on
their foundations. This is an exhibition of vast strength or power on
the part of God, as if he fixed them so firm that they could not be
moved - as if he handled with ease those vast masses of matter, with all
their rocks and forests - and caused them to repose steadily and calmly
on their foundations. We have few more exalted conceptions of the power
of God than to suppose him lifting with ease a vast mountain; letting it
down where he pleases, and settling it so firmly that it cannot be
moved.

Being girded with power - That is, they seemed to be surrounded or
encompassed with power, as a man girds himself up when he wishes to put
forth a great effort of strength.

[Psalms 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 65:7</span></span>

Which stilleth the noise of the seas - He calms the seas when they have
been agitated by the storm. He causes the mighty waves to settle down,
and the whole surface of the ocean becomes calm and smooth. The storm
subsides at his command, and the sea is still. It was the manifestation
of this power which demonstrated so clearly the divinity of the Lord
Jesus, when he said to the troubled waves, "Peace, be still, and the
wind ceased, and there was a great calm." [Mar
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039). Compare [Psa
107:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#029).

The noise of their waves - The loud roar of the waters, so that they are
still.

And the tumult of the people - The raging; the fury; the excitement of
assembled multitudes, resembling the raging waves of the ocean. This
comparison is very common. See [Isa
17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012). Compare the notes at [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006). This is perhaps a more striking
and wonderful exhibition of the power of God than that of calming down
the waves of the ocean. In the one case, it is the exertion of mere
power on nature, acting through its established laws, and where there is
no resistance of will; in the other, it is power exerted over the will;
power over agents conscious that they are free, and where the worst
passions meet and mingle and rage.

[Psalms 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 65:8</span></span>

They also that dwell in the utter-most parts - That is, Those who dwell
in the remotest regions; far from civilized lands; far from those places
where people are instructed as to the causes of the events which occur,
and as to the being and character of the great God who performs these
wonders. The idea is, that even they see enough of the evidences of the
divine presence and power to fill their minds with awe. In other words,
there are in all lands evidences of the Divine existence and might.
There is enough to fill the minds of people with awe, and to make them
solemn.

Are afraid - Thus the thunder, the storm, the tempest, the earthquake,
the eclipse of the sun or the moon, fill the minds of barbarous nations
with terror.

At thy tokens - Or signs. That is, the signs which really indicate the
existence, the presence, and the power of God.

Thou makest the outgoings - The word rendered outgoings means properly a
going forth, as of the rising of the sun [Psa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007); and then, a place of going
forth, or from which anything goes forth, as a gate or door [Eze
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#011), or fountains from which water
issues [Isa 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018); and hence, the
east, where the sun seems to come forth from his hiding-place. The
representation here is that the morning seems to come forth, or that the
rays of light stream out from the east; and, in like manner, that the
fading light of the evening - the twilight - seems to come from the
west.

Of the morning and evening to rejoice - The allusion is to the east and
the west. The sun in his rising and his setting seems to rejoice; that
is, he appears happy, bright, cheerful. The margin is to sing - a poetic
expression indicating exultation and joy.

[Psalms 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 65:9</span></span>

Thou visitest the earth - God seems to come down that he may attend to
the needs of the earth; survey the condition of things; arrange for the
welfare of the world which he has made; and supply the needs of those
whom he has created to dwell upon it. See the notes at [Psa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004).

And waterest it - Margin, After thou hadst made it to desire rain. This
difference between the translations in the text and in the margin can be
accounted for by the various meanings of the original word. The Hebrew
term - שׁוק shûq - means properly:

\(a\) to run;

\(b\) to run after anything, to desire, to look for;

\(c\) to run over, to overflow; and then,

\(d\) to cause to overflow.

The meaning here evidently is, he drenched the earth, or caused the
water to run abundantly. The reference is to a copious rain after a
drought.

Thou greatly enrichest it - That is, Thou givest to it abundance; thou
pourest water upon it in such quantities, and in such a manner, as to
make it rich in its productions.

With the river of God - A river so abundant and full that it seems to
come from God; it is such as we should expect to flow from a Being
infinite in resources and in benevolence. Anything great is in the
Scriptures often described as belonging to God, or his name is added to
it to denote its greatness. Thus, hills of God mean lofty hills; cedars
of God, lofty cedars, etc.

Which is full of water - The waters are so abundant that it seems as if
they must come from God.

Thou preparest them corn - Grain. Thou givest to those who cultivate the
earth an abundant harvest.

When thou hast so provided for it - Or rather, When thou hast thus
prepared the earth, to wit, by sending down abundant rains upon it. God
prepares the earth to bear an abundant harvest, and then he gives that
harvest. The preparation of the earth for the harvest, and then the
givinq of the harvest, are alike from him. The harvest could not be
without the previous rain, and neither the rain nor the harvest could be
without God. He does not create a harvest by miracle, but follows the
order which he has himself ordained, and has respect to his own laws.

[Psalms 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 65:10</span></span>

Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly - Or rather, its furrows,
for so the Hebrew word properly means. [Job
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#038); [Job
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#010). The allusion is to the furrows
made by the plow, which are filled with water by the rains.

Thou settlest the furrows thereof - Or rather, thou beatest down the
ridges thereof. Literally, thou makest them to descend. That is, The
rain - falling on them - beats them down, so that the ground becomes
level.

Thou makest it soft with showers - Margin, thou dissolvest it. The idea
is, to soften, to loosen, to make the soil light and open. All farmers
know that this is necessary, and that it cannot be done without water.

Thou blessest the springing thereof - Or, what springs from it; the
vegetation. Thou dost bless it by causing it to grow luxuriantly, thus
producing an abundant harvest.

[Psalms 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 65:11</span></span>

Thou crownest the year with thy goodness - Margin, the year of thy
goodness. The Hebrew is literally the year of thy goodness - meaning a
year remarkable for the manifestation of kindness; or a year of abundant
productions. But the Hebrew will admit of the other construction,
meaning that God crowns or adorns the year, as it revolves, with his
goodness; or that the harvests, the fruits, the flowers of the year are,
as it were, a crown set on the head of the year. The Septuagint renders
it, "Thou wilt bless the crown of the year of thy goodness." DeWette
renders it, "Thou crownest the year with thy blessing." Luther, "Thou
crownest the year with good." On the whole, the most probable meaning is
that expressed in our common version, referring to the beauty and the
abundant productions of the year as if they were a crown on its head.
The seasons are often personified, and the year is here represented as a
beautiful female, perhaps, walking forward with a diadem on her brow.

And thy paths drop fatness - That is, fertility; or, Fertility attends
thy goings. The word rendered "drop," means properly to distil; to let
fall gently, as the rain or the dew falls to the earth; and the idea is,
that whereever God goes, marching through the earth, fertility, beauty,
abundance seems to distil or to fall gently along his path. God, in the
advancing seasons, passes along through the earth, and rich abundance
springs up wherever he goes.

[Psalms 65:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 65:12</span></span>

They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness - The waste places, or the
waste parts of the land; the uncultivated places, the places of rocks
and sands. The word wilderness in the Scriptures does not mean, as with
us, a tract of country covered with trees, but a place of barren rocks
or sands - an uncultivated or thinly inhabited region. See the notes at
[Mat 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001); notes at [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001). In those wastes, however, there
would be valleys, or places watered by springs and streams that would
afford pastures for flocks and herds. Such are the "pastures of the
wilderness" referred to here. God's passing along those valleys would
seem to "drop," or distil, fertility and beauty, causing grass and
flowers to spring up in abundance, and clothing them with luxuriance.

And the little hills rejoice on every side - Margin, as in Hebrew, are
girded with joy. That is, Joyful, happy scenes surround them; or, they
seem to be full of joy and happiness. The valleys and the hills alike
seem to be made glad. The following remarks of Professor Hackett
("Illustrations of Scripture," p. 30), will explain this passage.
"Another peculiarity of the desert is that, though the soil is sandy, it
rarely consists, for successive days together, of mere sand; it is
interspersed, at frequent intervals, with clumps of coarse grass and low
shrubs, affording very good pasturage, not only for camels, the proper
tenants of the desert, but for sheep and goats. The people of the
villages on the borders of the desert are accustomed to lead forth their
flocks to the pastures found there. We frequently passed on our way
shepherds so employed; and it was interesting to observe as a
verification of what is implied in the Saviour's statement [Mat
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033), that the sheep and goats were
not kept distinct, but intermixed with one another. The shepherds not
only frequent the parts of the desert near their places of abode, but go
often to a considerable distance from them; they remain absent for weeks
and months, only changing their station from time to time, as their
needs in respect to water and herbage may require. The incident related
of Moses shows that the pastoral habits of the people were the same in
his day: 'Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the
priest of Midian; and he led the flock to the further part of the
desert, even to Horeb,' [Exo 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001). It
is of the desert in this sense, as supplying to some extent the means of
pasturage, that the prophet Joel speaks in [Joe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019); [Joe
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022). The psalmist also says [Psa
65:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012), with the same reference:

Thou crownest the year with thy goodness,

And thy paths drop fatness;

They drop fatness on the pastures of the wilderness.

[Psalms 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 65:13</span></span>

The pastures are clothed with flocks - The flocks stand so thick
together, and are spread so far, that they seem to be a clothing for the
pasture; or, the fields are entirely covered with them.

The valleys also are covered over with corn - With grain. That is, the
parts of the land - the fertile valleys - which are devoted to tillage.
They are covered over, or clothed with waving grain, as the
pasture-fields are with flocks.

They shout for joy, they also sing - They seem to be full of joy and
happiness. What a beautiful image is this! How well does it express the
loveliness of nature; how appropriately does it describe the goodness of
God! Everything seems to be happy; to be full of song; and all this is
to be traced to the goodness of God, as it all serves to express that
goodness. Strange that there should be an atheist in such a world as
this; - strange that there should be an unhappy man; - strange that
amidst such beauties, while all nature joins in rejoicing and praise -
pastures, cultivated fields, valleys, hills - there can be found a human
being who, instead of uniting in the language of joy, makes himself
miserable by attempting to cherish the feeling that God is not good!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 66](psa066)

</div>
