<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa080)  [Next](psa082) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 81](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 81:0</span></span>

This psalm purports also to be a psalm of Asaph. See Introduction to Ps.
73. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it may be assumed to
have been composed by or for the Asaph who was the contemporary of
David, and who was, appointed by him to preside over the music of the
sanctuary. Venema, indeed, supposes that the psalm was composed in the
time of Josiah, at the observance of the great Passover celebrated by
him 2 Chr. 35; but there is no positive evidence of this, though there
is nothing in the psalm that is inconsistent with such a supposition. On
the phrase in the title, upon Gittith, see the notes at the title to
[Psa 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001).

The occasion on which the psalm was composed seems to have been a festal
occasion, and the circumstances in the psalm will probably best accord
with the supposition that it was the Feast of the Passover. Rosenmuller
has indeed endeavored to show (see his notes at [Psa
81:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#004)) that it was composed on occasion
of the Feast of Trumpets ([Lev 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024),
following); but there is nothing in the psalm which would necessarily
restrict it to that, and, as we shall see, all the circumstances in the
psalm harmonize with the supposition that it was at the Feast of the
Passover, the principal and the most important festival of the Hebrews.
It is well remarked by DeWette (Introduction to the psalm), that as the
Hebrews were required to make known to their children the design of the
ordinance of the Passover (see [Exo
12:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#026)), nothing would be more
natural than that the sacred poets should take occasion from the return
of that festival to enforce the truths pertaining to it in songs
composed for the celebration. Such seems to have been the design of this
psalm - reminding the people of the goodness of God in the past, and
recalling them from their sins by a remembrance of his mercies, and by a
view of what would be the consequences of fully obeying his law.

It would seem from the psalm not improbable that it was composed in a
time of national declension in religion, and when there was a tendency
to idolatry, and that the object of the author was to rouse the nation
from that state, and to endeavor by a reference to the past to bring
them back to a more entire devotedness to God.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. The duty of praise, particularly on such occasions as that on which
the psalm was composed; a duty enjoined even in Egypt, in the time of
Joseph, when God delivered his people out of that strange land, [Psa
81:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001).

II\. The main command which was then ordained to be the guide of the
people - the fixed law of the nation - the fundamental idea in their
polity - that there was to be no strange god among them, but that they
were to worship the true God, and him alone, [Psa
81:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#008).

III\. The fact that the nation had refused to hear; that there had been
such a proneness to worship other gods, and to fall into the habits of
idolaters, that God had given them up to their own desires, and suffered
them to walk in their own ways, [Psa
81:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#011).

IV\. A statement of what God would have done for them if they had been
obedient; of what would have been the effect on their national
prosperity if they had hearkened to the commands of God; and
consequently of what would still be the result if the people should be
obedient, and submit themselves wholly to the law of God, [Psa
81:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013). Particularly:

\(1\) Their enemies would have been subdued, [Psa
81:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#014).

\(2\) those who hated the Lord would have yielded themselves to him,
[Psa 81:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#015).

\(3\) God would have given them abundant prosperity; he would have fed
them with the finest of the wheat, and would have satisfied them with
honey out of the rock, [Psa 81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016).

The psalm is of special importance to the church now, as reminding it of
its obligation from the past mercies of God, and as showing what would
be the consequences if it should be wholly devoted to the service of
God.

[Psalms 81:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 81:1</span></span>

Sing aloud unto God our strength - The strength and support of the
nation; he from whom the nation has derived all its power. The word
rendered sing aloud means to rejoice; and then, to make or cause to
rejoice. It would be appropriate to a high festal occasion, where music
constituted an important part of the public service. And it would be a
proper word to employ in reference to any of the great feasts of the
Hebrews.

Make a joyful noise - A noise indicating joy, as distinguished from a
noise of mourning or lamentation.

Unto the God of Jacob - Not here particularly the God of the patriarch
himself, but of the people who bore his name - his descendants.

[Psalms 81:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 81:2</span></span>

Take a psalm - literally, "Lift up a psalm; perhaps, as we should say,
"Raise the tune." Or, it may mean, Take an ode, a hymn, a psalm,
composed for the occasion, and accompany it with the instruments of
music which are specified.

And bring hither the timbrel - For the purpose of praise. On the meaning
of this word rendered "timbrel" - תף tôph - see the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012).

The pleasant harp - On the word here rendered "harp" - כנור kinnôr - see
also the notes at [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The word
translated "pleasant" - נעים nâ‛ı̂ym - means properly pleasant,
agreeable, sweet, [Psa 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001); [Psa
147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001). It is connected here with the
word harp, as meaning that that instrument was distinguished
particularly for a sweet or pleasant sound.

With the psaltery - On the meaning of the word used here - נבל nebel -
see the notes at [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). These were
the common instruments of music among the Hebrews. They were employed
alike on sacred occasions, and in scenes of revelry. See [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012).

[Psalms 81:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 81:3</span></span>

Blow up the trumpet - The word rendered blow means to make a clangor or
noise as on a trumpet. The trumpet was, like the timbrel, the harp, and
the psaltery, a common instrument of music, and was employed on all
their festive occasions. It was at first made of horn, and then was made
similar in shape to a horn. Compare [Jos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005); [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009); [Job
39:25](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#025).

In the new moon - On the festival held at the time of the new moon.
There was a high festival on the appearance of the new moon in the month
of Tisri, or October, which was the beginning of their civil year, and
it is not improbable that the return of each new moon was celebrated
with special services. See the notes at [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013); compare [Kg2
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023); [Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005); [Ch1
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#031); [Ch2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#004). It is not certain, however, that
the word used here means new moon. Prof. Alexander renders it in the
month; that is, in the month, by way of eminence, in which the passover
was celebrated. The word used - חדשׁ chôdesh - means, indeed, commonly
the new moon; the day of the new moon; the first day of the lunar month
[Num 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#006); [Sa1
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#005), [Sa1
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#018), [Sa1
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#024); but it also means a month; that
is, a lunar month, beginning at the new moon, [Gen
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005); [Exo
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004); et al. The corresponding or
parallel word, as we shall see, which is rendered in our version, in the
time appointed, means full moon; and the probability is, as Professor
Alexander suggests, that in the beginning of the verse the month is
mentioned in general, and the particular time of the month - the full
moon - in the other part of the verse. Thus the language is applicable
to the passover. On the other supposition - the supposition that the new
moon and the full moon are both mentioned - there would be manifest
confusion as to the time.

In the time appointed - The word used here - כסה keseh - means properly
the full moon; the time of the full moon. In Syriac the word means
either "the first day of the full moon," or "the whole time of the full
moon." (Isa Bar Ali, as quoted by Gesenius, Lexicon) Thus, the word
means, not as in our translation, in the time appointed, but at the full
moon, and would refer to the time of the Passover, which was celebrated
on the fourteenth day of the lunar month; that is, when the moon was at
the full. [Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006).

On our solemn feast day - Hebrew, In the day of our feast. The word
solemn is not necessarily in the original, though the day was one of
great solemnity. The Passover is doubtless referred to.

[Psalms 81:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 81:4</span></span>

For this was a statute for Israel ... - See [Exo
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003). That is, it was a law for the
whole Jewish people, for all who had the name Israel, for all the
descendants of Jacob. The word was is not in the original, as if this
had been an old commandment which might now be obsolete, but the idea is
one of perpetuity: it is a perpetual law for the Hebrew people.

A law of the God of Jacob - Hebrew, a judgment; or, right. The idea is,
that it was what was due to God; what was his right. It was a solemn
claim that he should be thus acknowledged. It was not a matter of
conventional arrangement, or a matter of convenience to them; nor was it
to be observed merely because it was found to be expedient and conducive
to the welfare of the nation. It was a matter of right and of claim on
the part of God, and was so to be regarded by the nation. The same is
true now of the Sabbath, and of all the appointments which God has made
for keeping up religion in the world. All these arrangements are indeed
expedient and proper; they conduce to the public welfare and to the
happiness of man; but there is a higher reason for their observance than
this. It is that God demands their observance; that he claims as his own
the time so appropriated. Thus he claims the Sabbath, the entire
Sabbath, as his own; he requires that it shall be employed in his
service, that it shall be regarded as his day; that it shall be made
instrumental in keeping up the knowledge of himself in the world, and in
promoting his glory. [Exo 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010).
People, therefore, "rob God" (compare [Mal
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008)) when they take this time for
needless secular purposes, or devote it to other ends and uses. Nor can
this be sinless. The highest guilt which man can commit is to "rob" his
Maker of what belongs to Him, and of what He claims.

[Psalms 81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 81:5</span></span>

This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony - literally, he placed this;
that is, he appointed it. The word Joseph here stands for the whole
Hebrew people, as in [Psa 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001). See
the notes at that verse. The meaning is, that the ordinance for
observing this festival - the Passover - was to be traced back to the
time when they were in Egypt. The obligation to observe it was thus
enhanced by the very antiquity of the observance, and by the fact that
it was one of the direct appointments of God in that strange and foreign
land.

When he went out through the land of Egypt - Margin, against. Or rather,
In his going out of the land of Egypt. Literally, In going upon the land
of Egypt. The allusion is, undoubtedly, to the time when the Hebrews
went out of the land of Egypt - to the Exodus; and the exact idea is,
that, in doing this, they passed over a considerable portion of the land
of Egypt; or, that they passed over the land. The idea in the margin, of
its being against the land of Egypt, is not necessarily in the original.

Where I heard a language that I understood not - literally, "The lip,
that is, the language, of one that I did not know, I heard." This
refers, undoubtedly, not to God, but to the people. The author of this
psalm identifies himself here with the people - the whole nation - and
speaks as if he were one of them, and as if he now recollected the
circumstances at the time - the strange language - the foreign customs -
the oppressions and burdens borne by the people. Throwing himself back,
as it were, to that time (compare the notes at [Th1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)) - he seems to himself to be in
the midst of a people speaking a strange tongue - a language
unintelligible to him - the language of a foreign nation. The Jews, in
all their long captivity in Egypt - a period of four hundred years (see
the notes at [Act 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006)) - preserved
their own language apparently incorrupt. So far as appears, they spoke
the same language, without change, when they came out of Egypt, that
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had used. The Egyptian was entirely a foreign
language to them, and had no affinity with the Hebrew.

[Psalms 81:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 81:6</span></span>

I removed his shoulder from the burden - The burden which the people of
Israel were called to hear in Egypt. The reference is undoubtedly to
their burdens in making bricks, and conveying them to the place where
they were to be used; and perhaps also to the fact that they were
required to carry stone in building houses and towns for the Egyptians.
Compare [Exo 1:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011); [Exo
5:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#004). The meaning is, that he had
saved them from these burdens, to wit, by delivering them from their
hard bondage. The speaker here evidently is God. In the previous verse
it is the people. Such a change of person is not uncommon in the
Scriptures.

His hands were delivered from the pots - Margin, as in Hebrew, passed
away. That is, they were separated from them, or made free. The word
rendered pots usually has that signification. [Job
41:20](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#020); [Sa1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#014); [Ch2
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013); but it may also mean a basket.
[Jer 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002); [Kg2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#007). The latter is probably the
meaning here. The allusion is to baskets which might have been used in
carrying clay, or conveying the bricks after they were made: perhaps a
kind of hamper that was swung over the shoulders, with clay or bricks in
each - somewhat like the instrument used now by the Chinese in carrying
tea - or like the neck-yoke which is employed in carrying sap where
maple sugar is manufactured, or milk on dairy farms. There are many
representations on Egyptian sculptures which would illustrate this. The
idea is that of a burden, or task, and the allusion is to the
deliverance that was accomplished by removing them to another land.

[Psalms 81:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 81:7</span></span>

Thou calledst in trouble - The people of Israel. [Exo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023); [Exo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#009); [Exo
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010).

And I delivered thee - I brought the people out of Egypt.

I answered thee in the secret place of thunder - That is, in the lonely,
retired, solemn place where the thunder rolled; the solitudes where
there was no voice but the voice of thunder, and where that seemed to
come from the deep recesses of the mountain gorges. The allusion is
doubtless to Sinai. Compare [Exo
19:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017). The meaning is, that he gave
a response - a real reply - to their prayer - amid the solemn scenes of
Sinai, when he gave them his law; when he recognized them as his people;
when he entered into covenant with them.

I proved thee - I tried you; I tested your fidelity.

At the waters of Meribah - Margin, as in Hebrew, strife. This was at
Mount Horeb. [Exo 17:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#005). The trial -
the proof - consisted in his bringing water from the rock, showing that
he was God - that he was their God.

[Psalms 81:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 81:8</span></span>

Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee ... - See the notes at
the similar passage in [Psa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007). God
calls their attention to what he required of them; to what his law
demanded; to what was the condition of their being his people and of
securing his favor. What the demanded was, that they should acknowledge
him; obey him; serve him; that there should be no strange god among
them, and that they should worship no false god, [Psa
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009).

[Psalms 81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 81:9</span></span>

There shall no strange god be in thee - Worshipped by thee; or
recognized and regarded as a god. This was a condition of his favor and
friendship. Compare [Deu 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#012); [Isa
43:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#012). The word here rendered
"strange" - זר zār - has reference to one of a foreign nation; and the
meaning is, that they were not to worship or adore the gods that were
worshipped by foreigners. This was a fundamental law of the Hebrew
commonwealth.

Neither shalt thou worship any strange god - The Hebrew word here is
different - נכר nêkâr - but means substantially the same thing. The
allusion is to gods worshipped by foreign nations.

[Psalms 81:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 81:10</span></span>

I am the Lord thy God ... - See [Exo
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002). The meaning is, "I am Yahweh,
that God; the God to be worshipped and honored by thee; I only am thy
God, and no other god is to be recognized or acknowledged by thee." The
foundation of the claim to exclusive service and devotion is here laid
in the fact that he had brought them out of the land of Egypt.
Literally, had caused them to ascend, or go up from that land. The claim
thus asserted seems to be twofold:

\(a\) that in doing this, he had shown that he was God, or that he had
performed a work which none but God could perform, and had thus shown
his existence and power; and

\(b\) that by this he had brought them under special obligations to
himself, inasmuch as they owed all that they had - their national
existence and liberty - entirely to him.

Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it - Possibly an allusion to young
birds, when fed by the parent-bird. The meaning here is, "I can amply
supply all your needs. You need not go to other gods - the gods of other
lands - as if there were any deficiency in my power or resources; as if
I were not able to meet your necessities. All your needs I can meet. Ask
what you need - what you will; come to me and make any request with
reference to yourselves as individuals or as a nation - to this life or
the life to come - and you will find in me all abundant supply for all
your needs, and a willingness to bless you commensurate with my
resources." What is here said of the Hebrews may be said of the people
of God at all times. There is not a want of our nature - of our bodies
or our souls; a want pertaining to this life or the life to come - to
ourselves, to our families, to our friends, to the church, or to our
country - which God is not able to meet; and there is not a real
necessity in any of these respects which he is not willing to meet. Why,
then, should his people ever turn for happiness to the "weak and
beggarly elements of the world" (compare the notes at [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)), as if God could not satisfy
them? Why should they seek for happiness in vain amusements, or in
sensual pleasures, as if God could not, or would not, supply the real
needs of their souls?

[Psalms 81:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 81:11</span></span>

But my people ... - See [Psa 78:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010),
[Psa 78:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#017). "And Israel would none
of me." Literally, "Did not will me;" that is, "did not incline to me;
were not attached to me; were not disposed to worship me, and to find
happiness in me." Compare [Isa 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019);
[Job 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#009); [Pro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025). They refused or rejected him.
See [Exo 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001); [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018).

[Psalms 81:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 81:12</span></span>

So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust - Margin, as in Hebrew, to
the hardness of their own hearts. Literally, "I sent them, or I
dismissed them, to the hardness of their hearts." I suffered them to
have what, in the hardness of their hearts they desired, or what their
hard and rebellious hearts prompted them to desire: I indulged them in
their wishes. I gave them what they asked, and left them to themselves
to work out the problem about success and happiness in their own way -
to let them see what must be the result of forsaking the true God. The
world - and the church too - has been often suffered to make this
experiment.

And they walked in their own counsels - As they thought wise and best.
Compare [Act 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#042); [Act
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016); [Rom
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024); [Psa
78:26-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026).

[Psalms 81:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 81:13</span></span>

Oh that my people had hearkened unto me - This passage is designed
mainly to show what would have been the consequences if the Hebrew
people had been obedient to the commands of God, [Psa
81:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#014). At the same time, however,
it expresses what was the earnest desire - the wish - the preference of
God, namely, that they had been obedient, and had enjoyed his favor.
This is in accordance with all the statements, all the commands, all the
invitations, all the warnings, in the Bible. In the entire volume of
inspiration there is not one command addressed to people to walk in the
ways of sin; there is not one statement that God desires they should do
it; there is not one intimation that he wishes the death of the sinner.
The contrary is implied in all the declarations which God has made - in
all his commands, warnings, and invitations - in all his arrangements
for the salvation of people. See [Deu
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029); [Deu
32:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029); [Isa
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018); [Eze
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023), [Eze
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032); [Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011); [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009); [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042).

And Israel had walked in my ways! - Had kept my commandments; had been
obedient to my laws. When people, therefore, do not walk in the ways of
God it is impossible that they should take refuge, as an excuse for it,
in the plea that God desires this, or that he commands it, or that he is
pleased with it, or that he approves it. There is no possible sense in
which this can be true; in every sense, and on every account, he prefers
that people should be obedient, and not disobedient; good, and not bad;
happy, and not miserable; saved, and not lost. Every doctrine of
theology should be held and interpreted in consistency with this as a
fundamental truth. That there are things which are difficult to be
explained on the supposition that this is true, must be admitted; but
what truth is there in reference to which there are not difficulties to
be explained? And is there anything in this, or in any of the truths of
the Bible, which more demands explanation than the facts which are
actually occurring under the government of God: the fact that sin and
misery have been allowed to come into the universe; the fact that
multitudes constantly suffer whom God could at once relieve?

[Psalms 81:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 81:14</span></span>

I should soon have subdued their enemies - This is one of the
consequences which, it is said, would have followed if they had been
obedient to the laws of God. The phrase rendered soon means literally
like a little; that is, as we might say, in a little, to wit, in a
little time. The word rendered subdued means to bow down; to be curved
or bent; and the idea is, that he would have caused them to bow down, to
wit, by submission before them. Compare [Deu
32:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029).

And turned my hand against their adversaries - Against those who
oppressed and wronged them. The act of turning the hand against one is
significant of putting him away - repelling him - disowning him - as
when we would thrust one away from us with aversion.

[Psalms 81:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 81:15</span></span>

The haters of the Lord - The enemies of the Lord, often represented as
those who hate him - hatred being always in fact or in form connected
with an unwillingness to submit to God. It is hatred of his law; hatred
of his government; hatred of his plans; hatred of his character. See
[Rom 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030); [Joh
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007), [Joh
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018), [Joh
15:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#023). Compare [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005).

Should have submitted themselves unto him - Margin, yielded retained
obedience. Hebrew, lied. See the phrase explained in the notes at [Psa
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044). The meaning is, that they would
have been so subdued as to acknowledge his authority or supremacy, while
it is, at the same time, implied that this would have been forced and
not cordial. No external power, though it may so conquer as to make
people outwardly obedient, can affect the will, or subdue that. The
grace of God alone can do that, and it is the special triumph of grace
that it can do it.

But their time - The time of his people. They would have continued to be
a happy and a flourishing nation.

Should have endured for ever - Perpetually - as long as they continued
to be obedient. If a nation were obedient to the will of God; if it
wholly obeyed his laws; if it countenanced by statute no form of sin; if
it protected no iniquity; if it were temperate, just, virtuous, honest,
there is no reason why its institutions should not be perpetual, or why
it should ever be overthrown. Sin is, in all cases, the cause of the
ruin of nations, as it is of individuals.

[Psalms 81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 81:16</span></span>

He should have fed them also - He would have given them prosperity, and
their land would have produced abundantly of the necessities - even of
the luxuries - of life. This is in accordance with the usual promises of
the Scriptures, that obedience to God will be followed by national
temporal prosperity. See [Deu
32:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013); [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008); [Psa
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011). Compare the notes at [Mat
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005).

With the finest of the wheat - Margin, as in Hebrew, with the fat of
wheat. The meaning is, the best of the wheat - as the words fat and
fatness are often used to denote excellence and abundance. [Gen
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028), [Gen
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039); [Job
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#016); [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008); [Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005); [Psa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#011).

And with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee - Palestine
abounded with bees, and honey was a favorite article of food. [Gen
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011); [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008); [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013); [Sa1
14:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#025); [Isa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015); [Eze
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013); [Mat
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004). Much of that which was obtained
was wild honey, deposited by the bees in the hollows of trees, and as it
would seem in the caverns of the rocks. Much of it was gathered also
from rocky regions, and this was regarded as the most delicate and
valuable. I do not know the cause of this, nor why honey in high and
rocky countries should be more pure and white than that obtained from
other places; but the whitest and the most pure and delicate honey that
I have ever seen I found at Chamouni in Switzerland. Dr. Thomson (land
and the Book, vol. ii. p. 362) says of the rocky region in the vicinity
of Timnath, that "bees were so abundant in a wood at no great distance
from this spot that the honey dropped down from the trees on the
ground;" and that "he explored densely-wooded gorges in Hermon and in
Southern Lebanon where wild bees are still found, both in trees and in
the clefts of the rocks."

The meaning here is plain, that, if Israel had been obedient to God, he
would have blessed them with abundance - with the richest and most
coveted productions of the field. Pure religion - obedience to God -
morality - temperance, purity, honesty, and industry, such as religion
requires - are always eminently favorable to individual and national
prosperity; and if a man or a nation desired to be most prospered, most
successful in the lawful and proper objects of individual or national
existence, and most happy, nothing would tend more to conduce to it than
those virtues which piety enjoins and cultivates. Individuals and
nations, even in respect to temporal prosperity, are most unwise, as
well as most wicked, when they disregard the laws of God, and turn away
from the precepts and the spirit of religion. It is true of nations, as
it is of individuals, that "Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is," [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 82](psa082)

</div>
