<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa065)  [Next](psa067) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 66:0</span></span>

The name of the author of this psalm is unknown. There is no certain
evidence that it was composed by David, yet there is nothing in the
psalm itself which is inconsistent with the supposition that he was the
author. Perhaps the most natural and obvious interpretation of [Psa
66:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013), would be that there is
reference there to the temple; and if so, of course, the psalm must have
been written by someone else. But it is not absolutely necessary to
suppose that the temple is there referred to, for the language might be
applied to the tabernacle as the "house" or the place of the worship of
God. There is, however, no positive evidence that it was composed by
David, and it is impossible now to determine its authorship.

As little can the occasion on which the psalm was composed be
determined. It is evident only that it was after there had been some
calamity of a private nature, or after the nation had been subjected to
oppression by some powerful enemies, and when there had been deliverance
from that calamity, [Psa 66:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011). The
calamity was similar to those which had been endured by the nation in
the time of the Egyptian oppressions, and naturally brought to mind the
sufferings endured by the people of God at that time, while their own
deliverance suggested a recollection of the deliverance of their fathers
from that bondage, [Psa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006). On the
whole, the supposition of Rosenmuller that it was composed after the
Babylonian captivity, and in view of the return of the people to their
native land - perhaps to be sung on their journey from the land of
exile, seems to me to be the most probable of any. Venema supposes that
it refers to the time of Hezekiah, and the overthrow of Sennacherib;
others regard it as referring to the persecutions of David by Saul;
others, to the rebellion of Absalom; others, to the famine which is
mentioned in 2 Sam. 21, or the pestilence, 2 Sam. 24. Paulus supposes
that it had reference to the times of the Maccabees. The psalm relates
to "vows" or promises which had been made in a time of trouble; and its
composition and use are designed as the fulfillment of those vows, [Psa
66:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013). Such a psalm of praise would
be a proper fulfillment of "vows" which it might be supposed the Hebrews
would make in the time of their exile; to wit, that if they were ever
permitted to return to their native land, they would go to the house of
God, and sacrifice again on his altars.

On the phrase in the title, "To the chief Musician," see Introduction to
[Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001). On the words, "A Song or
Psalm," see the notes at the titles to [Psa
30:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001) (notes) and [Psa
65:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001) (notes).

The psalm contains:

I. An exhortation, addressed to all the earth, to praise God, as a
matter pertaining to all lands, [Psa
66:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001).

II\. A reference to the mighty acts of God, as a reason for worshipping
him, [Psa 66:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003).

III\. A reference to his gracious interposition in time of national
danger and trouble, and to the fact that he had rescued the nation in a
marvelous manner, [Psa 66:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008).

IV\. A reference to the vows which had been made in that time of
trouble, and the purpose now to execute those vows, by going to the
house of God, and sacrificing on his altars, [Psa
66:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013).

V. A call on all people to hear what God had done for the worshippers:
namely, That he had heard prayer; that he had interposed for their
deliverance; that he had attended to the voice of supplication; that he
had not turned away his mercy, [Psa
66:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016).

[Psalms 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 66:1</span></span>

Make a joyful noise unto God - literally, "Shout." It is a call for
exultation and praise.

All ye lands - Margin, as in Hebrew, all the earth. The occasion was one
that made universal exultation and praise proper. They who had been so
deeply affected by the gracious interposition of God, could not but call
on all the nations of the earth to unite with them in the expression of
joy. The deliverance was so great that they wished all to rejoice with
them (compare [Luk 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#006), [Luk
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#009)); and the intervention of God in
the case of his people, furnished lessons about his character which gave
occasion to all men to rejoice.

[Psalms 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 66:2</span></span>

Sing forth the honor of his name - That is, Celebrate in appropriate
praise the honor due to his name. Make that honor known in connection
with songs.

Make his praise glorious - literally, "place honor, his praise;" that
is, Give him honor; give him praise. The meaning is, Set forth his
praise with songs - with music - with shouts; - that will be the
appropriate expression of the praise which is due to him.

[Psalms 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 66:3</span></span>

Say unto God - In your songs of praise. Let your songs be directly
addressed to him, setting forth the grounds of that praise, or the
reasons why it is due to him.

How terrible art thou in thy works! - How fearful! how much to be
reverenced! The meaning is, that the manifestations of his power and
greatness, in the events which occur under his government, are suited to
impress the mind with awe and reverence.

Through the greatness of thy power - By the putting forth of thy power.
Or, Thou hast such power over thine enemies as to be able to compel them
to submit to thee.

Shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee - Margin, Lie, or yield
reigned obedience. The Hebrew word means to lie, to speak lies; then, to
feign, to flatter, to play the hypocrite. It is thus applied to the
vanquished, who make a hollow profession of submission and love to their
victors. See the word explained in the notes at [Psa
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044); compare [Psa
81:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#015); [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029); [Job
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028). The meaning here is, that he
had power to subdue them, and to compel them to acknowledge his right to
reign. It is the putting forth of mere power which is here referred to;
and all that such power can do, is to secure outward and reigned
submission. It cannot of itself secure the submission of the heart, the
will, and the affections. That is to be secured by love, not by power;
and the difference between the submission of the true people of God and
that of all others is that the former are subdued by love, the latter by
power; the submission of the former is genuine, that of the latter is
forced. The inhabitants of heaven will be submissive to God because they
love him; the dwellers in hell will be restrained by power, because they
cannot deliver themselves. So now, the submission of a true child of God
is that of love, or is a willing submission; the submission of a
hypocrite is that of fear, when he feigns obedience because he cannot
help it, or because he simply dreads the wrath of God. The object here
is to celebrate the power of God, and it was sufficient, in order to set
that forth, to say that it awed, and outwardly subdued the enemies of
God.

[Psalms 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 66:4</span></span>

All the earth shall worship thee - That is, all the inhabitants of the
world will bow down before thee, or render thee homage. The time will
come when thy right to reign will be universally acknowledged, or when
thou wilt everywhere be adored as the true God. This is in accordance
with all the statements in the Bible. See the notes at [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027); Compare the notes at [Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023); notes at [Rom
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011).

And shall sing unto thee - Shall celebrate thy praises. "To thy name."
To thee.

[Psalms 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 66:5</span></span>

Come and see the works of God - See the notes at [Psa
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008), where substantially the same
expression occurs. The idea is, "Come and see what God has done and is
doing; come and learn from this what he is; and let your hearts in view
of all this, be excited to gratitude and praise." The particular
reference here is to what God had done in delivering his people from
their former bondage in Egypt [Psa
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006); but there is, connected with
this, the idea that he actually rules among the nations, and that in his
providence he has shown his power to govern and sbdue them.

He is terrible in his doing - That is, His acts are suited to inspire
awe and veneration. See the notes at [Psa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003).

[Psalms 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 66:6</span></span>

He turned the sea into dry land - The Red Sea, when he brought his
people out of Egypt, [Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). This
was an illustration of his power, and of his ability to defend and
deliver his people. The terror in that case, or that which was
"terrible," was the overthrow of their enemies the destruction of the
Egyptians in the Red Sea - thus showing that he had power to destroy all
the enemies of his people.

They went through the flood on foot - literally, "through the river." It
is probable that the reference here is to the passage of the river
Jordan, when the Israelites were about to pass into the promised land
[Jos 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014); thus combining the two
great acts of divine interposition in favor of his people, and showing
his power over streams and floods.

There did we rejoice in him - We, as a nation - our fathers - thus
rejoiced in God. See Exo. 15.

[Psalms 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 66:7</span></span>

He ruleth by his power for ever - literally, "Ruling by his power
forever." The idea is, that he does this constantly; in each age and
generation. He never has ceased to rule; he never will. His dominion
extends from age to age, and will stretch forward forever. The power
which he evinced in delivering his people he retains now, and will
retain forever. In that unchanging power, his people may confide; that
unchanging power, the wicked should fear.

His eyes behold the nations - All nations; all people. He sees all their
conduct. They can conceal nothing from him. They should, therefore,
stand in awe. The wicked have much to fear from One who sees all that
they do, and who has power to crush and destroy them. Compare the notes
at [Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004).

Let not the rebellious exalt themselves - Be lifted up with pride, or
feel secure. They cannot overcome an Almighty God; they cannot escape
from his power. The word rebellious here has reference to those who are
impatient under the restraints of the law of God, and who are disposed
to east off his authority. The admonition is one that may be addressed
to all who thus rebel against God, whether they are nations or
individuals. Alike they must feel the vengeance of his arm, and fall
beneath his power.

[Psalms 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 66:8</span></span>

O bless our God, ye people - That is, particularly the people of the
nation; the Hebrew people. The call here to praise or bless God is on
account of some special benefit which had been conferred on them, and
which is referred to more particularly in the following verses. It was
his gracious interposition in the time of danger, by which they were
delivered from their foes, [Psa
66:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011).

And make the voice of his praise to be heard - Let it be sounded out
afar, that it may be heard abroad.

[Psalms 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 66:9</span></span>

Which holdeth our soul in life - Margin, as in Hebrew, putteth. That is,
He has put (or placed) us in a state of safety. The word rendered "in
life" means literally "among the living." The word soul here is
equivalent to us - ourselves; and the idea is, that he keeps us among
the living. What is here said of this special deliverance is true of all
people at all times, that they owe the fact that they are among the
living to the care of God; or, it is because he puts them among the
living, or keeps them alive.

And suffereth not our feet to be moved - That is, from their firm
position of safety. The idea is taken from one who is walking, and who
is kept from slipping or falling.

[Psalms 66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 66:10</span></span>

For thou, O God, hast proved us - That is, Thou hast tried us; thou hast
tested the reality of our attachment to thee, as silver is tried by the
application of fire. God had proved or tried them by bringing calamity
upon them to test the reality of their allegiance to him. The nature of
the proof or trial is referred to in the following verses.

Thou hast tried us, as silver is tried - That is, by being subjected to
appropriate tests to ascertain its real nature, and to remove from it
imperfections. Compare the notes at [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007); notes at [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025); notes at [Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010); see also [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009); [Mal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003).

[Psalms 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 66:11</span></span>

Thou broughtest us into the net - That is, Thou hast suffered or
permitted us to be brought into the net; thou hast suffered us to be
taken captive, as beasts are caught in a snare. See the notes at [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015). The allusion here is to the
efforts made by their enemies to take them, as hunters lay gins, or
spread nets, to capture wild beasts. The idea here is, that those
enemies had been successful; God had suffered them to fall into their
hands. If we suppose this psalm to have been composed on the return from
the Babylonian captivity, the propriety of this language will be
apparent, for it well describes the fact that the nation had been
subdued by the Babylonians, and had been led captive into a distant
land. Compare [Lam 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013).

Thou laidst affliction upon our loins - The loins are mentioned as the
seat of strength (compare [Deu 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011);
[Kg1 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#010); [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016)).; and the idea here is, that he
had put their strength to the test; he had tried them to see how much
they could bear; he had made the test effectual by applying it to the
part which was able to bear most. The idea is, that he had called them
to endure as much as they were able to endure. He had tried them to the
utmost.

[Psalms 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 66:12</span></span>

Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads - This refers evidently to
some national subjection or conquest - most probably to their having
been subdued by the Babylonians. Professor Alexander renders this, "Thou
hast caused men to ride at our head," as if leading them forth as
captives in war. The most probable meaning, however, is that they had
been subdued, as if on a field of battle, and as if their conquerors had
ridden over them when prostrate on the ground. Compare the notes at [Psa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005), and the notes at [Isa
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023).

We went through fire and through water - This is designed to represent
the nature of their trials. It was as if they had been made to pass
through burning flames and raging floods. Compare the notes at [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002). Instead of passing through the
seas and rivers when the waters had been turned back, and when a dry and
safe path was made for them, as was the ease with their fathers [Psa
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006), they had been compelled to
breast the flood itself; and yet, notwithstanding this, God had brought
them into a place of safety. In either way, by parting the floods, or by
conducting his people through them, as shall seem best pleasing to him,
God can conduct his people safely, and deliver them from danger. The
power, the protecting care, the love, and the faithfulness of God are
shown with equal clearness whether he divides the flood and causes his
people to march through as on dry land, or whether he suffers the flood
to rage and heave around them while he conducts his chosen people safely
through.

But there broughtest us out into a wealthy place - Margin, moist.
Professor Alexander, overfIow, abundance. Vulgate, info a place of
refreshment - refrigerium. The Septuagint, εἰς ἀναψυχήν eis anapsuchēn.
Luther, Thou hast led us forth and quickened us. DeWette, zum
Ueberflusse - "to overflowing, or abundance." The Hebrew word - רויה
revâyâh - means properly "abundant drink," "abundance." It occurs only
here and in [Psa 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005), where it is
rendered "runneth over." See the notes at that place. The proper idea
here is, that he had brought them into a land where there was plenty of
water - as emblematic of abundance in general. He had led them to a
place where there were ample rivers, springs, and streams, producing
fertility and abundance. This would be the language of the people after
their return from exile, and when they were permitted again to re-visit
their native land - a land always characterized as a land of plenty. See
[Deu 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007); compare [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008); [Lev
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#024); [Num
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#027).

[Psalms 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 66:13</span></span>

I will go into thy house with burnt-offeriings - To thy temple - the
place of worship. This is language designed to represent the feelings
and the purpose of the people. If the psalm was composed on occasion of
the return from the Babylonian captivity, it means that, as their first
act, the people would go to the house of God, and acknowledge his
goodness to them, and render him praise. On the word burnt-offerings,
see the notes at [Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011).

I will pay thee my vows - I will keep the solemn promises which I had
made; that is, the promises which the people had made in the long period
of their captivity. On the word vows, see the notes at [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025).

[Psalms 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 66:14</span></span>

Which my lips have uttered ... - Margin, "opened." The Hebrew word,
however - פצה pâtsâh - means properly to tear apart; to rend; and then,
to open wide, as the mouth, for example - or the throat, - as wild
beasts do, [Psa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013). Then it means
to open the mouth in scorn [Lam 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016);
[Lam 3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046); and then, to utter hasty
words, [Job 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#016). The idea would be
expressed by us by the phrases to bolt or blurt out; to utter hastily;
or, to utter from a heart full and overflowing to utter with very little
care as to the language employed. It is the fullness of the heart which
would be suggested by the word, and not a nice choice of expressions.
The idea is, that the heart was full; and that the vows were made under
the influence of deep emotion, when the heart was so full that it could
not but speak, and when there was very little attention to the language.
It was not a calm and studied selection of words. Such vows are not less
acceptable to God than those which are made in the best-selected
language. Not a little of the most popular sacred poetry in all tongues
is of this nature; and when refined down to the nicest rules of art it
ceases to be popular, or to meet the needs of the soul, and is laid
aside. The psalmist here means to say, that though these vows were the
result of deep feeling - of warm, gushing emotion - rather than of calm
and thoughtful reflection, yet there was no disposition to disown or
repudiate them now. They were made in the depth of feeling - in real
sincerity - and there was a purpose fairly to carry them out.

When I was in trouble - When the people were in captivity, languishing
in a foreign land. Vows made in trouble - in sickness, in bereavement,
in times of public calamity - should be faithfully performed when health
and prosperity visit us again; but, alas, how often are they forgotten!

[Psalms 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 66:15</span></span>

I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings - Margin, marrow. On
the word rendered "burnt-offerings" see the notes at [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011). The word rendered "fatlings" is
rendered in [Isa 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#017), lambs. It may
be applied to any animal considered as fat - a qualification required in
sacrifices to be made on the altar, [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011).

With the incense of rams - The word here rendered incense is commonly
applied to aromatics which were burned in the tabernacle or temple,
producing a grateful odor (see the notes at [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)); but it seems here to be used
with reference to the smoke ascending from burning rams offered in
sacrifice - ascending as the smoke of incense did. The smoke thus
ascending would be as grateful and acceptable as incense.

I will offer bullocks with goats - Bullocks and goats. That is, I will
present sacrifices in all the forms required in worship; in all the
forms that will express gratitude to God, or that will be an
acknowledgment of dependence and guilt; in all that would properly
express homage to the Deity. Bullocks and goats were both required in
the ancient worship.

[Psalms 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 66:16</span></span>

Come and hear, all ye that fear God - All who are true worshippers of
God - the idea of fear or reverence being put for worship in general.
The call is on all who truly loved God to hear what he had done, in
order that he might be suitably honored, and that due praise might be
given him.

And I will declare what he hath done for my soul - This is probably the
personification of an individual to represent the people, considered as
delivered from oppression and bondage. The words "for my soul" are
equivalent to "for me." Literally, "for my life." The phrase would
embrace all that God had done by his gracious intervention in delivering
the people from bondage. The language here is such as may be used by any
one who is converted to God, in reference

\(a\) to all that God has done to redeem the soul;

\(b\) to all that he has done to pardon its guilt;

\(c\) to all that he has done to give it peace and joy;

\(d\) to all that he has done to enable it to overcome sin;

\(e\) to all that he has done to give it comfort in the prospect of
death;

\(f\) to all that he has done to impart thee hope of heaven.

The principle here is one which it is right to apply to all such cases.
It is right and proper for a converted sinner to call on others to hear
what God has done for him;

\(a\) because it is due to God thus to honor him;

\(b\) because the converted heart naturally gives utterance to
expressions of gratitude and praise, or wishes to make known the joy
derived from pardoned sin;

\(c\) because there is in such a soul a strong desire that others may
partake of the same blessedness, and find the same satisfaction and
peace in the service of God.

It is the duty of those who are pardoned and converted thus to call on
others to hear what God has done for them;

\(a\) because others have the same need of religion which they have;

\(b\) because the same salvation is provided for them which has been
provided for those who have found peace;

\(c\) because all are under obligation to make known as far as possible
the fact that God has provided salvation for sinners, and that all may
be saved.

He who has no such sense of the mercy of God, manifested toward himself,
as to desire that others may be saved - who sees no such value in the
religion which he professes as to have an earnest wish that others may
partake of it also - can have no real evidence that his own heart has
ever been converted to God. Compare the notes at [Rom
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001); notes at [Rom
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001).

[Psalms 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 66:17</span></span>

I cried unto him with my mouth - That is, in my trouble; when distress
came upon me. This, according to the explanation of the design of the
psalm given above, is one individual speaking on behalf of the nation,
or uttering the sentiment of the people. At the same time, however, all
this is language appropriate to an individual when recording his own
experience.

And he was extolled with my tongue - I praised him; I acknowledged his
supremacy. I recognized my dependence on him, and looked to him as that
God who had all things under his control, and who could grant me the
deliverance which I desired.

[Psalms 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 66:18</span></span>

If I regard iniquity in my heart - literally, "If I have seen iniquity
in my heart." That is, If I have indulged in a purpose of iniquity; if I
have had a wicked end in view; if I have not been willing to forsake all
sin; if I have cherished a purpose of pollution or wrong. The meaning is
not literally, If I have "seen" any iniquity in my heart - for no one
can look into his own heart, and not see that it is defiled by sin; but,
If I have cherished it in my soul; if I have gloated over past sins; if
I am purposing to commit sin again; if I am not willing to abandon all
sin, and to be holy.

The Lord will not hear me - That is, He will not regard and answer my
prayer. The idea is, that in order that prayer may be heard, there must
be a purpose to forsake all forms of sin. This is a great and most
important principle in regard to prayer. The same principle is affirmed
or implied in [Psa 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041); [Psa
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015); [Pro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028); [Pro
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#029); [Pro
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#009); [Isa
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001); [Jer
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#011); [Jer
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#012); [Zac
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#013); [Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031). It is also especially stated in
[Isa 58:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003). The principle is
applicable

\(a\) to secret purposes of sin; to sinful desires, corrupt passions.
and evil propensities;

\(b\) to acts of sin in individuals, as when a man is pursuing a
business founded on fraud, dishonesty, oppression, and wrong;

\(c\) to public acts of sin, as when a people fast and pray [Isa
58:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001), and yet hold their fellow-men
in bondage; or enact and maintain unjust and unrighteous laws; or uphold
the acts of wicked rulers; or countenance and support by law that which
is contrary to the law of God; and

\(d\) to the feelings of an awakened and trembling sinner when he is
professedly seeking salvation.

If there is still the love of evil in his heart; if he has some
cherished purpose of iniquity which he is not willing to abandon; if
there is any one sin, however small or unimportant it may seem to be,
which he is not willing to forsake, he cannot hope that God will hear
his prayer; he may be assured that he will not. All prayer, to be
acceptable to God, must be connected with a purpose to forsake all sin.

[Psalms 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 66:19</span></span>

But verily God hath heard me ... - That is, He has given me evidence
that he has heard my prayer; and, in doing this, he has thus given me
the assurance also that I do not regard iniquity in my heart. The
evidence that he has heard me is at the same time proof to my mind that
I do not love sin. As it is a settled and universal principle that God
does not hear prayer when there is in the heart a cherished love and
purpose of iniquity, so it follows that, if there is evidence that he
has heard our prayers, it is proof that he has seen that our hearts are
sincere, and that we truly desire to forsake all forms of sin.

[Psalms 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 66:20</span></span>

Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer - That is, It is
fit that I should praise and adore God for the fact that he has
graciously condescended to listen to the voice of my supplications.

Nor his mercy from me - There is no more proper ground of praise than
the fact that God hears prayer - the prayer of poor, ignorant, sinful,
dying men. When we consider how great is his condescension in doing
this; when we think of his greatness and immensity; when we reflect that
the whole universe is dependent on him, and that the farthest worlds
need his care and attention; when we bear in mind that we are creatures
of a day and "know nothing;" and especially when we remember how we have
violated his laws, how sensual, corrupt, and vile our lives have been,
how low and grovelling have been our aims and purposes, how we have
provoked him by our unbelief, our ingratitude, and our hardness of heart
- we can never express, in appropriate words, the extent of his goodness
in hearing our prayers, nor can we find language which will properly
give utterance to the praises due to his name for having condescended to
listen to our cries for mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 67](psa067)

</div>
