<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa048)  [Next](psa050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 49:0</span></span>

The title to this psalm is the same essentially as the title to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001); 44; 45; [Psa
46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001); [Psa
47:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001). On the meaning of the terms
occurring in the title, see the notes at the title to [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001).

The "author" of the psalm is unknown. There is no evidence that it was
composed by David; and, in fact, the presumption is that he was not the
author, as his name is not prefixed to it.

It is, of course, impossible to ascertain the "occasion" on which it was
composed. It would seem from the psalm itself (see the notes at [Psa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005)) that it was written in view of
some evil or wrong which the author was suffering from rich oppressors,
and that he sought consolation in his trials from the reflections which
he makes in the psalm - to wit, from the fact that wealth constitutes no
security - that it gives no permanence to the projects of its owners and
that it really possesses no "power" in carrying out the plans of those
who abuse it to purposes of oppression and wrong. The wealthy man, no
matter how great his possessions may be, cannot redeem a brother from
the grave; he cannot save himself from the tomb; he cannot make his
possessions permanent in his family; he cannot take his riches with him
when he dies. There is really, therefore, nothing to "fear" from the man
of wealth, for whatever such a man can do must be temporary. The higher
interests of the soul cannot be affected permanently by anything so
uncertain and transitory as riches. It is not improbable that this train
of thought was suggested by an actual occurrence in the life of the
psalmist, whoever he was; but the reflections are of universal
importance in regard to riches considered as a means of power, and to
their real value as it respects the great interests of man.

The contents of the psalm are as follows:

I. An introduction, calling attention to the general subject as worthy
of the consideration of all classes of persons, both low and high; as
conveying lessons of wisdom; and as being the result of much reflection,
[Psa 49:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001).

II\. The main subject in the psalm, or the point to be illustrated; to
wit, "that the righteous have no reason to be afraid when rich
oppressors compass them around; or when the rich oppress and wrong
them," [Psa 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005).

III\. Reasons for this; or, reasons why those who are possessed of
wealth, and who glory in the self-importance derived from wealth, should
not be feared, [Psa 49:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006).

\(1\) no one can by his riches save another - not even his own brother -
from the grave, for all (whatever may be their condition) must die, and
leave their wealth to others, [Psa
49:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006).

\(2\) they cannot, by any wisdom or skill make their possessions
"permanent," or secure, [Psa 49:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011).

\(3\) they will not learn wisdom on this subject from the experience of
the past, but the coming generation is as foolish as the one that went
before, [Psa 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013).

\(4\) all must go down to the grave, however rich they may be, [Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014).

\(5\) there is a better hope for the righteous, and though he goes down
to the grave, he will live hereafter, [Psa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015).

\(6\) the rich can carry none of their wealth with them when they go to
the grave. All must be left behind, and pass into the hands of others,
[Psa 49:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016). The conclusion from the
whole, therefore, is, that we should not be "afraid" when one is made
rich - when the glory of his house is increased, for the possession of
wealth by another, though an enemy, gives him no such permanent power as
to make him an object of dread. In our real, our highest interests, we
must be safe, whatever the rich oppressor may do.

[Psalms 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 49:1</span></span>

Hear this, all ye people - That is, What I am about; to utter is worthy
of universal attention; it pertains equally to all mankind. The
psalmist; therefore calls on all the nations to attend to what he is
about to say. Compare the notes at [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002).

Give ear - Incline your ear; attend. Compare the notes at [Psa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006). See also [Isa
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#017); [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003); [Dan
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018); [Pro
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002).

All ye inhabitants of the world - The truth to be declared does not
pertain exclusively to any one nation, or any one class of people. All
are interested in it. The term here rendered "world" - חלד cheled, -
means properly "duration of life, lifetime;" then, "life, time, age;"
and then it comes to denote the world, considered as made up of the
living, or the passing generations.

[Psalms 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 49:2</span></span>

Both low and high - Those alike of humble and those of exalted rank, for
it pertains equally to all. On the meaning of the "terms" employed here,
see the notes at [Isa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009). These
truths pertained to the "low;" that is, to those of humble rank, as
teaching them not to envy the rich, and not to fear their power; and
they pertained to those of exalted rank, as teaching them not to trust
in their riches, and not to suppose that they could permanently possess
and enjoy them.

Rich and poor together - As equally interested in these truths; that is,
What the psalmist was about to say was adapted to impart useful lessons
to both classes. Both needed instruction on the subject; and the same
class of truths was adapted to furnish that instruction. The class of
truths referred to was derived from the powerlessness of wealth in
regard to the things of most importance to man, and from the fact that
all which a man can gain must soon be left: teaching those of one class
that they should not set their heart on wealth, and should not pride
themselves on possessing it, and teaching the other class that they
should not envy or fear the possessor of riches.

[Psalms 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 49:3</span></span>

My mouth shall speak of wisdom - That is, I will utter sentiments that
are wise, or that are of importance to all; sentiments that will enable
all to take a just view of the subject on which I speak. This indicates
"confidence" in what he was about to utter, as being eminently deserving
of attention.

And the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding - What I
reflect on, and what I give utterance to, in the matter under
consideration. The idea is, that he had meditated on the subject, as to
what was real wisdom in the matter, and that he would now give utterance
to the result of his meditations. It was not wisdom in general, or
intelligence or understanding as such on which he designed to express
the results of his thoughts, but it was only in respect to the proper
value to be attached to wealth, and as to the fact of its causing fear
[Psa 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005) in those who were not
possessed of it, and who might be subjected to the oppressive acts of
those who were rich.

[Psalms 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 49:4</span></span>

I will incline mine ear to a parable - The phrase "I will incline mine
ear" means that he would listen or attend to - as we incline our ear
toward those whom we are anxious to hear, or in the direction from which
a sound seems to come. Compare [Psa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001); [Psa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001); [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012); [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002). On the word rendered "parable"
here משׁל mâshâl - see the notes at [Isa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004). Compare [Job
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#012), note; [Job
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#001), note. The word properly means
similitude; then, a sentence, sententious saying, apophthegm; then, a
proverb; then, a song or poem. There is usually found in the word some
idea of "comparison," and hence, usually something that is to be
illustrated "by" a comparison or a story. The reference here would seem
to be to some dark or obscure subject which needed to be illustrated;
which it was not easy to understand; which had given the writer, as well
as others, perplexity and difficulty. He proposed now, with a view to
understand and explain it, to place his ear, as it were, "close to the
matter," that he might clearly comprehend it. The matter was difficult,
but he felt assured he could explain it - as when one unfolds the
meaning of an enigma. The "problem" - the "parable" - the difficult
point - related to the right use, or the proper value, of wealth, or the
estimate in which it should be held by those who possessed it, and by
those who did not. It was very evident to the author of the psalm that
the views of people were not right on the subject; he therefore proposed
to examine the matter carefully, and to state the exact truth.

I will open - I will explain; I will communicate the result of my
careful inquiries.

My dark saying - The word used here - חידה chı̂ydâh - is rendered "dark
speeches" in [Num 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008); "riddle," in
[Jdg 14:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012); [Eze
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#002); "hard questions" in [Kg1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001); [Ch2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001); "dark saying" (as here) in [Psa
78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002); [Pro
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#006); "dark sentences," in [Dan
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023); and "proverb" in [Hab
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006). It does not elsewhere occur. It
means properly "something entangled, intricate;" then, a trick or
stratagem; then art intricate speech, a riddle; then, a sententious
saying, a maxim; then a parable, a poem, a song, a proverb. The idea
here is, that the point was intricate or obscure; it was not well
understood, and he purposed "to lay it open," and to make it plain.

Upon the harp - On the meaning of the word used here, see the notes at
[Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The idea here is, that he
would accompany the explanation with music, or would so express it that
it might be accompanied with music; that is, he would give it a poetic
form - a form such that the sentiment might be used in public worship,
and might be impressed upon the mind by all the force and power which
music would impart. Sentiments of purity and truth, and sentiments of
pollution and falsehood also, are always most deeply imbedded in the
minds of people, and are made most enduring and effective, when they are
connected with music. Thus the sentiments of patriotism are perpetuated
and impressed in song; and thus sentiments of sensuality and pollution
owe much of their permanence and power to the fact that they are
expressed in corrupt verse, and that they are perpetuated in exquisite
poetry, and are accompanied with song. Scenes of revelry, as well as
acts of devotion, are kept up by song. Religion proposes to take
advantage of this principle in our nature by connecting the sentiments
of piety with the sweetness of verse, and by impressing and perpetuating
those sentiments through associating them with all that is tender, pure,
and inspiriting in music. Hence, music, both vocal and that which is
produced by instruments, has always been found to be an invaluable
auxiliary in securing the proper impression of truth on the minds of
people, as well as in giving utterance to the sentiments of piety in
devotion.

[Psalms 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 49:5</span></span>

Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil - This verse is designed
evidently to state the main subject of the psalm; the result of the
reflections of the author on what had been to him a source of
perplexity; on what had seemed to him to be a dark problem. He "had"
evidently felt that there was occasion to dread the power of wicked rich
men; but he now felt that he had no ground for that fear and alarm. He
saw that their power was short-lived; that all the ability to injure,
arising from their station and wealth, must soon cease; that his own
highest interests could not be affected by anything which they could do.
The "days of evil" here spoken of are the times which are referred to in
the following phrase, "when the iniquity of my heels," etc.

When the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about - It would be
difficult to make any sense out of this expression, though it is
substantially the same rendering which is found in the Vulgate and the
Septuagint. Luther renders it "when the iniquity of my oppressors
encompasses me." The Chaldee Paraphrase renders it, "why should I fear
in the days of evil, unless it be when the guilt of my sin compasses me
about?" The Syriac renders it, "the iniquity of "my enemies." The
Arabic, "when my enemies surround me." DeWette renders it as Luther
does. Rosenmuller, "when the iniquity of those who lay snares against me
shall compass me around." Prof. Alexander, "when the iniquity of my
oppressors (or supplanters) shall surround me." The word rendered
"heels" here - עקב ‛âqêb - means properly "heel," [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); [Job
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#009); [Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022); then, the rear of an army, [Jos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#013); then, in the plural,
"footsteps," prints of the heel or foot, [Psa
77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019); and then, according to Gesenius
(Lexicon) "a lier in wait, insidiator."

Perhaps there is in the word the idea of craft; of lying in wait; of
taking the advantages - from the verb עקב ‛âqab, to be behind, to come
from behind; and hence to supplant; to circumvent. So in [Hos
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#003), "in the womb he held his brother
by the heel" (compare [Gen 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)).
Hence, the word is used as meaning to supplant; to circumvent, [Gen
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036); [Jer
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#004) (Hebrew, [Jer
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003)) This is, undoubtedly, the meaning
here. The true idea is, when I am exposed to the crafts, the cunning,
the tricks, of those who lie in wait for me; I am liable to be attacked
suddenly, or to be taken unawares; but what have I to fear? The psalmist
refers to the evil conduct of his enemies, as having given him alarm.
They were rich and powerful. They endeavored in some way to supplant him
- perhaps, as we should say, to "trip him up" - to overcome him by art,
by power, by trick, or by fraud. He "had" been afraid of these powerful
foes; but on a calm review of the whole matter, he came to the
conclusion that he had really no cause for fear. The reasons for this he
proceeds to state in the following part of the psalm.

[Psalms 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 49:6</span></span>

They that trust in their wealth - The first reason why there was no
cause of alarm is drawn [Psa 49:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)
from the "powerlessness" of wealth, as illustrated by the fact that it
can do nothing to save life or to prevent death. He refers to those who
possess it as "trusting" in their wealth, or "relying on" that as the
source of their power.

And boast themselves - Pride themselves; or feel conscious of safety and
strength because they are rich. It is the "power" which wealth is
supposed to confer, that is alluded to here.

In the multitude of their riches - The abundance of their wealth.

[Psalms 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 49:7</span></span>

None of them can bid any means redeem his brother - None of those who
are rich. This verse might be literally rendered, "a brother cannot by
redeeming redeem; a man cannot give to God his own ransom." The passage,
therefore, may mean either, as in our version, that no one, however
rich, can redeem a brother - his own brother - by his wealth; or, that a
brother - one who sustains the relation of a brother - cannot rescue
another from death. On the word "redeem," see [Psa
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#022), note; [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003), note. It means here that he
could not rescue him, or save him from the grave; he could not by his
wealth preserve him in life. The whole expression is emphatic:
"redeeming he cannot redeem;" that is - according to Hebrew usage - he
cannot "possibly" do it; it "cannot" be done. There is here no
particular reference to the "means" to be employed, but only an emphatic
statement of the fact that "it cannot by any possibility be done." The
object is to show how powerless and valueless is wealth in regard to the
things that most pertain to a man's welfare. It can do literally
"nothing" in that which most deeply affects man, and in which he most
needs help. There is no allusion here to the redemption of the soul, or
to the great work of redemption, as that term is commonly understood;
but it "is" true, in the highest sense, that if wealth cannot "redeem"
life, or keep our best and nearest friend from the grave, much less can
it avail in that which is so much more important, and so much more
difficult, the redemption of the soul from eternal ruin. Here, also, as
in the matter of saving from the grave, it is absolutely true that
wealth can do "nothing" - literally, "nothing" - in saving the soul of
its possessor, or in enabling its possessor to save his best friend.
Nothing but the blood of the cross can avail then; and the wealth of the
richest can do no more here than the poverty of the poorest.

Nor give to God a ransom for him - This would be more literally
rendered, "a man cannot give to God his ransom;" that is, he cannot,
though in the possession of the most ample wealth, give to God that
which would purchase his own release from the grave. On the word
"ransom," see as above, the notes at [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). Compare [Mat
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026).

[Psalms 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 49:8</span></span>

For the redemption of their soul is precious - The word "soul" here
means "life," and not the immortal part. The only question which the
psalmist here considers is the value of wealth in preserving "life," or
in saving man from the grave. The phrase, ""their" soul," refers
doubtless to the man and his brother, as alluded to in the previous
verse. The idea is that neither can the man of wealth ransom his own
life from the grave, nor the life of his brother. Wealth can save
neither of them. The word "precious" means "costly," "valuable." The
word is applied [Kg1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#002), [Kg1
10:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#010) to gems, and then to the
costlier kinds of stones employed in building, as marble and
hewn-stones, [Ch2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#006). Compare the
notes at [Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007). The idea here is,
that the rescue of the life, or the saving from the grave, would be too
"costly;" it would be beyond the power of all wealth to purchase it; no
amount of silver or gold, or raiment, or precious stones, could
"constitute" a sufficient "price" to secure it.

And it ceaseth for ever - That is, Wealth forever comes short of the
power necessary to accomplish this. It has always been insufficient; it
always "will" be. There is no hope that it "ever" will be sufficient;
that by any increase in the amount - or by any change in the conditions
of the bargain - property or riches can avail for this. The whole matter
is perfectly "hopeless" as to the power of wealth in saving one human
being from the grave. It must always "fail" in saving a man from death.
The word rendered "ceaseth" - חדל châdal - means "to leave off, to
desist, to fail," [Gen 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#008); [Exo
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#034); [Isa
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#022). As there is no allusion here to
the redemption of the "soul" - the immortal part - this passage affirms
nothing in regard to the fact that the work of redemption by the Saviour
is completed or finished, and that an atonement cannot be made again,
which is true; nor to the fact that when salvation through that
atonement is rejected, all hope of redemption is at an end, which is
also true. But though there is, originally, no such reference here, the
"language" is such as is "adapted" to express that idea. In a much
higher and more important sense than any which pertains to the power of
wealth in saving from the grave, it is true tint the work of the
atonement ceased for ever when the Redeemer expired on the cross, and
that all hope of salvation ceases forever when the atonement is
rejected, and when man refuses to be saved by his blood; nothing then
can save the soul. No other sacrifice will be made, and when a man has
finally rejected the Saviour, it may be said in the highest sense of the
term, that the redemption of the soul is too costly to be effected by
any other means, and that all hope of its salvation "has ceased"
forever.

[Psalms 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 49:9</span></span>

That he should still live for ever - That his brother whom he could not
redeem - or that he himself - should not die, [Psa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008). The idea is, that the price of
life is so great that no wealth can rescue it so that a man shall not
die.

And not see corruption - Should not return to dust, or moulder away in
the grave. See the notes at [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010).

[Psalms 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 49:10</span></span>

For he seeth that wise men die - He must see this; he does see it. He
perceives that no one can be saved from death. It comes on all alike -
the wise and the unwise. Nothing saves from it. The allusion is here
especially to the "rich," whether "they" are wise or whether they are
fools and "brutish." The simple fact, as stated, is that no matter what
may be the character of the man of wealth, whether wise or foolish, he
must certainly die His wealth cannot save him from the grave. The
possessor of wealth himself "sees" this. It cannot be concealed from
him.

Likewise the fool - The rich man who is a fool, or who is destitute of
wisdom. He who is rich and who is wise - wise in the things of this life
and wise unto salvation - (or who is gifted with a high degree of
intelligence and who evinces wisdom in respect to the higher matters of
existence) - and the rich man who is a fool - (who is regardless of his
highest interests, and who evinces no special intelligence, though
possessed of wealth) - all, all die alike.

And the brutish person - The rich man who is stupid and dull; who lives
like a brute; who lives to eat and drink; who lives for gross sensuality
- "he" dies as well as he who is wise. Wealth cannot in either case save
from death. Whether connected with wisdom or folly - whether carefully
husbanded or lavishly spent - whether a man employs it in the highest
and noblest manner in which it can be devoted, or in the indulgence of
the most low and debasing enjoyments - it is alike powerless in saving
people from the grave.

And leave their wealth to others - It all passes into other hands. It
"must" be so left. It cannot be carried away by its possessor when he
goes into the eternal world. It not only cannot save him from the grave,
but he cannot even take it with him. All his houses, his lands, his
title-deeds, his silver, his gold, his parks, gardens, horses, hounds -
all that he had accumulated with so much care, and worshipped with so
idolatrous an affection, is not even his own in the sense that he can
take it with him. The title passes absolutely into other hands, and even
if he could come back to earth again, he could no longer claim it, for
when he dies it ceases to be his forever. How powerless, then, is wealth
in reference to the great purposes of human existence!

[Psalms 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 49:11</span></span>

Their inward thought is - Their secret expectation and feeling is that
they have secured permanency for their wealth in their own families,
though they themselves may pass away. The essential thought in this
verse is, that the rich people referred to in the foregoing verses
imagine that their possessions will be perpetuated in their own
families. The word rendered "inward thought" - קרב qereb - means
properly "the midst, the middle, inner part;" and hence it comes to mean
the heart, or the mind, as the seat of thought and affection: [Psa
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009); [Psa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006). It means here, their hope, their
calculation, their secret expectation; and the whole verse is designed
to show the value or importance which they attach to wealth as being, in
their apprehension, suited to build up their families forever.

That their houses shall continue "for ever - Either the dwellings which
they rear, or - more probably - their families.

And their dwelling-places to all generations - Margin, as in Hebrew, "to
generation and generation." That is, forever. They expect that their
possessions will always remain in the family, and be transmitted from
one generation to another.

They call their lands after their own names - They give their own names
to the farms or grounds which they own, in the hope that, though they
must themselves pass away, their "names" may be handed down to future
times. This practice, which is not uncommon in the world, shows how
intense is the desire of people not to be forgotten; and at the same
time illustrates the main thought in the psalm - the importance attached
to wealth by its possessor, as if it could carry his "name" down to
future times, when he shall have passed away. In this respect, too,
wealth is commonly as powerless as it is in saving its possessor from
the grave. It is not very far into future times that mere wealth can
carry the name of a man after he is dead. lands and tenements pass into
other hands, and the future owner soon ceases to have any concern about
the "name" of the former occupier, and the world cares nothing about it.
A man must have some other claim to be remembered than the mere fact of
his having been rich, or he will be soon forgotten. Compare the notes at
[Isa 22:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015).

[Psalms 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 49:12</span></span>

Nevertheless, man being in honor abideth not - No matter to what rank he
may rise, no matter how much wealth he may accumulate, no matter how
fixed and secure he may seem to make his possessions, he cannot make
them permanent and enduring. He must pass away and leave all this to
others. The word rendered "abideth" - ילין yālı̂yn - means properly to
pass the night; to remain over night; to lodge, as one does for a night;
and the idea is, that he is not to lodge or remain permanently in that
condition; or, more strictly, he will not lodge there even for a night;
that is, he will soon pass away. It is possible that the Saviour had his
eye on this passage in the parable of the rich fool, and especially in
the declaration, "This night thy soul shall be required of thee," [Luk
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020).

He is like the beasts that perish - He is like the beasts; they perish.
This does not mean that in all respects he is like them, but only in
this respect, that he must die as they do; that he cannot by his wealth
make himself immortal. He must pass away just as if he were an animal of
the inferior creation, and had no power of accumulating wealth, or of
laying plans that stretch into the future. The squirrel and the beaver -
animals that "lay up" something, or that, like people, have the power of
"accumulating," die just like other animals. So the rich "man." His
intelligence, his high hopes, his far-reaching schemes, make no
difference between him and his fellow-men and the brute in regard to
death. They all die alike.

[Psalms 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 49:13</span></span>

This their way is their folly - This might be rendered, "This is their
way or course of life. It is their folly;" or, such is their folly. On
the word "way," see the notes at [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006). The idea is, that it is folly for
a man to cherish these hopes; to feel that wealth is of so much
importance; to imagine that it can deliver from the grave; to suppose
that he can perpetuate his own name, and secure his possessions in his
own family upon the earth. And yet the world is still full of people as
foolish as were those in the time of the psalmist; people who will not
be admonished by the suggestions of reason, or by the experience of
6,000 years in the past. This is one thing in which the world makes no
progress - in which it learns nothing from the experience of the past;
and as the beaver under the influence of instinct builds his house and
his home now in the same way that the first beaver did his, and as the
brutes all act in the same manner from generation to generation,
accumulating no knowledge, and making no advances from the experience of
the past, so it is with people in their desire to grow rich. On other
points the world accumulates knowledge, and profits from experience,
garnering up the lessons taught by past experiment and observation, and
thus becoming wiser in all other respects; but in regard to the desire
of wealth, it makes no progress, gains no knowledge, derives no
advantage, from the generations of fools that have lived and died in
past ages. They now engage in the pursuit of gold with the same zeal,
and the same expectation and hope which were evinced in the first ages
of the world, and "as if" their own superior skill and wisdom could set
at nought all the lessons taught by the past.

Yet their posterity - The coming generation is as confident and as
foolish as the one that went before.

Approve their sayings - Margin, "delight in their mouth." That is, they
delight or take pleasure in what proceeds from their mouth; in what they
say; in their views of things. They adopt "their" principles, and act on
"their" maxims; and, attaching the same importance to wealth which
"they" did, seek as "they" sought to perpetuate their names upon the
earth.

[Psalms 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 49:14</span></span>

Like sheep they are laid in the grave - The allusion here is to a flock
as "driven" forward by the shepherd; and the meaning is that they are
driven forward to the grave, as it were, in flocks, or as a flock of
sheep is driven by a shepherd. The word rendered "are laid" - שׁתוּ śatû
- is probably not derived from the verb שׁות śûth, or שׁית śı̂yth, as our
translators seem to have supposed, but from שׁתת śâthath, to set, or
place; and the meaning is, "Like sheep they put them in Sheol, or the
grave;" that is, they thrust or drive them down there. In other words,
this is "done," without intimating by whom it is done. They are urged
forward; they are driven toward the tomb as a flock of sheep is driven
forward to the slaughter. Some influence or power is pressing them in
masses down to the grave. The word rendered "grave" is "Sheol." It is
sometimes used in the sense of the grave, and sometimes as referring to
the abode of departed spirits. See [Job
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021), note; [Psa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005), note. It seems here to be used in
the former sense.

Death shall feed on them - The word rendered "feed" here - רעה râ‛âh -
means properly to feed a flock; to pasture; then, to perform the office
of a shepherd. The idea here is not, as in our translation, "death shall
feed on them;" but, death shall rule over them as the shepherd rules his
flock. The allusion to the "flock" suggested this. They are driven down
to the grave, or to Sheol. The shepherd, the ruler, he who does this, is
"death;" and the idea is not that death is a hungry monster, devouring
them "in" the grave, but that the shepherd over that "flock," instead of
being a kind and gentle friend and protector (as the word "shepherd"
naturally suggests), is "death" - a fearful and grim Ruler of the
departed. The idea, therefore, is not that of "feeding," specifically,
but it is that of ruling, controlling, guiding. So the Septuagint,
θάνατος ποιμανεῖ αὐτούς thanatos poimanei autous. The Vulgate, however,
renders it, "mors depascet eos;" and Luther, "der Tod naget sie;" death
gnaws or feeds on them.

And the upright - The just; the righteous. The meaning of this part of
the verse undoubtedly is, that the just or pious would have some kind of
ascendancy or superiority over them at the period here referred to as
the "morning."

Shall have dominion over them - Or rather, as DeWette renders it, shall
"triumph" over them. That is, will be exalted over them; or shall have a
more favored lot. Though depressed now, and though crushed by the rich,
yet they will soon have a more exalted rank, and a higher honor than
those who, though once rich, are laid in the grave tinder the dominion
of death.

In the morning - That is, very soon; tomorrow; when the morning dawns
after the darkness of the present. See the notes at [Psa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005). There is a time coming - a
brighter time - when the relative condition of the two classes shall be
changed, and when the upright - the pious - though poor and oppressed
now, shall be exalted to higher honors than "they" will be. There is no
certain evidence that this refers to the "morning" of the resurrection;
but it is language which well expresses the idea when connected with
that doctrine, and which can be best explained on the supposition that
that doctrine was referred to, and that the hope of such a resurrection
was cherished by the writer. Indeed, when we remember that the psalmist
expressly refers to the "grave" in regard to the rich, it is difficult
to explain the language on any other supposition than that he refers
here to the resurrection - certainly not as well as on this supposition
- and especially when it is remembered that death makes no distinction
in cutting down people, whether they are righteous or wicked. Both are
laid in the grave alike, and "any" prospect of distinction or triumph in
the case must be derived from scenes beyond the grave. This verse,
therefore, may belong to that class of passages in the Old Testament
which are founded on the belief of the resurrection of the dead without
always expressly affirming it, and which are best explained on the
supposition that the writers of the Old Testament were acquainted with
that doctrine, and drew their hopes as well as their illustrations from
it. Compare [Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002); [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019); [Psa
16:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009).

And their beauty - Margin, "strength." The Hebrew word means "form,
shape, image;" and the idea here is, that their form or figure will be
changed, or disappear, to wit, by consuming away. The idea of "beauty,"
or "strength," is not necessarily in the passage, but the meaning is,
that the form or figure which was so familiar among people will be
dissolved, and disappear in the grave.

Shall consume in the grave - Hebrew, "in Sheol." The word probably means
here "the grave." The original word rendered "consume," means literally
to make old; to wear out; to waste away. The entire form of the man will
disappear.

From their dwelling - Margin, "the grave being a habitation to every one
of them." Septuagint, "and their help shall grow old in the grave from
their glory." So the Latin Vulgate. The whole expression is obscure. The
most probable meaning is, "they shall consume in the grave, "from its
being a dwelling to him;"" that is, to each of them. Sheol, or the
grave, becomes a dwelling to the rich man, and in that gloomy abode -
that which is now his dwelling - he consumes away. It pertains to that
dwelling, or it is one of the conditions of residing there, that all
consume away and disappear. Others render it, "so that there is no
dwelling or habitation for them." Others, and this is the more common
interpretation, "their form passes away, the underworld is their
habitation." See DeWette in loc. This last rendering requires a slight
change in the punctuation of the original. DeWette, Note, p. 339. The
"general" idea in the passage is plain, that the possessors of wealth
are soon to find their home in the grave, and that their forms, with all
on which they valued themselves, are soon to disappear.

[Psalms 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 49:15</span></span>

But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave - literally,
"from the hand of Sheol;" that is, from the dominion of death. The hand
is an emblem of power, and it here means that death or Sheol holds the
dominion over all those who are in the grave. The control is absolute
and unlimited. The grave or Sheol is here personified as if reigning
there, or setting up an empire there. Compare the notes at [Isa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009). On the word "redeem," see the
references in the notes at [Psa 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007).

For he shall receive me - literally, "he shall take me." That is,
either, He will take me from the grave; or, He will take me "to"
himself. The general idea is, that God would take hold of him, and save
him from the dominion of the grave; from that power which death
exercises over the dead. This would either mean that he would be
preserved from going down to the grave and returning to corruption
there; or, that he would hereafter be rescued from the power of the
grave in a sense which would not apply in respect to the rich man. The
former evidently cannot be the idea, since the psalmist could not hope
to escape death; yet there might be a hope that the dominion of death
would not be permanent and enduring, or that there would be a future
life, a resurrection from the grave. It seems to me, therefore, that
this passage, like the expression in [Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014), "in the morning," and the
passages referred to in the notes at that verse, is founded on the
belief that death is not the end of a good man, but that he will rise
again, and live in a higher and better state. It was this consideration
which gave such comfort to the psalmist in contemplating the whole
subject; and the idea, thus illustrated, is substantially the same as
that stated by the Saviour in [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028), "Fear not them which kill the
body, but are not able to kill the soul."

[Psalms 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 49:16</span></span>

Be not thou afraid when one is made rich - Do not dread the power
derived from wealth; do not fear anything which a man can do merely
because he is rich. The original is, "when a "man" becomes rich." The
allusion is not necessarily to a bad man, though that is implied in the
whole passage, since there is no reason for fearing a "good" man,
whether he is rich or poor. The only thing that seems to have been
apprehended in the mind of the psalmist was that power of doing injury
to others, or of employing means to injure others, which wealth confers
on a bad man. The psalmist here changes the form of the expression, no
longer referring to himself, and to his own feelings, as in the former
part of the psalm, but making an application of the whole course of
thought to others, showing them, as the result of his own reflection and
observation, that no man had any real cause for dread and alarm when
riches increased in the hands of the wicked. The reasons why this power
should not be feared are stated in the following verses.

When the glory of his house is increased - Rich people often lavish much
of their wealth on their dwellings; on the dwelling itself; on the
furniture; on the grounds and appendages of their habitation. This is
evidently referred to here as "the "glory" of their house;" as that
which would be adapted to make an impression of the power and rank of
its possessor.

[Psalms 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 49:17</span></span>

For when he dieth - He must die. His wealth cannot save him from the
grave. It is always to be "assumed" of rich people, as of all other men,
that they "will" have to die. The point is not one which is to be
argued; not one about which there can be any doubt. Of all people,
whatever else may be said of them, it may always be affirmed that they
must die, and important inferences may be always drawn from that fact.

He shall carry nothing away - It is not improbable that the apostle Paul
had this passage in his eye in what he says in [Ti1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007), "For we brought nothing into this
world, and it is certain that we can carry nothing out." See the notes
at that passage. Compare [Job
27:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016).

His glory shall not descend after him - His wealth, and those things
which have been procured by wealth, as indicating station and rank,
cannot accompany him to the other world. This is said to show that he is
not to be "feared" on account of his wealth. The argument is, that
whatever there is in wealth that seems to give power, and to afford the
means of doing injury, must soon be separated from him. In respect to
wealth, and to all the power derived from wealth, he will be like the
most poor and penniless of mortals. All that he possesses will pass into
other hands, and whether for good or for evil, it will no longer be in
his power to use it. As this "must" occur soon - as it "may" occur in a
moment - there is no reason to "fear" such a man, or to suppose that he
can do permanent injury by any power derived from wealth. Compare the
notes at [Isa 14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#006), notes at [Isa
14:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#010).

[Psalms 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 49:18</span></span>

Though while he lived - Margin, as in Hebrew, "in his life." More
literally, "in his lives." The idea is, as long as he lived.

He blessed his soul - That is, he blessed himself; he congratulated
himself; he regarded his condition as desirable and enviable. He "took
airs" upon himself; he felt that his was a happy lot; he expected and
demanded respect and honor from others on account of his wealth. He
commended himself as having evinced sagacity in the means by which he
acquired wealth - thus imparting honor to himself; and he congratulated
himself on the result, as placing him in a conditiOn above want, and in
a condition that entitled him to honor. A striking illustration of this
feeling is found in the parable of the rich fool, [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019), "And I will say to my soul,
Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry."

And men will praise thee - Others will praise thee. He not only blessed
or commended himself, but he might expect that others would praise and
congratulate him also. They would regard him as a happy man; happy,
because he had been thus successful; happy, because he had accumulated
that which was the object of so universal desire among people. Success,
though founded on that which is entitled to no praise, and which is even
the result of unprincipled conduct, often secures the temporary praise
of men, while a want of success, though connected with the strictest,
sternest virtue, is often followed by neglect, or is even regarded as
proof that he who fails has no claim to honor.

When thou doest well to thyself - Well, in reference to success in life,
or in the sense that thou art prospered. Your industry, your sagacity,
your prosperity will be the theme of commendation. To a certain extent,
where this does not lead to self flattery and pride, it is proper and
right. The virtues which ordinarily contribute to prosperity "are"
worthy of commendation, and should be held up to the example of the
young. But what is evil and wrong in the matter here referred to is that
the man's commendation of himself, and the commendation by others, all
tends to foster a spirit of pride and self-confidence; to make the soul
easy and satisfied with the condition; to produce the feeling that all
is gained which needs to be gained; to make the possessor of wealth
arrogant and haughty; and to lead him to neglect the higher interests of
the soul.

[Psalms 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 49:19</span></span>

He shall go to the generation of his fathers - To be gathered to one's
own people, or to his fathers, is a common expression in the Old
Testament in speaking of death. See [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008), [Gen
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017); [Gen
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#029); [Gen
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029), [Gen
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033), [Num
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#024), [Num
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#026); [Num
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#013); [Num
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#002); [Deu
32:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#050); [Jdg
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010). It means that they were united
again with those who had gone before them, in the regions of the dead.
Death had indeed separated them, but by death they were again united.

They shall never see light - He and the "generation" to which he has
gone to be united, would no more see the light of this world; no more
walk among the living: [Job 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#030).
Compare the notes at [Isa 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#011); notes
at [Psa 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013). The meaning is, that
the rich sinner will die as others have done before him, leaving all his
earthly possessions, and will no more be permitted to revisit the world
where his forsaken possessions are, and will not even be permitted to
"look" on what before had been to him such a source of self-confidence,
self-gratulation, and pride.

[Psalms 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 49:20</span></span>

Man that is in honor - Man that is in possession of wealth, or that
occupies an exalted rank. See the notes at [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012).

And understandeth not - That is, who has no proper appreciation of what
it is to be a man; of what is his true rank "as" a man; of his relations
to God; of his condition as an immortal being - man that values himself
only on the fact that he is rich; that lives for this world alone; that
regards it as a sufficient distinction that he "is" rich; that degrades
his nobler nature in the mere enjoyment of the pleasures of sense - is
like the beasts - is in no way elevated above them.

Is like the beasts that perish - They live only for this life. They have
no higher nature than that which pertains to the senses, and they live
accordingly. The man who, though of exalted rank, lives for this life
alone, herein resembles them. See the notes at [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012). Alas! what multitudes there are
who thus live - whose only aim is to secure the wealth and the honors of
this life - who have no more thought of a future state, and who form no
more plans in regard to a future world, than do the brutes! For many
there are in exalted stations, who are surrounded by all that wealth can
give, yet who no more admit the thought of a future world into their
hopes and plans than if they had no other endowment than the camel or
the ox, and whose conduct in this respect would not be changed if all
the higher endowments which constitute the nature of man were withdrawn,
and they were at once reduced to the condition of a brute. While,
therefore, the main purpose of this psalm is to show that wealth confers
no "power" which is to be dreaded - that its possessor, though wicked,
cannot permanently injure us, since he must soon pass away by death -
the course of thought at the same time teaches us that we should not
"desire" wealth as our portion; that we should not live for this, as the
main object of life. The possessor of the most ample fortune must soon
be laid in the grave. All that he has acquired will pass into other
hands, and will be his no more. But he "has" a higher nature. He "may"
live in a manner different from the brute that perishes. He "may" act
with reference to a higher - an eternal - state of existence; and, when
he dies, he "may" leave his earthly inheritance, whether great or small,
only to enter on an inheritance that shall he permanent and eternal.
"What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul?" [Mar 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#036).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 50](psa050)

</div>
