<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa141)  [Next](psa143) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 142](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 142:0</span></span>

This also is a psalm of David. It is entitled, like not a few others of
the Psalms, "Maschil;" margin, "giving instruction:" a didactic hymn.
See the word explained in the Introduction to [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001). It is said, in the title, to
be "A prayer when he was in the cave;" that is, either a prayer which he
composed while there, or which he composed afterward, putting into a
poetic form the substance of the prayer which he breathed forth there,
or expressive of the feelings which he had when there. The reference may
be either to the cave of Adullam [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001), or to that in Engedi [Sa1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003). In both cases the circumstances
were substantially the same, for David had fled to the cave to escape
from Saul. The prayer is such as would be appropriate to a condition of
danger such as was that in which David then was. It is a cry of distress
when there was no refuge - no hope - but in God; when there seemed to be
no way of escape from his enemies; and when, forsaken by his friends,
and pursued by an enemy who sought his life, he seemed now to be in the
power of his foe. It may also be "used" to express the feelings of one
now in danger - as of a sinner under condemnation, seeing no way of
escape, exposed to ruin, and shut up entirely to the mercy of God. Such
a one feels, as David did on this occasion, that there can be no escape
but through the interposition of God.

[Psalms 142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 142:1</span></span>

I cried unto the Lord with my voice - See the notes at [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004), where the language is the same.
He uttered a loud and audible prayer, though he was alone. It was not a
mental ejaculation, but he gave expression to his desires.

With my voice unto the Lord did I make my supplication - See [Psa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008). The Hebrew word rendered "did
make my supplication," means to implore favor or mercy. It denotes the
language of petition and entreaty, not the language of claim.

[Psalms 142:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 142:2</span></span>

I poured out my complaint before him - literally, my meditation; that
is, What so much occupied my thoughts at the time I expressed aloud. The
word "complaint" does not express the idea. The meaning is, not that he
"complained" of God or of man; but that his mind "meditated" on his
condition. He was full of care and of anxiety; and he went and poured
this out freely before God. The Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate render
this, "my prayer." See [Psa 55:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#002),
where the same Hebrew word is used.

I showed before him my trouble - I made mention of it. I spoke of it.

[Psalms 142:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 142:3</span></span>

When my spirit was overwhelmed within me - Luther renders this, "When my
spirit was in distress." The Hebrew word rendered "overwhelmed" means,
in Kal, to cover as with a garment; then, to be covered as with
darkness, trouble, sorrow; and then, to languish, to faint, to be
feeble: [Psa 77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003); [Psa
107:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#005). The idea here is, that, in his
troubles, he had no vigor, no life, no spirit. He did not see how he
could escape from his troubles, and he had no heart to make an effort.

Then thou knewest my path - Thou didst see all. Thou didst see the way
that I was treading, and all its darkness and dangers, implying here
that God had made it an object to mark his course; to see what egress
there might be - what way to escape from the danger. It was in no sense
concealed from God, and no danger of the way was hidden from him. It is
much for us to feel when we are in danger or difficulty that God knows
it all, and that nothing can be hidden from him.

In the way wherein I walked - In my path; the path that I was treading.

Have they privily laid a snare for me - They treated me as a man would
treat his neighbor, who should spread a snare, or set a trap, for him in
the path which he knew he must take. The word rendered "have privily
laid" means to hide, to conceal. It was so concealed that I could not
perceive it. They did it unknown to me. I neither knew that it was laid,
nor where it was laid. They meant to spring it upon me at a moment when
I was not aware, and when I should be taken by surprise. It was not open
and manly warfare; it was stealth, cunning, trick, art.

[Psalms 142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 142:4</span></span>

I looked on my right hand, and beheld - Margin, "Look on the right hand
and see The words translated "looked" and "beheld" are in the imperative
mood in the Hebrew. They are not, however, improperly rendered as to the
sense. They refer to David's state of mind at the time, and give
vividness to the description. The psalmist seems to be in the presence
of others. He calls upon them to look around; to see how he was
encompassed with danger. Look, says he, in every direction; see who
there is on whom I may rely; what there is to which I may trust as a
refuge. I can find none; I see none; there is none. The "right hand" is
referred to here as the direction where he might look for a protector:
[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006), [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031).

But there was no man that would know me - No man to be seen who would
recognize me as his friend; who would stand up for me; on whom I could
rely.

Refuge failed me - Margin, as in Hebrew, "perished from me." If there
had been any hope of refuge, it has failed altogether. There is none
now.

No man cared for my soul - Margin, "No man sought after my soul."
Hebrew, after my "life." That is, No one sought to save my life; no one
regarded it as of sufficient importance to attempt to preserve me.

[Psalms 142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 142:5</span></span>

I cried unto thee, O Lord - When there was no help; when I saw myself
encompassed with dangers; when I looked on every hand and there was no
"man" that would undertake for me.

I said, Thou art my refuge -

\(a\) My "only" refuge. I can go nowhere else.

\(b\) Thou art "in fact" my refuge. I can and do put my trust in thee.
See the notes at [Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001).

And my portion - See the notes at [Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005).

In the land of the living - Among all those that live - all living
beings. There is no one else among the living to whom I can come but to
thee, the living God. My hope is not in human beings, for they are
against me; not in angels, for they have not the power to rescue me. It
is God only, the living God, whom I make my confidence and the ground of
my hope.

[Psalms 142:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 142:6</span></span>

Attend unto my cry - Give ear to me when I cry to thee. Do not turn away
and refuse to hear me.

For I am brought very low - I am reduced greatly; I am made very poor.
The language would be applicable to one who had been in better
circumstances, and who had been brought down to a condition of danger,
of poverty, of want. It is language which is commonly applied to
poverty.

Deliver me from my persecutors - Saul and his followers.

For they are stronger than I - More in number; better armed; better
suited for battle.

[Psalms 142:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 142:7</span></span>

Bring my soul out of prison - Bring me out of my present condition which
is like a prison. I am as it were shut up; I am encompassed with foes; I
do not know how to escape. Compare [Psa
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017).

That I may praise thy name - Not merely for my own sake, but that I may
have occasion more abundantly to praise thee; that thus "thou" mayest be
honored; an object at all times much more important than our own welfare
- even than our salvation.

The righteous shall compass me about - They shall come to me with
congratulations and with expressions of rejoicing. They will desire my
society, my friendship, my influence, and will regard it as a privilege
and an honor to be associated with me. David looked to this as an object
to be desired. He wished to be associated with the righteous; to enjoy
their friendship; to have their good opinion; to be reckoned as one of
them here and forever. Compare the notes at [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009). It "is" an honor - a felicity to
be desired - to be associated with good people, to possess their esteem;
to have their sympathy, their prayers, and their affections; to share
their joys here, and their triumphs in the world to come.

For thou shalt deal bountifully with me - Or, when thou shalt deal
bountifully with me. When thou dost show me this favor, then the
righteous will come around me in this manner. They will see that I am a
friend of God, and they will desire to be associated with me as his
friend.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 143](psa143)

</div>
