<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa127)  [Next](psa129) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 128](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 128:0</span></span>

The author of this psalm is unknown, as is also the occasion on which it
was composed. It is not known, either, why this psalm was placed among
those which are called "Songs of Degrees." The scope and design of it,
however, cannot be misunderstood. It is intended to show the advantage
of religion on the affairs of this life, and especially on the domestic
relations; in a numerous family, in the character of children, and in
being permitted to see numerous descendants. In connection with this,
the possessor of true religion would be permitted to see the prosperity
of Zion - the good of Jerusalem, and peace upon Israel. Of course this
is to be regarded as a general statement, or as indicating what will
commonly be true as the restilt of religion. See [Psa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009), note; [Psa
37:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#033), note; [Psa
112:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002), note. Thus industry,
temperance, prudence, tend to promote health and long life, so that
health and a long life are the general result; but it would be unfair to
regard one who should assert this as meaning to say that it is
universally true, or that people who are industrious, temperate, and
prudent, are never sick, and never die.

The psalm states, in general [Psa
128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001), the blessedness of those who
fear the Lord. This blessedness is seen

\(1\) in their success in life, [Psa
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002);

\(2\) in a numerous and happy family, [Psa
128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003);

\(3\) in being permitted to see children's children, [Psa
128:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006);

\(4\) in being permitted to see the prosperity of religion - the "good
of Jerusalem," and "peace upon Israel," [Psa
128:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005).

[Psalms 128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 128:1</span></span>

Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord - That honors God; that is
truly pious. See the notes at [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); [Psa
112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001). What that blessedness is, is
indicated in the following verses.

That walketh in his ways - The ways which God commands or directs. On
the word "walketh," see the notes at [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001).

[Psalms 128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 128:2</span></span>

For thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands - Thou shalt enjoy the
avails of thy labor; thou shalt be secure in thy rights. See the notes
at [Isa 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010). This is a general
promise respecting the prosperity which religion affords. If all people
were truly religious, this would be universal, so far as man is
concerned. Property would be secure; and, except so far as abundant
harvests might be prevented by the direct providence of God - by blight,
and mildew, and storms, and drought - all people would enjoy undisturbed
the avails of their labor. Slavery, whereby one man is compelled to
labor for another, would come to an end; every one who is now a slave
would "eat the labor of his own hands;" and property would no more be
swept away by war, or become the prey of robbers and freebooters.
Religion, if it prevailed universally, would produce universal security
in our rights.

Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee - literally, "Happy
thou, and well with thee." That is, happiness and security would be the
consequence of true religion.

[Psalms 128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 128:3</span></span>

Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house - It is
not uncommon in the East, as elsewhere, to train a vine along the sides
of a house - partly to save ground; partly because it is a good exposure
for fruit; partly as an ornament; and partly to protect it from thieves.
Such a vine, in its beauty, and in the abundant clusters upon it,
becomes a beautiful emblem of the mother of a numerous household. One of
the blessings most desired and most valued in the East was a numerous
posterity, and this, in the case of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was among
the chief blessings which God promised to them - a posterity that should
resemble in number the sands of the sea or the stars of heaven. Compare
[Gen 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005); [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017); [Gen
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#012). These two things - the right to
the avails of one's labor [Psa 128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002),
and a numerous family - are the blessings which are first specified as
constituting the happiness of a pious household.

Thy children like olive plants round about thy table - Compare the notes
at [Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008). Beautiful; producing
abundance; sending up young plants to take the place of the old when
they decay and die. The following extract and preceding cut from "The
land and Book," vol. i., pp. 76, 77, will furnish a good illustration of
this passage: "To what particular circumstance does David refer in the
128th Psalm, where he says, Thy children shall be like oliveplants round
about thy table? Follow me into the grove, and I will show you what may
have suggested the comparison. Here we have lilt upon a beautiful
illustration. This aged and decayed tree is surrounded, as you see, by
several young and thrifty shoots, which spring from the root of the
venerable parent. They seem to uphold, protect, and embrace it. We may
even fancy that they now bear that lead of fruit which would otherwise
be demanded of the feeble parent. Thus do good and affectionate children
gather round the table of the righteous. Each contributes something to
the common wealth and welfare of the whole - a beautiful sight, with
which may God refresh the eyes of every friend of mine."

[Psalms 128:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 128:4</span></span>

Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed ... - As if he had said,
"Look upon this picture. See the farmer cultivating his fields; see him
gathering in the grain; see him at his own table calmly, quietly, and
gratefully enjoying the fruit of his toil. Look upon that picture of a
happy family - numerous, cheerful, beloved - giving promise of upholding
the name of the family in future years - and see all this as coming from
the Lord - and you have an illustration of the blessedness which follows
a religious life."

[Psalms 128:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 128:5</span></span>

The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion - Will not merely bless thee in
the field and in the house, but will add blessings that seem to come
more directly out of Zion, or that seem to be more directly connected
with religion: shall bless thee with religious influences in thine own
family; shall bless thee by permitting thee to see the growth of the
church and the conversion of souls.

And thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem - The prosperity, the happiness
of Jerusalem: that is, the good of the church; the advancement of pure
religion. The Hebrew might be rendered, "And look thou upon the good of
Jerusalem" - in the imperative; and, thus rendered, it would be a
command to regard, in these circumstances, the welfare of Jerusalem, or
the prosperity of the church; but the language will also admit of the
other construction, and the connection seems to require it. Thus
understood, it is a promise that he who is referred to would be
permitted to enjoy a view of the continual prosperity of religion in the
world.

All the days of thy life - To the very close of life. No higher blessing
could be promised to a pious man than that he should see religion always
prospering; that the last view which he would have of the world should
be the rapid advances of religion; that he should die in a revival of
religion.

[Psalms 128:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 128:6</span></span>

Yea, thou shalt see thy children's children - This is a continuation of
the idea of blessedness as connected with a numerous posterity - an
object of so much interest to the Hebrews (see the notes at [Psa
128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003)), and having its foundation in
our nature.

And peace upon Israel - See [Psa
125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005). As the crowning blessing; a
blessing above that of success in worldly affairs; above that of seeing
a numerous and happy posterity. The love of God is the supreme affection
in the mind of a pious man; the desire that his cause may prosper and
triumph is to him a supreme desire. Man is truly and completely blessed
only in religion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 129](psa129)

</div>
