<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa131)  [Next](psa133) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 132](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 132:0</span></span>

This psalm is simply entitled "A Song of Degrees." The author of it is
not known, nor can the occasion on which it was written be certainly
ascertained. It would seem to have been composed in a time of public
distress and disaster; when the affairs of the nation were in jeopardy,
and especially when the line of the monarchy seemed about to fail, and
the promises made to David seemed about to come to nought. It would have
been a suitable occasion for such a psalm at the time immediately
preceding the captivity in Babylon, or on the return from Babylon, when
the throne was tottering or had fallen, and when God seemed to be about
to forsake his house, the temple - or had forsaken it, and suffered it
to fall to ruin. At such a time of national disaster, when it appeared
as if the house of God was to be permanently destroyed, and the
government to be overturned forever, it was natural and proper thus to
make mention of the zeal, the toil, and the sacrifice of him who had
sought a "habitation" for God; who had planned and labored that there
might be a permanent dwelling-place for the Most High, and who had
received gracious promises from God himself in regard to the permanent
establishment of his family on the throne. It would be appropriate,
also, to recall this as a foundation for the prayer that God would again
visit Zion, and would fulfill the promises which he had given to David.

The psalm therefore consists properly of two parts:

I. A statement of the zeal of David for the ark, in securing a permanent
abode for it, [Psa 132:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001); and

II\. A reference to the promises made to David and his posterity, and a
prayer that these promises might be carried out and accomplished, [Psa
132:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009).

[Psalms 132:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 132:1</span></span>

Lord, remember David - Call to remembrance his zeal, his labor, his
trials in order that there might be a permanent place for thy worship.
Call this to remembrance in order that his purpose in thy cause may not
be frustrated; in order that the promises made to him may be
accomplished.

And all his afflictions - The particular trial here referred to was his
care and toil, that there might be a settled home for the ark. The word
used would not refer merely to what is specified in the following verses
(his bringing up the ark to Mount Zion), but to his purpose to build a
house for God, and - since he was not permitted himself to build it
because he was a man of war, and had been engaged in scenes of blood,
[Kg1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#003); [Ch1
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#008) - to his care and toil in
collecting materials for the temple to be erected by his son and
successor. It is not, therefore, his general afflictions which are here
meant, but his anxiety, and his efforts to secure a lasting place for
the worship of God.

[Psalms 132:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 132:2</span></span>

How he sware unto the Lord - The solemn oath which he took that he would
make this the first object; that he would give himself no rest until
this was done; that he would sacrifice his personal ease and comfort in
order that he might thus honor God. This oath or purpose is not recorded
in the history. The fair interpretation of this would be either

\(1\) that these words properly expressed what was in the mind of David
at the time - that is, his acts implied that this purpose was in his
heart; or

\(2\) that this vow was actually made by David, though not elsewhere
recorded. Such a vow might have been made, and the remembrance of it
kept up by tradition, or it might have been suggested to the author of
the psalm by direct inspiration.

And vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob - See [Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024). The God whom Jacob worshipped,
and who had manifested himself so signally to him as a God of might or
power.

[Psalms 132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 132:3</span></span>

Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house - The tent of my
dwelling; the place where I abide. Nor go up into my bed The couch of my
bed, or where I sleep. I will make it my first business to find a
dwelling-place for the Lord; a place where the ark may repose.

[Psalms 132:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 132:4</span></span>

I will not give sleep to mine eyes ... - There is no difference here
between the words sleep and slumber. The meaning is, that the house of
the Lord should be his first care.

[Psalms 132:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 132:5</span></span>

Until I find out a place for the Lord - A place for the ark of God; a
place where it may constantly and safely remain. The symbol of the
divine presence rested on the mercy-seat, the cover of the ark, and
hence, this was represented as the seat or the house of God.

An habitation for the mighty God of Jacob - Hebrew, "For the mighty One
of Jacob." The reference is to a permanent dwelling-place for the ark.
It had been moved from place to place. There was no house appropriated
to it, or reared expressly for it, and David resolved to provide such a
house - at first, a tent or tabernacle on Mount Zion - and then, a more
spacious and magnificent structure, the temple. The latter he was not
permitted to build, though the purpose was in his heart.

[Psalms 132:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 132:6</span></span>

Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah - Most probably this is the language of
the contemporaries of David; or this is what they might be supposed to
say; or this is what tradition reports that they did say. David's
purpose, as referred to in the previous verses, is not recorded in the
history, and the memory of the whole transaction may have been handed
down by tradition. Or, this may be merely poetic language, expressing
the feelings of those who, when sent out by David, or accompanying him,
found the ark. Much difficulty has been felt in regard to this verse.
There is no mention in the history of the fact that the ark was "heard
of" at Ephrata, or that it was ever there. The name Ephrata - אפרתה
'ephrâthâh - is applied

\(1\) to a region of country to which was subsequently given the name
Bethlehem, [Gen 35:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016); [Rut
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011).

\(2\) Properly to Bethlehem, a city of Judah, the full name of which was
Bethlehem-Ephratah, [Gen 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007); [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002).

\(3\) It is a proper name, [Ch1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#019),
[Ch1 2:50](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#050); [Ch1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#004).

\(4\) It may perhaps be the same as Ephraim.

Compare [Jdg 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005); [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001); [Kg1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026). Some have supposed the meaning
to be, that they found it within the limits of the tribe of Ephraim, and
that the word Ephratah is used here with reference to that; but this is
a forced construction. It may have been indeed true that the ark was
found within the limits of that tribe, but the word Ephratah would not
naturally denote this; and, besides, the tribe of Ephraim was so large,
and covered such an extent of territory, that this would convey no
distinct information; and it cannot be supposed that the writer meant to
say merely that they found it within the limits of a tribe. Nor can it
mean that they actually found the ark at Ephrata, or Bethlehem, for this
would not be true. A simple and natural interpretation of the passage
has been suggested, which seems to make it plain: that, in their search
for the ark, it was at Ephratah or Bethlehem that they first heard of
it, but that they actually found it in the fields of the wood. It may
seem strange that there should have been so much uncertainty about the
ark as is here implied; that David did not know where it was; and that
none of the priests knew. But, while it must be admitted that it seems
to be strange, and that the fact is not of easy explanation, it is to he
remembered that the ark was at one time in the possession of the
Philistines; that when it was retaken it seems to have had no very
permanent resting place; that it may have been removed from one spot to
another as circumstances required; that it may have been committed now
to one, and now to another, for safe keeping; and thus it might have
occurred, in the unsettled and agitated state of affairs, that its exact
situation might be unknown, and that a somewhat diligent search was
necessary in order to find it We know too little of the times to enable
us to pronounce upon the subject with much confidence.

We found it in the fields of the wood - Continuing our search, we found
it there. Perhaps Kirjath-jearim, [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001); [Ch1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#005). It was to Kirjath-jearim that
the ark was carried after it had been taken by the Philistines [Sa1
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#021). The literal meaning of the
passage here is, "The fields of the wood" - or of Jear, where the word
in Hebrew is the same as in Kirjath-jearim. The name Kirjath-jearim
means Forest Town, or, city of the woods; and the allusion here is the
same as in [Sa1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001). The
interpretation, then, seems to be that they heard of the ark, or learned
where it was, when they were at Ephrata or Bethlehem; but that they
actually found it in the vicinity of Kirjath-jearim. The ignorance in
the case may have been merely in regard to the exact place or house
where it was at that time kept. Bethlehem was the home or city of David,
and the idea is, that, when there, and when it was contemplated to
remove the ark to Mount Zion, information or intelligence was brought
there of its exact locality, and they went forth to bring it to its new
abode or its permanent resting place.

[Psalms 132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 132:7</span></span>

We will go into his tabernacles - His tents, or the fixed resting place
prepared for the ark. This is evidently language supposed to have been
used on bringing up the ark into its place in Jerusalem: language such
as they may be supposed to have sung or recited on that occasion.

We will worship at his footstool - See the notes at [Psa
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005). The meaning is, the footstool of
God: let us bow humbly at his feet. The language denotes profound
adoration. It expresses the feelings of those who bare the ark to its
assigned place.

[Psalms 132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 132:8</span></span>

Arise, O Lord, into thy rest - Into that which is appointed for its
permanent place of repose, that it may no longer be removed from spot to
spot. This is spoken of the ark, considered as the place where God, by
an appropriate symbol, abode. That symbol - the Shechinah - rested on
the cover of the ark. The same language was used by Solomon at the
dedication of the temple: "Now, therefore, arise, O Lord God, into thy
resting place, thou and the ark of thy strength," [Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041).

Thou, and the ark of thy strength - The ark, the symbol of the divine
power, as if the power of God resided there, or as if the Almighty had
his abode there. Perhaps the language was derived from the fact that the
ark, in the wars of the Hebrews against their foes, was a symbol of the
divine presence and protection - that by which the divine power was put
forth.

[Psalms 132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 132:9</span></span>

Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness - This is also
substantially the same language that was used by Solomon at the
dedication of the temple. See again [Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041). The idea is, that in the service
of such a God, the priests, the ministers of religion, should be holy.
The honor of religion demanded it. It was the first qualification of
those who "served the altar;" a qualification without which all other
endowments would be valueless. On the word clothed, see the notes at
[Psa 35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026); compare [Psa
65:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013); [Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001); [Psa
104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001); [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010); [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005).

And let thy saints shout for joy - Thy holy ones; all who truly worship
and honor thee. Let them be happy in such a God; in thy presence; in thy
service. The fact that there is a God, and such a God, and that this God
is ours - that we may serve him, glorify him, enjoy him - is suited to
fill the mind with joy.

[Psalms 132:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 132:10</span></span>

For thy servant David's sake - Because of the promise made to him;
because of the zeal which he has shown in securing a place for the ark.
Let it not be in vain that he has shown such a regard to the honor of
God; let not the promises made to him fail. Such a prayer is proper now.
There is nothing wrong in our beseeching God to carry out and accomplish
the purposes cherished by his church for promoting the honor of his
name; or for a child to pray that the purposes of a pious parent in
regard to himself may not fail. It is an expression of nature - a desire
that the labor and sacrifices of those who have gone before us should
not be lost. This is the language of the author of the psalm, and of
those for whom the psalm was composed. See [Psa
132:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001). In view of all that David has
done, do thou now show favor and mercy.

Turn not away the face of thine anointed - As if in displeasure, or in
forgetfulness. The word anointed would refer to one who was set apart as
a king, a priest, or a prophet. See the notes at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). The word would be applicable to
David himself, as the anointed king; in a higher sense it is applicable
to the Messiah, the Christ. The reference here is probably to David
himself, as if a failure to carry out his purposes in regard to the
sanctuary, or to fulfill the promises made to him, would be a turning
away the face from him; would be a mark of the divine displeasure
against him. The prayer is, that God would carry out those purposes as
if his face was continually turned with benignity and favor toward
David.

[Psalms 132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 132:11</span></span>

The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David - He has made a gracious
promise, confirmed by an oath, which we may plead in our present
necessities. That promise was made "in truth," that is, sincerely - so
that it will certainly be carried out - so that we may appeal to God, on
the ground of his faithfulness, to keep his word.

He will not turn from it - We may be certain that he will carry it out.
We may appeal to him on the basis of that promise with the utmost
confidence.

Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne - Margin, as in
Hebrew, "of thy belly." The throne would descend to his posterity, [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012); see the notes at [Psa
89:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003).

[Psalms 132:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 132:12</span></span>

If thy children will keep my covenant ... - This was the condition
implied in the promise - that they were to keep the law of God, and to
serve and obey him. If they did not, they could not, of course, plead
the promise. This principle is universal. We cannot plead any promise of
God in our behalf, or in behalf of our children, unless we obey his
commands, and are ourselves faithful to him. See the sentiment in this
verse illustrated in the notes at [Psa
89:30-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030).

[Psalms 132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 132:13</span></span>

For the Lord hath chosen Zion - He has selected it as the place where he
will abide; the seat of his religion. This is a new plea or argument,
and shows that the psalm had reference to Zion or Jerusalem, as then in
danger, or as having been in danger. See the notes at [Psa
48:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001).

He hath desired it for his habitation - A place where to abide. Its had
selected this as the permanent place of his worship.

[Psalms 132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 132:14</span></span>

This is my rest for ever - My home; my permanent abode. I will no more
remove from place to place - as when the ark was carried in the
wilderness, and as it has been since; but Zion shall now be the fixed
seat of religion. See the notes at [Psa
68:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016).

Here will I dwell ... - Permanently; constantly.

[Psalms 132:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 132:15</span></span>

I will abundantly bless her provision - Margin, surely. Hebrew,
"Blessing I will bless," a strong affirmation, meaning that he would
certainly do it; that he would do it in every way; that every needed
blessing would be imparted. The word rendered provision is a cognate
form of the word in [Psa 78:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025),
translated meat: "He sent them meat to the full." It properly refers to
food for a journey, but it is applicable to any kind of food. The
original idea is that of food obtained by hunting - as game, venison:
[Gen 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028); [Job
38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041). The meaning here is, that God
would provide abundantly for their support.

I will satisfy her poor with bread - I will give them what they need.
See the notes at [Psa 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025).

[Psalms 132:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 132:16</span></span>

I will also clothe her priests with salvation - See the notes at [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009), where - instead of the word
which in [Ch2 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041), as here, is
"salvation," we find the word "righteousness." The promise here
corresponds to the prayer in [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009). It is a reason why God should
interpose. What they prayed for [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009), had been expressly promised,
and that promise is now urged as a plea why the prayer should be
granted.

And her saints shall shout aloud for joy - See [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009). In [Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041) the prayer is, "And let thy
saints rejoice in goodness." The sense is not materially varied. The
Hebrew is, "And let thy saints rejoicing rejoice;" that is, let them
shout, shout; let them be full of joy.

[Psalms 132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 132:17</span></span>

There will I make thy horn of David to bud - The horn was an emblem of
power; and then, of success or prosperity. See the notes at [Luk
1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069). The word rendered "to bud" means
to grow, or to shoot forth as a plant, or as grass grows; and then it
may be applied to anything which shoots forth or grows. The allusion
here would seem to be to a horn as it shoots forth on the head of an
animal. So David would be endowed with growing strength; would have the
means of defending himself against his enemies, and of securing victory.
The language had no original reference to the Messiah, but it is not
improperly applied to him (as springing from David) in [Luk
1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069). On the word horn, see the notes
at [Psa 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004). Compare [Psa
89:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#017), [Psa
89:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024); [Psa
92:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010); [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009); [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008); [Dan
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005).

I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed - Margin, a candle. I have
appointed; that is, I have given him that which will always be as a lamp
or guide to him; that by which he will see to walk. I have given him
true and precious promises, which will be to him as a lamp, a candle, a
lantern is to one walking in the night. See [Psa
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028), note; [Psa
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105), note.

[Psalms 132:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 132:18</span></span>

His enemies will I clothe with shame - They shall be so confounded that
shame shall seem to cover them as a garment. See the notes at [Psa
109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029). That is, David would be
triumphant.

But upon himself shall his crown flourish - His crown shall be as a
fresh, blooming garland. The Hebrew word used here may mean either to
glitter, or to flower, to fiourish or bloom. As applied to a crown, it
may mean either that it would sparkle or glitter, as set with precious
stones - or (under the idea of a garland) it may mean that it would
appear to bloom or blossom. In either case it denotes success, joy,
triumph - and is a promise of prosperity to David as a king. This was a
part of the promise referred to by the psalmist, and a ground of the
plea in the psalm. God had made these precious promises to David and his
posterity; and now, in a time of sorrow and disaster, when the glory of
the crown seemed about to pass away, the psalmist, in the name of the
people, and in language to be used by the people, prays that those
ancient promises might be remembered and fulfilled. So, in a time of
general religious declension, we may plead the promises, so rich and so
abundant, which God has made to his church, as a reason for his gracious
interposition, for his coming to revive his work.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 133](psa133)

</div>
