<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa148)  [Next](psa150) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 149](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 149:0</span></span>

This belongs to the group of psalms already referred to Ps. 146-150,
each beginning and ending with a "Hallelujah," and probably composed
after the return from the captivity, and the rebuilding of the walls of
the city and the second temple. This psalm would be eminently
appropriate to such an occasion - first, as expressing the joy of the
nation; and secondly, as indicative of what the nation was to do in
those circumstances in carrying out the purposes of God, and
accomplishing his will. The people are considered as restored to their
land; as safe, peaceful, happy; their city is securely fortified, and
they are armed to defend themselves, and are now in a position to carry
their conquests over the pagan and hostile powers around them. The
psalm, therefore, consists of two parts:

I. The exhortation to praise, to joy, to rejoicing - as appropriate to
their deliverance; to their safe return; to their re-establishment in
their own land, [Psa 149:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001).

II\. The exhortation to carry out the purposes of God in regard to the
people who had them, and who wronged were still hostile to them: to
inflict on them the punishment which was due to them, and which God
designed to bring upon them - regarding themselves as called of God to
be his instruments in executing that punishment, in token of the divine
displeasure at the conduct of those who had oppressed and wronged them,
[Psa 149:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#006).

[Psalms 149:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 149:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord - Margin, Hallelujah. See the notes at [Psa
146:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001).

Sing unto the Lord a new song - As if there was a new and a special
occasion for praise. This would be so if the psalm was composed on the
return from the exile; on the rebuilding of the city; and on the
re-dedication of the temple. On the meaning of the language, see [Psa
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#003), note; [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009), note; [Rev
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003), note; see also [Psa
96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001); [Isa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010).

And his praise in the congregation of saints - In the assembly of the
people of God. See [Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014), note;
[Psa 111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001), note.

[Psalms 149:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 149:2</span></span>

Let Israel - The people of Israel; the Hebrew people; the people of God.

Rejoice in him that made him - Him, who has made the people what they
are. All that they have and are is to be traced to him, as really as the
universe of matter is to be traced to his power. Their condition is not
one of development, or one which is the result of their own wisdom,
grace, or power. See the notes at [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003) : "It is he that hath made us,
and not we ourselves." Compare [Isa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005).

Let the children of Zion - Those who dwell in Zion or Jerusalem.

Be joyful in their King - In God as their king.

\(a\) That they have a king, or that there is one to rule over them;

\(b\) That they have such a king; one so wise, so powerful, so good;

\(c\) That he administers his government with so much efficiency,
impartiality, equity, wisdom, goodness. Compare [Psa
100:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003).

[Psalms 149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 149:3</span></span>

Let them praise his name in the dance - Margin, with the pipe. The
Hebrew word here - מחול mâchôl - is rendered dancing in [Psa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011); dance, as here, [Psa
150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004) (where also the margin has
pipe); [Jer 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#013); [Lam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#015); dances, [Jer
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004). It does not elsewhere occur. On
the verb חול chûl, see [Psa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005),
note; [Psa 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005), note. Here it cannot
be improper to regard it as referring to that measured tread, or solemn
movement which sometimes constituted a part of worship: [Sa2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014). Such a movement cannot be proved
to be wrong in worship; whether it is wise or expedient is a different
matter. Customs in worship change as the customs of a people change; and
that might be very proper in one stage of society, or in one period of
the world, which, though not in itself wrong, might be very unadvisable
in another. There was much in the Hebrew mode of worship which cannot be
transferred to the forms of Christian worship without an obvious
incongruity and disadvantage; and because a thing has been done, and is
not in itself wrong, we should not infer that it should always be done,
or that it would be always best. If people like the Shakers dance in
worship, they have an undoubted right to do so, and it may be the most
edifying mode of worship for them with their low notions of religion;
let not others ridicule them; nor let others go to see them as they
would any other "outr'e" performance from idle curiosity. Such
absurdities might soon die away if they were not kept alive by the
notice which they attract, and by the foolish curiosity of wiser people.
There are some things which are more certain to come to an end by
neglect than they could by sober argument; some things which live merely
because they are ridiculed, and because they who practice them are
exalted into conspicuity by their own folly, and by the idea that they
are martyrs.

Let them sing praises unto him with the timbrel and harp - On these
instruments, see the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012); notes at [Job
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012); notes at [Psa
68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025); notes at [Psa
81:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#002).

[Psalms 149:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 149:4</span></span>

For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people - Let them rejoice on this
account. He loves them; he approves their conduct; he bestows his favors
upon them. All this should add to their joy, and fill their hearts with
gladness. Compare the notes at [Psa
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#027). The Hebrew word here rendered
"taketh pleasure" conveys the idea of complacency, satisfaction,
delight. It is the opposite of being pained or offended. God has
complacency in his people. He delights in their welfare; he delights in
doing them good.

He will beautify the meek with salvation - The word here rendered
beautify means to adorn, to honor, as the sanctuary, [Isa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007) (rendered glorify); and it here
means that the salvation which God would bestow upon them would be of
the nature of an ornament, as if they were clothed with costly or
splendid raiment. Compare [Psa 132:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#016).
The word meek here means humble or lowly, and may refer to those who are
humble in rank or condition, or those who are humble in heart. Perhaps
the two ideas are here combined. They have not external adorning, but
God will give them an honor and beauty in salvation which no outward
adorning could impart.

[Psalms 149:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 149:5</span></span>

Let the saints be joyful in glory - In the glory of their condition; in
the favor of God; in the honor which he bestows upon them. Let them
rejoice in this; let them shout and triumph over this. Other men rejoice
in honor; in wealth; in houses, lands, parks, libraries, works of art:
let the saints rejoice in the glory of being the friends of God; in the
hope of heaven. Compare [Psa 84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011).

Let them sing aloud upon their beds - Compare [Job
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010), note; [Act
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025), note; [Psa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001), note. The idea is, that in the
meditations of the night, when darkness is around them, when alone with
God, they may find occasion for exultation and praise. Their hearts may
be full of joy, and alone they may give expression to their joy in songs
of praise.

[Psalms 149:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 149:6</span></span>

Let the high praises of God be in their mouth - Margin, as in Hebrew, in
their throat. Literally, "Praises of God in their throat; and a sword of
two edges in their hand." That is, In the very work of executing the
purposes of God on his enemies, there should be the feeling and the
language of praise. Their hearts should be full of confidence in God;
they should feel that they are engaged in his service; and while they
defend themselves, or inflict punishment on the enemies of God, they
should chant His praise. The idea is, that even in the work of war they
might feel that they were engaged in the service of God, and that the
passions usual in war should be subdued and kept under by the
consciousness that they are mere instruments in the hand of God to
accomplish His purposes. Perhaps the Hebrew word rendered "high praises"
- רוממה rômemâh - may imply more than mere praise. It may embrace
anything that is lofty and exalted, and may mean here that they would
have the consciousness that they were engaged in high and lofty aims;
that they were carrying out the great designs of God; that they were
executing purposes more momentous than their own could be - even the
eternal purposes of the Most High. This would give an importance, a
dignity, an elevation to their conduct which could spring from no other
source.

And a two-edged sword in their hand - literally, a sword of edges; that
is, a sword with an edge on both sides of the blade. Roman swords were
often made in this manner. They were made for piercing as well as for
striking. See the notes at [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012).

[Psalms 149:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 149:7</span></span>

To execute vengeance upon the heathen - To inflict punishment upon them
as a recompence for their sins. The word pagan here means nations. The
allusion is, doubtless, to those who had oppressed and injured the
Hebrew people - perhaps referring to those who had destroyed the city
and the temple at the time of the Babylonian captivity. They were now to
receive the punishment due for the wrongs which they had done to the
nation; a just recompence at the hand of God, and by the instrumentality
of those whom they had wronged. Compare the notes at [Psa
137:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007).

And punishments upon the people - The people of those lands. Those who
had waged war with the Hebrew nation.

[Psalms 149:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 149:8</span></span>

To bind their kings with chains - To make them prisoners and captives.
This is but carrying out the idea in the previous verses, of inflicting
punishment upon them for the wrongs which they had done to the people of
God. There is no evidence that this refers to a spiritual conquest, or
to a spiritual subjection of those nations to the true religion. The
whole idea is in accordance with what is so often expressed in the
Psalms - that of inflicting just punishment on the wicked. See the
General Introduction, Section 6.

And their nobles with fetters of iron - To make them prisoners. That is,
to subdue them. Captives in war, even those of elevated rank, were often
led in chains to grace the triumph of conquerors.

[Psalms 149:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 149:9</span></span>

To execute upon them the judgment written - Either, that which is
written in the law in general as what is threatened to wicked men; or,
that which was written for their particular case, or which they were
specifically commanded to do. Compare [Deu
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Deu
32:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041). Most probably the reference
is to some particular command in this case.

This honor have all his saints -

\(a\) It is an honor to engage in executing or carrying out the purposes
of God. As it is an honor to be a magistrate, a judge, a sheriff, a
constable, a commander of an army, an admiral in a navy, to execute the
purposes of a government - an honor sought with great avidity among
people as among the most valued distinctions of life - why should it be
less honorable to execute the purposes of God? Are the objects which he
seeks in his administration less important than those which are sought
among people? Are his laws of less importance? Are his aims less pure?
Is there less of justice, and equity, and benevolence in his plans?

\(b\) It is an honor which pertains to "all the saints" - to all who
love and fear God - to be engaged in carrying out or executing his
plans. In their own way, and in their own sphere - it may, indeed, be a
very humble sphere - but each and all in their own sphere, are engaged
in executing the purposes of God. In the duties of a family; in kindness
to the poor; in the office of a teacher or a magistrate; in clearing a
farm; in cultivating the land; in building a schoolhouse; in founding a
church, a college, an asylum for the blind, the dumb, the lame, the
insane; in contributing to send the gospel abroad over our own land, or
among the pagan, or in going to carry that gospel to a benighted world -
in some of these ways all who are truly the friends of God, or who are
entitled to be enrolled among the "saints of the Lord" are, in fact,
carrying out the purposes of the Lord - the "judgments written" to guide
mankind; and man's highest honor here, as it will be in heaven, is to
carry out the purposes of the Lord.

Praise ye the Lord - Hallelu-jah. It is a subject of praise and
thanksgiving, it should lead us to shout Hallelujah, that we are
permitted to be employed in any way, however humble, in carrying out the
divine plans, or in accomplishing those great designs which he
contemplates toward our race.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 150](psa150)

</div>
