<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa139)  [Next](psa141) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 140](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 140:0</span></span>

This, also, is a psalm of David. The occasion on which it was composed
is not indicated in the title, but the contents of the psalm leave no
room to doubt that it was written at an early period of his life, in the
time when he was subjected to persecution - most probably in the time of
Saul. The psalm bears every mark of David's style and spirit; and there
can be no doubt that he was the author of it. For the reasons why it may
have had a place "here" in the Book of Psalms, see the Introduction to
[Psa 138:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001). On the phrase, "To the
chief Musician," see the Introduction to [Psa
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).

[Psalms 140:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 140:1</span></span>

Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man - That is, evidently from some
particular man who was endeavoring to injure him; some personal enemy.
All the circumstances mentioned agree well with the supposition that
Saul is intended.

Preserve me from the violent man - Margin, as in Hebrew, "man of
violences." That is, one who has committed violence so often, who has so
frequently done wrong, that this may be considered a characteristic of
the man. This would apply well to the repeated acts of Saul in
persecuting David, and endeavoring to do him injury.

[Psalms 140:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 140:2</span></span>

Which imagine mischiefs in their heart - Here the language is changed to
the plural number in the Hebrew, implying that while there was one man
who was eminent in his wickedness and his wrong-doing, there were many
others associated with him, acting under his direction. The word
"mischiefs" in the Hebrew means "evils; wickednesses." It was not a
single purpose; the plan embraced many forms of evil - doing him wrong
in every way possible.

Continually are they gathered together for war - They are organized for
this purpose; they are constantly prepared for it. The word rendered
"gathered together" properly means to sojourn, to dwell for a time; and
it has been proposed by some to render this, "All the day they dwell
with wars;" that is, they are constantly involved in them. But the word
may mean also "to gather together," as in [Psa
56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006).

[Psalms 140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 140:3</span></span>

They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent - Compare the notes at
[Psa 64:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#003). The idea here is, that
since the tongue of the serpent "seems" to be sharp, pointed, adapted to
penetrate (and probably the original reference in the image was derived
from that idea), the wound inflicted is by the serpent's tongue - "as
if" with a hard, penetrating point. It is now known, however, that it is
by a tooth - a single tooth, made flexible for the purpose - at the root
of which a small bag containing the poison is located, which is injected
through an orifice in the tooth into the wound. The meaning here is,
that the words spoken by such persons - by their tongues - were like the
poison produced by the bite of a serpent.

Adders' poison is under their lips - The asp or adder is among the most
poisonous of serpents. Thus, Cleopatra of Egypt is said to have
destroyed her own life by an asp, which she had concealed for that
purpose. This passage is quoted in [Rom
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013), as a proof of human depravity.
See the notes at that verse.

[Psalms 140:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 140:4</span></span>

Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked ... - See the notes at
[Psa 71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004). This is a repetition of the
prayer in [Psa 140:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#001).

Who have purposed to overthrow my goings - To thrust me down as I go; to
defeat my plans; to destroy me. They endeavor to prevent my
accomplishing what I had designed to do.

[Psalms 140:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 140:5</span></span>

The proud have hid a snare for me - Haughty; arrogant; oppressive men.
See [Psa 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007), note; [Psa
57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006), note.

And cords - Strings; twine; as those do who lay a net to catch birds,
and who design to spring it upon them unawares.

They have spread a net by the wayside - Where I may be expected to walk,
and where it may be suddenly sprung upon me.

They have set gins for me - Snares, toils - such as are set for wild
beasts. The meaning is, that they had not only made open war upon him,
but they had sought to bring him into an ambush - to rush upon him
suddenly when he was not on his guard, and did not know that, danger was
near.

[Psalms 140:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 140:6</span></span>

I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God ... - In all these dangers from
open war, in all these perils from a crafty enemy lying in ambush, my
only refuge was God; my hope was in him alone. From all these dangers,
seen and unseen, I knew that he could defend me, and I confidently
believed that he would.

[Psalms 140:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 140:7</span></span>

O God the Lord ... - literally, "Yahweh, Lord, the strength of my
salvation" The word rendered "God," in the original, is יהוה Yahweh. The
address is to Yahweh as the Lord; that is, as the supreme Ruler - who
presides over all things. Him the psalmist acknowledged as "his" Lord
and Ruler. The phrase "the strength of my salvation" means the strength
or power on which my safety depends. I have no other hope of deliverance
but in thee.

Thou hast covered my head in the day of battle - Thou hast been a shield
unto me. Literally, "In the day of arms," or of armor, [Kg1
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#025); [Eze
39:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#009).

[Psalms 140:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 140:8</span></span>

Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked - That is, in the matter
under consideration. Let them not accomplish their desire in my
destruction. Let them not succeed in their designs against me. The
prayer, however, "may" be used more generally. It is proper to pray that
the desires of the wicked, as wicked people, may not be granted to them;
that they may "not" be successful in their purposes. Success in such
desires would be only an injury to themselves and to the world. It is
proper to pray that the purposes of the wicked may be defeated, and that
they may be led to abandon their designs and to seek better ends. For
this, in fact, we always pray when we pray for their conversion.

Further not his wicked device - His purpose against me.

Lest they exalt themselves - Lest they attribute it to their own skill,
wisdom, or valor, and lest they pride themselves on their success. To
succeed in a righteous cause makes a man humble and grateful; in a bad
cause, proud, and forgetful of God. The margin here is, "Let them not be
exalted." The meaning is, that success would at the same time elate them
in their own estimation, and increase their bad influence in the world.
It is, on every account, a benevolent prayer that wicked people may
"not" be successful in their plans of iniquity.

[Psalms 140:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 140:9</span></span>

As for the head of those that compass me about - Luther renders this,
"The calamity which my enemies design against me must fall upon their
own heads." The passage stands in contrast with [Psa
140:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#007) : "Thou hast covered my head,"
etc. As for his own head, it had been protected in the day of battle. In
reference now to the heads of his enemies - of those that compassed him
about - he prays that what they had designed for "his" head might come
by a just retribution on their own. The phrase "compass me about" refers
to his enemies as being numerous, and as surrounding him on every side.
See [Psa 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012); [Psa
88:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#017); [Psa
109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003); [Psa
118:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010).

Let the mischief of their own lips cover them - Come upon them. The
mischief which they have designed against me; that which they have
conspired to bring on me. The reference is to a combination against him,
or to some agreement which they had made to destroy him.

[Psalms 140:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 140:10</span></span>

Let burning coals fall upon them - Let them be punished, "as if" burning
coals were poured upon them. See [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006), note; [Psa
18:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012), notes; [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004), note.

Let them be cast into the fire - Punished as if they were cast into the
fire and consumed.

Into deep pits, that they rise not up again - That they may utterly
perish. This was one mode of punishing, by casting a man into a deep pit
from which he could not escape, and leaving him to die, [Gen
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#020), [Gen
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#024); [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015); [Psa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007); [Jer
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#007).

[Psalms 140:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 140:11</span></span>

Let not an evil speaker - literally, "A man of tongue." That is, a man
whom the tongue rules; a man of an unbridled tongue; a man who does not
control his tongue. See the notes at [Jam
3:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002).

Be established in the earth - Be successful or prosperous; let him not
carry out his designs. It is not desirable that a man should prosper in
such purposes; and therefore, this is not a prayer of malignity, but of
benevolence.

Evil shall hunt the violent man ... - More literally, "A man of violence
- a bad man - they shall hunt him down speedily;" or, "let him be hunted
down speedily. Let him who forms a project of violence and wrong - a bad
man - be hunted as the beasts of prey are, and let his destruction come
quickly." Margin, "Let him be hunted to his overthrow." But the
explanation now given suits the connection, and is a literal expression
of the sense of the original.

[Psalms 140:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 140:12</span></span>

I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted - See the
notes at [Psa 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004). The psalmist here
doubtless refers primarily to himself, as having a confident belief that
the Lord would maintain "his" cause, or would defend "him." At the same
time he makes the statement general, implying that what would be done to
him would be done to all in similar circumstances. The idea is that God,
in all his attributes, in all his providential arrangements, in all his
interpositions on earth, would be found to be on the side of the
oppressed, the afflicted, and the wronged. He has no attribute that can
take part with an oppressor or a wrong doer. The wicked cannot come to
him with the belief that he will be on their side: the righteous - the
oppressed - the afflicted - can.

And the right of the poor - He will defend the right of the poor.
Literally, "The judgment of the poor." That which will be just and right
in their case.

[Psalms 140:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 140:13</span></span>

Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name - Unto thee.

\(1\) they will have occasion to do it;

\(2\) they will be disposed to do it.

They will not be unmindful of the favors conferred upon them; it will be
a characteristic of them that they "will" be thankful.

The upright shall dwell in thy presence - They shall be under thy
protection; they shall be admitted to thy favor; they shall dwell in thy
dwelling-place.

\(1\) On earth they shall enjoy his favor - "as if" they abode with God.

\(2\) in heaven they will be permitted to dwell with him forever.

The general idea of the psalm is, that the poor, the persecuted, the
afflicted, if righteous, shall enjoy the favor and protection of God.
God is on their side, and not on the side of the wicked who oppress
them. But then, people "should be righteous" in order that they may find
the favor of God and dwell with him. There is no reason why a "poor"
wicked man should enjoy the favor of God anymore than why a "rich"
wicked man should. It is not poverty or riches that commend us to God;
it is faith, and holiness, and love, and obedience, in the condition of
life in which we are placed, be it in a cottage or a palace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 141](psa141)

</div>
