<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa100)  [Next](psa102) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 101](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 101:0</span></span>

This psalm purports to be a Psalm of David, and there is no reason to
doubt that it was composed by him, though it is not possible to
ascertain why it did not have a place in the collection of his psalms in
the early part of the book Ps. 1-72. There are several such, however,
scattered through the latter part of the Book of Psalms, leading us to
suppose that this which may have been an early collection or "edition"
of his psalms, became known as the Psalms of David, and that
miscellaneous psalms - and among them not a few of his composition -
perhaps later psalms - were subsequently "added" to the volume.

The time when it was composed cannot be ascertained with any certainty
or probability. It would "seem" to have been written when he was
entering on domestic life, as the psalm consists of "rules" which he
appears to have laid down for himself as the head of a family, or as
indicating the course which he purposed to pursue in the management of
his household. As such, the psalm has a universal application, and may
be useful in all times and in all places. Few questions are more
important than those which occur to one entering on married life, in
regard to his own conduct as the head of a family, to the principles
which he shall maintain in his own dwelling, and to the rules by which
he shall govern his own conduct. For one in such circumstances it is an
inestimable advantage to have an inspired composition like this,
indicating what is proper, and suggesting the rules which should guide
one in such circumstances.

The psalm consists of the following parts:

I. The introduction - the purpose to praise God with respect to "mercy
and judgment;" that is, to make these the theme of his song, [Psa
101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001).

II\. His purpose to lead an upright life - a life characterized by
wisdom - especially in his own family, [Psa
101:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002). It is a purpose to "begin"
life in this relation aright; "to be" an upright man in his family.

III\. The principles on which he purposed to do this, especially in
reference to those who should be in his employ as domestics, servants,
or laborers, [Psa 101:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004) :

\(1\) He would employ no "froward" person, [Psa
101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004).

\(2\) He would employ no one who was a "slanderer," [Psa
101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005).

\(3\) He would employ no one who had "a high look or a proud heart,"
[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005).

\(4\) He would seek out the faithful and the pious in the land to be in
his service, [Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006).

\(5\) He would employ no one who was deceitful; no one who could not be
trusted; no one who was a liar, [Psa
101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007).

IV\. These same principles, he says, should govern him in a higher
relation - as a sovereign and monarch, for they were principles which
were as needful in administering the government of a nation, as in a
family; they were principles which a good man should take with him to
all the public duties of life, whatever might be his rank, [Psa
101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008). Thus understood, the psalm
contains important principles applicable

\(a\) to man or woman entering on the married life;

\(b\) to those who are at the head of manufacturing establishments;

\(c\) to farmers and mechanics;

\(d\) to those who occupy official positions, and who administer the
government of a land - judges, rulers, princes, monarchs.

No better rules could be given to guide those who have others under them
or in their employ, in respect to their own conduct, or in respect to
those who shall be employed, than such as the psalmist here says should
guide him.

[Psalms 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 101:1</span></span>

I will sing of mercy and judgment - That is, In the psalm which he was
about to compose, he would make these the burden of his song; he would,
in fact, by stating his views as to the regulation of his own conduct,
commend these virtues - mercy and justice - to mankind, and celebrate
their value. He who himself "adopts" the principles of mercy, kindness,
truth, and justice, as his own guide, commends these virtues to mankind
in the best way possible. No language can do it effectually, unless a
man practices these virtues himself.

Unto thee, O Lord, will I sing - As commending and approving these
things; as having put it into my heart to practice them; as displaying
them in thine own higher administration: for a father of a family, or a
magistrate, is but the representative of God.

[Psalms 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 101:2</span></span>

I will behave myself wisely - In the choice of principles to guide me;
in my conduct in my family; in my official relations. This expresses a
"desire" to act wisely, and a "purpose" to do it.

In a perfect way - In accordance with the perfect rules of right. I will
make these my guide. I will "aim" to be perfect; I will have before me a
perfect standard.

O when wilt thou come unto me? - Perhaps this would be better rendered,
"When thou dost come unto me;" that is, When then dost visit me and my
dwelling, thou shalt find that these are the principles which regulate
and govern me in my house. The idea is that God would come to visit his
habitation, and inspect his conduct; and that whenever this should
occur, however often it might be, or however unexpectedly he might come,
he should "always" find these principles governing him in his family. A
man should so live that "whenever" God comes into his dwelling, or when
anyone comes, or however narrow and searching may be the inspection,
these principles shal be found to regulate his conduct.

I will walk within my house - Before my family; in the principles which
shall govern me there.

With a perfect heart - Always aiming to do exactly that which is right:
in my general conduct; in the rules by which I live; in my treatment of
all under my charge and in my employ. The great principles of "right,"
in everything - in the smallest matters - shall guide and govern me.

[Psalms 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 101:3</span></span>

I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes - That is, I will propose no
wicked thing to be done; I will have no such object in view; I will
employ no one to do that which is wrong. The margin, as the Hebrew, is,
"thing of Belial." See the notes at [Psa
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008). It here means that which is
worthless, bad, wicked. He would have no wicked aim; he would not look
upon a wicked thing for a moment, or with the least favor.

I hate the work of them that turn aside - All their doings, motives,
plans. The word rendered "turn aside" means to turn out of the way; out
of the right path: Wanderers - transgressors - those who leave the path
of truth and honesty.

It shall not cleave to me - I will have nothing to do with it. It shall
not he allowed to attach itself to me. A wicked plan or purpose is thus
represented as having a tendency to fasten itself on a man, or to "stick
to him" - as pitch, or wax, as a "burn" does.

[Psalms 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 101:4</span></span>

A froward heart shall depart from me - The word here rendered froward
means perverse, false, deceitful, depraved. See the notes at [Psa
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026). The "idea" here is that of one
who is inclined to evil; who has some wrong passion or inclination to
indulge; who has an obstinate and perverse will; who does not listen to
reason or the voice of wise persuasion; who will do wrong, despite all
the means which may be employed to induce him to do right. The language
may either refer to the author of the psalm himself, as regulating his
own conduct; or it may refer to those in his employ. In the former
sense, it would mean that he would not himself be perverse and froward;
in the latter sense, that he would not have such persons in his employ.
The connection seems to require that we should understand it in the
latter sense, as referring to the class of persons that the psalmist
would have about him.

I will not know a wicked person - I will not countenance such a one; I
will not recognize such a one among those who are admitted into my
house, or own him as my friend; or, I will not have such in my employ.
Probably the language embraces both these ideas - as it should in the
case of all who are at the head of a family:

\(a\) I will not countenance or recognize as among my friends, who are
to be admitted to my fireside and family, and who are to be familiar
with me and my children, those who are profligate, wicked, and
unprincipled, whatever may be their rank, their wealth, their
accomplishments, their fascination of manner, or their power of
conversation;

\(b\) I will have in my employ no one who is not honest, temperate,
virtuous, pure. The welfare of a family depends more on the former of
these things than the latter; no family can be well ordered where both
are not found.

[Psalms 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 101:5</span></span>

Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour - literally, "One who speaks
concerning his neighbor in secret." If a man has any good to say of
another, he will be likely to say it openly; if he has any evil to say,
it will be likely to be said in secret. Hence, to speak in secret of
anyone comes to mean the same thing as to slander him.

Him will I cut off - That is, I will cut him off from me; I will not
employ him. He would not have one in his house, or in his service, who
did injustice to the character of others; who stabbed their reputation
in the dark. This was alike indicative of the personal character of the
author of the psalm, and of his purpose as the head of a family. It is
hardly necessary to say that no one should employ another who is in the
habit of slandering his neighbor.

Him that hath an high look - That is proud - as a proud man commonly
carries his head high.

And a proud heart - The Hebrew word here rendered "proud" commonly means
wide, broad, large, as of the sea, or of an extended country, [Job
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#009); [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008). It is applied also to the law of
God as comprehensive, and without limit, [Psa
119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096). Then it comes to mean swelled
up - made large - inflated [Pro 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#025);
and hence, proud and arrogant.

Will not I suffer - I will not tolerate such a person near me. No one
can have peace in his house who has such a class of servants or
domestics; no one should countenance such persons. Humility is the very
foundation of all virtue.

[Psalms 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 101:6</span></span>

Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land ... - I will look to
them to be employed in my house, and in my service. The word rendered
"faithful" means those who are worthy of belief or confidence. It does
not "necessarily" mean those who are pious or religious - though it is
often used to denote such persons, in reference to the principal trait
in the character of the pious, that is, confidence or faith in God. The
essential meaning here is, that he would seek those who were
trustworthy; on whom he could place reliance; whose truth, fidelity, and
honesty he could confide in. This would be most certainly found in those
who are "faithful" to God, and who would then be "faithful" to lower
obligations. Undoubtedly, also, it is desirable, on some accounts, to
have only such in our employ, if such can be found. But we are not to
regard this passage as teaching the doctrine, even by the example of the
psalmist, that we are to employ no persons but such as are truly
religious. There are others who will be found faithful, honest, and
reliable; and they have such a claim to our confidence as to impose on
us a moral obligation to show them that confidence - so far, at least,
that we shall not, by any act of ours, declare them not worthy of trust
because they are not religious. Besides, it may be desirable, on many
accounts, that persons who are not religious should be brought under the
influence of religion in pious families, and enjoy the advantages which
may be connected with a religious household. In seeking our own
interest, and what will be for our own welfare and happiness, we should
not be unmindful of what may be for the good of others. Religion may
extend itself much in the world by thus bringing into the service of
religious households those who may, by example, instruction, and prayer,
be led to the possession and practice of true religion.

He that walketh in a perfect way ... - Margin, "perfect in the way." The
translation in the text is the more correct. The phrase means an upright
man; a man of integrity. It does not necessarily imply that he is
absolutely holy, or free from all sin, but that he is upright,
consistent, honest: a man whose moral character is developed in proper
proportions, or is such that it may be relied on. See the notes at [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001).

[Psalms 101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 101:7</span></span>

He that worketh deceit - The man who is dishonest - who is full of
tricks, false pretences, and devices - who cannot be confided in as
straight-forward and sincere - one whose word cannot be relied on - one
whose course is subterranean or serpentine.

Shall not dwell within my house - Shall neither be employed in my
service, nor be admitted as a guest and companion. I will not, in any
way, patronise or countenance such a person.

He that telleth lies - In any way: by stating what is false; by
promising what is not performed; by deceiving me in his professions. I
will seek only those who love and speak the truth.

Shall not tarry in my sight - Margin, "shall not be established." The
idea is that of being confirmed or established. The sense here seems to
be, that though such a person should gain admittance to his house on any
pretence or profession, he should not obtain a permanent residence
there. As soon as his real character was known, he would be dismissed or
discharged. The psalmist says that he would do nothing to show him
countenance; he would not give occasion to have it represented that he
favored liars or dishonest persons, or that such persons might find
employment with him. As a universal rule, no man should have such plans
to accomplish in his family, or in his business-transactions, that he
cannot employ, in accomplishing those things, persons who are perfectly
honest; or, in other words, no man should engage in any undertaking, or
pursue any kind of business, that would require people of loose
principles - the cunning, the crafty, the deceitful, the dishonest - to
carry it out. Yet there are many such employments in the world; and
there are men suited for such employments, and who are willing to engage
in such work. It may be a good test for a man in regard to the business
in which he is engaged, to ask himself what kind of agents, clerks, or
servants, it will be necessary for him to employ in carrying it out. If
the business is such as to make it necessary to employ unprincipled
people - people who have easy consciences - people who will violate the
sabbath - men who have more skill than honesty - more cunning than
principle - that very fact should determine him at once in regard to the
propriety of the business.

[Psalms 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 101:8</span></span>

I will early destroy ... - Hebrew, "In the mornings I will destroy."
That is, It shall be my first business as I enter upon the day.
Possibly, also, by the use of the plural here - "in the mornings" -
there may be the idea that this would be his constant rule of conduct:
he would do it every day; he would do it morning by morning. He would on
no day - at no time - allow the wicked to be in his service. This rule
would be unvarying. It would extend through his life. The word "destroy"
here may refer not only to his conduct as a man, and as the head of a
family, but to the act of a magistrate; and the idea may be, that the
rule which he prescribed for himself in his own house was a rule which
he would carry with him into public: that is, as the psalm was composed
by David, that, as a king and sovereign, it should be his aim to carry
those principles to the throne; that, in respect to the state, he would
do what he purposed to do in his home-relations. The strict and stern
regard for truth, sincerity, honesty, fidelity, which he would evince in
the one case he would evince in the other; carrying to the high
employments of public life, where there were so many temptations to a
contrary course, the inflexible virtues which were needful for peace,
for happiness, and for success in domestic life.

That I may cut off - By discountenancing them; by punishing them if they
are guilty.

All wicked doers - All violators of law.

From the city of the Lord - From Jerusalem, the place where God dwelt,
and which was sacred to his service. See [Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004), note; [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002), note; [Psa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008), note. Happy is the man at the
head of a family - happy is the magistrate - who adopts for himself, and
who faithfully carries out the principles laid down by the author of
this psalm - divinely inspired to adopt such rules for himself, and to
suggest them for others in all ages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 102](psa102)

</div>
