<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa149)  [Next](pro000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 150](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 150:0</span></span>

This beautiful and animated psalm closes the series of the Hallelujah
Psalms Ps. 146-150, and appropriately also closes the entire volume. Its
author is unknown, but in respect to the object for which it was
composed there can be no uncertainty. It was manifestly designed,
whoever wrote it, to occupy the very place which it does occupy - to
complete the volume devoted to praise. Praise is the suitable ending of
the book; praise is what the Spirit of inspiration meant to secure in
the heart and on the lips. In the review of the whole there is occasion
for praise. In view of all that has been disclosed about God, about his
religion, about the manifestations of his mercy and grace to his people,
there is occasion for praise. After all that has been experienced,
observed, and recorded in this book - all of trial, sorrow, temptation,
conflict, disappointment, sickness, bereavement, persecution, war,
captivity, bondage, exile, tears, pain, darkness, trouble - there is, as
the result of the whole, as there will be at the end of our own troubled
and chequered lives, occasion for exultation, praise, triumph - songs,
rejoicings, raptures, hallelujahs. This psalm, then, made up wholly of
expressions of gratitude and praise, is an appropriate close to the
entire Book of Psalms. So may our lives close, when its varied scenes
are over, with thanksgivings and praises, as a proper expression in view
of the past, and as emblematic of the uninterrupted employment that
awaits us in the heavens.

[Psalms 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 150:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord - See the notes at [Psa
146:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001).

Praise God in his sanctuary - His holy place; the place where he dwells.
The allusion here is, probably, to the temple, the place of his abode on
earth.

Praise him in the firmament of his power - The whole expression is
equivalent to earth and heaven; Praise him on earth; praise him in
heaven. The word rendered firmament is the same which is used in [Gen
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006). It properly means an expanse - a
thing spread out. The verb from which the word is derived means to beat;
then, to beat out - that is, to spread out by beating, as gold is; and
then, simply to spread out, to expand. Compare [Psa
136:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006); [Isa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005); [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024). In Syriac the word means to
make firm; but this idea is not necessarily in the Hebrew word. The idea
of a firmament as something firm is derived from the Septuagint - in
[Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006), στερέωμα stereōma - in this
place, ἐν στερεώματι en stereōmati. The Hebrew, however, merely means
"an expanse" - something spread out, as the heavens seem to us to be
"stretched out;" and the call here is on all that dwell above that
expanse - in heaven - to unite with those on earth in his praise. It is
called "the expanse of his power" because it is in the heavens - in the
sun, the moon, the stars - that the power of God seems to be principally
displayed.

[Psalms 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 150:2</span></span>

Praise him for his mighty acts - See the notes at [Psa
145:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#004) : "One generation shall praise
thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts." The Hebrew
word is the same. The reference is to that which displays the power of
God; the things which manifest his omnipotence.

Praise him according to his excellent greatness - Hebrew, the multitude
of his greatness. Let the praise in elevation correspond with this; let
it be such as shall properly express this; let all be employed that will
contribute to make this known, or that will be appropriate to this.
Hence, the psalmist proceeds to call on all to make use of everything,
by instrument and voice, that would in any manner set forth the praise
of God.

[Psalms 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 150:3</span></span>

Praise him with the sound of the trumpet - Margin, cornet. In this verse
and the verses following there is an allusion to the instruments of
music which were commonly employed in Hebrew worship. The idea is, that
all these - all that could properly express praise - should be used to
celebrate the praises of God. Each one, with its own distinct note, and
all combined in harmony, should be employed for this purpose. Most of
these instruments, and many more, are now combined in the organ, where
the instruments, instead of being played on by separate performers, are
so united that they can be supplied with wind from one source - the
bellows - and all played by one performer. Thus one mind directs the
performance, securing, if skillfully done, perfect unity and harmony.
This instrument was unknown to the Hebrews. Among them, each instrument
had its own performer. The trumpet was principally used to call the
people together, but it was also an important instrument among those
used by the bands of musicians that performed in the temple, as its
tones are now important ones in the organ.

Praise him with the psaltery and harp - Hebrew, the נבל nebel and כנור
kinnôr. See these instruments described in the notes at [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). The word here rendered psaltery
is there rendered viol - "And the harp and the viol," etc.

[Psalms 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 150:4</span></span>

Praise him with the timbrel - Hebrew, תף tôph. See this described in the
notes at [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). It is rendered
tabret and tabrets in [Gen 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#027); [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005); [Sa1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006); [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012); [Isa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008); [Isa
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#032); [Jer
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004); [Eze
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#013); timbrel and timbrels in [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020); [Jdg
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034); [Sa2
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#005); [Ch1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#008); [Job
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012); [Psa
81:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#002); [Psa
149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003); and in the margin in [Jer
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004). The word does not occur
elsewhere. It was an instrument that was struck with the hands.

And dance - See this word explained in the notes at [Psa
149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003). Dancing among the Hebrews seems
to have accompanied the timbrel or tabret. See [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020),

Praise him with stringed instruments - מנים minniym. This word means
strings, from a verb which means to divide; and the proper reference
would be to slender threads, as if they were divided, or made small. It
is nowhere else applied to instruments of music, but might be properly
applied to a harp, a violin, a bass-viol, etc. The word strings is
indeed applied elsewhere to instruments of music [Psa
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002); [Psa
144:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#009); [Sa1
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#016); [Isa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020); [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019), but the Hebrew word is
different. Such instruments were commonly used in the praise of God. See
the notes at [Psa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002).

And organs - Hebrew, עוגב ‛ûgâb. See this word explained in the notes at
[Job 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012). It occurs elsewhere only
in [Gen 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021); [Job
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012); [Job
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031); in all of which places it is
rendered organ. The word is derived from a verb meaning to breathe, to
blow; and would be applicable to any wind-instrument. It here represents
the whole class of wind-instruments. The word organ is a Greek word, and
is found in the Septuagint in this place; and hence, our word organ has
been introduced into the translation. The Greek word properly denotes

\(a\) something by which work is accomplished, as a machine;

\(b\) a musical instrument;

\(c\) the material from which anything is made;

\(d\) the work itself. (Passow, Lexicon).

Our word organ, as used in music, suggests the idea of a combination of
instruments or sounds. That idea is not found in the Hebrew word. It
denotes merely a wind-instrument. Neither the Hebrews nor any of the
ancient nations had an instrument that corresponded with the organ as we
now use the term.

[Psalms 150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 150:5</span></span>

Praise him upon the loud cymbals - literally, "the cymbals of sound" or
hearing. That is, Let there be audibly expressed joy. The allusion here
is to an instrument of music that was most distinctly heard in union
with other instruments. The sound of the cymbal would be most clearly
audible in its accompaniment of the other instruments referred to, as
the sound of cymbals, or as the "triangle" would be now. The Hebrew word
rendered cymbal means a tinkling, clanging, ringing, as of metal, or of
arms; then, a whirring, as of wings (compare the notes at [Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)); then, any tinkling or clanging
instrument, as a fish-spear or harpoon; then, cymbals, instruments of
music. The cymbal, as now used, is an instrument of brass, in a circular
form, like a dish, producing, when two are struck gether, a sharp,
ringing sound - Webster. An instrument of this kind is evidently
referred to here. The word occurs in the Bible in the following places
only: [Deu 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#042), rendered locust;
[Sa2 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#005), rendered, as here, cymbal;
[Job 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#007), rendered fish-spears; and
[Isa 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001), rendered shadowing with.

Praise him upon the high-sounding cymbals - The cymbals of joyful voice.
On the word teruah, rendered high, see the notes at [Psa
89:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#016). A loud, lofty sound or shout,
as on the reception of a conqueror, is the idea here; and the sense is,
that the praise of God was to be celebrated with that which would in the
highest sense express joy and triumph.

[Psalms 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 150:6</span></span>

Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord - All living things in
the air, the earth, the waters. Let there be one universal burst of
praise. Let his praises be celebrated not only with instruments of
music, but let all living beings unite in that praise; let a breathing
universe combine in one solemn service of praise.

Praise ye the Lord - Hallelu-jah. Thus, at the end of all the trials,
the conflicts, the persecutions, the sorrows, the joys recorded in this
book, the psalmist gives utterance to feelings of joy, triumph,
transport, rejoicing; and thus at the end of all - when the affairs of
this world shall be closed - when the church shall have passed through
all its trials, shall have borne all its persecutions, shall have
suffered all that it is appointed to suffer - when the work of
redemption shall be complete, and all the ransomed of the Lord shall
have been recovered from sin, and shall be saved - that church, all
heaven, the whole universe, shall break forth in one loud, long,
triumphant Hallelujah. "The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come
to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness; and sorrow and sighing shall flee away," [Isa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Introduction](pro000)

</div>
