<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa109)  [Next](psa111) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 110:0</span></span>

This psalm is entitled "A Psalm of David." It is also ascribed to David
by the Saviour [Mat 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043); and by
Peter [Act 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034); and there is no
reason to doubt the correctness of the title. There is nothing, however,
in the title, or in the psalm, to determine at what period of David's
life, or on what occasion it was written. Aben Ezra supposed that it was
at the time referred to in [Sa2
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015); and others have selected
other occasions in the life of David. But all this is conjecture. The
psalm has no particular reference to anything in his history, and as it
is wholly prophetic of the Messiah, it might have been composed at any
period of his life.

The psalm is repeatedly quoted in the New Testament as referring to the
Messiah, and in such a manner as to show that this was the customary
interpretation among the Jews, or that it might be referred to by way of
"proof" in regard to the Messiah, so that the relevancy and pertinence
of the argument would be at once admitted. [Mat
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044) (compare [Mar
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#036); [Luk
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#042)); [Act
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034); [Heb
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006); [Heb
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017), [Heb
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021). The way in which it is quoted
shows that this was the prevailing and received mode of interpreting the
psalm.

Yet this belief has not been uniform. DeWette supposes that it refers to
David himself. Jarchi supposed that it referred to Abraham; Borhek, to
Solomon; Justin Martyr and Tertullian, to Hezekiah. See Rosenmuller.

The application of the psalm in the New Testament to the Messiah is so
clear and unequivocal, that we are bound to defend the opinion that it
was "designed" to refer to him; and the manner in which it is quoted
shows that it was in no secondary sense, and in no way of
"accommodation," but that it had an original and exclusive applicability
to him. Every principle of honesty in interpretation demands this. There
may be difficulties in the interpretation itself, but the fact that it
refers to the Messiah involves no difficulty, if it be once admitted
that there is such a thing as prophecy at all, and that "any" portion of
the Old Testament has reference to a Messiah. There is no part of the
Old Testament that is more clearly applied to him in the New Testament
than this psalm; there is no part that more naturally suggests the
Messiah; there is none that is more difficult of explanation if it be
maintained that it does not refer to him; there is none that is made
more plain by referring it to him. It will be assumed, therefore, in
this exposition, that the psalm had an original and exclusive reference
to the Messiah, and that the friends of revelation are bound to show
that in him who claimed to be the Messiah, and to whom it is applied in
the New Testament - the Lord Jesus - there is a "fair" fulfillment of
the predictions which are contained in it.

The idea in the psalm is that of the exaltation, the conquest, the
priesthood, and the dominion of the Messiah. Two things - the kingship
and the priesthood of the Messiah - are combined. The leading idea is
that of the "priest-king" or the "king-priest," as in the case of
Melchizedek, in whom the two offices of priest and king were in a very
unusual manner and form united in one person. Usually they were
separate, even in the earliest ages of the world. In the case of
Melehizedek they were "combined," and hence, he was selected as a proper
representative of the Messiah - of one who should combine these offices,
apparently incongruous, in one.

The psalm embraces the following points:

I. The appointment of the Messiah - acknowledged by the author of the
psalm as his "Lord" - to that high office, to be held until he should
subdue all his enemies, [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001).

II\. His being endowed with "power" needful for the accomplishment of
the design for which he was appointed, [Psa
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002).

III\. The assurance that his people would be made "willing" in the day
when he should put forth his power, [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003).

IV\. The special characteristic of his reign, as that of a
"priest-king," after the order of Melehizedek; combining the two
functions of king and priest in his own person and office, [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004).

V. His conquest and triumph, [Psa
110:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005).

[Psalms 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 110:1</span></span>

The Lord said unto my Lord - In the Hebrew, "Spake Jehovah to my Lord."
The word יהוה Yahweh is the incommunicable name of God. It is never
given to a created being. The other word translated "Lord - אדני 'Adonāy
- means one who has rule or authority; one of high rank; one who has
dominion; one who is the owner or possessor, etc. This word is applied
frequently to a creature. It is applied to kings, princes, rulers,
masters. The phrase "my Lord" refers to someone who was superior in rank
to the author of the psalm; one whom he could address as his superior.
The psalm, therefore, cannot refer to David himself, as if Yahweh had
said to him, "Sit thou at my right hand." Nor was there anyone on earth
in the time of David to whom it could be applicable; anyone whom he
would call his "Lord" or superior. If, therefore, the psalm was written
by David, it must have reference to the Messiah - to one whom he owned
as his superior - his Lord - his Sovereign. It cannot refer to God as if
he were to have this rule over David, since God himself is referred to
as "speaking" to him whom David called his Lord: "Jehovah said unto my
Lord." The reasoning of the Saviour, therefore, in [Mat
22:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043), was founded on a fair and
just interpretation of the psalm, and was so plain and conclusive that
the Pharisees did not attempt to reply to it. [Mat
22:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#046). See the notes at that passage.
No other interpretation "can" be given to it, consistently with the
proper rules of expounding language, unless it be shown that the psalm
was not composed by David, and might, therefore, be applied to someone
whom the author would acknowledge as his "Lord." But there is no
evidence of this, and there is no one in the Old Testament history to
whom the psalm would be applicable.

Sit thou at my right hand - The position of honor and of rank. Compare
the notes at [Psa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008). See also [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009); [Mar
14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062); [Luk
22:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#069); [Act
7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055); [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001). The phrase is properly applicable
to the Messiah as exalted to the highest place in the universe - the
right hand of God.

Until I make thine enemies thy footstool - Until they are entirely
subdued under time. See the notes at [Mat
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044). The enemies here referred to
are the enemies of the Messiah considered as King (see [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)); and the promise here is, that
"he must reign until he shall have put all enemies under his feet." See
the notes at [Co1 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025).

[Psalms 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 110:2</span></span>

The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion - The scepter of
thy power; that with which thou shalt rule. It will be given to thee by
Yahweh; and it will be given to thee, as it were, "out of Zion;" that
is, as proceeding from the church, and as derived from that. It will be
an appointment connected with the church, and will be "as if" the church
had conferred it on thee. The idea is, that the Messiah would receive,
as it were, his designation, authority, commission, power from the
church. He would spring from it [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); would act for it; would do what
was needful for its good; would wield the power which properly belongs
to the church on the earth. Compare the notes at [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009).

Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies - Set up thy power over them,
and reign in them. This is a commission to set up a kingdom "in the very
midst" of those who were his enemies; in the hearts of those who had
been and were rebellious. His kingdom is set up not by destroying them,
but by "subduing" them so that they become his willing servants. They
yield to him, and he rules over them. It is not here a commission to cut
them off, but one much more difficult of execution - to make them his
friends, and to dispose them to submit to his authority. Mere "power"
may crush people; it requires more than that to make rebels willingly
submissive, and to dispose them voluntarily to obey.

[Psalms 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 110:3</span></span>

Thy people - All who are given to thee; all over whom thou art to rule.
This verse has been variously translated. The Septuagint renders it,
"With thee is the beginning in the day of thy power, in the splendor of
thy saints, from the womb, before the light of the morning have I
begotten thee." So the Latin Vulgate. Luther renders it, "After thy
victory shall thy people willingly bring an offering to thee, in holy
adorning: thy children shall be born to thee as the dew of the morning."
DeWette, "Willingly shall thy people show themselves to thee on the day
of the assembling of thy host in holy adorning, as from the womb of the
morning, thy youth (vigor) shall be as the dew." Prof. Alexander, "Thy
people (are) free-will offerings in the day of thy power, in holy
decorations, from the womb of the dawn, to thee (is) the dew of thy
youth." Every clause of the verse is obscure, though the "general" idea
is not difficult to perceive; that, in the day of Messiah's power, his
people would willingly offer themselves to him, in holy robes or
adorning, like the glittering dew of the morning; or, in numbers that
might be compared with the drops of the morning dew. The essential ideas
are:

\(1\) that he would have a "people;"

\(2\) that their subjection to him would be a "willing" subjection;

\(3\) that this would be accomplished by his "power;"

\(4\) that they would appear before him in great beauty - in robes of
holy adorning;

\(5\) that they would in some way resemble the dew of the morning; and

\(6\) that to him in thus subduing them there would be the vigor of
youth, the ardor of youthful hope.

Shall be willing - literally, "Thy people (are, or shall be)
willing-offerings." The word rendered "willing" - נדבות nedâbôth - is in
the plural number; "thy people, 'willingnesses.'" The singular - נדבה
nedâbâh - means voluntariness, spontaneousness: and hence, it comes to
mean spontaneously, voluntarily, of a willing mind. It is rendered a
"willing offering," in [Exo 35:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#029);
"free offering," in [Exo 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#003);
"voluntary offering," in [Lev 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016);
"free-will offering," in [Lev 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#018),
[Lev 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021), [Lev
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#023); [Lev
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#038); [Num
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#003); [Num
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#039); [Deu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006), [Deu
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#017); [Deu
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#010); [Deu
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#023); [Ch2
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#014); [Ezr
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#004); [Ezr
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#005); [Ezr
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#028); [Psa
119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108); "willingly," in [Ch2
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#008); "plentiful," in [Psa
68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009); "voluntary, and voluntarily," in
[Eze 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#012); "freely," in [Hos
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004); and "free-offering," in [Amo
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#005). It does not occur elsewhere. The
idea is that of "freeness;" of voluntariness; of doing it from choice,
doing it of their own will. They did it in the exercise of freedom.
There was no compulsion; no constraint. Whatever "power" there was in
the case, was to make them "willing," not to compel them to do a thing
"against" their will. That which was done, or that which is here
intended to be described as having been done, is evidently the act of
devoting themselves to him who is here designated as their Ruler - the
Messiah. The allusion may be either

\(a\) to their devoting themselves to "him" in conversion, or becoming
his;

\(b\) to their devoting themselves to his "service" - as soldiers do in
war; or

\(c\) to their devoting their time, wealth, talents, to him in lives
consecrated to him.

"Whatever" there is as the result of his dominion over them is
"voluntary" on their part. There is no compulsion in his religion.
People are not constrained to do what they are unwilling to do. All the
power that is exerted is on the will, disposing people to do what is
right, and what is for their own interest. No man is forced to go to
heaven against his will; no man is saved from hell against his will; no
man makes a sacrifice in religion against his will; no man is compelled
to serve the Redeemer in any way against his will. The acts of religion
are among the most free that people ever perform; and of all the hosts
of the redeemed no one will ever say that the act of his becoming a
follower of the Redeemer was not perfectly voluntary. He chose - he
"professed" - to be a friend of God, and he never saw the time when he
regretted the choice.

In the day of thy power - The power given to the Messiah to accomplish
the work of his mission; the power to convert people, and to save the
world. [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027); [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002). This implies

\(a\) that "power" would be employed in bringing people to submit to
him; and

\(b\) that there would be a fixed time when that power would be put
forth.

Still, it is power which is not inconsistent with freedom. It is power
exerted in making people "willing," not in "compelling or forcing" them
to submit to him. There "is" a power which may be exerted over the will
consistent with liberty, and that is the power which the Messiah employs
in bringing people to himself.

In the beauties of holiness - This power will be connected with the
beauty of holiness; or, holiness will be manifested when that power is
put forth. The object is to "secure" holiness; and there will be beauty
in that holiness. The only power put forth in the case is to make people
holy; and they will, in their lives and conduct, manifest all the beauty
or attractiveness which there is in a holy and pure character. The word
rendered "beauty" is in the plural number, and the allusion may be to
the raiment of those who are referred to. They would appear in pure
garments - in sacerdotal vestments - as priests of God. Compare [Lev
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004). The idea may be that they would
be a "kingdom of priests," clad in priestly vestments ([Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006); compare the notes at [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005), notes at [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)), and that they would be adorned
with "robes" appropriate to that office. This may refer, however, to
their actual, internal holiness, and may mean that they would, when they
were subjugated to him, appear as a holy or a righteous people.

From the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth - Margin,
more than the womb of the morning, thou shalt have, etc." The expression
here is evidently designed to refer to the source of the dew - the dew
of the early dawn - as having its "birth" then, or as seeming to be
"born" then. The morn is represented as the "mother" of the dew. The
figure is highly poetic and beautiful. The ground of the comparison may
be either

\(a\) that the "beauty of holiness" - the beautiful array of the saints
- "is more than" that produced in the womb of the morning; or

\(b\) that the dew of youth is more beautiful than the dew produced in
the morning. As the word "dew," that on which the comparison must turn,
occurs in the last member of the sentence, it is probable that the
second of these interpretations is the true one, as indicated in the
margin: "More than the womb of the morning (more than the morning
produces) thou hast the dew of thy youth." That is, "as the young
morning - the youth of the day - has its beauties in the abundance and
luster of the dew-drops, so shall the dew of thy youth be - the
beginning of thy glorious day." May there not be here also an allusion
to the multitudes that would be among his "people" - numerous as the
dewdrops of the morning, and as beautiful as they - on his going forth
to the world with all the beauty of a bright dawn?

The meaning of the whole, I apprehend, is, "Thy reign shall be like the
day - a long bright day. Thy coming - the morning of that day - shall be
like the early dawn - so fresh, so beautiful, made so lovely by the
drops of dew sparkling on every blade of grass. More beautiful by far -
more lovely - shall be the beginning of the day of thy reign; - more
lovely to the world thy youth - thy appearing - the beginning of thy
day." Thus understood, the verse is a most beautiful poetic description
of the bright morning when the Messiah should come; the dawn of that
glorious day when he should reign. Compare [Isa
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001).

[Psalms 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 110:4</span></span>

The Lord hath sworn - He has confirmed the appointment of the Messiah by
a solemn oath, or as by an oath. That is, It is as sure and fixed as if
he had taken an oath. Compare [Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013). The "time," so to speak, if the
word time can be applied to transactions in a past eternity, was that
when he was designated in the divine purpose as Messiah; in the eternal
counsels of God. Compare [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007).

And will not repent - Will not change his purpose.

Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek - The word
rendered "order" here means properly a word, a thing, a matter; hence, a
way or manner. The meaning here is, that he would be a priest "after the
manner" of Melchizedek; or, such a priest as he was. He would not be of
the tribe of Levi; he would not be in the regular line of the
priesthood, but he would resemble, in the characteristics of his office,
this ancient priest-king, combining in himself the two functions of
priest and king; as a priest, standing alone; not deriving his authority
from any line of predecessors; and having no successors. See this verse
explained at length, in its application to the Messiah, in the notes at
[Heb 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006) (note), [Heb
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010) (note); [Heb
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001) (note). The passage as it stands
here, and as looked at without any reference to the use made of it in
the New Testament, would imply these things:

\(1\) That he who was spoken of would be, in a proper sense, a priest.

\(2\) that he would have a perpetual or permanent priesthood -
"forever."

\(3\) that he would not be of the established line of priests in the
tribe of Levi, but that his appointment would be unusual and
extraordinary.

\(4\) that the appointment would come directly from God, and would not
be "derived" from those who went before him.

\(5\) that as a priest he would "resemble" Melchizedek, according to the
record which was found of Melchizedek in Genesis.

\(6\) that as Melchizedek was a priest of the Most High God, so he would
be.

\(7\) that as Melchizedek combined in himself the functions of both
priest and king, so these would be found in him.

\(8\) that as Melchizedek had no successors in office, so he would have
none.

How far these things were applicable to the Lord Jesus Christ, and with
what propriety the passage might be applied to him, may be seen by
examining the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 5-7.

[Psalms 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 110:5</span></span>

The Lord at thy right hand - See the notes at [Psa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008).

Shall strike through kings - The Hebrew word here rendered "shall
strike," - from מחץ mâchats - means "to shake, to agitate"; and then,
"to shake in pieces, to dash in pieces, to crush"; and here it has the
sense of dashing in pieces, smiting, wounding, crushing. The "kings"
referred to are the enemies of God and the Messiah, and the idea is that
all would be subdued before him; that he would set up a universal
dominion; that none would be able to stand before him; or, that he would
reign over all the earth. The "language" is that which is derived from
conquests in war; from the subjugation of enemies by force of arms.
Compare the notes at [Psa 2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009); and
the notes at [Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004).

In the day of his wrath - [Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012).

[Psalms 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 110:6</span></span>

He shall judge among the heathen - Among the "nations." That is, he
shall set up a kingdom, or shall rule over the nations of the earth. He
shall come to execute judgment and justice, and shall apportion to
people what is due to them. See the notes at [Isa
11:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003).

He shall fill the places with the dead bodies - He shall make a great
slaughter - indicative of conquest, and of the subjugation of the world
to himself. It would be "as if" the bodies of the slain in battle
strewed the ground, or filled the valleys of the earth.

He shall wound the heads - The same word is used here that occurs in the
previous verse, and that is there rendered "shall strike." It is the
language of "conquest," as if the world was to be subdued to himself by
war.

Over many countries - Margin, "great." Over vast and extensive regions,
carrying his conquests into distant lands. This will be fulfilled only
when all the earth shall be subject to the reign of the Messiah. [Co1
15:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024).

[Psalms 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 110:7</span></span>

He shall drink of the brook in the way - The design here seems to be to
represent the Messiah as a victorious king and conqueror pursuing his
enemies. In the previous verse the psalmist had represented him under
the image of one engaged in battle, and slaying his enemies with a great
slaughter. He here represents him as pursuing those who should escape
from the battle, and as pursuing them without fainting or exhaustion. He
is like one who finds abundant springs and streams of water in his
journeyings; who refreshes himself at those fountains and streams; who,
therefore, is not faint and weary. He pursues his foes vigorously and
with success.

Therefore shall he lift up the head - Therefore shall he triumph, or be
successful. The head falls when we are faint and exhausted, when we are
disappointed and are ashamed, when we are conscious of guilt. It is
lifted up in conscious rectitude, in success and triumph, in the
exuberance of hope. The idea here is, that the Messiah would be
triumphant. He would achieve the victory over all his foes; he would
pursue, without exhaustion, his flying enemies, and he would return from
the conquest joyous, exulting, triumphant. All this is under the image
of a victorious hero; all this will be accomplished in the conquest of
the world by the Gospel; in the subduing of the foes of God; in the
final scene when the Redeemer shall deliver up the kingdom to God. [Co1
15:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 111](psa111)

</div>
