<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa144)  [Next](psa146) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 145](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 145:0</span></span>

This is also a Psalm of David, and the last of the series in this part
of the collection. It is entitled simply, "Of Praise," or, in the
Hebrew, "Praise by David," or "Praise of David;" that is, one of David's
songs of praise. It is an "alphabetical" psalm; that is, each verse
begins with a letter of the Hebrew alphabet. The arrangement in this
respect is complete, except that the Hebrew letter nun (נ n, "n") is
omitted, for which no reason can be assigned, unless it was from a
desire that the psalm might consist of three equal parts of seven verses
each. In the Septuagint, Syriac, Arabic, Latin Vulgate, and Aethiopic
versions, this omission is attempted to be supplied by inserting between
[Psa 145:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#013) a verse which in Hebrew
would begin with the Hebrew letter nun (נ n, "n"), - נאמן, etc.: -
"Faithful is the Lord in all his words, and holy in all his works." This
is taken from [Psa 145:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#017) of the psalm
by the change of a word in the beginning - "faithful" for "righteous,"
נאמן for צדיק. There is no authority for this, however, in the MSS., and
it is evidently an attempt to supply what seemed to be an omission or
defect in the composition of the psalm. The verse is not in the Chaldee
Paraphrase, or in the version of Aquila and Theodotion; and it is
certain that as early as the time of Origen and Jerome it was not in the
Hebrew text. The Masorites and the Jewish commentators reject it. The
sense is in no way affected by the insertion or omission of this, since
the verses of the psalm have no necessary connection in meaning - the
composition, as in most of the alphabetical psalms, being made up of
independent sentiments suggested in part at least by the necessity of
commencing each verse with a particular letter.

The psalm does not admit of any particular analysis, and it is
impossible now to ascertain the occasion on which it was written.

[Psalms 145:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 145:1</span></span>

I will extol thee ... - I will lift thee up; I will lift up thy name and
praise, so that it may be heard afar.

And I will bless thy name forever and ever - I will bless or praise
thee. I will do it now; I will do it in all the future. I will do it in
time; I will do it in eternity. See the notes at [Psa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001).

[Psalms 145:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 145:2</span></span>

Every day will I bless thee ... - Compare [Psa
92:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#002); [Psa
55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017). As we receive blessings from
God every day (compare [Lam 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#023)), it
is proper that we should render to him daily thanks; as God is the same
always - "yesterday, today, and forever" - it is proper that he should
receive from day to day the tribute of praise; as we are daily dependent
on him - one day as much as another - our recognition of that dependence
should be daily; and as he will always be unchangeably the same, it will
be proper that he should be praised forever and ever. Two things are
apparent from this verse:

\(1\) that a truly religious man "will" worship God every day;

\(2\) that it is the fixed purpose of a truly religious man to continue
this forever.

[Psalms 145:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 145:3</span></span>

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised - See [Psa
96:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004), note; [Psa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003), note.

And his greatness is unsearchable - See [Job
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009), note; [Job
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010), note; [Job
11:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007), notes.

[Psalms 145:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 145:4</span></span>

One generation shall praise thy works ... - Shall praise thee on account
of thy works or thy doings. That is, Thy praise shall be always kept up
on the earth. See the notes at [Isa
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019); notes at [Psa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002). One generation shall transmit
the knowledge of thy works to another by praise - by hymns and psalms
recording and celebrating thy praise. Successive generations of people
shall take up the language of praise, and it shall thus be transmitted
to the end of time.

And shall declare thy mighty acts - Thy works of strength or power.
God's greatness - his infinity - is in itself a just ground of praise,
for we should rejoice that there is One Infinite Eternal Being; and as
all that greatness is employed in the cause of truth, of law, of good
order, of justice, of kindness, of mercy, it should call forth continued
praise in all parts of his dominions.

[Psalms 145:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 145:5</span></span>

I will speak - That is, in my acts of praise. I will not be ashamed to
be known as his worshipper; I will publicly declare my belief in his
existence, his greatness, his goodness.

Of the glorious honor of thy majesty - The glory of the honor of thy
majesty. This accumulation of epithets shows that the heart of the
psalmist was full of the subject, and that he labored to find language
to express his emotions. It is beauty; it is glory; it is majesty: it is
all that is great, sublime, wonderful - all combined - all concentrated
- in one Being.

And of thy wondrous works - Margin, "things," or "words." The reference
is to wondrous deeds or acts considered as the subject of discourse or
praise.

[Psalms 145:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 145:6</span></span>

And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts - The force, the
power of those things done by thee which are suited to inspire fear or
reverence. The great power displayed in those acts shall be a ground or
reason for celebrating thy praise. The manifestations of that power will
so deeply impress the minds of people, that they will be led to speak of
them.

And I will declare thy greatness - Hebrew, "And thy greatness, I will
declare it." In respect to that, I will recount it, or I will make it
known to others.

[Psalms 145:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 145:7</span></span>

They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness - Hebrew,
The memory of the greatness of thy goodness they will pour forth. The
word rendered "abundantly utter" means to bud forth, to gush out, to
flow, as a fountain. [Pro 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004); [Pro
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#023); [Pro
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#002), [Pro
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028). It is applied to words as
poured forth in praise. The meaning is, that the heart is full, as a
fountain is full of water, and that it naturally overflows, or seeks to
discharge itself. The thought of the goodness of God fills the heart,
and makes it overflow with gratitude.

And shall sing of thy righteousness - They shall shout for joy at the
displays of thy justice; at the manifestations of thy righteous
character.

[Psalms 145:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 145:8</span></span>

The Lord is gracious - See [Psa 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005),
note; [Psa 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015), note.

And full of compassion - Kind; compassionate; ready to do good. See the
notes at [Psa 103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008).

Slow to anger - See [Psa 103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008), where
the same expression occurs.

And of great mercy - Margin, great in mercy. His greatness is shown in
his mercy; and the manifestation of that mercy is great: great, as on a
large scale; great, as manifested toward great sinners; great, in the
sacrifice made that it may be displayed; great, in the completeness with
which sin is pardoned - pardoned so as to be remembered no more.

[Psalms 145:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 145:9</span></span>

The Lord is good to all - To all his creatures. That is, he is kind and
compassionate toward them; he is disposed and ready to do them good.
There is not one of them whom he is not ready and willing to bless; not
one whose happiness would not be agreeable to him, or whose welfare he
is not ready to promote. Compare [Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005).

And his tender mercies are over all his works - In all that he has made
there is evidence that he is a kind and benevolent God. He has a heart
to love, to bless, what he has made; everywhere arrangements are made
for happiness; he is not disposed to cast off the feeble, the erring,
and the suffering; he is willing to receive back again those who have
wandered from him, to pardon the offending, to wipe away the tears of
the sorrowful.

[Psalms 145:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 145:10</span></span>

All thy works shall praise thee - Or, do praise thee; that is, all thy
works show what thou art, and combine in setting forth thy perfections.
See the notes at [Psa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001).

And thy saints shall bless thee - Or, do bless thee. All those who are
holy in heaven and on earth, the angels around thy throne, and thy
people below, all combine to proclaim thy praise.

[Psalms 145:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 145:11</span></span>

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom - Of thy reign; of the
great principles of thy government and laws. They see in that reign
evidence that thou art worthy of universal praise. Seeing this, it
becomes to them a subject on which they talk or converse (compare [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016)) - a subject of interest to their
hearts, and "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks." People
talk about that which interests them; those things in which they have
pleasure; those which they desire to understand; those in which they see
difficulties that they would wish to have solved. It is one of the
characteristics of the "saints" - of the people of God - that they do
talk about God and his kingdom; that the subject is to them a pleasant
theme of meditation and conversation; that they have the kind of
pleasure in talking about God which other people have in conversing
about their farms or their merchandise, their children and friends, the
news of the day, politics, literature, or science.

And talk of thy power - As put forth in the works of creation; as
manifested in the dispensations of thy providence; as evinced in the
conversion of sinners; as displayed in carrying thy truth around the
world; as exhibited in sustaining fine sufferer, and in giving peace and
support to the dying.

[Psalms 145:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 145:12</span></span>

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts - To bring other people
to understand and to appreciate the evidences of the power of God. A man
who sees this himself will wish that others may see it also. This is the
foundation of the desire which warms and animates the heart of the
Christian missionary - the desire to make the great truths of redemption
known as far as possible, even to the ends of the earth.

And the glorious majesty of his kingdom - And the glory of the majesty
of his reign. They wish to communicate the knowledge of this to those
ignorant of it. They themselves see this to be glorious, and they wish
that all others may see it also.

[Psalms 145:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 145:13</span></span>

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom ... - See [Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016), note; [Dan
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034), note. The meaning is, that the
reign of God will continue forever and ever. It will never pass away as
other dominions do; it will not change as dynasties do among people; it
will not be overthrown as they are; its great principles will stand firm
forever and ever. Compare the notes at [Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017).

[Psalms 145:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 145:14</span></span>

The Lord upholdeth all that fall - The word used here is a participle,
literally, "The Lord sustaining;" that is, the Lord is a Sustainer or
Upholder of all that fall. The allusion is to those who have no power to
go of themselves; who would sink under the burdens of life if they were
not supported. The idea is, that it is a characteristic of the Lord,
that he does sustain such; that all such may confidently look to him to
uphold them.

And raiseth up all those that be bowed down - The word here also is a
participle: "he is lifting up;" that is, he is a lifter up. The
reference is to those who are bent and bowed under the duties, the
cares, the trials of life; who go bowed down under those burdens. God is
able to strengthen them so that they can bear those burdens without
being crushed under them.

[Psalms 145:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 145:15</span></span>

The eyes of all wait upon thee - Margin, Look unto thee. All creatures,
on the land, in the air, in the waters; all in heaven; all throughout
the universe. That is, It is as if all directed their eyes to thee
imploringly for the supply of their needs. To no one else can they look
for those things which are needful for them. A universe thus looks every
day, every hour, every moment, to its God! How sublime the scene!

And thou givest them their meat in due season - See the notes at [Psa
104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027), where the same words occur.

[Psalms 145:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 145:16</span></span>

Thou openest thine hand - By the mere opening of the hand all needful
gifts are bestowed on the creatures dependent on thee. The same words
are found in [Psa 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028); see the
notes at that passage.

And satisfiest the desire of every living thing - All kinds of creatures
- people, fowls, beasts, fishes, insects - the innumerable multitudes
that swarm on the earth, in the air, in the waters. In [Psa
104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028), it is, "They are filled with
good." The meaning is essentially the same. Of course this is to be
taken in a general sense. It cannot mean that absolutely no one ever
needs, or ever perishes from want, but the idea is that of the amazing
beneficence and fullness of God in being able and willing to satisfy
such multitudes; to keep them from perishing by cold, or hunger, or
nakedness. And, in fact, how few birds perish by hunger; how few of the
infinite number of the inhabitants of the sea; how few animals that roam
over deserts, or in vast plains; how few people; how few even of the
insect tribes - how few in the world revealed by the microscope - the
world beneath us - the innumerable multitudes of living things too small
even to be seen by the naked eye of man!

[Psalms 145:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 145:17</span></span>

The Lord is righteous in all his ways - In his own character; in his
laws; in his providential dealings; in his arrangements for the
redemption and salvation of man. In his own character he is what it is
desirable that a God should be; in all his laws he ordains that only
which it is desirable should be enacted; in all his dealings with people
he does that which it is desirable should be done. He violates no right;
he wrongs no one; he demands of no one a service which would be unjust;
he makes no arrangements for pardon and salvation which it is not best
should be made. It is much for a man to be able to say in all that
occurs to him under the divine administration, "It is right;" it is much
for a man to have such confidence in God as to be able to feel that all
he does in respect to nations is the best thing that could be done.
Compare [Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014), note; [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002), note.

And holy in all his works - Margin, merciful, or bountiful. The Hebrew
word is merciful. The idea seems to be that righteousness and mercy are
equally consulted in his arrangements; that they meet together, and act
harmomoniously in the divine plans. Compare the notes at [Psa
85:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010).

[Psalms 145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 145:18</span></span>

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him - There is a sense in
which he is "nigh" to all, for he is everywhere present; but there is a
special sense in which he seems to be near to us; in which he manifests
himself to us; in which he gives us evidence of his presence. It is in
prayer, in praise, in his ordinances - in his gracious interpositions in
our behalf - in the peace and joy which we have in communion with him.
Compare the notes at [Psa 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018) : "The
Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart."

To all that call upon him in truth - In sincerity; not hypocritically;
worshipping him as the true God, and with a sincere desire to obtain his
favor. Compare the notes at [Joh 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024).
We can have no hope that God will hear us unless we are sincere in our
worship. He sees the heart, and he will act toward us as we are, and not
as we profess to be.

[Psalms 145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 145:19</span></span>

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him - Of those who worship
him with reverence - those who are his true friends. See the notes at
[Mat 7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007); notes at [Joh
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013); notes at [Jo1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#014); notes at [Psa
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015).

He also will hear their cry, and will save them - He will regard their
expressed desire - their earnest prayer.

[Psalms 145:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 145:20</span></span>

The Lord preserveth all them that love him - He keeps them; watches over
them; defends them; makes them the object of his care. See [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020), note, [Psa
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023), note; [Psa
97:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010), note.

But all the wicked will he destroy - All that are found ultimately to be
wicked; all that on the final trial deserve to be classed with the
wicked. See [Psa 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017), note; [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006), note; [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046), note.

[Psalms 145:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 145:21</span></span>

My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord - That is, I will utter his
praise. In view of all these things, in view of his character and
doings, I will praise him. I will be found among those who honor him;
who acknowledge him as the true God; who render homage for what he is,
and thanks for what he has done.

And let all flesh bless his holy name forever and ever - All people; all
that dwell upon the earth. Let his praise be universal and eternal. This
is the language of true piety; all in whose bosom there is any true
religion will heartily say Amen. No desire of a pious heart is more
constant and strong than that God should be praised, adored, honored by
all intelligent creatures; that he should be known and acknowledged in
all the earth as the true God; that his praise should ascend from all
parts of the universe forever. See the notes at [Psa
100:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 146](psa146)

</div>
