<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa137)  [Next](psa139) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 138](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 138:0</span></span>

This is the first of a series of eight psalms Ps. 138-145, placed
together in this part of the book, and ascribed to David. They appear to
be of the nature of a supplement to the Book of Psalms, composed of
psalms unknown to the original collector and arranger of the book, and
subsequently discovered and ascertained to be the works of David. It is
not to be regarded as strange that there should be psalms of this nature
David at different periods which might have been preserved in different
branches of his family, and which might not have been generally known to
exist. It is rare that the works of an author, especially a poet, are
collected and published, and that things of this kind - fugitive and
occasional pieces - are not subsequently found; nor is it very unusual
that such pieces may, after all, be among the most tender, touching, and
beautiful of his compositions. Burns' Highland Mary," so much admired,
and his "When wild War's deadly blast was blown," a poem which no one
can read without tears - with not a few others of his, are of this
description. They are said, in his Biography, to have been "extracted
from the correspondence of Burns." (Works of Robert Burns, Philad.,
1834, pp. 76, 85, 89.)

The occasion on which this psalm was composed cannot now be determined.
It was evidently written in view of trouble [Psa
138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003), [Psa
138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007), and it expresses confidence
that God would interpose in the future in behalf of the author, as he
had done in the past; and it is, therefore, adapted to inspire
confidence and hope in all who are called to pass through scenes of
trial. The psalm does not admit of any particular analysis.

[Psalms 138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 138:1</span></span>

I will praise thee with my whole heart - Reserving nothing m my heart to
give to idols or to other gods. All that constitutes praise to God as
God, he would address to him alone. He would use no language, and
cherish no feeling, which implied a belief that there was any other God;
he would indulge in no attachment which would be inconsistent with
supreme attachment to God, or which would tend to draw away his
affections from him. See the notes at [Psa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001).

Before the gods will I sing praise unto thee - The idols; all idols; in
preference to them all. This does not mean that he would do this in the
presence of other gods; but that Yahweh should be acknowledged to be God
in preference to any or all of them.

[Psalms 138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 138:2</span></span>

I will worship - I will bow down and adore.

Toward thy holy temple - See the notes at [Psa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007). The word temple here undoubtedly
refers to the tabernacle.

And praise thy name for thy loving-kindness - Praise thee for thy
benignity; thy mercy; thy benevolence.

And for thy truth - Thy truthfulness; thy faithfulness to thy promises.

For thou hast magnified thy word - Thou hast made it great. Compare [Isa
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021). The reference here is to the
promises of God, and especially to the promise which God had made to
David that the Messiah would descend from him. Compare 2 Sam. 7.

Above all thy name - Above all else that thou hast done; above all the
other manifestations of thyself to me or to the world. The word name
here would refer properly to all that God had done to make himself known
- since it is by the name that we designate or distinguish anyone; and,
thus understood, the meaning would be, that the word of God - the
revelation which he has made of himself and of his gracious purposes to
mankind - is superior in clearness, and in importance, to all the other
manifestations which he has made of himself; all that can be known of
him in his works. Beyond all question there are higher and clearer
manifestations of himself, of his being, of his perfection, of his
purposes, in the volume of revelation, than any which his works have
disclosed or can disclose. Compare [Psa
19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001). There are very many points in
relation to God, of the highest interest to mankind, on which the
disclosures of science shed no light; there are many things which it is
desirable for man to know, which calmer be learned in the schools of
philosophy; there are consolations which man needs in a world of trouble
which cannot be found in nature; there is especially a knowledge of the
method by which sin may be pardoned, and the soul saved, which can never
be disclosed by the blow-pipe, the telescope, or the microscope. These
things, if learned at all must be learned from revelation, and these are
of more importance to man as a traveler to another world than all the
learning which can be acquired in the schools of philosophy - valuable
as that learning is.

[Psalms 138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 138:3</span></span>

In the day when I cried - Referring to some former period of his life
when he was in trouble.

Thou answeredst me - In the very day when I called, thou gavest me the
answer: that is, immediately.

And strengthenedst me with strength in my soul - literally, "Thou didst
embolden - or, didst make me courageous with strength." Thou didst
enable me to meet danger, and to overcome fear. It would seem probable
that this was on some occasion when he was in danger from his enemies.

[Psalms 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 138:4</span></span>

All the kings of the earth shall praise thee ... - That is, kings,
princes, and rulers shall learn the words of promise; shall be made
acquainted with the words which thou hast graciously spoken, and with
their fulfillment, and shall be led to praise thee. This refers to a
time, of which frequent prophetic mention is made in the Scriptures,
when kings and rulers shall be converted to the true religion, and when
they shall act an important part, by their example and influence, in
maintaining and diffusing it. Compare [Psa
68:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031); [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023).

[Psalms 138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 138:5</span></span>

Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord - In the ways which God has
appointed. They shall join with all that love him - with the humblest of
the people - in acknowledging God. Kings and people shall thus bow
before God in common acts of praise, and as being on the same level
before him. As people, as sinners, as redeemed, as traveling to the
grave, they are all alike before God.

For great is the glory of the Lord - Great is his character; great his
dignity; great his honor; and all this will be seen to be so when those
of most exalted rank thus worship and adore him. The most lofty on earth
shall acknowledge that there is one who is more exalted than they are,
and their own dignity and splendor shall thus contribute to deepen the
impression of the honor and glory of God.

[Psalms 138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 138:6</span></span>

Though the Lord be high - This might be rendered "For lofty is Yahweh -
and the humble he sees - and the proud he knows from afar." The idea is,
that God - so high and exalted - sees and knows all of every rank among
people. The mind of the psalmist had been impressed with a sense of the
greatness and majesty of God, but (as if it might be said that one so
great could not regard man, so humble and insignificant) he adds, that
the fact of God's exaltation does not prevent his noticing the affairs
of people: that the lowly in life need not fear lest they should be
overlooked; the proud need not hope that they will escape the notice of
his eye.

Yet hath he respect unto the lowly - Those in humble life; the obscure;
the unknown. It does not mean here that he has any special favor toward
them, but merely that he sees them. Their low and obscure condition does
not prevent his observing them, and they need have no fear that he will
overlook them, or that they will be forgotten. Compare the notes at [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006); notes at [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005).

But the proud - Those of lofty rank, and of lofty feelings; the haughty.

He knoweth afar off - From afar. Though he is exalted - though he is in
heaven - yet he is not so far removed but that he sees them, and knows
them altogether. Distance from him is no protection for them; nor can
the wicked hope to escape notice from the fact that God reigns over
distant worlds.

[Psalms 138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 138:7</span></span>

Though I walk in the midst of trouble - Though I am in the low vale of
sorrow, I shall not be overlooked or forgotten. This implies that the
writer was then in trouble, and it expresses the conviction that
whenever he should be in trouble God would remember him, and give him
life and strength.

Thou wilt revive me - Thou wilt cause me to live; thou wilt give me
life. [Psa 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003). Compare the notes at
[Psa 71:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#020). The meaning is, Thou wilt
give me life - vigor - strength - to bear the trouble.

Thou shalt stretch forth thine hand - As one does when he is about to
inflict a blow.

Against the wrath of mine enemies ... - In reference to all their
attempts to destroy me. Thou wilt meet their wrath by thy power, and I
shall be safe.

[Psalms 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 138:8</span></span>

The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me - He will complete what
he has begun. He will not begin to interpose in my behalf, and then
abandon me. He will not promise to save me, and then fail to fulfill his
promise. He will not encourage me, and then cast me off. So of us. He
will complete what he begins. He will not convert a soul, and then leave
it to perish. "Grace will complete what grace begins." See the notes at
[Phi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006).

Thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever - See the notes at [Psa
136:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001).

Forsake not the works of thine own hands - What thou hast made; what
thou hast begun to do. Do not leave me to perish. Prayer is one of the
means - and an essential means - by which the saints are to be kept unto
salvation. The doctrine of the "perseverance of the saints." is not
inconsistent with prayer, but rather prompts to it; and he who professes
to rely on that doctrine, and feels so safe that he does not need to
pray, and does not pray, gives certain evidence that he has never been
converted, and has no true religion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 139](psa139)

</div>
