<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev014)  [Next](rev016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 15:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

This chapter [Rev 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001) has a close
connection in design with the previous chapter. In that, pledges and
assurances had been given that all the enemies of religion would be cut
off, and that the church would be ultimately triumphant, and
particularly that that formidable anti-Christian power represented by
the "beast" would be destroyed. This chapter commences the statement in
regard to the manner in which these pledges would be accomplished, and
the statement is pursued through the subsequent chapters, giving in
detail what is here promised in a general manner. The vision in this
chapter may be thus described:

I. The writer sees a new sign or wonder in heaven. Seven angels appear,
having the seven last plagues that fill up or complete the wrath of God;
representing the wrath that is to come upon the beast, or the complete
overthrow of this formidable anti-Christian power, [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001).

II\. Those who in former times had "gotten the victory over the beast,"
now appear standing on a sea of glass, rejoicing and rendering thanks
for the assurance that this great enemy of the church was now to be
destroyed, and that now all nations were to come and worship before God,
[Rev 15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002).

III\. The writer sees the interior of the temple opened in heaven, and
the seven angels, having the seven plagues, issuing forth to execute
their commission. They come clothed in pure and white linen, and girded
with golden girdles. One of the four beasts before the throne
immediately gives them the seven golden vials full of the wrath of God,
to empty them upon the earth - that is, to bring upon the beast the
predicted destruction. The temple is immediately filled with smoke, so
that no one might enter; that is, no one could now approach to make
intercession, and the destruction of this great enemy's power is now
certain, [Rev 15:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#005).

This chapter, therefore, is merely introductory to what follows, and its
interpretation is attended with no particular difficulty. It is a
beautiful scenic representation preparatory to the infliction of
predicted judgments, and designed to introduce the account of those
judgments with suitable circumstances of solemnity.

[Revelation 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 15:1</span></span>

And I saw another sign in heaven - Another wonder or extraordinary
symbol. The word "sign" here - σημεῖον sēmeion - is the same which in
[Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001), [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003); [Rev
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#013), is rendered "wonder" and
"wonders," and in [Rev 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014); [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014); [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020), "miracles." The word is not
found elsewhere in the Book of Revelation, though it is of frequent
occurrence in other parts of the New Testament. See it explained in the
notes on [Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001). Here it is used to
denote something wonderful or marvelous. This is represented as
appearing in heaven, for the judgments that were to fall upon the world
were to come thence. Compare [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019); [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001); [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001), [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006),[Rev
14:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013), [Rev
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017).

Great and marvelous - Great and wonderful, or suited to excite
admiration - θαυμαστὸν thaumaston. The subsequent statements fully
justify this, and show that the vision was one of portentous character,
and that was suited to hold the mind in astonishment.

Seven angels - Compare the notes on [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004).

Having the seven last plagues - The article here, "the seven last
plagues," would seem to imply that the plagues referred to had been
before specified, or that it would be at once understood what is
referred to. These plagues, however, have not been mentioned before, and
the reason why the article is used here seems to be this: the
destruction of this great anti-Christian power had been distinctly
mentioned, Rev. 14. That might be spoken of as a thing now well known,
and the mention of it would demand the article; and as that was well
known, and would demand the article, so any allusion to it, or
description of it, might be spoken of in the same manner, as a thing
that was definite and fixed, and hence, the mention of the plagues by
which it was to be accomplished would be referred to in the same manner.
The word "plagues" - πληγὰς plēgas, from, πληγή plēgē - means properly a
wound caused by a stripe or blow, and is frequently rendered "stripe"
and "stripes," [Luk 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048); [Act
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023), [Act
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#033); [Co2
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005); [Co2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023). It does not elsewhere occur in
the New Testament, except in the Book of Revelation. In this book it is
rendered "wound" in [Rev 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003), [Rev
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012), [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014); and plagues in [Rev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020); [Rev
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#006); [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001), [Rev
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006),[Rev
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#008); [Rev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009), [Rev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021); [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004), [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008); [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009); [Rev
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018). It does not occur elsewhere.
The secondary meaning of the word, and the meaning in the passage before
us, is "a stripe" or "blow inflicted by God"; calamity or punishment.
The word "last" means those under which the order of things here
referred to would terminate; the winding up of the affairs respecting
the beast and his image - not necessarily the closing of the affairs of
the world. Important events were to occur subsequent to the destruction
of this anti-Christian power Rev. 19-22, but these were the plagues
which would come finally upon the beast and his image, and which would
terminate the existence of this formidable enemy.

For in them is filled up the wrath of God - That is, in regard to the
beast and his image. All the expressions of the divine indignation
toward that oppressive and persecuting power will be completed or
exhausted by the pouring out of the contents of these vials. Compare
notes on [Rev 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007), where the word
rendered "filled up" - ἐτελέσθη etelesthē - is rendered "finished."

[Revelation 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 15:2</span></span>

And I saw as it were a sea of glass - In [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), a similar vision is recorded -
"And before the throne there was a sea of glass, like unto crystal." See
the notes on that passage. The sea of glass here means a sea clear,
pellucid, like glass: an expanse that seemed to be made of glass. There
it was entirely clear; here it is mingled with fire.

Mingled with fire - That is, a portion of the sea was red like fire. It
was not all clear and pellucid, as in [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), but it was as it were a
tesselated expanse, composed in part of what seemed to be glass, and in
part of a material of a red or fiery color. In the former case [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), the emblem was designed to
represent the pure worship of heaven without reference to any other
symbolic design, and hence, the sea is wholly clear and pellucid; here,
in connection with the purpose of furnishing an appropriate symbol of
the divine majesty, there is united the idea of punishment on the foes
of God, represented by the fiery or red color. If it is proper, from
conjecture, to suggest the meaning of this as an emblem, it would be
that the foundation - the main element - of all the divine dealings is
justice or holiness - represented by the portion of the sea that seemed
to be glass; and that there was, in this case, intermingled with that,
the image of wrath or anger - represented by the portion that was fiery
or red. The very sight of the pavement, therefore, on which they stood
when worshipping God, would keep before their minds impressive views of
his character and dealings.

And them that had gotten the victory over the beast - [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011). That is, they who had gained a
victory in times of persecution and temptation; or they whom the "beast"
had not been able, by arts or arms, to subdue. The persons referred to
here, I suppose, are those who in the long dominion of the papal power,
and amidst all its arts and corruptions - its threats and persecutions -
had remained steadfast in the truth, and who might thus be said to have
gained a victory - for such victories of piety, virtue, and truth,
amidst the corrupting influences of sin and error, and the intimidations
of power, are the most important that are gained in this world.

And over his image - See the notes on [Rev
13:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014). The meaning is, that they
had not been led to apostatize by the dread of the power represented
here by the "image of the beast." In all the attempts of that power to
subdue them - to intimidate them - to induce them to give up their
attachment to the truth as it is in Jesus - they had remained steadfast
in the faith, and had triumphed.

And over his mark - See the notes on [Rev
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016). Over all the attempts of the
beast to fix his mark upon them, or to designate them as his own.

And over the number of his name - See the notes on [Rev
13:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#017). Over all the attempts to fix
upon them that mysterious number which expressed his name. The general
sense is, that in times of general error and corruption; when the true
friends of Christ were exposed to persecution; when every effort was
made to induce them to become the followers of the "beast," and to yield
to the corrupt system represented by the "beast," they remained unmoved,
and adhered firmly to the truth. The number of such in the aggregate was
not small; and with great beauty and propriory they are here represented
as rejoicing and giving thanks to God on the overthrow of that corrupt
and formidable power.

Stand on the sea of glass - That is, before God. They are now seen in
heaven, redeemed and triumphant.

Having the harps of God - Harps that pertained to the worship of God;
harps to be employed in his praise. See the notes on [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002).

[Revelation 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 15:3</span></span>

And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God - A song of
thanksgiving and praise, such as Moses taught the Hebrew people to sing
after their deliverance from Egyptian bondage. See Exo. 15. The meaning
here is, not that they would sing that identical song, but that, as
Moses taught the people to celebrate their deliverance with an
appropriate hymn of praise, the redeemed would celebrate their delivery
and redemption in a similar manner. There is an obvious propriety here
in referring to the "song of Moses," because the circumstances are very
similar; the occasion of the redemption from that formidable
anti-Christian power here referred to, had a strong resemblance to the
rescue from Egyptian bondage.

And the song of the Lamb - The hymn which is sung in honor of the Lamb,
as their great deliverer. Compare the notes on [Rev
5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009), [Rev
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012).

Saying, Great and marvelous are thy works - See the notes on [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001). The meaning is, that great power
was evinced in redeeming them; and that the interposition of the divine
goodness in doing it was marvelous, or was such as to excite wonder and
admiration.

Lord God Almighty - This would seem to mean the same thing as the
expression so common in the Old Testament, "Yahweh, God of hosts." The
union of these appellations give solemnity and impressiveness to the
ascription of praise, for it brings into view the fact, that he whose
praise is celebrated is Lord - Yahweh - -the uncreated and eternal One;
that he is God the creator, upholder, and sovereign of all things; and
that he is Almighty - having all power in all worlds. All these names
and attributes are suggested when we think of redemption; for all the
perfections of a glorious God are suggested in the redemption of the
soul from death. It is the Lord the Ruler of all worlds; it is God - the
Maker of the race, and the Father of the race, who performs the work of
redemption; and it is a work which could be accomplished only by one who
is Almighty.

Just and true - The attributes of justice and truth are brought
prominently into view also in the redemption of man. The fact that God
is just, and that in all this work he has been careful to maintain his
justice [Rom 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026); and the fact that
he is true to himself, true to the creation, true to the fulfillment of
all his promises, are prominent in this work, and it is proper that
these attributes should be celebrated in the songs of praise in heaven.

Are thy ways - Thy ways or dealings with us, and with the enemies of the
church. That is, all the acts or "ways" of God in the redemption of his
people had been characterized by justice and truth.

Thou King of saints - King of those who are holy; of all who are
redeemed and sanctified. The more approved reading here, however, is
"King of nations" - ὁ βασιλεὺς τῶν ἐθνῶν ho basileus tōn ethnōn -
instead of "King of saints" - τὼν ἁγιῶν tōn hagiōn. So it is read in the
critical editions of Griesbach, Tittmann, and Hahn. The sense is not
materially affected by the difference in the reading.

[Revelation 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 15:4</span></span>

Who shall not fear thee, O Lord - Reverence and adore thee; for the word
"fear," in the Scriptures, is commonly used in this sense when applied
to God. The sense here is, that the judgments about to be inflicted on
the beast and his image should and would teach people to reverence and
adore God. There is, perhaps, included here also the idea of awe,
inasmuch as this would be the effect of punishment.

And glorify thy name - Honor thee - the name being put for the person
who bare it. The sense is, that, as a consequence of these judgments,
men would be brought to honor God, and to acknowledge him as the Ruler
of the earth.

For thou only art holy - That is, in these judgments he would show
himself to be a holy God; a God hating sin, and loving righteousness and
truth. When it is said that he "only" is holy, the expression is used,
of course, in a comparative sense. He is so pure that it may be said
that, in comparison with him, no one else is holy. Compare the notes on
[Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018); [Job
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015).

For all nations shall come and worship before thee - That is, as the
result of these punishments inflicted on this dread anti-Christian
power, they shalt come and worship thee. Everywhere in the New Testament
the destruction of that power is connected with the promise of the
speedy conversion of the world.

For thy judgments are made manifest - To wit, on the beast. That
formidable power is overthrown, and the grand hindrance to the universal
spread of the true religion is now taken away. Compare the notes on [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009).

[Revelation 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 15:5</span></span>

And after that I looked - After I had seen in vision the redeemed thus
referred to, celebrating the praises of God, I saw the preparation made
for the execution of these purposes of judgment.

And behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony - Not the
whole temple, but only that part to which this name was given. The word
"tabernacle" - σκηνή skēnē - means properly a booth, hut, tent, and was
the name commonly given to the tent or tabernacle that was erected in
the wilderness for the service of God. See the notes on [Act
7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044). The same word came naturally to
be applied to the temple that was reared for the same purpose in
Jerusalem. It is called the "tabernacle of testimony," because it was a
testimony or witness of the presence of God among the people - that is,
it served to keep up the remembrance of him. See the notes as above on
[Act 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044), where the same Greek phrase
is used as here - rendered there "tabernacle of witness." The word
"temple" here - ναὸς naos - does not refer to the whole of the building
called the "temple," but to the holy of holies. See the notes on [Heb
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#003). This was regarded as the unique
dwelling-place of God; and it was this sacred place, usually closed from
all access, that now seemed to be opened, implying that the command to
execute these purposes came directly from God himself.

In heaven - That is, that part of heaven which corresponds to the most
holy place in the temple was opened; to wit, what is the unique
residence of God himself.

Was opened - Was thrown open to the viewer John, so that he was
permitted to look, as it were, upon the very dwelling-place of God. From
his holy presence now came forth the angels to execute his purposes of
judgment on that anti-Christian power which had so long corrupted
religion and oppressed the world.

[Revelation 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 15:6</span></span>

And the seven angels - See the notes on [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001).

Came out of the temple - Were seen to come from the temple; that is,
from the immediate presence of God.

Having the seven plagues - See the notes on [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001). Each one entrusted with a single
"plague" to be executed upon the earth. The meaning here is, that they
were designated or appointed to execute those plagues in judgments. The
symbols of their office - the golden vials - were given to them
afterward, [Rev 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007).

Clothed in pure and white linen - The emblem of holiness - the common
representation in regard to the heavenly inhabitants. See the notes on
[Rev 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013). Compare [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002); [Luk
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#029); [Mar
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005).

And having their breasts girded with golden girdles - See the notes on
[Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013). The meaning is, that they
were attired in a manner befitting their rank and condition.

[Revelation 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 15:7</span></span>

And one of the four beasts - See the notes on [Rev
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006). Which one of the four is not
mentioned. From the explanation given of the design of the
representation of the "four beasts," or living creatures, in the notes
on [Rev 4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), it would seem that the
meaning here is, that the great principles of that divine government
would be illustrated in the events which are now to occur. In events
that were so closely connected with the honor of God and the triumph of
his cause on the earth, there was a propriety in the representation that
these living creatures, symbolizing the great principles of divine
administration, would be particularly interested.

Gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials - The word used here -
φιάλη phialē - means properly, "a bowl or goblet, having more breadth
than depth" (Robinson, Lexicon). Our word vial, though derived from
this, means rather a thin long bottle of glass, used particularly by
apothecaries and druggists. The word would be better rendered by "bowl"
or "goblet," and probably the representation here was of such bowls as
were used in the temple service. See the notes on [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008). They are called in [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001), "vials of the wrath of God"; and
here they are said to be "full of the wrath of God." The allusion seems
to be to a drinking cup or goblet filled with poison, and given to
persons to drink - an allusion drawn from one of the methods of
punishment in ancient times. See the notes on [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010). These vials or goblets thus
became emblems of divine wrath, to be inflicted on the beast and his
image.

Full of the wrath of God - Filled with what represented his wrath; that
is, they seemed to be filled with a poisonous mixture, which being
poured upon the earth, the sea, the rivers, the sun, the seat of the
beast, the river Euphrates, and into the air, was followed by severe
divine judgments on this great anti-Christian power. See [Rev
16:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002), [Rev
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008),[Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010), [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012), [Rev
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017).

Who liveth forever and ever - The eternal God. The particular object in
referring to this attribute here appears to be, that though there may
seem to be delay in the execution of his purposes, yet they will be
certainly accomplished, as he is the ever-living and unchangeable God.
He is not under a necessity of abandoning his purposes, like people, if
they are not soon accomplished.

[Revelation 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 15:8</span></span>

And the temple was filled with smoke - The usual symbol of the divine
presence in the temple. See the notes on [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005); [Isa
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004).

From the glory of God - From the manifestation of the divine majesty.
That is, the smoke was the proper accompaniment of the Divine Being when
appearing in majesty. So on Mount Sinai he is represented as appearing
in this manner: "And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the
Lord descended on it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the
smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly," [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018). The purpose here seems to have
been, partly to represent the smoke as the proper symbol of the divine
presence, and partly to represent it as so filling the temple that no
one could enter it until the seven plagues were fulfilled.

And from his power - Produced by his power; and the symbol of his power.

And no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of
the seven angels were fulfilled - Until those vials had been poured out,
and all that was indicated by them was accomplished. The meaning here
seems to be, that no one would be permitted to enter to make
intercession - to turn away his wrath - to divert him from his purpose.
That is, the purpose of punishment had been formed, and would certainly
be executed. The agents or instrumentalities in this fearful work had
been now sent forth, and they would by no means be recalled. The
mercy-seat, in this respect, was inaccessible; the time of judgment on
the great foe had come, and the destruction of the grand enemy of the
church was certain. The point, therefore, at which this vision leaves us
is, that where all the preparations are made for the infliction of the
threatened punishment on the grand anti-Christian power which had so
long stood up against the truth; where the agents had prepared to go
forth; and where no intercession will ever avail to turn away the
infliction of the divine wrath. The detail follows in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 16](rev016)

</div>
