<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev017)  [Next](rev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 18:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

This chapter Rev. 18 may be regarded as a still further "explanatory
episode" (compare analysis to chapter 17), designed to show the effect
of pouring out the seventh vial [Rev
16:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017) on the formidable
anti-Christian power so often referred to. The description in this
chapter is that of a rich merchant-city reduced to desolation, and is
but carrying out the general idea under a different form. The chapter
comprises the following points:

\(1\) Another angel is seen descending from heaven, having great power,
and making proclamation that Babylon the great is fallen, and is become
utterly desolate, [Rev 18:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001).

\(2\) a warning voice is heard from heaven, calling on the people of God
to come out of her, and to be partakers neither of her sins nor her
plagues. Her torment and sorrow would be proportionate to her pride and
luxury; and her plagues would come upon her suddenly; death, and
mourning, and famine, and consumption by fire, [Rev
18:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004).

\(3\) lamentation over her fall - by those especially who had been
connected with her; who had been corrupted by her; who had been profited
by her, [Rev 18:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009);

\(a\) By kings, [Rev 18:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009). They had
lived deliciously with her, and they would lament her.

\(b\) By merchants, [Rev 18:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011).
They had trafficked with her, but now that traffic was to cease, and no
man would buy of her. Their business, so far as she was concerned, was
at an end. All that she had accumulated was now to be destroyed; all her
gathered riches were to be consumed; all the traffic in those things by
which she had been enriched was to be ended; and the city that was more
than all others enriched by these things, as if clothed in fine linen,
and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls, was to be destroyed forever.

\(c\) By ship-masters and seamen, [Rev
18:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017). They had been made rich by
this traffic, but now all was ended; the smoke of her burning is seen to
ascend, and they stand afar off and weep.

\(4\) rejoicing over her fall, [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020). Heaven is called upon to
rejoice, and the holy apostles and prophets, for their blood is avenged,
and persecution ceases in the earth.

\(5\) the final destruction of the city, [Rev
18:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021). A mighty angel takes up a
stone and casts it into the sea as an emblem of the destruction that is
to come upon it. The voice of harpers, and musicians, and pipers would
be heard no more in it; and no craftsmen would lye there, and the sound
of the millstone would be heard no more, and the light of a candle would
shine no more there, and the voice of the bridegroom and bride would be
heard no more.

[Revelation 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 18:1</span></span>

And after these things - After the vision referred to in the previous
chapter.

I saw another angel come down from heaven - Different from the one that
had last appeared, and therefore coming to make a new communication to
him. It is not unusual in this book that different communications should
be entrusted to different angels. Compare [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), [Rev
14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008), [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015), [Rev
14:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017).

Having great power - That is, he was one of the higher rank or order of
angels.

And the earth was lightened with his glory - The usual representation
respecting the heavenly beings. Compare [Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016); [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002); [Luk
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009); [Act
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003). This would, of course, add
greatly to the magnificence of the scene.

[Revelation 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 18:2</span></span>

And he cried mightily - Literally, "he cried with a strong great voice."
See [Rev 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#003).

Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen - See the notes on [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). The proclamation here is
substantially the same as in that place, and no doubt the same thing is
referred to.

And is become the habitation of devils - Of demons - in allusion to the
common opinion that the demons inhabited abandoned cities, old ruins,
and deserts. See the notes on [Mat
12:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043). The language here is taken
from the description of Babylon in [Isa
13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020); and for a full illustration
of the meaning, see the notes on that passage.

And the hold of every foul spirit - φυλακὴ phulakē. A watch-post,
station, haunt of such spirits - That is, they, as it were, kept guard
there; were stationed there; haunted the place.

And a cage of every unclean and hateful bird - That is, they would
resort there, and abide there as in a cage. The word translated "cage"
is the same which is rendered "hold" - φυλακὴ phulakē. In [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021), it is said, "and owls shall
dwell there"; and in [Isa 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023), it is
said that it would be a "possession for the bittern." The idea is that
of utter desolation; and the meaning here is, that spiritual Babylon -
papal Rome [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008) - will be reduced
to a state of utter desolation resembling that of the real Babylon. It
is not necessary to suppose this of the city of Rome itself - for that
is not the object of the representation. It is the papacy, represented
under the image of the city, and having its seat there. That is to be
destroyed as utterly as was Babylon of old; that will become as odious,
and loathsome, and detestable as the literal Babylon, the abode of
monsters is.

[Revelation 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 18:3</span></span>

For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication -
See the notes on [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). This is
given as a reason why this utter ruin had come upon her. She had
beguiled and corrupted the nations of the earth, leading them into
estrangement from God, and into pollution and sin. See the notes on [Rev
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020).

And the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her -
Spiritual adultery; that is, she has been the means of seducing them
from God and leading them into sinful practices.

And the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of
her delicacies - The word rendered "abundance" here, means commonly
"power." It might here denote influence, though it may also mean number,
quantity, wealth. Compare [Rev 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008),
where the same word is used. The word rendered "delicacies" - στρῆνους
strēnous - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. It properly means
rudeness, insolence, pride; and hence "revel, riot, luxury." It may be
rendered here properly as "luxury," or "proud voluptuousness"; and the
reference is to such luxuries as are found commonly in a great, a
frivolous, and a splendid city. These, of course, give rise to much
traffic, and furnish employment to many merchants and sailors, who thus
procure a livelihood, or become wealthy as the result of such traffic.
Babylon - or papal Rome - is here represented under the image of such a
luxurious city; and of course, when she falls, they who have thus been
dependent on her, and who have been enriched by her, have occasion for
mourning and lamentation. It is not necessary to expect to find a
literal fulfillment of this, for it is emblematic and symbolical. The
image of a great, rich, splendid, proud and luxurious city having been
employed to denote that anti-Christian power, all that is said in this
chapter follows, of course, on its fall. The general idea is, that she
was doomed to utter desolation, and that all who were connected with
her, far and near, would be involved in her ruin.

[Revelation 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 18:4</span></span>

And I heard another voice from heaven - He does not say whether this was
the voice of an angel, but the idea seems rather to be that it is the
voice of God.

Come out of her, my people - The reasons for this, as immediately
stated, are two:

\(a\) that they might not participate in her sins; and,

\(b\) that they might not be involved in the ruin that would come upon
her.

The language seems to be derived from such passages in the Old Testament
as the following: "Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans,
with a voice of singing," [Isa 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020).
"Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be
not cut off in her iniquity," [Jer
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006). "My people, go ye out of the
midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of
the Lord," [Jer 51:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045). Compare [Jer
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008).

That ye be not partakers of her sins - For the meaning of this
expression, see the notes on [Ti1
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022). It is implied here that by
remaining in Babylon they would lend their sanction to its sins by their
presence, and would, in all probability, become contaminated by the
influence around them. This is an universal truth in regard to iniquity,
and hence it is the duty of those who would be pure to come out from the
world, and to separate themselves from all the associations of evil.

And that ye receive not of her plagues - Of the punishment that was to
come upon her - as they must certainly do if they remained in her. The
judgment of God that was to come upon the guilty city would make no
discrimination among those who were found there; and if they would
escape these woes they must make their escape from her. As applicable to
papal Rome, in view of her impending ruin, this means:

\(a\) that there might be found in her some who were the true people of
God;

\(b\) that it was their duty to separate wholly from her - a command
that will not only justify the Reformation, but which would have made a
longer continuance in communion with the papacy, when her wickedness was
fully seen, an act of guilt before God;

\(c\) that they who remain in such a communion cannot but be regarded as
partaking of her sin; and,

\(d\) that if they remain, they must expect to be involved in the
calamities that will come upon her. There never was any duty plainer
than that of withdrawing from papal Rome; there never has been any act
attended with more happy consequences than that by which the Protestant
world separated itself forever from the sins and the plagues of the
papacy.

[Revelation 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 18:5</span></span>

For her sins have reached unto heaven - So in [Jer
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009), speaking of Babylon, it is said,
"For her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the
skies." The meaning is not that the sins of this mystical Babylon were
like a mass or pile so high as to reach to heaven, but that it had
become so prominent as to attract the attention of God. Compare [Gen
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010), "The voice of thy brother's
blood crieth unto me from the ground." See also [Gen
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020).

And God hath remembered her iniquities - He had seemed to forget them,
or not to notice them, but now he acted as if they had come to his
recollection. See the notes on [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019).

[Revelation 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 18:6</span></span>

Reward her even as she rewarded you - It is not said to whom this
command is addressed, but it would seem to be to those who had been
persecuted and wronged. Applied to mystical Babylon - papal Rome - it
would seem to be a call on the nations that had been so long under her
sway, and among whom, from time to time, so much blood had been shed by
her, to arise now in their might, and to inflict deserved vengeance. See
the notes on [Rev 17:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016).

And double unto her double according to her works - That is, bring upon
her double the amount of calamity which she has brought upon others;
take ample vengeance upon her. Compare for similar language, [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002), "She hath received of the Lord's
hand double for all her sins." "For your shame ye shall have double,"
[Isa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007).

In the cup which she hath filled - To bring wrath on others. See the
notes at [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008).

Fill to her double - Let her drink abundantly of the wine of the wrath
of God - double what she has dealt out to others. That is, either let
the quantity administered to her be doubled, or let the ingredients in
the cup be doubled in intensity.

[Revelation 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 18:7</span></span>

How much she hath glorified herself - Been proud, boastful, arrogant.
This was true of ancient Babylon, that she was proud and haughty; and it
has been no less true of mystical Babylon - papal Rome.

And lived deliciously - By as much as she has lived in luxury and
dissoluteness, so let her suffer now. The word used here and rendered
"lived deliciously" - ἐστρηνίασεν estrēniasen - is derived from the noun
- στρῆνος strēnos - which is used in [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003), and rendered "delicacies." See
the notes on that verse. It means properly, "to live strenuously,
rudely," as in English, "to live hard"; and then to revel, to live in
luxury, riot, dissoluteness. No one can doubt the propriety of this as
descriptive of ancient Babylon, and as little can its propriety be
doubted as applied to papal Rome.

So much torment and sorrow give her - Let her punishment correspond with
her sins. This is expressing substantially the same idea which occurs in
the previous verse.

For she saith in her heart - This is the estimate which she forms of
herself.

I sit a queen - Indicative of pride, and of an asserted claim to rule.

And am no widow - Am not in the condition of a widow - a state of
depression, sorrow, and mourning. All this indicates security and
self-confidence, a description in every way applicable to papal Rome.

And shall see no sorrow - This is indicative of a state where there was
nothing feared, notwithstanding all the indications which existed of
approaching calamity. In this state we may expect to find papal Rome,
even when its last judgments are about to come upon it; in this state it
has usually been; in this state it is now, notwithstanding all the
indications that are abroad in the world that its power is waning, and
that the period of its fall approaches.

[Revelation 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 18:8</span></span>

Therefore - In consequence of her pride, arrogance, and luxury, and of
the calamities that she has brought upon others.

Shall her plagues come in one day - They shall come in a time when she
is living in ease and security; and they shall come at the same time -
so that all these terrible judgments shall seem to be poured upon her at
once.

Death - This expression, and those which follow, are designed to denote
the same thing under different images. The general meaning is, that
there would be utter and final destruction. It would be as if death
should come and cut off the inhabitants.

And mourning - As there would be where many were cut off by death.

And famine - As if famine raged within the walls of a besieged city, or
spread over a land,

And she shall be utterly burned with fire - As completely destroyed as
if she were entirely burned up. The certain and complete destruction of
that formidable anti-Christian power is predicted under a great variety
of emphatic images. See [Rev 14:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010);
[Rev 16:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017); [Rev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009), [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016). Perhaps in this so frequent
reference to a final destruction of that formidable anti-Christian power
by fire, there may be more intended than merely a figurative
representation of its final ruin. There is some degree of probability,
at least, that Rome itself will be literally destroyed in this manner,
and that it is in this way that God intends to put an end to the papal
power, by destroying what has been so long the seat and the center of
this authority. The extended prevalence of this belief, and the grounds
for it, may be seen from the following remarks:

\(1\) It was an early opinion among the Jewish rabbies that Rome would
be thus destroyed. Vitringa, on the Apocalypse, cites some opinions of
this kind; the Jewish expectation being founded, as he says, on the
passage in [Isa 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009), as Edom was
supposed to mean Rome. "This chapter," says Kimchi, "points out the
future destruction of Rome, here called Bozra, for Bozra was a great
city of the Edomites." This is, indeed, worthless as a proof or an
interpretation of Scripture, for it is a wholly unfounded
interpretation; it is of value only as showing that somehow the Jews
entertained this opinion.

\(2\) the same expectation was entertained among the early Christians.
Thus Mr. Gibbon (vol. i. p. 263, ch. xv.), referring to the expectations
of the glorious reign of the Messiah on the earth (compare the notes on
[Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008)), says, speaking of Rome as
the mystic Babylon, and of its anticipated destruction: "A regular
series was prepared (in the minds of Christians) of all the moral and
physical evils which can afflict a flourishing nation; intestine
discord, and the invasion of the fiercest barbarians from the unknown
regions of the north; pestilence and famine, comets and eclipses,
earthquakes and inundations. All these were only so many preparatory and
alarming signs of the great catastrophe of Rome, when the country of the
Scipios and Caesars should be consumed by a flame from heaven, and the
city of the seven hills, with her palaces, her temples, and her
triumphal arches, should be buried in a vast lake of fire and
brimstone." So even Gregory the Great, one of the most illustrious of
the Roman pontiffs, himself says, acknowledging his belief in the truth
of the tradition: Roma a Gentilibus non exterminabitur; sed
tempestatibus, coruscis turbinibus, ac terrae motu, in se marcescet
(Dial. [Isa 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#015)).

\(3\) whatever may be thought of these opinions and expectations, there
is "some" foundation for the opinion in the nature of the case:

\(a\) The region is adapted to this. "It is not Aetna, the Lipari
volcanic islands, Vesuvius, that alone offer visible indications of the
physical adaptedness of Italy for such a catastrophe. The great Apennine
mountain-chain is mainly volcanic in its character, and the country of
Rome more especially is as strikingly so almost as that of Sodom
itself." Thus the mineralogist Ferber, in his "Tour in Italy," says:
"The road from Rome to Ostia is all volcanic ashes until within two
miles of Ostia." "From Rome to Tivoli I went on fields and hills of
volcanic ashes or tufa." "A volcanic hill in an amphitheatrical form
includes a part of the plain over Albano, and a flat country of volcanic
ashes and hills to Rome. The ground about Rome is generally of that
nature," pp. 189, 191, 200, 234.

\(b\) Mr. Gibbon, with his usual accuracy, as if commenting on the
Apocalypse, has referred to the physical adaptedness of the soil of Rome
for such an overthrow. Speaking of the anticipation of the end of the
world among the early Christians, he says: "In the opinion of a general
conflagration, the faith of the Christian very happily coincided with
the tradition of the East, the philosophy of the Stoics, and the analogy
of nature; 'and even the country, which, from religious motives, had
been chosen for the origin and principal scene of the conflagration, was
the best adapted for that purpose by natural and physical causes;' by
its deep caverns, beds of sulphur, and numerous volcanoes, of which
those of Aetna, of Vesuvius, and of Lipari, exhibit a very imperfect
representation," vol. i. p. 263, ch. xv. As to the general state of
Italy, in reference to volcanoes, the reader may consult, with
advantage, Lyell's Geology, book ii. ch. 9-12. See also Murray's
Encyclopaedia of Geography, book ii. ch. 2. Of the country around Rome
it is said in that work, among other things: "The country around Rome,
and also the hills on which it is built, is composed of tertiary marls,
clays, and sandstones, and intermixed with a preponderating quantity of
granular and lithoidal volcanic tufas. The many lakes around Rome are
formed by craters of ancient volcanoes." "On the road to Rome is the
Lake of Vico, formerly the Lacus Cimini, which has all the appearance of
a crater."

The following extract from a recent traveler will still further confirm
this representation: "I behold everywhere - in Rome, near Rome, and
through the whole region from Rome to Naples - most astounding proof,
not merely of the possibility, but the probability, that the whole
region of central Italy will one day be destroyed by such a catastrophe
(by earthquakes or volcanoes). The soil of Rome is tufa, with a volcanic
subterranean action going on. At Naples the boiling sulphur is to be
seen bubbling near the surface of the earth. When I drew a stick along
the ground, the sulphurous smoke followed the indentation; and it would
never surprise me to hear of the utter destruction of the southern
peninsula of Italy. The entire country and district is volcanic. It is
saturated with beds of sulphur and the substrata of destruction. It
seems as certainly prepared for the flames, as the wood and coal on the
hearth are prepared for the taper which shall kindle the fire to consume
them. The divine hand alone seems to me to hold the element of fire in
check by a miracle as great as what protected the cities of the plain,
until the righteous Lot had made his escape to the mountains"
(Townsend's Tour in Italy in 1850).

For strong is the Lord God who judgeth her - That is, God has ample
power to bring all these calamities upon her.

[Revelation 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 18:9</span></span>

And the kings of the earth - This verse commences the description of the
lamentation over the fall of the mystical Babylon (see the Analysis of
the chapter).

Who have committed fornication - That is, who have been seduced by her
from the true God, and have been led into practical idolatry. See the
notes on [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). The kings of the
earth seem to be represented as among the chief mourners, because they
had derived important aid from the power which was now to be reduced to
ruin. As a matter of fact, the kings of Europe have owed much of their
influence and power to the support which has been derived from the
papacy, and when that power shall fall, there will fall much that has
contributed to sustain oppressive and arbitrary governments, and that
has prevented the extension of popular liberty. In fact, Europe might
have been long since free, if it had not been for the support which
despotic governments have derived from the papacy.

And lived deliciously with her - In the same kind of luxury and
dissoluteness of manners. See [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003), [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007). The courts of Europe, under the
papacy, have had the same general character for dissoluteness and
licentiousness as Rome itself. The same views of religion produce the
same effects everywhere.

Shall bewail her, and lament for her - Because their ally is destroyed,
and the source of their power is taken away. The fall of the papacy will
be the signal for a general overturning of the thrones of Europe.

When they shall see the smoke of her burning - When they shall see her
on fire, and her smoke ascending toward heaven. See the notes on [Rev
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011).

[Revelation 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 18:10</span></span>

Standing afar off for the fear of her torment - Not daring to approach,
to attempt to rescue and save her. They who had so long contributed to
the support of the papal power, and who had, in turn, been upheld by
that, would not now even attempt to rescue her, but would stand by and
see her destroyed, unable to render relief.

Alas, alas, that great city Babylon - The language of lamentation that
so great and so mighty a city should fall.

For in one hour is thy judgment come - See the notes on [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008). The general sentiment here is,
that, in the final ruin of papal Rome, the kings and governments that
had sustained her, and had been sustained by her, would see the source
of their power taken away, but that they would not, or could not attempt
her rescue. There have been not a few indications already that this will
ultimately occur, and that the papal power will be left to fall, without
any attempt, on the part of those governments which have been so long in
alliance with it, to sustain or restore it.

[Revelation 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 18:11</span></span>

And the merchants of the earth - Who have been accustomed to traffic
with her, and who have been enriched by the traffic. The image is that
of a rich and splendid city. Of course, such a city depends much on its
merchandise; and when it declines and falls, many who had been
accustomed to deal with it, as merchants or traffickers, are affected by
it, and have occasion to lament its fall.

Shall weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise
anymore - The merchandise which they were accustomed to take to the
city, and by the sale of which they lived. The enumeration of the
articles of merchandise which follows, seems to have been inserted for
the purpose of filling out the representation of what is usually found
in such a city, and to show the desolation which would occur when this
traffic was suspended.

[Revelation 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 18:12</span></span>

The merchandise of gold, and silver - Of course, these constitute an
important article of commerce in a great city.

And precious stones - Diamonds, emeralds, rubies, etc. These have always
been important articles of traffic in the world, and, of course, most of
the traffic in them would find its way to great commercial cities.

And pearls - See the notes on [Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006); [Mat
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046). These, too, have been always,
and were, particularly in early times, valuable articles of commerce.
Mr. Gibbon mentions them as among the articles that contributed to the
luxury of Rome in the age of the Antonines: "precious stones, among
which the pearl claimed the first rank after the diamond," vol. i. p.
34.

And fine linen - This was also a valuable article of commerce. It was
obtained chiefly from Egypt. See the notes on [Isa
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#009). Linen, among the ancients, was
an article of luxury, for it was worn chiefly by the rich, [Exo
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042); [Lev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010); [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019). The original word here is
βύσσος bussos, "byssus," and it is found in the New Testament only in
this place, and in [Luk 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019). It was
a "species of fine cotton, highly prized by the ancients." Various kinds
are mentioned - as that of Egypt, the cloth which is still found wrapped
around mummies; that of Syria, and that of India, which grew on a tree
similar to the poplar; and that of Achaia, which grew in the vicinity of
Elis. See Robinson, Lexicon.

And purple - See the notes on [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019). Cloth of this color was a
valuable article of commerce, as it was worn by rich men and princes.

And silk - Silk was a very valuable article of commerce, as it was
costly, and could be worn only by the rich. It is mentioned by Mr.
Gibbon as such an article in Rome in the age of the Antonines: "Silk, a
pound of which was esteemed not inferior in value to a pound of gold,"
vol. i. p. 34. On the cultivation and manufacture of silk by the
ancients, see the work entitled, "The History of Silk, Cotton, Linen,
and Wool, etc.," published by Harper Brothers, New York, 1845, pp. 1-21.

And scarlet - See the notes on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).

And all thyine wood - The word used here - θύΐνον thuinon - occurs
nowhere else in the New Testament. It denotes an evergreen African tree,
from which statues and costly vessels were made. It is not agreed,
however, whether it was a species of cedar, savin, or lignum-vitae,
which latter constitutes the modern genus Thuja, or Thyia. See Rees'
Cyclo., art. "Thuja."

And all manner vessels of ivory - Everything that is made of ivory.
Ivory, or the tusk of the elephant, has always been among the precious
articles of commerce.

And all manner vessels of most precious wood - Furniture of costly wood
- cedar, the citron tree, lignum-vitae, etc.

And of brass, and iron, and marble - Brass or copper would, of course,
be a valuable article of commerce. The same would be the case with iron;
and so marble, for building, for statuary, etc., would likewise be.

[Revelation 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 18:13</span></span>

And cinnamon - Cinnamon is the aromatic bark of the Laurus Cinnamomam,
which grows in Arabia, India, and especially in the island of Ceylon. It
was formerly, as it is now, a valuable article in the Oriental trade.

And odours - Aromatics employed in religious worship, and for making
perfumes. Mr. Gibbon (vol. i. p. 34) mentions, among the articles of
commerce and luxury, in the age of the Antonines, "a variety of
aromatics that were consumed in religious worship and the pomp of
funerals." It is unnecessary to say that the use of such odors has been
always common at Rome.

And ointments - Unguents - as spikenard, etc. These were in common use
among the ancients. See the [Mat 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#007)
note; [Mar 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003) note.

And frankincense - See the notes on [Mat
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011). It is unnecessary to say that
incense has been always much used in public worship in Rome, and that it
has been, therefore, a valuable article of commerce there.

And wine - An article of commerce and luxury in all ages.

And oil - That is, olive oil. This, in ancient times, and in Oriental
countries particularly, was an important article of commerce.

And fine flour - The word here means the best and finest kind of flour.

And beasts, and sheep, and horses - Also important articles of
merchandise.

And chariots - The word used here - ῥεδῶν redōn - means, properly a
carriage with four wheels, or a carriage drawn by mules (Prof. Stuart).
It was properly a traveling carriage. The word is of Gallic origin
(Quinctil. 1:9; Cic. Mil. 10; Att. v. 17; 6:1. See Adam's Rom. Ant. p.
525). It was an article of luxury.

And slaves - The Greek here is σωμάτων sōmatōn - "of bodies." Prof.
Stuart renders it "grooms," and supposes that it refers to a particular
kind of slaves who were employed in taking care of horses and carriages.
The word properly denotes body - an animal body - whether of the human
body, living or dead, or the body of a beast; and then the external man
- the person, the individual. In later usage, it comes to denote a slave
(see Robinson, Lexicon), and in this sense it is used here. The traffic
in slaves was common in ancient times, as it is now. We know that this
traffic was carried on to a large extent in ancient Rome, the city which
John probably had in his eye in this description. See Gibbon, Dec. and
Fall, vol. 1, pp. 25, 26. Athenaeus, as quoted by Mr. Gibbon (p. 26),
says that "he knew very many Romans who possessed, not for use, but for
ostentation, ten, and even twenty thousand slaves." It should be said
here, however, that although this refers evidently to traffic in slaves,
it is not necessary to suppose that it would be literally characteristic
of papal Rome. All this is symbolical, designed to exhibit the papacy
under the image of a great city, with what was customary in such a city,
or with what most naturally presented itself to the imagination of John
as found in such a city; and it is no more necessary to suppose that the
papacy would be engaged in the traffic of slaves, than in the traffic of
cinnamon, or fine flour, or sheep and horses.

And souls of men - The word used and rendered "souls" - ψυχὰς psuchas -
though commonly denoting the "soul" (properly the "breath" or "vital
principle"), is also employed to denote the living thing - the animal -
in which the soul or vital principle resides; and hence may denote a
person or a man. Under this form it is used to denote a "servant" or
"slave." See Robinson, Lexicon. Prof. Robinson supposes that the word
here means "female slaves," in distinction from those designated by the
previous word. Prof. Stuart (in loco) supposes that the previous word
denotes a particular kind of slaves - those who had the care of horses -
and that the word here is used in a generic sense, denoting slaves in
general. This kind of traffic in the "persons" or souls of people is
mentioned as characterizing ancient Tyre, in [Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013); "Javan, Tubal, and Meshech,
they were thy merchants; they traded in the persons of men." It is not
quite clear why, in the passage before us, this traffic is mentioned in
two forms, as that of the bodies and the souls of people but it would
seem most probable that the writer meant to designate all that would
properly come under this traffic, whether male or female slaves were
bought and sold; whether they were for servitude, or for the
gladiatorial sports (see Wetstein, in loco); whatever might be the kind
of servitude that they might be employed in, and whatever might be their
condition in life. The use of the two words would include all that is
implied in the traffic, for, in most important senses, it extends to the
body and the soul. In slavery both are purchased; both are supposed, so
far as he can avail himself of them, to become the property of the
master.

[Revelation 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 18:14</span></span>

And the fruits that thy soul lusted after - Literally, "the fruits of
the desire of thy soul." The word rendered "fruits" - ὀπώρα opōra -
properly means, "late summer; dog-days," the time when Sirius, or the
Dog-star, is predominant. In the East this is the season when the fruits
ripen, and hence the word comes to denote fruit. The reference is to any
kind of fruit that would be brought for traffic into a great city, and
that would be regarded as an article of luxury.

Are departed from thee - That is, they are no more brought for sale into
the city.

And all things which were dainty and goodly - These words "characterize
all kinds of furniture and clothing which were gilt, or plated, or
embroidered, and therefore were bright or splendid" (Prof. Stuart).

And thou shalt find them no more at all - The address here is decidedly
to the city itself. The meaning is, that they would no more be found
there.

[Revelation 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 18:15</span></span>

The merchants of these things - Who trafficked in these things, and who
supplied the city with them, [Rev
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011).

Which were made rich by her - By traffic with her.

Shall stand afar off - [Rev 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010).

For fear of her torment - Struck with terror by her torment, so that
they did not dare to approach her, [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010).

[Revelation 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 18:16</span></span>

And saying, Alas, alas ... - notes on [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010).

That was clothed in fine linen - In the previous description [Rev
18:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012), these are mentioned as
articles of traffic; here the city, under the image of a female, is
represented as clothed in the most rich and frivolous of these articles.

And purple, and scarlet - See the notes on [Rev
17:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). Compare [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) of this chapter.

And decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls - notes on [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004).

[Revelation 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 18:17</span></span>

For in one hour - In a very brief period - so short, that it seemed to
them to be but one hour. In the prediction [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008), it is said that it would be "in
one day" (see the notes on that place); here it is said that, to the
on-lookers, it seemed to be but an hour. There is no inconsistency,
therefore, between the two statements.

So great riches is come to nought - All the accumulated wealth of so
great and rich a city. This should have been united with [Rev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016), as it is a part of the
lamentation of the merchants, and as the lamentation of the mariners
commences in the other part of the verse. It is so divided in the Greek
Testaments.

And every ship-master - This introduces the lamentation of the mariners,
who would, of course, be deeply interested in the destruction of a city
with which they had been accustomed to trade, and by carrying
merchandise to which they had been enriched. The word "ship-master" -
κυβερνήτης kubernētēs - means, properly, a "governor"; then a governor
of a ship - the "steersman" or "pilot," [Act
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#011).

And all the company in ships - Prof. Stuart renders this "coasters."
There is here, however, an important difference in the reading of the
text. The commonly received text is, πᾶς ἐπὶ τῶν πλοίων ὁ ὅμιλος pas epi
tōn ploiōn ho homilos - "the whole company in ships," as in our common
version; the reading which is now commonly adopted, and which is found
in Griesbach, Hahn, and Tittmann, is ὁ ἐπὶ τόπον πλέων ho epi topon
pleōn - "he who sails to a place"; that is, he who sails from one place
to another along the coast, or who does not venture out far to sea; and
thus the phrase would denote a secondary class of sea-captains or
officers - those less venturesome, or experienced, or bold than others.
There can be little doubt that this is the correct reading (compare
Wetatein, in loco); and hence the class of seamen here referred to is
"coasters." Such seamen would naturally be employed where there was a
great and luxurious maritime city, and would have a deep interest in its
fall.

And sailors - Common seamen.

And as many as trade by sea - In any kind of craft, whether employed in
a near or a remote trade.

Stood afar off - notes on [Rev 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010).

[Revelation 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 18:18</span></span>

And cried ... - That is, as they had a deep interest in it, they would,
on their own account, as well as hers, lift up the voice of
lamentation.What city is like unto this great city? - In her
destruction. What calamity has ever come upon a city like this?

[Revelation 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 18:19</span></span>

And they cast dust on their heads - A common sign of lamentation and
mourning among the Orientals. See the notes on [Job
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012).

By reason of her costliness - The word rendered "costliness" -
τιμιότητος timiotētos - means, properly, "preciousness, costliness";
their magnificence, costly merchandise. The luxury of a great city
enriches many individuals, however much it may impoverish itself.

For in one hour is she made desolate - So it seemed to them. See the
notes on [Rev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017).

[Revelation 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 18:20</span></span>

Rejoice over her - Over her ruin. There is a strong contrast between
this language and what precedes. Kings, merchants, and seamen, who had
been countenanced and sustained by her in the indulgence of corrupt
passions, or who had been enriched by traffic with her, would have
occasion to mourn. But not so they who had been persecuted by her. Not
so the church of the redeemed. Not so heaven itself. The great oppressor
of the church, and the corrupter of the world, was now destroyed; the
grand hindrance to the spread of the gospel was now removed, and all the
holy in heaven and on earth would have occasion to rejoice. This is not
the language of vengeance, but it is the language of exultation and
rejoicing in view of the fact, that the cause of truth might now spread,
without hindrance, through the earth.

Thou heaven - The inhabitants of heaven. Compare the notes on [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002). The meaning here is, that the
dwellers in heaven - the holy angels and the redeemed - had occasion to
rejoice over the downfall of the great enemy of the church.

And ye holy apostles - Prof. Stuart renders this, "Ye saints, and
apostles, and prophets." In the common Greek text, it is, as in our
version, "holy apostles and prophets." In the text of Griesbach, Hahn,
and Tittmann, the word καὶ kai (and) is interposed between the word
"holy" and "apostle." This is, doubtless, the true reading. The meaning,
then, is that the "saints" in heaven are called on to rejoice over the
fall of the mystical Babylon.

Apostles - The twelve who were chosen by the Saviour to be his witnesses
on earth. See the notes on [Co1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001).
The word is commonly limited to the twelve, but, in a larger sense, it
is applied to other distinguished teachers and preachers of the gospel.
See the notes on [Act 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014). There is
no impropriety, however, in supposing that the apostles are referred to
here as such, since they would have occasion to rejoice that the great
obstacle to the reign of the Redeemer was now taken away, and that that
cause in which they had suffered and died was now to he triumphant.

And prophets - Prophets of the Old Testament and distinguished teachers
of the New. See the notes on [Rom
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006). All these would have occasion to
rejoice in the prospect of the final triumph of the true religion.

For God hath avenged you on her - Has taken vengeance on her for her
treatment of you. That is, as she had persecuted the church as such,
they all might be regarded as interested in it and affected by it. All
the redeemed, therefore, in earth and in heaven, are interested in
whatever tends to retard or to promote the cause of truth. All have
occasion to mourn when the enemies of the truth triumph; to rejoice when
they fall.

[Revelation 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 18:21</span></span>

And a mighty angel - See the notes on [Rev
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001). This seems, however, to have
been a different angel from the one mentioned in [Rev
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001), though, like that, he is
described as having great power.

Took up a stone like a great millstone - On the structure of mills among
the ancients see the notes on [Mat
24:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041).

And cast it into the sea - As an emblem of the utter ruin of the city;
an indication that the city would be as completely destroyed as that
stone was covered by the waters.

Saying, Thus with violence - With force, as the stone was thrown into
the sea. The idea is, that it would not be by a gentle and natural
decline, but by the application of foreign power. This accords with all
the representations in this book, that violence will be employed to
overthrow the papal power. See [Rev
17:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016). The origin of this image is
probably [Jer 51:63-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063); "And it shall
be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book, that thou shalt
bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates; and thou
shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil
that I will bring on her."

[Revelation 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 18:22</span></span>

And the voice of harpers - Those who play on the harp. This was usually
accompanied with singing. The idea, in this verse and the following, is
substantially the same as in the previous parts of the chapter, that the
mystical Babylon - papal Rome - would be brought to utter desolation.
This thought is here exhibited under another form - that all which
constituted festivity, joy, and amusement, and all that indicated thrift
and prosperity, would disappear. Of course, in a great and "fun" city,
there would be all kinds of music; and when it is said that this would
be heard there no more it is a most striking image of utter desolation.

And musicians - Musicians in general; but perhaps here singers, as
distinguished from those who played on instruments.

And of pipers - Those who played on pipes or flutes. See the [Co1
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#007) note; [Mat
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017) note.

And trumpeters - Trumpets were common instruments of music, employed on
festival occasions, in war, and in worship. Only the principal
instruments of music are mentioned here, as representatives of the rest.
The general idea is, that the sound of music, as an indication of
festivity and joy, would cease.

Shall be heard no more at all in thee - It would become utterly and
permanently desolate.

And no craftsman, of whatsoever craft - That is, artificers of all kinds
would cease to ply their trades there. The word used here - τεχνίτης
technitēs - would include all artisans or mechanics, all who were
engaged in any kind of trade or craft. The meaning here is, that all
these would disappear, an image, of course, of utter decay.

And the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more - Taylor (Frag. to
Calmet, Dictionary vol. iv. p. 346) supposes that this may refer not so
much to the rattle of the mill as to the voice of singing, which usually
accompanied grinding. The sound of a mill is cheerful, and indicates
prosperity; its ceasing is an image of decline.

[Revelation 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 18:23</span></span>

And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee - Another
image of desolation, as if every light were put out, and there were
total darkness.

And the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more
at all in thee - The merry and cheerful voice of the marriage procession
in the streets (notes on [Mat 25:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)),
or the cheerful, glad voice of the newly-married couple in their own
dwelling (notes on [Joh 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)).

For thy merchants were the great men of the earth - Those who dealt with
thee were the rich, and among them were even nobles and princes; and now
that they trade with thee no more there is occasion for lamentation and
sorrow. The contrast is great between the time when distinguished
foreigners crowded thy marts, and now, when none of any kind come to
traffic with thee. The origin of this representation is probably the
description of Tyre in Ezek. 27.

For by thy sorceries were all nations deceived - This is stated as a
reason for the ruin that had come upon her. It is a common
representation of papal Rome that she has deceived or deluded the
nations of the earth (see the notes on [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014)), and no representation ever
made accords more with facts as they have occurred. The word "sorceries"
here refers to the various arts the tricks impostures, and false
pretences by which this has been done. See the notes on [Rev
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021).

[Revelation 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 18:24</span></span>

And in her - When she came to be destroyed, and her real character was
seen.

Was found the blood of prophets - Of the public teachers of the true
religion. On the word "prophets" see the notes on [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020).

And of saints - Of the holy. See the notes on [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020).

And of all that were slain upon the earth - So numerous have been the
slain, so constant and bloody have been the persecutions there, that it
may be said that all the blood ever shed has been poured out there.
Compare the notes on [Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035). No
one can doubt the propriety of this representation with respect to pagan
and papal Rome.

In regard to the general meaning and application of this chapter the
following remarks may be made:

\(1\) It refers to papal Rome, and is designed to describe the final
overthrow of that formidable anti-Christian power. The whole course of
the interpretation of the previous chapters demands such an application,
and the chapter itself naturally suggests it.

\(2\) if it be asked why so much of this imagery is derived from the
condition of a maritime power, or pertains to commerce, since both
Babylon and Rome were at some distance from the sea, and neither could
with propriety be regarded as seaport towns, it may be replied:

\(a\) that the main idea in the mind of John was that of a rich and
magnificent city;

\(b\) that all the things enumerated were doubtless found, in fact, in
both Babylon and Rome;

\(c\) that though not properly seaport towns, they were situated on
rivers that opened into seas, and were therefore not unfavorably
situated for commerce; and,

\(d\) that, in fact, they traded with all parts of the earth.

The leading idea is that of a great and luxurious city, and this is
filled up and decorated with images of what is commonly found in large
commercial towns. We are not, therefore, to look for a literal
application of this, and it is not necessary to attempt to find all
these things, in fact, in the city referred to. Much of the description
may be for the mere sake of keeping, or ornament.

\(3\) if this refers to Rome, as is supposed, then, in accordance with
the previous representations, it shows that the destruction of the papal
power is to be complete and final. The image which John had in his eye
as illustrating that was undoubtedly ancient Babylon as prophetically
described in Isa. 13-14, and the destruction of the power here referred
to is to be as complete as was the destruction described there. It would
not be absolutely necessary in the fulfillment of this to suppose that
Rome itself is to become a heap of ruins like Babylon, whatever may be
true on that point, but that the papal power, as such, is to be so
utterly destroyed that the ruins of desolate Babylon would properly
represent it.

\(4\) if this interpretation is correct, then the Reformation was in
entire accordance with what God would have his people do, and was
demanded by solemn duty to him. Thus, in [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004), his people are expressly
commanded to "come out of her, that they might not be partakers of her
sins, nor of her plagues." If it had been the design of the Reformers to
perform a work that should be in all respects a fulfilling of the
command of God, they could have done nothing that would have more
literally met the divine requirement. Indeed, the church has never
performed a duty more manifestly in accordance with the divine will, and
more indispensable for its own purity, prosperity, and safety, than the
act of separating entirely and forever from papal Rome.

\(5\) the Reformation was a great movement in human affairs. It was the
index of great progress already reached, and the pledge of still
greater. The affairs of the world were at that period placed on a new
footing, and from the period of the Reformation, and just in proportion
as the principles of the Reformation are acted on, the destiny of
mankind is onward.

\(6\) the fall of papal Rome, as described in this chapter, will remove
one of the last obstructions to the final triumph of the gospel. In the
notes on [Rev 16:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010), we saw that
one great hindrance to the spread of the true religion would be taken
away by the decline and fall of the Turkish power. A still more
formidable hindrance will be taken away by the decline and fall of the
papal power; for that power holds more million of the race under its
subjection, and with a more consummate art, and a more powerful spell.
The papal influence has been felt, and still is felt, in a considerable
part of the world. It has churches, and schools, and colleges, in almost
all lands. It exercises a vast influence over governments. It has
powerful societies organized for the purpose of propagating its
opinions; and it so panders to some of the most powerful passions of our
nature, and so converts to its own purposes all the resources of
superstition, as still to retain a mighty, though a waning hold on the
human mind. When this power shall finally cease, anyone can see that
perhaps the most mighty obstruction which has ever been on the earth for
a thousand years to the spread of the gospel will have been removed, and
the way will be prepared for the introduction of the long-hoped-for
millennium.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 19](rev019)

</div>
