<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev000)  [Next](rev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

This chapter, Rev. 1, contains a general introduction to the whole book,
and comprises the following parts:

I. The announcement that the object of the book is to record a
revelation which the Lord Jesus Christ had made of important events
which were shortly to occur, and which were signified by an angel to the
author, John, [Rev 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001). A blessing
is pronounced on him who should read and understand the book, and
special attention is directed to it because the time was at hand when
the predicted events would occur.

II\. Salutation to the seven churches of Asia, [Rev
1:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). To those churches, it would
seem from this, the book was originally dedicated or addressed, and two
of the chapters Rev. 2-3 refer exclusively to them. Among them evidently
the author had resided [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009), and
the whole book was doubtless sent to them, and committed to their
keeping. In this salutation, the author wishes for them grace, mercy,
and peace from "him which is, and which was, and which is to come" - the
original fountain of all light and truth - referring to the Father;
"from the seven Spirits which are before the throne" - referring to the
Holy Spirit (see the note on [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)), by whom all grace is
communicated to people; and from the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
revelation is imparted. As it is his revelation, as it is designed
especially to glorify him, and as it predicts the final triumph of his
religion, the author appends to this reference to him a special
ascription of praise, [Rev 1:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005). He
refers to the great work which he had done for his people in redeeming
them, and making them kings and priests to God; he assures those to whom
he wrote that he would come in glory to the world again, and that all
eyes would see him; and he represents the Redeemer himself as applying
to his own person a title - "Alpha and Omega," "the beginning and the
ending" - which indicates his exalted nature, and his supreme authority.

III\. The commission of the writer, or his authority for thus addressing
the churches of Asia, [Rev 1:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009). His
authority to do this is derived from the fact that the Lord Jesus had
appeared to him personally in his exile, and had directed him to reveal
what he saw in vision, and to send it to those churches. The statement
of this commission is made as impressive as it well could be:

\(a\) The writer was an exile - banished to a lonely island on account
of the common faith, [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009).

\(b\) On the day of Christian rest - the day set apart to the memory of
the Saviour, and which he sacredly observed in his solitude as holy time
- when in the spirit of calm contemplation on the truths appropriate to
this day, he suddenly heard the voice of his Redeemer, like a trumpet,
commanding him to record what he saw, and to send it to the seven
churches of Asia, [Rev 1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).

\(c\) Then follows [Rev 1:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012) a
magnificent description of the appearance of the Saviour, as he appeared
in his glory. He is seen standing in the midst of seven golden
candlesticks, clothed in a long white robe, girded with a girdle of
gold, his hair white, his eyes like a flame of fire, his feet like
brass, and his voice like the roaring of mighty waters. In his hand are
seven stars, and from his mouth goes a sharp sword, and his countenance
is like the sun in the full splendor of its shining. John falls at his
feet as if he were dead; and the Saviour lays his right hand upon him,
and animates him with the assurance that though he had himself been dead
he is now alive, and would forever live, and that he has the keys of
hell and death.

\(d\) Then follows the commission itself, [Rev
1:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019). He was to make a record of
the things which he saw. He was especially to unfold the meaning of the
seven stars which he saw in the right hand of the Saviour, and of the
seven golden candlesticks, as referring to the seven churches of Asia
Minor; and was then to describe the series of visions which pertained to
the future history and destiny of the church at large.

In the scene represented in this chapter, there is some imagery which
would be suggested by the arrangements in the temple at Jerusalem, and
it has been supposed (Elliott, i., 72, 73) that the vision was laid
there, and that Christ is represented as walking among the seven lamps
"habited as the ancient high priest." But the vision is not such an one
as would have been presented in I the holy place in the temple. In that
place there was but one lampstand, with seven sconces; here, there were
seven separate lampstands; there were there no "stars," and the
vestments of the Jewish high priest were not those in which the Saviour
is represented as appearing. He had no mitre, no ephod, no breastplate,
and no censer. The object was not to represent Christ as a priest, or as
superseding the Jewish high priest, but to represent him with costume
appropriate to the Son of God - as having been raised from the dead, and
received to the glory of heaven.

His vestments are neither those of a prophet, a king, nor a priest; not
with such garments as the ancient prophets wore, nor with crown and
scepter such as monarchs bear, nor yet with the usual habiliments of a
priest. He appears as the Son of God, irrespective of the offices that
he bears, and comes as the glorified Head of the Church to declare his
will in regard to the seven churches of Asia, and to disclose the future
for the guidance and comfort of his church at large. The scene appears
to be laid at Patmos, and the apostle in the vision of the Saviour does
not appear to have regarded himself as transferred to any other place.
The view which is to be kept before the mind in the description of "the
things that are" Rev. 2-3, is that of seven burning lamps, and the Son
of God standing among them. Thus, amidst these lamps, representing the
churches, he dictates to the apostle what he shall write to the
churches; thus, with seven stars in his hand, representing the angels of
the churches, he dictates what shall be said to them. Is it unnatural to
suppose that the position of those lamps might have been arranged in the
vision in a manner resembling the geographical position of the churches
themselves? If so, the scene would be more significant, and more
sublime.

[Revelation 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 1:1</span></span>

The Revelation of Jesus Christ - This is evidently a title or caption of
the whole book, and is designed to comprise the substance of the whole;
for all that the book contains would be embraced in the general
declaration that it is a revelation of Jesus Christ. The word rendered
"Revelation" - Ἀποκάλυψις Apokalupsis, whence we have derived our word
"Apocalypse" - means properly an that is, nakedness; from ἀποκαλύπτω
apokaluptō, to uncover. It would apply to anything which had been
covered up so as to be bidden from the view, as by a veil, a darkness,
in an ark or chest, and then made manifest by removing the covering. It
comes then to be used in the sense of disclosing or revealing, by
removing the veil of darkness or ignorance. "There is nothing covered
that shall not be revealed." It may be applied to the disclosing or
manifesting of anything which was before obscure or unknown. This may be
done:

\(a\) by instruction in regard to what was before obscure; that is, by
statements of what was unknown before the statements were made; as in
[Luk 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032), where it is said that
Christ would be "a light to lighten the Gentiles" - φῶς εἰς ἀποκάλυψιν
ἐθνῶν phōs eis apokalupsin ethnōn; or when it is applied to the divine
mysteries, purposes, or doctrines, before obscure or unknown, but made
clear by light revealed in the gospel, [Rom
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025); [Co1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010); [Co1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006); [Eph
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005).

\(b\) by the event itself; as the manifestation of the wrath of God at
the day of judgment will disclose the true nature of his wrath. "After
thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath
against the day of wrath and "revelation" of the righteous judgment of
God," [Rev 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005). "For the earnest
expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation (Greek
revelation) of the sons of God," [Rom
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019); that is until it shall be
manifest by the event what they who are the children of God are to be.
In this sense the word is frequently applied to the second advent or
appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, as disclosing him in his glory, or
showing what he truly is; "When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed," [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007) - ἐν τῇ ἀποκαλυψει en tēn
apokalupsei - in the revelation of Jesus Christ; "Waiting for the coming
(the revelation - την ἀποκάλυψιν tēn apokalupsin of our Lord Jesus
Christ," [Co1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007); "At the appearing
(Greek revelation) of Jesus Christ," [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007); "When his glory shall be
revealed," [Pe1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013).

\(c\) It is used in the sense of making known what is to come, whether
by words, signs, or symbols, as if a veil were lifted from what is
hidden from human vision, or which is covered by the darkness of the
unknown future. This is called a revelation, because the knowledge of
the event is in fact made known to the world by Him who alone can see
it, and in such a manner as he pleases to employ; though many of the
terms or the symbols may be, from the necessity of the case, obscure,
and though their full meaning may be disclosed only by the event. It is
in this sense, evidently, that the word is used here: and in this sense
that it is more commonly employed when we speak of a revelation. Thus,
the word גּלה gaalaah is used in [Amo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007), "Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants." So [Job
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#016), "Then he openeth (margin,
revealeth or uncovereth; Heb. יגלה yigleh the ears of men"; that is, in
a dream, he discloses to their ears his truth before concealed or
unknown. Compare [Dan 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022), [Dan
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028); [Dan
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001); [Deu
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029). These ideas enter into the word
as used in the passage before us. The idea is that of a disclosure of an
extraordinary character, beyond the mere ability of man, by a special
communication from heaven. This is manifest, not only from the usual
meaning of this word, but by the word "prophecy," in [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003), and by all the arrangements by
which these things were made known. The ideas which would be naturally
conveyed by the use of this word in this connection are two:

\(1\) that there was something which was before hidden, obscure, or
unknown; and,

\(2\) that this was so disclosed by these communications as to be seen
or known.

The things hidden or unknown were those which pertained to the future;
the method of disclosing them was mainly by symbols. In the Greek, in
this passage, the article is missing - ἀποκάλυψις apokalupsis - a
Revelation, not ἡ hē, the Revelation. This is omitted because it is the
title of a book, and because the use of the article might imply that
this was the only revelation, excluding other books claiming to be a
revelation; or it might imply some previous mention of the book, or
knowledge of it in the reader. The simple meaning is, that this was "a
Revelation"; it was only a part of the revelation which God has given to
mankind.

The phrase, "the Revelation of Jesus Christ," might, so far as the
construction of the language is concerned, refer either to Christ as the
subject or object. It might either mean that Christ is the object
revealed in this book, and that its great purpose is to make him known,
and so the phrase is understood in the commentary called Hyponoia (New
York, 1844); or it may mean that this is a revelation which Christ makes
to mankind, that is, it is his in the sense that he communicates it to
the world. That this latter is the meaning here is clear:

\(1\) because it is expressly said in this verse that it was a
revelation which God gave to him;

\(2\) because it is said that it pertains to things which must shortly
come to pass; and,

\(3\) because, in fact, the revelation is a disclosure of eyelets which
were to happen, and not of the person or work of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Which God gave unto him - Which God imparted or communicated to Jesus
Christ. This is in accordance with the representations everywhere made
in the Scriptures, that God is the original fountain of truth and
knowledge, and that, whatever was the original dignity of the Son of
God, there was a mediatorial dependence on the Father. See [Joh
5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019), "Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do:
for whatsoever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. For the
Father loveth the Son, and showeth him (δεικνυσιν αὐτῷ deiknusin autō)
all things that himself doeth." "My doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me," [Joh 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016). "As my Father
hath taught me ἐδιδάξεν με edidaxen me, I speak these things," [Joh
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028). "For I have not spoken of
myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I
should say, and what I should speak," [Joh
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049). See also [Joh
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010); [Joh
17:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#007); [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027); [Mar
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032). The same mediatorial dependence
the apostle teaches us still subsists in heaven in his glorified state,
and will continue until he has subdued all things [Co1
15:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024); and hence, even in that
state, he is represented as receiving the Revelation from the Father to
communicate it to people.

To show unto his servants - That is, to his people, to Christians, often
represented as the servants of God or of Christ, [Pe1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016); [Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020); [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003); [Rev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002); [Rev
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003). It is true that the word is
sometimes applied, by way of eminence, to the prophets [Ch1
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#049); [Dan
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020), and to the apostles [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001); [Gal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010); [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001); [Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001); [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); but it is also applied to the
mass of Christians, and there is no reason why it should not be so
understood here. The book was sent to the churches of Asia, and was
clearly designed for general use; and the contents of the book were
evidently intended for the churches of the Redeemer in all ages and
lands. Compare [Rev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003). The word
rendered "to show" (δεῖξαι deixai) commonly denotes to point out, to
cause to see, to present to the sight, and is a word eminently
appropriate here, as what was to be revealed was, in general, to be
presented to the sight by sensible tokens or symbols.

Things which must shortly come to pass - Not all the things that will
occur, but such as it was deemed of importance for his people to be made
acquainted with. Nor is it certainly implied that all the things that
are communicated would shortly come to pass, or would soon occur. Some
of them might perhaps he in the distant future, and still it might be
true that there were those which were revealed in connection with them,
which soon would occur. The word rendered "things" (ἅ ha) is a pronoun,
and might be rendered "what"; "he showed to his servants what things
were about to occur," not implying that he showed all the things that
would happen, but such as he judged to be needful that his people should
know. The word would naturally embrace those things which, in the
circumstances, were most desirable to be known. The phrase rendered
"must come to pass" (δεῖ γενέσθαι dei genesthai), would imply more than
mere futurity; The word used (δεῖ dei) means "it needs, there is need
of," and implies that there is some kind of necessity that the event
should occur.

That necessity may either arise from the felt waist of anything, as
where it is absent or missing, Xen. Cyr. iv., 10; ib. [Rev
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#005), [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009); or from the nature of the case,
or from a sense of duty, as [Mat
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021), "Jesus began to show to his
disciples that he must go (δεῖ ἀπελθεῖν dei apelthein) to Jerusalem"
(compare [Mat 26:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#035); [Mar
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#031); [Luk
2:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049)); or the necessity may exist,
because a thing is right and just, meaning that it ought to be done, as
[Luk 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014), "There are six days in
which men ought to work" δεῖ ἐργάζεσθαι dei ergazesthai. And ought not
this woman οὐκ ἔδει ouk edei, whom Satan hath bound, etc., be loosed
from this bond," [Luk 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#016) (compare
[Mar 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#014); [Joh
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020); [Act
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#011), [Act
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029); [Ti2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006); [Mat
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#033); [Mat
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)); or the necessity may be that
it is conformable to the divine arrangement, or is made necessary by
divine appointment, as in [Joh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014),
"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must (δεῖ
dei) the Son of man be lifted up." "For as yet they knew not the
Scriptures, that he must (δεῖ dei) rise again from the dead," [Joh
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#009); compare [Act
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012); [Act
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022), et al.

In the passage before us, it is implied that there was some necessity
that the things referred to should occur. They were not the result of
chance, they were not fortuitous. It is not, however, stated what was
the ground of the necessity; whether because there was a want of
something to complete a great arrangement, or because it was fight and
proper in existing circumstances, or because such was the divine
appointment. They were events which, on some account, must certainly
occur, and which, therefore, it was important should be made known. The
real ground of the necessity, probably, was founded in the design of God
in redemption. He intended to carry out his great plans in reference to
his church, and the things revealed here must necessarily occur in the
completion of that design. The phrase rendered "shortly" (ἐν τάχει en
tachei) is one whose meaning has been much controverted, and on which
much has been made to depend in the interpretation of the whole book.

The question has been whether the phrase necessarily implies that the
events referred to were soon to occur, or whether it may have such an
extent of meaning as to admit the supposition that the events referred
to, though beginning soon, would embrace in their development far
distant years, and would reach the end of all things. Those who
maintain, as Prof. Stuart, that the book was written before the
destruction of Jerusalem, and that the portion in Rev. 4-11 has special
reference to Jerusalem and Judea, and the portion in Rev. 12-19 refers
to persecution and pagan Rome, maintain the former opinion; those who
suppose that Rev. 4-11 refers to the irruption of Northern barbarians in
the Roman empire, and Rev. 12ff., to the rise and the persecutions of
the papal power, embrace the latter opinion. All that is proper in this
place is, without reference to any theory of interpretation, to inquire
into the proper meaning of the language, or to ascertain what idea it
would naturally convey:

\(a\) The phrase properly and literally means, "with quickness,
swiftness, speed; that is, speedily, quickly, shortly" (Robinson's
Lexicon; Stuart, in loco). It is the same in meaning as ταχέως tacheōs.
Compare [Co1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#019), "But I will come to
you shortly, if the Lord will." "Go out quickly into the streets," [Luk
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#021). "Sit down quickly, and write
fifty," [Luk 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#006). "She rose up
hastily (ταχέως tacheōs) and went out," [Joh
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031). "That ye are so soon removed
(ταχέως tacheōs) from him that called you," [Gal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006). "Lay hands suddenly on no man,"
[Ti1 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022). See also [Phi
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019), [Phi
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#024); [Th2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002); [Ti2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009). The phrase used here ἐν τάχει en
tachei occurs in [Luk 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008), "He will
avenge them speedily" (literally with speed). "Arise up quickly," [Act
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007). "Get time quickly out of
Jerusalem," [Act 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#018). "Would depart
shortly," [Act 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004). "Bruise Satan
under your feet shortly," [Rom 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020);
and [Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001); [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006). The essential idea is, that the
thing which is spoken of was soon to occur, or it was not a remote and
distant event. There is the notion of rapidity, of haste, of suddenness.
It is such a phrase as is used when the thing is on the point of
happening, and could not be applied to an event which was in the remote
future, considered as an independent event standing by itself. The same
idea is expressed, in regard to the same thing, in [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003), "The time is at hand" - ὁ γὰρ
καιρὸς ἐγγύς ho gar kairos engus; that is, it is near, it is soon to
occur. Yet.

\(b\) it is not necessary to suppose that the meaning is that all that
there is in the book was soon to happen. It may mean that the series of
events which were to follow on in their proper order was soon to
commence, though it might be that the sequel would be remote. The first
in the series of events was soon to begin, and the others would follow
on in their train, though a portion of them, in the regular order, might
be in a remote futurity. If we suppose that there was such an order,
that a series of transactions was about to commence, involving along
train of momentous developments, and that the beginning of this was to
occur soon, the language used by John would be what would be naturally
employed to express it. Thus, in case of a revolution in a government,
when a reigning prince should be driven from his kingdom, to be
succeeded by a new dynasty, which would long occupy the throne, and
involving, as the consequence of the revolution, important events
extending far into the future, we would naturally say that these things
were shortly to occur, or that the time was near. It is customary to
speak of a succession of events or periods as near, however vast or
interminable the series may be, when the commencement is at hand. Thus,
we say that the great events of the eternal world are near; that is, the
beginning of them is soon to occur. So Christians now speak often of the
millennium as near, or as about to occur, though it is the belief of
many that it will be protracted for many ages.

\(c\) That this is the true idea hem is clear, whatever general view of
interpretation in regard to the book is adopted. Even Prof. Stuart, who
contends that the greater portion of the book refers to the destruction
of Jerusalem, and the persecutions of pagan Rome, admits that "the
closing part of the Revelation relates beyond all doubt to a distant
period, and some of it to a future eternity" (ii., p. 5); and, if this
be so, then there is no impropriety in supposing that a part of the
series of predictions preceding this may lie also in a somewhat remote
futurity. The true idea seems to be that the writer contemplated a
series of events that were to occur, and that this series was about to
commence. How far into the future it was to extend, is to be learned by
the proper interpretation of all the parts of the series.

And he sent - Greek: "Sending by his angel, signified it to his servant
John." The idea is not precisely that he sent his angel to communicate
the message, but that he sent by him, or employed him as an agent in
doing it. The thing sent was rather the message than the angel.

And signified it - Ἐσήμανεν Esēmanen. He indicated it by signs and
symbols. The word occurs in the New Testament only in [Joh
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#033); [Joh
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#032); [Joh
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019); [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028); [Act
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#027), and in the passage before us,
in all which places it is rendered "signify, signifying, or signified."
It properly refers to some sign, signal, or token by which anything is
made known (compare [Mat 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028); [Rom
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011); [Gen
9:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012); [Gen
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#011); [Luk
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#012); [Co2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012); [Co1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)), and is a word most happily
chosen to denote the manner in which the events referred to were to be
communicated to John, for nearly the whole book is made up of signs and
symbols. If it be asked what was signified to John, it may be replied
that either the word "it" may be understood, as in our translation, to
refer to the Apocalypse (Revelation), or refer to what he saw (ὅσα εἶδε
hosa eide), as Prof. Stuart supposes; or it may be absolute, without any
object following, as Prof. Robinson (Lexicon) supposes. The general
sense is, that, sending by his angel, he made to John a communication by
expressive signs or symbols.

By his angel - That is, an angel was employed to cause these scenic
representations to pass before the mind of the apostle. The
communication was not made directly to him, but was through the medium
of a heavenly messenger employed for this purpose. Thus, in [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006), it is said, "And the Lord God of
the holy prophets sent his angel to show unto his servants the things
which must shortly be done." Compare [Rev
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008) of that chapter. There is
frequent allusion in the Scriptures to the fact that angels have been
employed as agents in making known the divine will, or in the
revelations which have been made to people. Thus, in [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053), it is said, "Who have received
the law by the disposition of angels." "For if the word spoken by angels
was stedfast," etc., [Heb 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002); "and it
was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator," [Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019). Compare the notes on [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038), [Act
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053). There is almost no further
reference to the agency of the angel employed for this service in the
book, and there is no distinct specification of what he did, or of his
great agency in the case.

John is everywhere represented as seeing the symbols himself, and it
would seem that the agency of the angel was, either to cause those
symbols to pass before the apostle, or to convey their meaning to his
mind. How far John himself understood the meaning of these symbols, we
have not the means of knowing with certainty. The most probable
supposition is, that the angel was employed to cause these visions or
symbols to pass before his mind, rather than to interpret them. If an
interpretation had been given, it is inconceivable that it should not
have been recorded, and there is no more probability that their meaning
should have been disclosed to John himself, for his private use, than
that it should have been disclosed and recorded for the use of others.
It would seem probable, therefore, that John had only that view of the
meaning of what he saw which anyone else might obtain from the record of
the visions. Compare the notes on [Pe1
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010).

Unto his servant John - Nothing could be learned from this expression as
to what John was the author of the book, whether the apostle of that
name or some other. Compare the introduction, section 1. It cannot be
inferred from the use of the word "servant," rather than apostle, that
the apostle John was not the author, for it was not uncommon for the
apostles to designate themselves merely by the words "servants," or
"servants of God." Compare the notes on [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001).

[Revelation 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 1:2</span></span>

Who bare record of the word of God - Who bore witness to, or testified
of ἐμαρτύρησεν emarturēsen the Word of God. He regarded himself merely
as a "witness" of what he had seen, and claimed only to make a fair and
faithful "record" of it. "This is the disciple which "testifieth" (ὁ
μαρτυρῶν ho marturōn) of these things, and wrote these things," [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024). "And he that saw it bare
record" - μεμαρτύρηκε memarturēke [Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035). Compare also the following
places, where the apostle uses the same word of himself: [Jo1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002); [Jo1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014). The expression here, "the word
of God," is one the meaning of which has been much controverted, and is
important in its bearing on the question who was the author of the Book
of Revelation. The main inquiry is, whether the writer refers to the
"testimony" which he bears in this book respecting the "word of God"; or
whether he refers to some testimony on that subject in some other book
with which those to whom he wrote were so familiar that they would at
once recognize him as the author; or whether he refers to the fact that
he had borne his testimony to the great truths of religion, and
especially respecting Jesus Christ, as a preacher who was well known,
and who would be characterized by this expression.

The phrase "the word of God" - τὸν λόγον τοῦ Θεοῦ ton logon tou Theou -
occurs frequently in the New Testament (compare [Joh
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035); [Act
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031); [Act
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002), [Act
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007); [Act
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001); [Act
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#024)); and may either mean the Word
or doctrine respecting God - that which teaches what God is - or what he
speaks or teaches. It is more commonly used in the latter sense (compare
the passages referred to above), and especially refers to what God
speaks or commands in the gospel. The fair meaning of this expression
would be, that John had borne faithful witness to, or testimony of, the
truth which God had spoken to man in the gospel of Christ. So far as the
"language" used here is concerned, this might apply either to a written
or an oral testimony; either to a treatise like that of his gospel, to
his preaching, or to the record which he was then making. Vitringa and
others suppose that the reference here is to the gospel which he had
published, and which now bears his name; Lucke and others, to the
revelation made to him in Patmos, the record of which he now makes in
this book; Prof. Stuart and others, to the fact that he was a teacher or
preacher of the gospel, and that (compare [Rev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)) the allusion is to the testimony
which he had borne to the gospel, and for which he was an exile in
Patmos. Is it not possible that these conflicting opinions may be to
some extent harmonized, by supposing that in the use of the aorist tense
- ἐμαρτύρησε emarturēse - the writer meant to refer to a characteristic
of himself, to wit, that he was a faithful witness of the Word of God
and of Jesus Christ whenever and however made known to him?

With an eye, perhaps, to the record which he was about to make in this
book, and intending to include that may he not also refer to what had
been and was his well-known character as a witness of what God
communicated to him? He had always borne this testimony. He always
regarded himself as such a witness. He had been an eyewitness of what
had occurred in the life and at the death of the Saviour (see the notes
on [Pe2 1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017)), and had, in all his
writings and public administrations, horne witness to what he had seen
and heard; for that [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009) he had
been banished to Patmos: and he was now about to carry out the same
characteristic of himself by bearing witness to what he saw in these new
revelations. This would be much in the manner of John, who often refers
to this characteristic of himself (compare [Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035); [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024); [Jo1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)), as well as harmonize the
different opinions. The meaning, then, of the expression, "who bare
record of the word of God," as I understand it, is, that it was a
characteristic of the writer to bear simple but faithful testimony to
the truth which God communicated to people in the gospel. If this be the
correct interpretation, it may be remarked:

\(a\) that this is such language as John the apostle would be likely to
use, and yet

\(b\) that it is not such language as an author would be likely to adopt
if there was an attempt to forge a book in his name.

The artifice would be too refined to occur probably to anyone, for
although perfectly natural for John, it would not be so natural for a
forger of a book to select this circumstance and weave it thus
unostentatiously into his narrative.

And of the testimony of Jesus Christ - That is, in accordance with the
interpretation above, of the testimony "which Jesus Christ bore for the
truth"; not of a testimony "respecting" Jesus Christ. The idea is, that
Jesus Christ was himself "a witness" to the truth, and that the writer
of this book was a witness merely of the testimony which Christ had
borne. Whether the testimony of Jesus Christ was borne in his preaching
when in the flesh, or whether made known to the writer by him at any
subsequent period, it was his office to make a faithful record of that
testimony. As he had always before done that, so he was about to do it
now in the new revelation made to him in Patmos, which he regarded as a
new testimony of Jesus Christ to the truth, [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001). It is remarkable that, in
confirmation of this view, John so often describes the Lord Jesus as a
witness, or represents him as having come to hear his faithful testimony
to the truth. Thus, in [Rev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); "And
from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful and true witness." "I am one that
bear witness - ὁ μαρτυρῶν ho marturōn - of myself," [Joh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018). "To this end was I born, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness - ἵνα
μαρτυρήσω hina marturēsō - to the truth," [Joh
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037). "These things saith the Amen,
the faithful and true witness" - ὁ μάρτυς ὁ πιστὸς ho martus ho pistos,
... [Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014). Of this testimony which
the Lord Jesus came to bring to man respecting eternal realities, the
writer of this book says that he regarded himself as a witness. To the
office of bearing such testimony he had been dedicated; that testimony
he was now to bear, as he had always done.

And of all things that he saw - Ὅσα τε εἰδεν Hosa te eiden. This is the
common reading in the Greek, and according to this reading it would
properly mean, "and whatsoever he saw"; that is, it would imply that he
bore witness to "the Word of God," and to "the testimony of Jesus
Christ," and to "whatever he saw" - meaning that the things which he
saw, and to which he refers, were things additional to those to which he
had referred by "the Word of God," and the "testimony of Christ." From
this it has been supposed that in the former part of the verse he refers
to some testimony which he had formerly borne, as in his gospel or in
his preaching, and that here he refers to what he "saw" in the visions
of the Revelation as additional to the former. But it should be
remembered that the word rendered "and" - τε te - is missing in a large
number of manuscripts (see Wetstein), and that it is now omitted in the
best editions of the Greek Testament - as by Griesbach, Tittmann and
Hahn. The evidence is clear that it should be omitted; and if so
omitted, the reference is to whatever he had at any time borne his
testimony to, and not particularly to what passed before him in the
visions of this book.

It is a general affirmation that he had always borne a faithful
testimony to whatever he had seen respecting the Word of God and the
testimony of Christ. The correct rendering of the whole passage then
would be, "And sending by his angel, he signifies it to his servant
John, who bare record of" (that is, whose character and office it was to
bear his testimony to) "the word of God" (the message which God has sent
to me), "and the testimony of Jesus Christ" (the testimony which Christ
bore to the truth), "whatsoever he saw." He concealed nothing; he held
nothing back; he made it known precisely as it was seen by him. Thus
interpreted, the passage refers to what was a general characteristic of
the writer, and is designed to embrace all that was made known to him,
and to affirm that he was a faithful witness to it. There were doubtless
special reasons why John was employed as the medium through which this
communication was to be made to the church and the world. Among these
reasons may have been the following:

\(a\) That he was the "beloved disciple."

\(b\) That he was the only surviving apostle.

\(c\) That his character was such that his statements would be readily
received. Compare [Joh 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035); [Joh
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024); [Jo3
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#012).

\(d\) It may be that his mind was better suited to be the medium of
these communications than that of any other of the apostles - even if
they had been then alive.

There is almost no one whose mental characteristics are less correctly
understood than those of the apostle John. Among the most gentle and
amiable of people; with a heart so suited for love as to be known as
"the beloved disciple" - he yet had mental characteristics which made it
proper that he should be called "a son of thunder" [Mar
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017); a mind suited to preserve and
record the profound thoughts in his gospel; a mind of high poetic order,
suited for the magnificent conceptions in this book.

[Revelation 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 1:3</span></span>

Blessed is he that readeth - That is, it is to be regarded as a
privilege attended with many blessings, to be permitted to mark the
disclosures to be made in this book; the important revelations
respecting future times. Prof. Stuart supposes that this refers to a
public reading, and that the phrase "those who hear the words of this
prophecy," refers to those who listened to the public reader, and that
both the reader and hearer should regard themselves as highly favored.
It is, however, more in accordance with the usual meaning of the word
rendered "read," to suppose that it refers to the act of one's reading
for himself; to learn by reading. So Robinson (Lexicon) understands it.
The Greek word, indeed, would bear the other interpretation (see [Luk
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016); [Act
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027); [Act
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021); [Co2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)); but as this book was sent
abroad to be read by Christians, and not merely to be in the hands of
the ministers of religion to be read by them to others, it is more
natural to interpret the word in the usual sense.

And hear the words of this prophecy - As they shall be declared or
repeated by others; or perhaps the word "hear" is used in a sense that
is not uncommon, that of giving attention to; taking heed to. The
general sense is, that they were to be regarded as highly favored who
became acquainted in any way with what is here communicated. The writer
does not say that they were blessed who understood it, or that they who
read or heard it would fully understand it; but it is clearly implied,
that there would be so far an understanding of its meaning as to make it
a felicitous condition to have been made acquainted with it. An author
could not be supposed to say that one should regard his condition as a
favored one who merely heard words that he could not understand, or who
had placed before him magnificent symbols that had to him no meaning.
The word "prophecy" is used here in its more strict sense as denoting
the disclosure of future events - a large portion of the book being of
this nature. It is here synonymous with "Revelation" in [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

And keep those things which are written therein - Keep in mind those
things which relate to the future; and obey those things which arc
required as truth and duty. The blessing which results from having in
possession the revealed truth of God is not merely in reading it, or in
hearing it: it results from the fact that the truth is properly
regarded, and exerts a suitable influence over our lives. Compare [Psa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011); "And in keeping of them there
is great reward."

For the time is at hand - See [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001). The word used here - ἐγγύς engus
- has the same signification substantially as the word "shortly" in [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001). It would apply to any event whose
beginning was soon to occur, though the end might be remote, for the
series of events might stretch far into the future. It cannot be
doubted, however, that the writer meant to press upon them the
importance of attending to these things, from the fact that either
entirely or in part these things were soon to happen. It may be inferred
from this verse, that it is possible so to "understand" this book, as
that it may convey useful instruction. This is the only book in the
Bible of which a special blessing is pronounced on him who reads it; but
assuredly a blessing would not be pronounced on the perusal of a book
which is entirely unintelligible. While, therefore, there may be many
obscurities in this book, it is also to be assumed that it may be so far
understood as to be useful to Christians, in supporting their faith, and
giving them elevated views of the final triumph of religion, and of the
glory of the world to come. Anything is a blessing which enables us with
well-founded hope and joy to look forward to the heavenly world.

[Revelation 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 1:4</span></span>

John to the seven churches which are in Asia - The word "Asia" is used
in quite different senses by different writers. It is used:

\(1\) as referring to the whole eastern continent now known by that
name;

\(2\) either Asia or Asia Minor;

\(3\) that part of Asia which Attalus III, king of Pergamos, gave to the
Romans, namely, Mysia, Phrygia, Lycaonia, Lydia, Carla, Pisidia, and the
southern coast - that is, all in the western, southwestern, and southern
parts of Asia Minor; and,

\(4\) in the New Testament, usually the southwestern part of Asia Minor,
of which Ephesus was the capital. See the notes at [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009).

The word "Asia" is not found in the Hebrew Scriptures, but it occurs
often in the Books of Maccabees, and in the New Testament. In the New
Testament it is not used in the large sense in which it is now, as
applied to the whole continent, but in its largest signification it
would include only Asia Minor. It is also used, especially by Luke, as
denoting the country that was called "Ionia," or what embraced the
provinces of Caria and Lydia. Of this region Ephesus was the principal
city, and it was in this region that the "seven churches" were situated.
Whether there were more than seven churches in this region is not
intimated by the writer of this book, and on that point we have no
certain knowledge. it is evident that these seven were the principal
churches, even if there were more, and that there was some reason why
they should be particularly addressed.

There is mention of some other churches in the neighborhood of these.
Colosse was near to Laodicea; and from [Col
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#013), it would seem not improbable
that there was a church also at Hierapolis. But there may have been
nothing in their circumstances that demanded particular instruction or
admonition, and they may have been on that account omitted. There is
also some reason to suppose that, though there had been other churches
in that vicinity besides the seven mentioned by John, they had become
extinct at the time when he wrote the Book of Revelation. It appears
from Tacitus (History, xiv, 27; compare also Pliny, N. H., v. 29), that
in the time of Nero, 61 a.d., the city of Laodicea was destroyed by an
earthquake, in which earthquake, according to Eusebius, the adjacent
cities of Colosse and Hierapolis were involved. Laodicea was, indeed,
immediately rebuilt, but there is no evidence of the re-establishment of
the church there before the time when John wrote this book.

The earliest mention we have of a church there, after the one referred
to in the New Testament by Paul [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001); [Col
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#013), [Col
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#015), is in the time of Trajan,
when Papias was bishop there, sometime between 98 a.d. and 117 a.d. It
would appear, then, to be not improbable that at the time when the
Apocalypse was written, there were in fact but seven churches in the
vicinity. Prof. Stuart (i., 219) supposes that "seven, and only so many,
may have been named, because the sevenfold divisions and groups of
various objects constitute a conspicuous feature in the Apocalypse
throughout." But this reason seems too artificial; and it can hardly be
supposed that it would influence the mind of John, in the specification
by name of the churches to which the book was sent. If no names had been
mentioned, and if the statement had occurred in glowing poetic
description, it is not inconceivable that the number seven might have
been selected for some such purpose.

Grace be unto you, and peace - The usual form of salutation in
addressing a church. See the notes on [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

From him which is, and which was, and which is to come - From him who is
everlasting - embracing all duration, past, present, and to come. No
expression could more strikingly denote eternity than this. He now
exists; he has existed in the past; he will exist in the future. There
is an evident allusion here to the name Yahweh, the name by which the
true God is appropriately designated in the Scriptures. That name יהוה
Yahweh, from היה haayah, to be, to exist, seems to have been adopted
because it denotes existence, or being, and as denoting simply one who
exists; and has reference merely to the fact of existence. The word has
no variation of form, and has no reference to time, and would embrace
all time: that is, it is as true at one time as another that he exists.
Such a word would not be inappropriately paraphrased by the phrase "who
is, and who was, and who is to come," or who is to be; and there can be
no doubt that John referred to him here as being himself the eternal and
uncreated existence, and as the great and original fountain of all
being.

They who desire to find a full discussion in regard to the origin of the
name Yahweh, may consult an article by Prof. Tholuck, in the "Biblical
Repository," vol. iv., pp. 89-108. It is remarkable that there are some
passages in pagan inscriptions and writings which bear a very strong
resemblance to the language used here by John respecting God. Thus,
Plutarch (De Isa. et Osir., p. 354.), speaking of a temple of Isis, at
Sais, in Egypt, says, "It bore this inscription - 'I am all that was,
and is, and shall be, and my vail no mortal can remove'" - Ἐγώ εἰμι πᾶν
τὸ γεγονός, καὶ ὅν, καὶ ἐσόμενον καὶ τὸν ἐμὸν πέπλον οὐδείς τω θνητὸς
ἀνεκάλυψεν Egō eimi pan to gegonos, kai hon, kai esomenon kai ton emon
peplon oudeis tō thnētos anekalupsen. So Orpheus (in Auctor. Lib. de
Mundo), "Jupiter is the head, Jupiter is the middle, and all things are
made by Jupiter." So in Pausanias (Phocic. 12), "Jupiter was; Jupiter
is; Jupiter shall be." The reference in the phrase before us is to God
as such, or to God considered as the Father.

And from the seven Spirits which are before his throne - After all that
has been written on this very difficult expression, it is still
impossible to determine with certainty its meaning. The principal
opinions which have been held in regard to it are the following:

I. That it refers to God, as such. This opinion is held by Eichhorn, and
is favored by Ewald. No arguments derived from any parallel passages are
urged for this opinion, nor can any such be found, where God is himself
spoken of under the representation of a sevenfold Spirit. But the
objections to this view are so obvious as to be insuperable:

\(1\) If it refers to God as such, then it would be mere tautology, for
the writer had just referred to him in the phrase "from him who was,"
etc.

\(2\) it is difficult to perceive in what sense "seven spirits" could be
ascribed to God, or how he could be described as a being of "Seven
Spirits." At least, if he could be spoken of as such, there would be no
objection to applying the phrase to the Holy Spirit.

\(3\) how could it be said of God himself that he was "before the
throne?" He is everywhere represented as sitting on the throne, not as
before it. It is easy to conceive of angels as standing before the
throne; and of the Holy Spirit it is more easy to conceive as being
represented thus as ready to go forth and convey a heavenly influence
from that throne, but it is impossible to conceive in what sense this
could be applied to God as such.

II\. The opinion held by Grotius, and by John Henry Heinrichs, that it
refers to "the multiform providence of God," or to God considered as
operating in seven or many different ways. In support of this Grotius
appeals to [Rev 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012); [Rev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012). But this opinion is so
far-fetched, and it is so destitute of support, as to have found, it is
believed, no other advocates, and to need no further notice. It cannot
be supposed that John meant to personify the attributes of the Deity,
and then to unite them with God himself, and with the Lord Jesus Christ,
and to represent them as real subsistences from which important
blessings descend to people. It is clear that as by the phrase, "who is,
and who was, and who is to come," and by "Jesus Christ, the faithful and
true witness," he refers to real subsistences, so he must here. Besides,
if the attributes of God, or the modes of divine operation, are denoted
why is the number seven chosen? And why are they represented as standing
before the throne?

III\. A third opinion is, that the reference is to seven attending and
ministering presence-angels - angels represented as standing before the
throne of God, or in his presence. This opinion was adopted among the
ancients by Clemens of Alexandria Andreas of Cesarea, and others; among
the moderns by Beza, Drusius, Hammond, Wetstein, Rosenmuller, Clarke,
Prof. Stuart, and others. This opinion, however, has been held in
somewhat different forms; some maintaining that the seven angels are
referred to because it was a received opinion among the Hebrews that
there were seven angels standing in the presence of God as seven princes
stood in the Persian court before the king; others, that the angels of
the seven churches are particularly referred to, represented now as
standing in the presence of God; others, that seven angels, represented
as the principal angels employed in the government of the world, are
referred to; and others, that seven archangels are particularly
designated. Compare Poole, Synoptists in loco. The arguments which are
relied on by those who suppose that seven angels are here referred to
are briefly these:

\(1\) The nature of the expression used here. The expression, it is
said, is such as would naturally denote beings who were before his
throne - beings who were different from him who was on the throne - and
beings more than one in number. That it could not refer to one on the
throne, but must mean those distinct and separate from one on the
throne, is argued from the use of the phrases "before the throne," and
"before God," in [Rev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005); [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009), [Rev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015); [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002); [Rev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004), [Rev
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016); [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010); [Rev
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003); [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012); in all which places the
representation denotes those who were in the presence of God, and
standing before him.

\(2\) it is argued from other passages in the Book of Revelation which,
it is said (Prof. Stuart), go directly to confirm this opinion. Thus, in
[Rev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002); "And I saw the seven angels
which stood before God." So [Rev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005);
the seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, are said to be "the
seven Spirits of God." In these passages, it is alleged that the article
"the" designates the well-known angels; or those which had been before
specified, and that this is the first mention of any such angels after
the designation in the passage before us.

\(3\) it is said that this is in accordance with what was usual among
the Hebrews, who were accustomed to speak of seven presence-angels, or
angels standing in the presence of Yahweh. Thus, in the Book of Tobit
(12:15), Raphael is introduced as using this language: "I am Raphael,
one of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the saints,
and which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One." The
apocryphal Book of Enoch (chapter 20) gives the names of the seven
angels who watch; that is, of the watchers (compare the notes on [Dan
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013), [Dan
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017)) who stand in the presence of God
waiting for the divine commands, or who watch over the affairs of
people. So in the Zendavesta of Zoroaster, seven amshaspends, or
archangels, are mentioned. See Prof. Stuart, in loco.

To these views, however, there are objections of great weight, if they
are not in fact quite insuperable. They are such as the following:

\(1\) That the same rank should be given to them as to God, as the
source of blessings. According to the view which represents this
expression as referring to angels, they are placed on the same level, so
far as the matter before us is concerned, with "him who was, and is, and
is to come," and with the Lord Jesus Christ - a doctrine which does not
elsewhere occur in the Scriptures, and which we cannot suppose the
writer designed to teach.

\(2\) that blessings should be invoked from angels - as if they could
impart "grace and peace." It is evident that, whoever is referred to
here by the phrase "the seven Spirits," he is placed on the same level
with the others mentioned as the source of "grace and peace." But it
cannot be supposed that an inspired writer would invoke that grace and
peace from any but a divine being.

\(3\) that as two persons of the Trinity are mentioned here, it is to be
presumed that the third would not be omitted; or to put this argument in
a stronger form, it cannot be supposed that an inspired writer would
mention two of the persons of the Trinity in this connection, and then
not only not mention the third, but refer to angels - to creatures - as
bestowing what would be appropriately sought from the Holy Spirit. The
incongruity would be not merely in omitting all reference to the Spirit
- which might indeed occur, as it often does in the Scriptures - but in
putting in the place which that Spirit would naturally occupy an
allusion to angels as conferring blessings.

\(4\) if this refer to angels, it is impossible to avoid the inference
that angel-worship, or invocation of angels, is proper. To all intents
and purposes, this is an act of worship; for it is an act of solemn
invocation. It is an acknowledgment of the "seven Spirits," as the
source of "grace and peace." It would be impossible to resist this
impression on the popular mind; it would not be possible to meet it if
urged as an argument in favor of the propriety of angel-invocation, or
angel-worship. And yet, if there is anything clear in the Scriptures, it
is that God alone is to he worshipped. For these reasons, it seems to me
that this interpretation cannot be well founded.

IV\. There remains a fourth opinion, that it refers to the Holy Spirit,
and in favor of that opinion it may be urged:

\(1\) That it is most natural to suppose that the Holy Spirit would be
invoked on such an occasion, in connection with him "who was, and is,
and is to come," and with "Jesus Christ." If two of the persons of the
Trinity were addressed on such an occasion, it would be properly
supposed that the Holy Spirit would not be omitted, as one of the
persons from whom the blessing was to descend. Compare [Co2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014); "The grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be
with you all."

\(2\) it would be unnatural and improper, in such an invocation, to
unite angels with God as imparting blessings, or as participating with
God and with Christ in communicating blessings to man. An invocation to
God to send his angels, or to impart grace and favor through angelic
help, would be in entire accordance with the usage in Scripture, but it
is not in accordance with such usage to invoke such blessings from
angels.

\(3\) it cannot be denied that an invocation of grace from "him who is,
and was, and is to come," is of the nature of worship. The address to
him is as God, and the attitude of the mind in such an address is that
of one who is engaged in an act of devotion. The effect of uniting any
other being with him in such a case, would be to lead to the worship of
one thus associated with him. In regard to the Lord Jesus, "the faithful
and true witness," it is from such expressions as these that we are led
to the belief that he is divine, and that it is proper to worship him as
such. The same effect must be produced in reference to what is here
called "the seven Spirits before the throne." We cannot well resist the
impression that someone with divine attributes is intended; or, if it
refer to angels, we cannot easily show that it is not proper to render
divine worship to them. If they were thus invoked by an apostle, can it
be improper to worship them now?

\(4\) the word used here is not "angels," but "spirits"; and though it
is true that angels are spirits, and that the word "spirit" is applied
to them [Heb 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007), yet it is also true
that that is not a word which would be understood to refer to them
without designating that angels were meant. If angels had been intended
here, that word would naturally have been used, as is the case elsewhere
in this book.

\(5\) in [Rev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005), where there is a
reference to "the seven lamps before the throne," it is said of them
that they "are," that is, they represent "the seven Spirits of God."
This passage may be understood as referring to the same thing as that
before us, but it cannot he well understood of angels; because:

\(a\) if it did, it would have been natural to use that language for the
reason above mentioned;

\(b\) the angels are nowhere called "the spirits of God," nor would such
language be proper.

The phrase, "Spirit of God" naturally implies divinity, and could not be
applied to a creature. For these reasons it seems to me that the
interpretation which applies the phrase to the Holy Spirit is to be
preferred; and though that interpretation is not free from difficulties,
yet there are fewer difficulties in that than in either of the others
proposed. Though it may not be possible wholly to remove the
difficulties involved in that interpretation, yet perhaps something may
be done to diminish their force:

\(1\) First, as to the reason why the number seven should be applied to
the Holy Spirit:

\(a\) There would be as much propriety certainly in applying it to the
Holy Spirit as to God as such. And yet Grotius, Eichhorn, Ewald, and
others saw no difficulty in such an application considered as
representing a sevenfold mode of operation of God, or a manifold divine
agency.

\(b\) The word "seven" often denotes a full or complete number, and may
be used to denote what is full, complete, or manifold; and might thus be
used in reference to an all-perfect Spirit, or to a spirit which was
manifold in its operations.

\(c\) The number seven is evidently a favorite number in the Book of
Revelation, and it might be used by the author in places, and in a
sense, such as it would not be likely to be used by another writer.
Thus, there are seven epistles to the seven churches; there are seven
seals, seven trumpets, seven vials of the wrath of God, seven last
plagues; there are seven lamps, and seven Spirits of God; the Lamb has
seven horns and seven eyes. In [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016), seven stars are mentioned; in
[Rev 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012), seven attributes of God;
[Rev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003), the dragon has seven heads;
[Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), the beast has seven heads.

\(d\) The number seven, therefore, may have been given to the Holy
Spirit with reference to the diversity or the fulness of his operations
on the souls of people, and to his manifold agency on the affairs of the
world, as further developed in this book.

\(2\) as to his being represented as "before the throne," this may be
intended to designate the fact that the Divine Spirit was, as it were,
prepared to go forth, or to be sent forth, in accordance with a common
representation in the Scriptures, to accomplish important purposes on
human affairs. The posture does not necessarily imply inferiority of
nature, anymore than the language does respecting the Son of God, when
he is represented as being sent into the world to execute an important
commission from the Father.

[Revelation 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 1:5</span></span>

And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness - See the notes on
[Rev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002). He is faithful in the sense
that he is one on whose testimony there may be entire reliance, or who
is entirely worthy to be believed. From him "grace and peace" are
appropriately sought, as one who hears such a testimony, and as the
first-begotten from the dead, and as reigning over the kings of the
earth. Thus, grace and peace are invoked from the infinite God in all
his relations and operations: as the Father, the Source of all
existence; as the Sacred Spirit, going forth in manifold operations upon
the hearts of people; and as the Son of God, the one appointed to bear
faithful testimony to the truth respecting God and future events.

And the first-begotten of the dead - The same Greek expression -
πρωτότοκος prōtotokos - occurs in [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018). See it explained in the notes on
that passage. Compare the notes at [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020).

And the prince of the kings of the earth - Who has over all the kings of
the earth the pre-eminence which kings have over their subjects. He is
the Ruler of rulers; King of kings. In [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014); [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016), the same thought is expressed
by saying that he is the "King of kings." No language could more
sublimely denote his exalted character, or his supremacy. Kings and
princes sway a scepter over the million of the earth, and the exaltation
of the Saviour is here expressed by supposing that all those kings and
princes constitute a community over which he is the head. The exaltation
of the Redeemer is elsewhere expressed in different language, but the
idea is one that everywhere prevails in regard to him in the Scriptures.
Compare [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027); [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002); [Eph
1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020); [Phi
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009); [Col
1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015). The word "prince" - ὁ ἄρχων
ho archōn - means properly, "ruler, leader, the first in rank." We often
apply the word "prince" to an heir to a throne who is not invested with
absolute sovereignty. The word here, however, denotes that he actually
exercises dominion over the rulers of the earth. As this is an authority
which is claimed by God (compare [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005) ff; [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001) ff; [Psa
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002); [Psa
99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001); [Psa
103:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#009); [Dan
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)), and which can only pertain to
God, it is clear that in ascribing this to the Lord Jesus it is implied
that he is possessed of divine attributes. As much of the revelations of
this book pertained to the assertion of power over the princes and
rulers of this world, there was a propriety that, in the commencement,
it should be asserted that he who was to exert that power was invested
with the prerogative of a ruler of the nations, and that he had this
right of control.

Unto him that loved us - This refers undoubtedly to the Lord Jesus,
whose love for people was so strong that nothing more was necessary to
characterize him than to speak of him as the one "who loved us." It is
manifest that the division in the verses should have been made here, for
this commences a new subject, not having any special connection with
what precedes. In [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004), and the
first part of this verse, the writer had invoked grace from the Father,
the Spirit, and the Saviour. In the latter clause of the verse there
commences an ascription of praise to the Redeemer; an ascription to him
particularly, because the whole book is regarded as a revelation from
him [Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001); because he was the one
who especially appeared to John in the visions of Patmos; and because he
was to be the great agent in carrying into execution the purposes
revealed in this book.

And washed us from our sins in his own blood - He has removed the
pollution of sin from our souls by his blood; that is, his blood has
been applied to cleanse us from sin. Blood can be represented as having
a cleansing power only as it makes an expiation for sin, for considered
literally its effect would be the reverse. The language is such as would
be used only on the supposition that he had made an atonement, and that
it was by the atonement that we are cleansed; for in what sense could it
be said of a martyr that he "had washed us from our sins in his blood?"
How could this language be used of Paul or Polycarp; of Ridley or
Cranmer? The doctrine that the blood of Christ cleanses us from sin, or
purifies us, is one that is common in the Scriptures. Compare [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007); [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014). The specific idea of washing,
however - representing that blood as washing sin away - is one which
does not elsewhere occur. It is evidently used in the sense of
"cleansing" or "purifying," as we do this by "washing," and as the blood
of Christ accomplishes in respect to our souls, what washing with water
does in respect to the body.

[Revelation 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 1:6</span></span>

And hath made us kings and priests unto God - In [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009) the same idea is expressed by
saying of Christians that they are "a royal priesthood." See the notes
on that verse. The quotation in both places is from [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006); "And ye shall be unto me a
kingdom of priests." This idea is expressed here by saying that Christ
had made us in fact kings and priests; that is, Christians are exalted
to the dignity and are invested with the office, implied in these words.
The word "kings," as applied to them, refers to the exalted rank and
dignity which they will have; to the fact that they, in common with
their Saviour, will reign triumphant over all enemies; and that, having
gained a victory over sin and death and hell, they may be represented as
reigning together. The word "priests" refers to the fact that they are
engaged in the holy service of God, or that they offer to him acceptable
worship. See the notes on [Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005).

And his Father - Even his Father; that is, the Saviour has redeemed
them, and elevated them to this exalted rank, in order that they may
thus be engaged in the service of his Father.

To him be glory - To the Redeemer; for so the construction [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005) demands. The word "glory" here
means praise, or honor, implying a wish that all honor should be shown
him.

And dominion - This word means literally "strength" - κράτος kratos; but
it here means the strength, power, or authority which is exercised over
others, and the expression is equivalent to a wish that he may reign.

[Revelation 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 1:7</span></span>

Behold he cometh with clouds - That is, the Lord Jesus, when he returns,
will come accompanied with clouds. This is in accordance with the
uniform representation respecting the return of the Saviour. See the
notes on [Mat 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030). Compare [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064); [Mar
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#026); [Mar
14:62](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#062); [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009), [Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011). Clouds are appropriate symbols
of majesty, and God is often represented as appearing in that manner.
See [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018); [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011) ff; [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001). So, among the pagan, it was
common to represent their divinities as appearing clothed with a cloud:

"tandem venias, precamur,

Nube candentes humeros amictus.

Augur Apollo"

The design of introducing this representation of the Saviour, and of the
manner in which he would appear, seems to be to impress the mind with a
sense of the majesty and glory. of that being from whom John received
his revelations. His rank, his character, his glory were such as to
demand respect; all should reverence him, and all should feel that his
communications about the future were important to them, for they must
soon appear before him.

And every eye shall see him - He will be made visible in his glory to
all that dwell upon the earth; to all the children of men. Everyone,
therefore, has an interest in what he says; everyone has this in certain
prospect, that he shall see the Son of God coming as a Judge.

And they also which pierced him - When he died; that is, they who
pierced his hands, his feet, and his side. There is probably an allusion
here to [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010); "They shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn." The language here
is so general that it may refer to any act of looking upon the pierced
Saviour, and might be applied to those who would see him on the cross
and to their compunctious visitings then; or to their subsequent
reflections, as they might look by faith on him whom they had crucified;
or to the feeling of any sinners who should reflect that their sins had
been the cause of the death of the Lord Jesus; or it might be applied,
as it is here, more specifically to the feelings which his murderers
will have when they shall see him coming in his glory. All sinners who
have pierced his heart by their crimes will then behold him and will
mourn over their treatment of him; they, in a special manner, who
imbrued their hands in his blood will then remember their crime and be
overwhelmed with alarm. The design of what is here said seems to be, to
show that the coming of the Saviour will be an event of great interest
to all mankind. None can be indifferent to it, for all will see him. His
friends will hail his advent (compare [Rev
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020)), but all who were engaged in
putting him to death, and all who in any manner have pierced his heart
by sin and ingratitude, unless they shall have repented, will have
occasion of bitter lamentation when he shall come. There are none who
have a more fearful doom to anticipate than the murderers of the Son of
God, including those who actually put him to death, and those who would
have engaged in such an act had they been present, and those who, by
their conduct, have done all they could to pierce and wound him by their
ingratitude.

And all kindreds of the earth - Greek, "All the tribes - φυλαὶ phulai of
the earth." This language is the same which the Saviour uses in [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030). See the notes on that passage.
The word "tribes" is what is commonly applied to the twelve tribes of
Israel, and thus used, it would describe the inhabitants of the Holy
Land; but it may be used to denote nations and people in general, as
descended from a common ancestor, and the connection requires that it
should be understood in this sense here, since it is said that "every
eye shall see him"; that is, all that dwell on the face of the earth.

Shall wail because of him - On account of him; on account of their
treatment of him. The word rendered "wail" - κόπτω koptō - means
properly to beat, to cut; then to beat or cut oneself in the breast as
an expression of sorrow; and then to lament, to cry aloud in intense
grief. The coming of the Saviour will be an occasion of this:

\(a\) because it will be an event which will call the sins of people to
remembrance, and

\(b\) because they will be overwhelmed with the apprehension of the
wrath to come.

Nothing would fill the earth with greater consternation than the coming
of the Son of God in the clouds of heaven; nothing could produce so deep
and universal alarm. This fact, which no one can doubt, is proof that
people feel that they are guilty, since, if they were innocent, they
would have nothing to dread by his appearing. It is also a proof that
they believe in the doctrine of future punishment, since, if they do
not, there is no reason why they should be alarmed at his coming. Surely
people would not dread his appearing if they really believed that all
will be saved. Who dreads the coming of a benefactor to bestow favors on
him? Who dreads the appearing of a jailer to deliver him from prison; of
a physician to raise him up from a bed of pain; of a deliverer to knock
off the fetters of slavery? And how can it be that people should be
alarmed at the coming of the Saviour, unless their consciences tell them
that they have much to fear in the future? The presence of the Redeemer
in the clouds of heaven would destroy all the hopes of those who believe
in the doctrine of universal salvation - as the approach of death now
often does. People believe that there is much to be dreaded in the
future world, or they would not fear the coming of Him who shall wind up
the affairs of the human race.

Even so, Amen - ναὶ, ἀμήν nai, amēn. "A double expression of "so be it,
assuredly, certainly," one in Greek and the other in Hebrew" (Prof.
Stuart). Compare [Rom 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016), "Abba,
Father" - ἀββᾶ, ὁ πατήρ abba, ho patēr. The idea which John seems to
intend to convey is, that the coming of the Lord Jesus, and the
consequences which he says will follow, are events which are altogether
certain. This is not the expression of a wish that it may be so, as our
common translation would seem to imply, but a strong affirmation that it
will be so. In some passages, how. over, the word (ναὶ nai) expresses
assent to what is said, implying approbation of it as true, or as
desirable. "Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight," [Mat
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026); [Luk
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021). So in [Rev
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#007), "Even so (ναὶ nai), Lord God
Almighty." So in [Rev 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020), "Even so
(ναὶ nai), come, Lord Jesus." The word "Amen" here seems to determine
the meaning of the phrase, and to make it the affirmation of a
"certainty," rather than the expression of a "wish."

[Revelation 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 1:8</span></span>

I am Alpha and Omega - These are the first and the last letters of the
Greek alphabet, and denote properly the first and the last. So in [Rev
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013), where the two expressions are
united, "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and
the last." So in [Rev 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017), the
speaker says of himself, "I am the first and the last." Among the Jewish
rabbis it was common to use the first and the last letters of the Hebrew
alphabet to denote the whole of anything, from beginning to end. Thus,
it is said, "Adam transgressed the whole law, from 'Aleph (א) to Taw
(תּ)." "Abraham kept the whole law, from 'Aleph (א) to Taw (תּ)." The
language here is what would properly denote "eternity" in the being to
whom it is applied, and could be used in reference to no one but the
true God. It means that he is the beginning and the end of all things;
that he was at the commencement, and will be at the close; and it is
thus equivalent to saying that he has always existed, and that he will
always exist. Compare [Isa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004), "I
the Lord, the first, and with the last"; [Isa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006), "I am the first, and I am the
last; and beside me there is no God"; [Isa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012), "I am he; I am the first, I
also am the last." There can be no doubt that the language here would be
naturally understood as implying divinity, and it could be properly
applied to no one but the true God. The obvious interpretation here
would be to apply this to the Lord Jesus; for:

\(a\) it is he who is spoken of in the verses preceding, and

\(b\) there can be no doubt that the same language is applied to him in
[Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011).

As there is, however, a difference of reading in this place in the Greek
text, and as it can. not be absolutely certain that the writer meant to
refer to the Lord Jesus specifically here, this cannot be adduced with
propriety as a proof-text to demonstrate his divinity. Many mss.,
instead of "Lord," κυρίος kurios, read "God," Θεὸς Theos and this
reading is adopted by Griesbach, Tittman, and Hahn, and is now regarded
as the correct reading. There is no real incongruity in supposing, also,
that the writer here meant to refer to God as such, since the
introduction of a reference to him would not be inappropriate to his
manifest design. Besides, a portion of the language used here, "which
is, and was, and is to come," is what would more naturally suggest a
reference to God as such, than to the Lord Jesus Christ. See [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). The object for which this passage
referring to the "first and the last - to him who was, and is, and is to
come," is introduced here evidently is, to show that as he was clothed
with omnipotence, and would continue to exist through all ages to come
as he had existed in all ages past, there could be no doubt about his
ability to execute all which it is said he would execute.

Saith the Lord - Or, saith God, according to what is now regarded as the
correct reading.

Which is, and which was, ... - See the notes on [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004).

The Almighty - An appellation often applied to God, meaning that he has
all power, and used here to denote that he is able to accomplish what is
disclosed in this book.

[Revelation 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 1:9</span></span>

I John, who also am your brother - Your Christian brother; who am a
fellow-Christian with you. The reference here is doubtless to the
members of the seven churches in Asia, to whom the epistles in the
following chapters were addressed, and to whom the whole book seems to
have been sent. In the previous verse, the writer had closed the
salutation, and he here commences a description of the circumstances
under which the vision appeared to him. He was in a lonely island, to
which he had been banished on account of his attachment to religion; he
was in a state of high spiritual enjoyment on the day devoted to the
sacred remembrance of the Redeemer; he suddenly heard a voice behind
him, and turning saw the Son of man himself, in glorious form, in the
midst of seven golden lamps, and fell at his feet as dead.

And companion in tribulation - Your partner in affliction. That is, he
and they were suffering substantially the same kind of trials on account
of their religion. It is evident from this that some form of persecution
was then raging, in which they were also sufferers, though in their case
it did not lead to banishment. The leader, the apostle, the aged and
influential preacher, was banished; but there were many other forms of
trial which they might be called to endure who remained at home. What
they were we have not the means of knowing with certainty.

And in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ - The meaning of this
passage is, that he, and those whom he addressed, were not only
companions in affliction, but were fellow-partners in the kingdom of the
Redeemer; that is, they shared the honor and the privileges pertaining
to that kingdom; and that they were fellow-partners in the "patience" of
Jesus Christ, that is, in enduring with patience whatever might follow
from their being his friends and followers. The general idea is, that
alike in privileges and sufferings they were united. They shared alike
in the results of their attachment to the Saviour.

Was in the isle that is called Patmos - Patmos is one of the cluster of
islands in the Aegean Sea anciently called the "Sporades." It lies
between the island of Icaria and the promontory of Miletus. It is merely
mentioned by the ancient geographers (Plin. Hist. Nat., iv., 23; Strabo,
x., 488). It is now called Patino or Patmoso. It is some six or eight
miles in length, and not more than a mile in breadth, being about
fifteen miles in circumference. It has neither trees nor rivers, nor has
it any land for cultivation, except some little nooks among the ledges
of rocks. On approaching the island, the coast is high, and consists of
a succession of capes, which form so many ports, some of which are
excellent. The only one in use, however, is a deep bay, sheltered by
High mountains on every side but one, where it is protected by a
projecting cape. The town attached to this port is situated upon a high
rocky mountain, rising immediately from the sea, and this, with the
Scala below upon the shore, consisting of some ships and houses, forms
the only inhabited site of the island.

Though Patmos is deficient in trees, it abounds in flowery plants and
shrubs. Walnuts and other fruit trees are raised in the orchards, and
the wine of Patmos is the strongest and the best flavored in the Greek
islands. Maize and barley are cultivated, but not in a quantity
sufficient for the use of the inhabitants and for a supply of their own
vessels, and others which often put into their good harbor for
provisions. The inhabitants now do not exceed four or five thousand;
many of whom are emigrants from the neighboring continent. About halfway
up the mountain there is shown a natural grotto in a rock, where John is
said to have seen his visions and to have written this book. Near this
is a small church, connected with which is a school or college, where
the Greek language is taught; and on the top of the hill, and in the
center of the island, is a monastery, which, from its situation, has a
very majestic appearance (Kitto's Cyclopoedia of Bib. Literally). The
annexed engraving is supposed to give a good representation of the
appearance of the island,

It is commonly supposed that John was banished to this island by
Domitian, about 94 a.d. No place could have been selected for banishment
which would accord better with such a design than this. Lonely,
desolate, barren, uninhabited, seldom visited, it had all the requisites
which could be desired for a place of punishment; and banishment to that
place would accomplish all that a persecutor could wish in silencing an
apostle, without putting him to death. It was no uncommon thing, in
ancient times, to banish people from their country; either sending them
forth at large, or specifying some particular place to which they were
to go. The whole narrative leads us to suppose that this place was
designated as that to which John was to be sent. Banishment to an island
was a common mode of punishment; and there was a distinction made by
this act in favor of those who were thus banished. The more base, low,
and vile of criminals were commonly condemned to work in the mines; the
more decent and respectable were banished to some lonely island. See the
authorities quoted in Wetstein, "in loco."

For the word of God - On account of the word of God; that is, for
holding and preaching the gospel. See the notes on [Rev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002). It cannot mean that he was sent
there with a view to his "preaching" the Word of God; for it is
inconceivable that he should have been sent from Ephesus to preach in
such a little, lonely, desolate place, where indeed there is no evidence
that there were any inhabitants; nor can it mean that he was sent there
by the Spirit of God to receive and record this revelation, for it is
clear that the revelation could have been made elsewhere, and such a
place afforded no special advantages for this. The fair interpretation
is, in accordance with all the testimony of antiquity, that he was sent
there in a time of persecution, as a punishment for preaching the
gospel.

And for the testimony of Jesus Christ - See the notes on [Rev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002). He did not go there to bear
testimony to Jesus Christ on that island, either by preaching or
recording the visions in this book, but he went because he had preached
the doctrines which testified of Christ.

[Revelation 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 1:10</span></span>

I was in the Spirit - This cannot refer to his own spirit, for such an
expression would be unintelligible. The language then must refer to some
unusual state, or to some influence that had been brought to bear upon
him from without, that was appropriate to such a day. The word "Spirit"
may refer either to the Holy Spirit, or to some state of mind such as
the Holy Spirit produces - a spirit of elevated devotion, a state of
high and uncommon religious enjoyment. It is clear that John does not
mean here to say that he was under the influence of the Holy Spirit in
such a sense as that he was inspired, for the command to make a record,
as well as the visions, came subsequently to the time referred to. The
fair meaning of the passage is, that he was at that time favored, in a
large measure, with the influences of the Holy Spirit - the spirit of
true devotion; that he had a high state of religious enjoyment, and was
in a condition not inappropriate to the remarkable communications which
were made to him on that day.

The state of mind in which he was at the time here referred to, is not
such as the prophets are often represented to have been in when under
the prophetic inspiration (compare [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003); [Eze
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#002); [Jer
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001)), and which was often accompanied
with an entire prostration of bodily strength (compare [Num
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004)); [Sa1
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024); [Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028); [Dan
10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008); [Rev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017)), but such as any Christian may
experience when in a high state of religious enjoyment. He was not yet
under the prophetic ecstasy (compare [Act
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010); [Act
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005); [Act
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017)), but was, though in a lonely
and barren island, and far away from the privileges of the sanctuary,
permitted to enjoy, in a high degree, the consolations of religion - an
illustration of the great truth that God can meet his people anywhere;
that, when in solitude and in circumstances of outward affliction, when
persecuted and cast out, when deprived of the public means of grace and
the society of religious friends, He can meet them with the abundant
consolations of His grace, and pour joy and peace into their souls. This
state was not inappropriate to the revelations which were about to be
made to John, but this itself was not that state. It was a state which
seems to have resulted from the fact, that on that desert island he
devoted the day to the worship of God, and, by honoring the day
dedicated to the memory of the risen Saviour, found, what all will find,
that it was attended with rick spiritual influences on his soul.

On the Lord's day - The word rendered here as "Lord's" (κυριακῇ
kuriakē), occurs only in this place and in [Co1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020), where it is applied to the
Lord's supper. It properly means "pertaining to the Lord"; and, so far
as this word is concerned, it might mean a day "pertaining to the Lord,"
in any sense, or for any reason; either because he claimed it as his
own, and had set it apart for his own service, or because it was
designed to commemorate some important event pertaining to him, or
because it was observed in honor of him. It is clear:

\(1\) That this refers to some day which was distinguished from all
other days of the week, and which would be sufficiently designated by
the use of this term.

\(2\) that it was a day which was for some reason regarded as especially
a day of the Lord, or especially devoted to him.

\(3\) it would further appear that this was a day particularly devoted
to the Lord Jesus; for:

\(a\) that is the natural meaning of the word "Lord" as used in the New
Testament (compare the notes on [Act
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#024)); and

\(b\) if the Jewish Sabbath were intended to be designated, the word
"Sabbath" would have been used.

The term was used generally by the early Christians to denote the first
day of the week. It occurs twice in the Epistle of Ignatius to the
Magnesians (about 101 a.d.), who calls the Lord's day "the queen and
prince of all days." Chrysostom (on Ps. 119) says, "It was called the
Lord's day because the Lord rose from the dead on that day." Later
fathers make a marked distinction between the "Sabbath" and the "Lord's
day"; meaning by the former the Jewish "Sabbath," or the seventh day of
the week, and by the latter the first day of the week, kept holy by
Christians. So Theodoret (Fab. Haeret. ii. 1), speaking of the
Ebionites, says, "They keep the Sabbath according to the Jewish law, and
sanctify the Lord's day in like manner as we do" (Prof. Stuart). The
strong probability is, that the name was given to this day in honor of
the Lord Jesus, and because he rose on that day from the dead. No one
can doubt that it was an appellation given to the first day of the week;
and the passage, therefore, proves:

\(1\) that that day was thus early distinguished in some special manner,
so that the mere mention of it would be sufficient to identify it in the
minds of those to whom the apostle wrote;

\(2\) that it was in some sense regarded as devoted to the Lord Jesus,
or was designed in some way to commemorate what he had done; and,

\(3\) that if this book were written by the apostle John, the observance
of that day has the apostolic sanction. He had manifestly, in accordance
with a prevailing custom, set apart this day in honor of the Lord Jesus.
Though alone, he was engaged on that day in acts of devotion. Though far
away from the sanctuary, he enjoyed what all Christians hope to enjoy on
such a day of rest, and what not a few do in fact enjoy in its
observance. We may remark, in view of this statement:

\(a\) that when away from the sanctuary, and deprived of its privileges,
we should nevertheless not fail to observe the Christian Sabbath. If on
a bed of sickness, if in a land of strangers, if on the deep, if in a
foreign clime, if on a lonely island, as John was, where we have none of
the advantages of public worship, we should yet honor the Sabbath. We
should worship God alone, if we have none to unite with us; we should
show to those around us, if we are with strangers, by our dress and our
conversation, by a serious and devent manner, by abstinence from labor,
and by a resting from travel, that we devoutly regard this day as set
apart for God.

\(b\) We may expect, in such circumstances, and with such a devout
observance of the day, that God will meet with us and bless us. It was
on a lonely island, far away from the sanctuary and from the society of
Christian friends, that the Saviour met "the beloved disciple," and we
may trust it will be so with us. For on such a desert island, in a
lonely forest, on the deep, or amid strangers in a foreign land, he can
as easily meet us as in the sanctuary where we have been accustomed to
worship, and when surrounded by all the privileges of a Christian land.
No man, at home or abroad, among friends or strangers, enjoying the
privileges of the sanctuary, or deprived of those privileges, ever kept
the Christian Sabbath in a devout manner without profit to his own soul;
and, when deprived of the privileges of public worship, the visitations
of the Saviour to the soul may be more than a compensation for all our
privations. Who would not be willing to be banished to a lonely island
like Patmos, if he might enjoy such a glorious vision of the Redeemer as
John was favored with there?

And heard behind me a great voice - A loud voice. This was of course
sudden, and took him by surprise.

As of a trumpet - Loud as a trumpet. This is evidently the only point in
the comparison. It does not mean that the tones of the voice resembled a
trumpet, but only that it was clear, loud, and distinct like a trumpet.
A trumpet is a well-known wind instrument, distinguished for the
clearness of its sounds, and was used for calling assemblies together,
for marshalling hosts for battle, etc. The Hebrew word employed commonly
to denote a trumpet שׁופר showpar means "bright" and "clear," and is
supposed to have been given to the instrument on account of its clear
and shrill sound, as we now give the name "clarion" to a certain
wind-instrument. The Hebrew trumpet is often referred to as employed, on
account of its clearness, to summon people together, [Exo
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013); [Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010); [Jdg
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#018), etc.; [Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003); [Sa2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#010).

[Revelation 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 1:11</span></span>

Saying - That is, literally, "the trumpet saying." It was, however,
manifestly the voice that addressed these words to John, though they
seemed to come through a trumpet, and hence the trumpet is represented
as uttering them.

I am Alpha and Omega - [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008).

The first and the last - An explanation of the terms Alpha and Omega.
See the notes on [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008).

And, What thou seest - The voice, in addition to the declaration, "I am
Alpha and Omega," gave this direction that he should record what he saw.
The phrase, "what thou seest," refers to what would pass before him in
vision, what he there saw, and what he would see in the extraordinary
manifestations which were to be made to him.

Write in a book - Make a fair record of it all; evidently meaning that
he should describe things as they occurred, and implying that the vision
would be held so long before the eye of his mind that he would be able
to transfer it to the "book." The fair and obvious interpretation of
this is, that he was to make the record in the island of Patmos, and
then send it to the churches. Though Patmos was a lonely and barren
place, and though probably here were few or no inhabitants there, yet
there is no improbability in supposing that John could have found
writing materials there, nor even that he may have been permitted to
take such materials with him. He seems to have been banished for
"preaching," not for "writing"; and there is no evidence that the
materials for writing would be withheld from him. John Bunyan, in
Bedford jail, found materials for writing the "Pilgrim's Progress," and
there is no evidence that the apostle John was denied the means of
recording his thoughts when in the island of Patmos. The word "book"
here (βιβλίον biblion), would more properly mean a roll or scroll, that
being the form in which books were anciently made. See the notes on [Luk
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017).

And send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia - The churches
which are immediately designated, not implying that there were no other
churches in Asia, but that there were particular reasons for sending it
to these. He was to send all that he should "see"; to wit, all that is
recorded in this volume or book of "Revelation." Part of this Rev. 2;
Rev. 3 would pertain particularly to them; the remainder Rev. 4-22 would
pertain to them no more than to others, but still they would have the
common interest in it which all the church would have, and, in their
circumstances of trial, there might be important reasons why they should
see the assurance that the church would ultimately triumph over all its
enemies. They were to derive from it themselves the consolation which it
was suited to impart in time of trial, and to transmit it to future
times, for the welfare of the church at large.

Unto Ephesus - Perhaps mentioned first as being the capital of that
portion of Asia Minor; the most important city of the seven; the place
where John had preached, and whence he had been banished. For a
particular description of these seven churches, see the notes on the
epistles addressed to them in Rev. 2-3.

[Revelation 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 1:12</span></span>

And I turned to see the voice that spake with me - He naturally turned
round to see who it was that spake to him in this solitary and desolate
place, where he thought himself to be alone. To see the "voice" here
means to see the "person" who spake.

And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks - These were the
"first" things that met his eye. This must have been in "vision," of
course, and the meaning is, that there "seemed" to be there seven such
lamps or candelabras. The word rendered "candlesticks" (λυχνία luchnia)
means properly a light-stand, lampstand - something to bear up a light.
It would be applied to anything that was used for this purpose; and
nothing is intimated, in the use of the word, in regard to the form or
dimensions of the light-bearers. Lamps were more commonly used at that
time than candles, and it is rather to be supposed that these were
designed to be lamp-bearers, or lamp-sustainers, than candle-sticks.
They were seven in number; not one branching into seven, but seven
standing apart, and so far from each other that he who appeared to John
could stand among them. The lamp-bearers evidently sustained each a
light, and these gave a special brilliancy to the scene. It is not
improbable that, as they were designed to represent the seven churches
of Asia, they were arranged in an order resembling these churches. The
scene is not laid in the temple, as many suppose, for there is nothing
that resembles the arrangements in the temple except the mere fact of
the lights. The scene as yet is in Patmos, and there is no evidence that
John did not regard himself as there, or that he fancied for a moment
that he was translated to the temple in Jerusalem. There can be no doubt
as to the design of this representation, for it is expressly declared
[Rev 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020) that the seven lamp-bearers
were intended to represent the seven churches. Light is often used in
the Scriptures as an emblem of true religion; Christians are represented
as "the light of the world" ([Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014); compare [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015); [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)), and a Christian church may be
represented as a light standing in the midst of surrounding darkness.

[Revelation 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 1:13</span></span>

And in the midst of the seven candlesticks - Standing among them, so as
to be encircled with them. This shows that the representation could not
have been like that of the vision of Zechariah [Zac
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002), where the prophet sees "a
candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven
lamps thereon." In the vision as it appeared to John, there was not one
lampbearer, with seven lamps or branches, but there were seven
lamp-bearers, so arranged that one in the likeness of the Son of man
could stand in the midst of them.

One like unto the Son of man - This was evidently the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, elsewhere so often called "the Son of man." That it was the
Saviour himself is apparent from [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018). The expression rendered "like
unto the Son of man," should have been "like unto a son of man"; that
is, like a man, a human being, or in a human form. The reasons for so
interpreting it are:

\(a\) that the Greek is without the article, and

\(b\) that, as it is rendered in our version, it seems to make the
writer say that he was like himself, since the expression "the Son of
man" is in the New Testament but another name for the Lord Jesus.

The phrase is often applied to him in the New Testament, and always,
except in three instances [Act 7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056);
[Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013); [Rev
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014), by the Saviour himself,
evidently to denote his warm interest in man, or his relationship to
man; to signify that he was a man, and wished to designate himself
eminently as such. See the notes on [Mat
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020). In the use of this phrase in the
New Testament, there is probably an allusion to [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013). The idea would seem to be, that
he whom he saw resembled "the Son of man" - the Lord Jesus, as he had
seen him in the days of his flesh though it would appear that he did not
know that it was he until he was informed of it, [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018). Indeed, the costume in which he
appeared was so unlike that in which John had been accustomed to see the
Lord Jesus in the days of his flesh, that it cannot be well supposed
that he would at once recognize him as the same.

Clothed with a garment down to the foot - A robe reaching down to the
feet, or to the ankles, yet so as to leave the feet themselves visible.
The allusion here, doubtless, is to a long, loose, flowing robe, such as
was worn by kings. Compare the notes on [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001).

And girt about the paps - About the breast. It was common, and is still,
in the East, to wear a girdle to confine the robe, as well as to form a
beautiful ornament. This was commonly worn about the middle of the
person, or "the loins," but it would seem also that it was sometimes
worn around the breast. See the notes on [Mat
5:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038).

With a golden girdle - Either wholly made of gold, or, more probably,
richly ornamented with gold. This would naturally suggest the idea of
one of rank, probably one of princely rank. The raiment here assumed was
not that of a priest, but that of a king. It was very far from being
that in which the Redeemer appeared when he dwelt upon the earth, and
was rather designed to denote his royal state as he is exalted in
heaven. He is not indeed represented with a crown and scepter here, and
perhaps the leading idea is that of one of exalted rank, of unusual
dignity, of one suited to inspire awe and respect. In other
circumstances, in this book, this same Redeemer is represented as
wearing a crown, and going forth to conquest. See [Rev
19:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012). Here the representation
seems to have been designed to impress the mind with a sense of the
greatness and glory of the personage who thus suddenly made his
appearance.

[Revelation 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 1:14</span></span>

His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow -
Exceedingly or perfectly white - the first suggestion to the mind of the
apostle being that of wool, and then the thought occurring of its
extreme whiteness resembling snow - the purest white of which the mind
conceives. The comparison with wool and snow to denote anything
especially white is not uncommon. See [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018). Prof. Stuart supposes that this
means, not that his hairs were literally white, as if with age, which he
says would be incongruous to one just risen from the dead, clothed with
immortal youth and vigor, but that it means radiant, bright, resplendent
- similar to what occurred on the transfiguration of the Saviour, [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002). But to this it may be replied:

\(a\) That this would not accord well with that with which his hair is
compared - snow and wool, particularly the latter.

\(b\) The usual meaning of the word is more obvious here, and not at all
inappropriate.

The representation was suited to signify majesty and authority; and this
would be best accomplished by the image of one who was venerable in
years. Thus, in the vision that appeared to Daniel [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009), it is said of him who is there
called the "Ancient of Days," that "his garment was white as snow, and
the hair of his head like the pure wool." It is not improbable that John
had that representation in his eye, and that therefore he would be
impressed with the conviction that this was a manifestation of a divine
person. We are not necessarily to suppose that this is the form in which
the Saviour always appears now in heaven, anymore than we are to suppose
that God appears always in the form in which he was manifested to Isaiah
[Isa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001), to Daniel [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009), or to Moses and Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu in the mount, [Exo 24:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010). The
representation is, that this form was assumed for the purpose of
impressing the mind of the apostle with a sense of his majesty and
glory.

And his eyes were as a flame of fire - Bright, sharp, penetrating; as if
everything was light before them, or they would penetrate into the
thoughts of people. Such a representation is not uncommon. We speak of a
lightning glance, a fiery look, etc. In [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), it is said of the man who
appeared to the prophet on the banks of the river Hiddekel, that his
eyes were "as lamps of fire." Numerous instances of this comparison from
the Greek and Latin Classics may be seen in Wetstein, in loco.

[Revelation 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 1:15</span></span>

And his feet like unto fine brass - Compare [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), "And his arms and his feet like
in color to polished brass." See also [Eze
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007), "and they" (the feet of the
living creatures) "sparkled like the color of burnished brass." The word
used here - χαλκολιβάνω chalkolibanō - occurs in the New Testament only
here and in [Rev 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018). It is not found
in the Septuagint. The word properly means "white brass" (probably
compounded of χαλκός chalkos, brass, and λίβανος libanos, whiteness,
from the Hebrew לבן laban, white). Others regard it as from χαλκός
chalkos, brass, and λιπαρόν liparon, clear. The metal referred to was
undoubtedly a species of brass distinguished for its clearness or
whiteness. Brass is a compound metal, composed of copper and zinc. The
color varies much according to the different proportions of the various
ingredients. The Vulgate here renders the word "aurichalcum," a mixture
of gold and of brass - perhaps the same as the ἠλεκτρον ēlektron - the
electrum of the ancients, composed of gold and of silver, usually in the
proportion of four parts gold and one part silver, and distinguished for
its brilliancy. See Robinson, Lexicon, and Wetstein, in loco. The kind
of metal here referred to, however, would seem to be some compound of
brass - of a whitish and brilliant color. The exact proportion of the
ingredients in the metal here referred to cannot now be determined.

As if they burned in a furnace - That is, his feet were so bright that
they seemed to be like a beautiful metal glowing intensely in the midst
of a furnace. Anyone who has looked upon the dazzling and almost
insupportable brilliancy of metal in a furnace, can form an idea of the
image here presented.

And his voice as the sound of many waters - As the roar of the ocean, or
of a cataract. Nothing could be a more sublime description of majesty
and authority than to compare the voice of a speaker with the roar of
the ocean. This comparison often occurs in the Scriptures. See [Eze
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#002), "And behold the glory of the God
of Israel came from the east: and his voice was like the sound of many
waters: and the earth shined with his glory." So [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002); [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006). Compare [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024); [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006).

[Revelation 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 1:16</span></span>

And he had in his right hand seven stars - Emblematic of the angels of
the seven churches. How he held them is not said. It may be that they
seemed to rest on his open palm; or it may be that he seemed to hold
them as if they were arranged in a certain order, and with some sort of
attachment, so that they could be grasped. It is not improbable that, as
in the case of the seven lamp-bearers (see the notes at [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013)), they were so arranged as to
represent the relative position of the seven churches.

And out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword - On the form of the
ancient two-edged sword, see the notes on [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017). The two edges were designed to
cut both ways; and such a sword is a striking emblem of the penetrating
power of truth, or of words that proceed from the mouth; and this is
designed undoubtedly to be the representation here - that there was some
symbol which showed that his words, or his truth, had the power of
cutting deep, or penetrating the soul. So in [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002), it is said of the same
personage, "And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword." See the notes
on that verse. So in [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012), "The
Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword,"
etc. So it is said of Pericles by Aristophanes:

"His powerful speech.

Pierced the hearer's soul, and left behind.

Deep in his bosom its keen point infixt."

A similar figure often occurs in Arabic poetry. "As arrows his words
enter into the heart." See Gesenius, Commentary zu, [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002). The only difficulty here is in
regard to the apparently incongruous representation of a sword seeming
to proceed from the mouth; but it is not perhaps necessary to suppose
that John means to say that he saw such an image. He heard him speak; he
felt the penetrating power of his words; and they were as if a sharp
sword proceeded from his mouth. They penetrated deep into the soul, and
as he looked on him it seemed as if a sword came from his mouth. Perhaps
it is not necessary to suppose that there was even any visible
representation of this - either of a sword or of the breath proceeding
from his mouth appearing to take this form, as Prof. Stuart supposes. It
may be wholly a figurative representation, as Heinrichs and Ewald
suppose. Though there were visible and impressive symbols of his majesty
and glory presented to the eyes, it is not necessary to suppose that
there were visible symbols of his words.

And his countenance - His face. There had been before particular
descriptions of some parts of his face - as of his eyes - but this is a
representation of his whole aspect; of the general splendor and
brightness of his countenance.

Was as the sun shineth in his strength - In his full splendor when
unobscured by clouds; where his rays are in no way intercepted. Compare
[Jdg 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031); "But let them that love him
(the Lord) be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might"; [Sa2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#004), "And he shall be as the light of
the morning, when the sun ariseth, even a morning without clouds"; [Psa
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005), "Which (the sun) is as a
bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to
run a race." There could be no more striking description of the majesty
and glory of the countenance than to compare it with the overpowering
splendor of the sun. This closes the description of the personage that
appeared to John. The design was evidently to impress him with a sense
of his majesty and glory, and to prepare the way for the authoritative
nature of the communications which he was to make. It is obvious that
this appearance must have been assumed.

The representation is not that of the Redeemer as he rose from the dead
- a middle-aged man; nor is it clear that it was the same as on the
mount of transfiguration - where, for anything that appears, he retained
his usual aspect and form though temporarily invested with extraordinary
brilliancy; nor is it the form in which we may suppose he ascended to
heaven for there is no evidence that he was thus transformed when he
ascended; nor is it that of a priest - for all the special habiliments
of a Jewish priest are missing in this description. The appearance
assumed is, evidently, in accordance with various representations of God
as he appeared to Ezekiel, to Isaiah, and to Daniel - what was a
suitable manifestation of a divine being - of one clothed in the majesty
and power of God. We are not to infer from this, that this is in fact
the appearance of the Redeemer now in heaven, or that this is the form
in which he will appear when he comes to judge the world. Of his
appearance in heaven we have no knowledge; of the aspect which he will
assume when he comes to judge people we have no certain information. We
are necessarily quite as ignorant of this as we are of what will be our
own form and appearance after the resurrection from the dead.

[Revelation 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 1:17</span></span>

And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead - As if I were dead;
deprived of sense and consciousness. He was overwhelmed with the
suddenness of the vision; he saw that this was a divine being; but he
did not as yet know that it was the Saviour. It is not probable that in
this vision he would immediately recognize any of the familiar features
of the Lord Jesus as he had been accustomed to see him some sixty years
before; and if he did, the effect would have been quite as overpowering
as is here described. But the subsequent revelations of this divine
personage would rather seem to imply that John did not at once recognize
him as the Lord Jesus. The effect here described is one that often
occurred to those who had a vision of God. See [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018), "Now as he was speaking with me,
I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the ground; but he touched me,
and set me upright"; [Dan 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027), "And I
Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did
the king's business." Compare [Exo
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020); [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005); [Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028); [Eze
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#003); [Dan
10:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007), [Dan
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#017).

And he laid his right hand upon me - For the purpose of raising him up.
Compare [Dan 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018), "He touched me and
set me upright." We usually stretch out the right hand to raise up one
who has fallen.

Saying unto me, Fear not - Compare [Mat
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#027), "It is I; be not afraid." The
fact that it was the Saviour, though he appeared in this form of
overpowering majesty, was a reason why John should not be afraid. Why
that was a reason, he immediately adds - that he was the first and the
last; that though he had been dead he was now alive, and would continue
ever to live, and that he had the keys of hell and of death. It is
evident that John was overpowered with that awful emotion which the
human mind must feel at the evidence of the presence of God. Thus,
people feel when God seems to come near them by the impressive symbols
of his majesty - as in the thunder, the earthquake, and the tempest.
Compare [Hab 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016); [Luk
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#034). Yet, amidst the most awful
manifestations of divine power, the simple assurance that our Redeemer
is near us is enough to allay our fears, and diffuse calmness through
the soul.

I am the first and the last - See the notes at [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008). This is stated to be one of the
reasons why he should not fear - that he was eternal: "I always live -
have lived through all the past, and will live through all which is to
come - and therefore I can accomplish all my promises, and execute all
my purposes."

[Revelation 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 1:18</span></span>

I am he that liveth, and was dead - I was indeed once dead, but now I
live, and shall continue to live forever. This would at once identify
him who thus appeared as the Lord Jesus Christ, for to no one else could
this apply. He had been put to death; but he had risen from the grave.
This also is given as a reason why John should not fear; and nothing
would allay his fears more than this. He now saw that he was in the
presence of that Saviour whom more than half a century before he had so
tenderly loved when in the flesh, and whom, though now long absent, he
had faithfully served, and for whose cause he was now in this lonely
island. His faith in his resurrection had not been a delusion; he saw
the very Redeemer before him who had once been laid in the tomb.

Behold, I am alive forevermore - I am to live forever. Death is no more
to cut me down, and I am never again to slumber in the grave. As he was
always to live, he could accomplish all his promises, and fulfil all his
purposes. The Saviour is never to die again. He can, therefore, always
sustain us in our troubles; he can be with us in our death. Whoever of
our friends die, he will not die; when we die, he will still be on the
throne.

Amen - A word here of strong affirmation - as if he had said, it is
"truly," or "certainly so." See the notes on [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007). This expression is one that the
Saviour often used when he wished to give emphasis, or to express
anything strongly. Compare [Joh 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003);
[Joh 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025).

And have the keys of hell and of death - The word rendered "hell" - ᾅδης
Hadēs, "Hades" - refers properly to the underworld; the abode of
departed spirits; the region of the dead. This was represented as dull
and gloomy; as enclosed with walls; as entered through gates which were
fastened with bolts and bars. For a description of the views which
prevailed among the ancients on the subject, see the [Luk
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023) note, and [Job
10:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021) notes. To hold the key of
this, was to hold the power over the invisible world. It was the more
appropriate that the Saviour should represent himself as having this
authority, as he had himself been raised from the dead by his own power
(compare [Joh 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)), thus showing
that the dominion over this dark world was entrusted to him.

And of death - A personification. Death reigns in that world. But to his
wide-extended realms the Saviour holds the key, and can have access to
his empire when he pleases, releasing all whom he chooses, and confining
there still such as he shall please. It is probably in part from such
hints as these that Milton drew his sublime description of the gates of
hell in the "Paradise Lost." As Christ always lives; as he always
retains this power over the regions of the dead, and the whole world of
spirits, it may be further remarked that we have nothing to dread if we
put our trust in him. We need not fear to enter a world which he has
entered, and from which he has emerged, achieving a glorious triumph; we
need not fear what the dread king that reigns there can do to us, for
his power extends not beyond the permission of the Saviour, and in his
own time that Saviour will call us forth to life, to die no more.

[Revelation 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 1:19</span></span>

Write the things which thou hast seen - An account of the vision which
thou hast had, [Rev 1:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).

And the things which are - Give an account of those things which thou
hast seen as designed to represent the condition of the seven churches.
He had seen not only the Saviour, but he had seen seven lampstands, and
seven stars in the hand of the Saviour, and he is now commanded to
record the meaning of these symbols as referring to things then actually
existing in the seven churches. This interpretation is demanded by [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020).

And the things which shall be hereafter - The Greek phrase rendered
"hereafter" - μετὰ ταῦτα meta tauta - means "after these things"; that
is, he was to make a correct representation of the things which then
were, and then to record what would occur "after these things:" to wit,
of the images, symbols, and truths, which would be disclosed to him
after what he had already seen. The expression refers to future times.
He does not say for how long a time; but the revelations which were to
be made referred to events which were to occur beyond those which were
then taking place. Nothing can be argued from the use of this language
in regard to the length of time embraced in the revelation-whether it
extended only for a few years or whether it embraced all coming time.
The more natural interpretation, however, would seem to be, that it
would stretch far into future years, and that it was designed to give at
least an outline of what would be the character of the future in
general.

[Revelation 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 1:20</span></span>

The mystery of the seven stars - On the word "mystery," see notes on
[Eph 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009). The word means, properly,
"what is hidden, obscure, unknown" - until it is disclosed by one having
the ability to do it, or by the course of events. When disclosed, it may
be as clear, and as capable of comprehension, as any other truth. The
meaning here, as applied to the seven stars, is, that they were symbols,
and that their meaning as symbols, without a suitable explanation, would
remain hidden or unknown. They were designed to represent important
truths, and John was directed to write down what they were intended in
the circumstances to signify, and to send the explanation to the
churches. It is evidently implied that the meaning of these symbols
would be beyond the ordinary powers of the human mind to arrive at with
certainty, and hence John was directed to explain the symbol. The
general and obvious truths which they would serve to convey would be
that the ministers of the churches, and the churches themselves, were
designed to be lights in the world, and should burn clearly and
steadily. Much important truth would be couched under these symbols,
indeed, if nothing had been added in regard to their signification as
employed here by the Saviour; but there were particular truths of great
importance in reference to each of these "stars" and "lampbearers,"
which John was more fully to explain.

Which thou sawest in my right hand - Greek, "upon my right hand" - ἐπὶ
τῆς δεξιᾶς μου epi tēs dexias mou: giving some support to the opinion
that the stars, as they were seen, appeared to be placed on his hand -
that is, on the palm of his hand as he stretched it out. The expression
in [Rev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016) is, that they were "in
(ἐν en) his right hand"; but the language used here is not decisive as
to the position of the stars. They may have been held in some way by the
hand, or represented as scattered on the open hand,

The seven golden candlesticks - The truth which these emblematic
representations are designed to convey.

The seven stars are - That is, they represent, or they denote - in
accordance with a common usage in the Scriptures. See the notes on [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026).

The angels of the seven churches - Greek, "Angels of the seven
churches:" the article being missing. This does not refer to them as a
collective or associated body, for the addresses are made to them as
individuals - an epistle being directed to "the angel" of each
particular church, [Rev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001), [Rev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012), etc. The evident meaning,
however, is, that what was recorded should be directed to them, not as
pertaining to them exclusively as individuals, but as presiding over or
representing the churches, for what is recorded pertains to the
churches, and was evidently designed to be laid before them. It was for
the churches, but was committed to the "angel" as representing the
church, and to be communicated to the church under his care. There has
been much diversity of opinion in regard to the meaning of the word
"angels" here. By the advocates of Episcopacy, it has been argued that
the use of this term proves that there was a presiding bishop over a
circle or group of churches in Ephesus, in Smyrna, etc., since it is
said that it cannot be supposed that there was but a single church in a
city so large as Ephesus, or in the other cities mentioned. A full
examination of this argument may be seen in my work on the Apostolic
Church (pp. 191-199, London edition). The word "angel" properly means a
messenger, and is thus applied to celestial beings as messengers sent
forth from God to convey or to do his will. This being the common
meaning of the word, it may be employed to denote anyone who is a
messenger, and hence, with propriety, anyone who is employed to
communicate the will of another; to transact his business, or, more
remotely, to act in his place - to be a representative. In order to
ascertain the meaning of the word as used in this place, and in
reference to these churches, it may be remarked:

\(1\) That it cannot mean literally an angel, as referring to a heavenly
being, for no one can suppose that such a being presided over these
churches.

\(2\) it cannot be shown to mean, as Lord (in loco) supposes, messengers
that the churches had sent to John, and that these letters were given to
them to be returned by them to the churches; for:

\(a\) there is no evidence that any such messenger had been sent to
John;

\(b\) there is no probability that while he was a banished exile in
Patmos such a thing would be permitted;

\(c\) the message was not sent by them, it was sent to them "Unto the
angel of the church in Ephesus write," etc.

\(3\) it cannot be proved that the reference is to a prelatical bishop
presiding over a group or circle of churches, called a diocese; for:

\(a\) There is nothing in the word "angel," as used in this connection,
which would be especially applicable to such a personage - it being as
applicable to a pastor of a single church, as to a bishop of many
churches.

\(b\) There is no evidence that there were any such groups of churches
then as constitute an episcopal diocese.

\(c\) The use of the word "church" in the singular, as applied to
Ephesus, Smyrna, etc., rather implies that there was but a single church
in each of those cities. Compare [Rev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001), [Rev
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008),[Rev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012), [Rev
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018); see also similar language in
regard to the church in Corinth, [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002); in Antioch, [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001); at Laodicea, [Col
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016); and at Ephesus, [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028).

\(d\) There is no evidence, as Episcopalians must suppose, that a
successor to John had been appointed at Ephesus, if, as they suppose, he
was "bishop" of Ephesus; and there is no probability that they would so
soon after his banishment show him such a want of respect as to regard
the see as vacant, and appoint a successor.

\(e\) There is no improbability in supposing that there was a single
church in each of these cities - as at Antioch, Corinth, Rome.

\(f\) If John was a piclatical "bishop," it is probable that he was
"bishop" of the whole group of churches embracing the seven: yet here,
if the word "angel" means "bishop," we have no less than seven such
bishops immediately appointed to succeed him. And,

\(g\) the supposition that this refers to prelatical bishops is so
forced and unnatural that many Episcopalians are compelled to abandon
it. Thus, Stillingfleet - than whom an abler man, or one whose praise is
higher in Episcopal churches, as an advocate of prelacy, is not to be
found - says of these angels: "If many things in the epistles be
directed to the angels, but yet so as to concern the whole body, then,
of necessity, the angel must be taken as a representative of the whole
body; and then why may not the angel be taken by way of representation
of the body itself, either of the whole church, or, which is far more
probable, of the concessors, or order of presbyters in this church?"

\(4\) if the word does not mean literally "an angel"; if it does not
refer to messengers sent to John in Patmos by the churches; and if it
does not refer to a prelatical bishop, then it follows that it must
refer to someone who presided over the church as its pastor, and through
whom a message might be properly sent to the church. Thus understood,
the paster or "angel" would be regarded as the representative of the
church; that is, as delegated by the church to manage its affairs, and
as the authorized person to whom communications should be made in
matters pertaining to it - as pastors are now. A few considerations will
further confirm this interpretation, and throw additional light on the
meaning of the word:

\(a\) The word "angel" is employed in the Old Testament to denote a
prophet; that is, a minister of religion as sent by God to communicate
his will. Thus in [Hag 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013) it is
said, "Then spake Haggai, the Lord's messenger (Hebrew: angel, מלאך יהוה
mal'ak Yahweh - Septuagint: ἄγγελος κυρίου angelos kuriou, in the Lord's
message unto the people," etc.

\(b\) It is applied to a priest, as one sent by God to execute the
functions of that office, or to act in the name of the Lord. [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007), "for the priest's lips should
keep knowledge, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts" - מלאך
יהוה צבאות mal'ak Yahweh tsebaa'owt - that is," angel of the Lord of
hosts."

\(c\) The name prophet is often given in the New Testament to the
ministers of religion, as being appointed by God to proclaim or
communicate his will to his people, and as occupying a place resembling,
in some respects, that of the prophets in the Old Testament.

\(d\) There was no reason why the word might not be thus employed to
designate a pastor of a Christian church, as well as to designate a
prophet or a priest under the Old Testament dispensation.

\(e\) The supposition that a pastor of a church is intended will meet
all the circumstances of the case; for:

\(1\) it is an appropriate appellation;

\(2\) there is no reason to suppose that there was more than one church
in each of the cities referred to;

\(3\) it is a term which would designate the respect in which the office
was held;

\(4\) it would impress upon those to whom it was applied a solemn sense
of their responsibility.

Further, it would be more appropriately applied to a pastor of a single
church than to a prelatical bishop; to the tender, intimate, and
endearing relation sustained by a pastor to his people, to the blending
of sympathy, interest, and affection, where he is with them continually,
meets them frequently in the sanctuary, administers to them the bread of
life, goes into their abodes when they axe afflicted, and attends their
kindred to the grave, than to the union subsisting between the people of
an extended diocese and a prelate - the formal, infrequent, and, in many
instances, stately and pompous visitations of a diocesan bishop - to the
unsympathizing relation between him and a people scattered in many
churches, who are visited at distant intervals by one claiming a
"superiority in ministerial rights and powers," and who must be a
stranger to the ten thousand ties of endearment which bind the hearts of
a pastor and people together. The conclusion, then, to which we have
come is, that the "angel of the church" was the pastor, or the presiding
presbyter in the church; the minister who had the pastoral charge of it,
and who was therefore a proper representative of it. He was a man who,
in some respects, performed the functions which the angels of God do;
that is, who was appointed to execute his will, to communicate his
message, and to convey important intimations of his purposes to his
people. To no one could the communications in this book, intended for
the churches, be more properly entrusted than to such an one; for to no
one now would a communication be more properly entrusted than to a
pastor.

Such is the sublime vision under which this book opens; such the solemn
commission which the penman of the book received. No more appropriate
introduction to what is contained in the book could be imagined; no more
appropriate circumstances for making such a sublime revelation could
have existed. To the most beloved of the apostles, now the only
surviving one of the number; to him who had been a faithful laborer for
a period not far from 60 years after the death of the Lord Jesus, who
had been the bosom friend of the Saviour when in the flesh, who had seen
him in the mount of transfiguration, who had seen him die, and who had
seen him ascend, into heaven; to him who had lived while the church was
founded, and while it had spread into all lands; and to him who was now
suffering persecution on account of the Saviour and his cause, it was
appropriate that such communications should be made. In a lonely island;
far away from the homes of people; surrounded by the ocean, and amid
barron rocks; on the day consecrated to the purposes of sacred repose
and the holy duties of religion - the day observed in commemoration of
the resurrection of his Lord, it was most fit that the Redeemer should
appear to the "beloved disciple" in the last Revelation which he was
ever to make to mankind. No more appropriate time or circumstance could
be conceived for disclosing, by a series of sublime visions, what would
occur in future times; for sketching out the history of the church or
the consummation of all things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 2](rev002)

</div>
