<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev016)  [Next](rev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 17:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

This chapter Rev. 17 properly commences a more detailed description of
the judgment inflicted on the formidable anti-Christian power referred
to in the last chapter, though under a new image. It contains an account
of the sequel of the pouring out of the last vial, and the description,
in various forms, continues to the close of Rev. 19. The whole of this
description Rev. 17-19 constitutes the last great catastrophe
represented under the seventh vial [Rev
16:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017), at the close of which the
great enemy of God and the church will be destroyed, and the church will
be triumphant, [Rev 19:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017). The
image in this chapter is that of a harlot, or abandoned woman, on whom
severe judgment is brought for her sins. The action is here delayed, and
this chapter has much the appearance of an explanatory episode, designed
to give a more clear and definite idea of the character of that
formidable anti-Christian power on which the judgment was to descend.
The chapter, without any formal division, embraces the following points:

\(1\) Introduction, [Rev 17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001). One
of the seven angels entrusted with the seven vials comes to John, saying
that he would describe to him the judgment that was to come upon the
great harlot with whom the kings of the earth had committed fornication,
and who had made the dwellers upon the earth drunk by the wine of her
fornication - that is, of that anti-Christian power so often referred to
in this book, which by its influence had deluded the nations, and
brought their rulers under its control.

\(2\) a particular description of this anti-Christian power represented
as an abandoned and attractive female, in the usual attire of an harlot,
[Rev 17:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). She is seated on a
scarlet-colored beast, covered over with blasphemous names - a beast
with seven heads and ten horns. She is arrayed in the usual gorgeous and
alluring attire of an harlot, clothed in purple, decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls, with a golden cup in her hand full of
abomination and filthiness. She has on her forehead a name expressive of
her character. She is represented as drunken with the blood of the
saints, and is such as to attract attention and excite wonder.

\(3\) an explanation of what is meant by this scarlet-clothed woman, and
of the design of the representation, [Rev
17:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007). This comprises several parts:

\(a\) A promise of the angel that he would explain this, [Rev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007).

\(b\) An enigmatical or symbolical representation of the design of the
vision, [Rev 17:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008). This description
consists of an account of the beast on which the woman sat, [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008); of the seven hcads of the beast,
as representing seven mountains, [Rev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009); of the succession of kings or
dynasties represented, [Rev 17:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009);
of the ten horns as representing ten kings or kingdoms giving their
power and strength to the beast, [Rev
17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012); and of the conflict or
warfare of all these confederated or consolidated powers with the Lamb,
and their discomfiture by him, [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014).

\(c\) A more literal statement of what is meant by this, [Rev
17:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015). The waters on which the
harlot sat represent a multitude of people subject to her control, [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015). The ten horns, or the ten
kingdoms, on the beast, would ultimately hate the harlot, and destroy
her, as if they should eat her flesh, and consume her with fire, [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016). This would be done because God
would put it into their hearts to fulfil his purposes, alike in giving
their kingdom to the beast, and then turning against it to destroy it,
[Rev 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017). The woman referred to is
at last declared to be the great city which reigned over the kings of
the earth, [Rev 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018). For
particularity and definiteness, this is one of the most remarkable
chapters in the book, and there can be no doubt that it was the design
in it to give such an explanation of what was referred to in these
visions, that there could be no mistake in applying the description.
"All that remains between this and the twentieth chapter," says Andrew
Fuller, "would in modern publications be called notes of illustration.
No new subject is introduced, but mere enlargement on what has already
been announced" (Works, 6:205).

[Revelation 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 17:1</span></span>

And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials - See
the notes on [Rev 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001), [Rev
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007). Reference is again made to these
angels in the same manner in [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009), where one of them says that he
would show to John "the bride, the Lamb's wife." No particular one is
specified. The general idea seems to be, that to those seven angels was
entrusted the execution of the last things, or the winding up of affairs
introductory to the reign of God, and that the communications respecting
those last events were properly made through them. It is clearly quite
immaterial by which of these it is done. The expression "which had the
seven vials," would seem to imply that though they had emptied the vials
in the manner stated in the previous chapter, they still retained them
in their hands.

And talked with me - Spake to me. The word "talk" would imply a more
protracted conversation than occurred here.

Come hither - Greek, δεῦρο deuro - "Here, hither." This is a word merely
calling the attention, as we should say now, "Here." It does not imply
that John was to leave the place where he was.

I will shew unto thee - Partly by symbols, and partly by express
statements; for this is the way in which, in fact, he showed him.

The judgment - The condemnation and calamity that will come upon her.

Of the great whore - It is not uncommon in the Scriptures to represent a
city under the image of a woman - a pure and holy city under the image
of a virgin or chaste female; a corrupt, idolatrous, and wicked city
under the image of an abandoned or lewd woman. See the notes on [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021); "How is the faithful city become
an harlot!" Compare the notes on [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008). In [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018), it is expressly said that "this
woman is that great city which reigneth over the kings of the earth" -
that is, as I suppose, papal Rome; and the design here is to represent
it as resembling an abandoned female - fit representative of an
apostate, corrupt, unfaithful church. Compare the notes on [Rev
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021).

That sitteth upon many waters - An image drawn either from Babylon,
situated on the Euphrates, and encompassed by the many artificial rivers
which had been made to irrigate the country, or Rome, situated on the
Tiber. In [Rev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015) these waters are
said to represent the peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues over
which the government symbolized by the woman ruled. See the notes on
that verse. Waters are often used to symbolize nations.

[Revelation 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 17:2</span></span>

With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication - Spiritual
adultery. The meaning is, that papal Rome, unfaithful to God, and
idolatrous and corrupt, had seduced the rulers of the earth, and led
them into the same kind of unfaithfulness, idolatry, and corruption.
Compare [Jer 3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008); [Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007); [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027); [Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014); [Eze
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032); [Eze
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037); [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002); [Heb
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002). How true this is in history need
not be stated. All the princes and kings of Europe in the dark ages, and
for many centuries were, and not a few of them are now, entirely under
the influence of papal Rome.

And the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of
her fornication - The alluring cup which, as an harlot, she had extended
to them. See this image explained in the notes on [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). There it is said that Babylon -
referring to the same thing - had "made them drink of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication"; that is, of the cup that led to wrath or
punishment. Here it is said that the harlot had made them "drunk with
the wine of her fornication"; that is, they had been, as it were,
intoxicated by the alluring cup held out to them. What could better
describe the influence of Rome on the people of the world, in making
them, under these delusions, incapable of sober judgment, and in
completely fascinating and controlling all their powers?

[Revelation 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 17:3</span></span>

So he carried me away in the spirit - In vision. He seemed to himself to
be thus carried away; or the scene which he is about to describe was
made to pass before him as if he were present.

Into the wilderness - Into a desert. Compare the notes on [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006). Why this scene is laid in a
wilderness or desert is not mentioned. Prof. Stuart supposes that it is
because it is "appropriate to symbolize the future condition of the
beast." So DeWette and Rosenmuller. The imagery is changed somewhat from
the first appearance of the harlot in [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001). There she is represented as
"sitting upon many waters." Now she is represented as "riding on a
beast," and of course the imagery is adapted to that. Possibly there may
have been no intentional significancy in this; but on the supposition,
as the interpretation has led us to believe all along, that this refers
to papal Rome, may not the propriety of this be seen in the condition of
Rome and the adjacent country, at the rise of the papal power? That had
its rise (see the notes on [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)
ff) after the decline of the Roman civil power, and properly in the time
of Clovis, Pepin, or Charlemagne. Perhaps its first visible appearance,
as a power that was to influence the destiny of the world, was in the
time of Gregory the Great, 590-605 a.d. On the supposition that the
passage before us refers to the period when the papal power became thus
marked and defined, the state of Rome at this time, as described by Mr.
Gibbon, would show with what propriety the term "wilderness" or "desert"
might be then applied to it.

The following extract from this author, in describing the state of Rome
at the accession of Gregory the Great, has almost the appearance of
being a designed commentary on this passage, or is, at anyrate, such as
a partial interpreter of this book would desire and expect to find.
Speaking of that period, he says (Decline and Fall, 3:207-211): "Rome
had reached, about the close of the sixth century, the lowest period of
her depression. By the removal of the seat of empire, and the successive
loss of the provinces, the sources of public and private opulence were
exhausted; the lofty tree under whose shade the nations of the earth had
reposed was deprived of its leaves and branches, and the sapless trunk
was left to wither on the ground. The ministers of command and the
messengers of victory no longer met on the Appian or Flaminian Way; and
the hostile approach of the Lombards was often felt and continually
feared. The inhabitants of a potent and peaceful capital, who visit
without an anxious thought the garden of the adjacent country, will
faintly picture in their fancy the distress of the Romans; they shut or
opened their gates with a trembling hand, beheld from the walls the
flames of their houses, and heard the lamentations of their brethren who
were coupled together like dogs, and dragged away into distant slavery
beyond the sea and the mountains.

Such incessant alarms must annihilate the pleasures, and interrupt the
labors of a rural life; and the Campagna of Rome was speedily reduced to
the stale of a dreary wilderness, in which the land is barren, the
waters are impure, and the air is infectious. Curiosity and ambition no
longer attracted the nations to the capital of the world; but if chance
or necessity directed the steps of a wandering stranger, he contemplated
with horror the vacancy and solitude of the city; and might be tempted
to ask, Where is the Senate, and where are the people? In a season of
excessive rains, the Tiber swelled above its banks, and rushed with
irresistible violence into the valleys of the seven hills. A
pestilential disease arose from the stagnation of the deluge, and so
rapid was the contagion that fourscore persons expired in an hour in the
midst of a solemn procession which implored the mercy of Heaven. A
society in which marriage is encouraged, and industry prevails, soon
repairs the accidental losses of pestilence and war; but as the far
greater part of the Romans was condemned to hopeless indigence and
celibacy, the depopulation was constant and visible, and the gloomy
enthusiasts might expect the approaching failure of the human race. Yet
the number of citizens still exceeded the measure of subsistence; their
precarious food was supplied from the harvests of Sicily or Egypt; and
the frequent repetition of famine betrays the inattention of the emperor
to a distant province. The edifices of Rome were exposed to the same
ruin and decay; the mouldering fabrics were easily overthrown by
inundations, tempests, and earthquakes; and the monks who had occupied
the most advantageous stations exulted in their base triumph over the
ruins of antiquity.

"Like Thebes, or Babylon, or Carthage, the name of Rome might have been
erased from the earth, if the city had not been animated by a vital
principle which again restored her to honor and dominion. The power as
well as the virtue of the apostles resided with living energy in the
breast of their successors; and the chair of Peter, under the reign of
Maurice, was occupied by the first and greatest of the name of Gregory.
The sword of the enemy was suspended over Rome; it was averted by the
mild eloquence and seasonable gifts of the pontiff, who commanded the
respect of heretics and barbarians." Compare [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003), [Rev
13:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012). On the supposition, now,
that the inspired author of the Apocalypse had Rome, in that state when
the civil power declined and the papacy arose, in his eye, what more
expressive imagery could he have used to denote it than he has employed?
On the supposition - if such a supposition could be made - that Mr.
Gibbon meant to furnish a commentary on this passage, what more
appropriate language could he have used? Does not this language look as
if the author of the Apocalypse and the author of the Decline and Fall
meant to play into each other's hands?

And, in further confirmation of this, I may refer to the testimony of
two Roman Catholic writers, giving the same view of Rome and showing
that, in their apprehension also, it was only by the reviving influence
of the papacy that Rome was saved from becoming a total waste. They are
both of the middle ages. The first is Augustine Steuchus, who thus
writes: "The empire having been overthrown, unless God had raised up the
"pontificate," Rome, resuscitated and restored by none, would have
become uninhabitable, and been a most foul habitation thenceforward of
cattle. But in the pontificate it revived as with a second birth; its
empire in magnitude not indeed equal to the old empire, but its form not
very dissimilar: because all nations, from East and from West, venerate
the pope, not otherwise than they before obeyed the emperor." The other
is Flavio Blondas: "The princes of the world now adore and worship as
perpetual dictator the successor not of Caesar but of the fisherman
Peter; that is, the supreme pontiff, the substitute of the aforesaid
emperor." See the original in Elliott, 3:113.

And I saw a woman - Evidently the same which is referred to in [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001).

Sit upon a scarlet-coloured beast - That is, either the beast was itself
naturally of this color, or it was covered with trappings of this color.
The word "scarlet" properly denotes a bright red color - brighter than
crimson, which is a red color tinged with blue. See the notes on [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018). The word used here - κόκκινον
kokkinon - occurs in the New Testament only in the following places:
[Mat 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028); [Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019); [Rev
17:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003); [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012), [Rev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016) - in all which places it is
rendered "scarlet." See the [Mat 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)
note and [Heb 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019) note. The color was
obtained from a small insect which was found adhering to the shoots of a
species of oak in Spain and Western Asia. This was the usual color in
the robes of princes, military cloaks, etc. It is applicable in the
description of papal Rome, because this is a favorite color there. Thus
it is used in [Rev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003), where the
same power is represented under the image of a "red dragon."

See the notes on that passage. It is remarkable that nothing would
better represent the favorite color at Rome than this, or the actual
appearance of the pope, the cardinals, and the priests in their robes,
on some great festival occasion. Those who are familiar with the
descriptions given of papal Rome by travelers, and those who have passed
much time in Rome, will see at once the propriety of this description,
on the supposition that it was intended to refer to the papacy. I caused
this inquiry to be made of an intelligent gentleman who had passed much
time in Rome - without his knowing my design what would strike a
stranger on visiting Rome, or what would be likely particularly to
arrest his attention as remarkable there; and he unhesitatingly replied,
"The scarlet color." This is the color of the dress of the cardinals -
their hats, and cloaks, and stockings being always of this color.

It is the color of the carriages of the cardinals, the entire body of
the carriage being scarlet, and the trappings of the horses the same. On
occasion of public festivals and processions, scarlet is suspended from
the windows of the houses along which processions pass. The inner color
of the cloak of the pope is scarlet; his carriage is scarlet; the carpet
on which he treads is scarlet. A large part of the dress of the
body-guard of the pope is scarlet; and no one can take up a picture of
Rome without seeing that this color is predominant. I looked through a
volume of engravings representing the principal officers and public
persons of Rome. There were few in which the scarlet color was not found
as constituting some part of their apparel; in not a few the scarlet
color prevailed almost entirely. And in illustration of the same
thought, I introduce here an extract from a foreign newspaper, copied
into an American newspaper of Feb. 22, 1851, as an illustration of the
fact that the scarlet color is characteristic of Rome, and of the
readiness with which it is referred to in that respect: "Curious
Costumes - The three new cardinals, the archbishops of Thoulouse,
Rheims, and Besancon, were presented to the president of the French
Republic by the Pope's nuncio. They wore red caps, red stockings, black
Roman coats lined and bound with red, and small cloaks." I conclude,
therefore, that if it be admitted that it was intended to represent
papal Rome in the vision, the precise description would have been
adopted which is found here.

Full of names of blasphemy - All covered over with blasphemous titles
and names. What could more accurately describe papal Rome than this?
Compare for some of these names and titles the notes on [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004); [Ti1
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001); and notes on [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005).

Having seven heads and ten horns - See the notes on [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001).

[Revelation 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 17:4</span></span>

And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour - On the nature
of the scarlet color, see the notes on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). The purple color - πορφύρα
porphura - was obtained from a species of shellfish found on the coasts
of the Mediterranean, which yielded a reddish-purple dye, much prized by
the ancients. Robes dyed in that color were commonly worn by persons of
rank and wealth, [Mar 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#017), [Mar
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#020); [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019). The purple color contains more
blue than the crimson, though the limits are not very accurately
defined, and the words are sometimes interchanged. Thus the mock robe
put on the Saviour is called in [Mar
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#017), [Mar
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#020), πορφύραν porphuran - "purple,"
and in [Mat 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028), κοκκίνην kokkinēn -
"crimson." On the applicability of this to the papacy, see the notes on
[Rev 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).

And decked with gold - After the manner of an harlot, with rich jewelry.

And precious stones - Sparkling diamonds, etc.

And pearls - Also a much-valued female ornament. Compare the notes on
[Mat 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006); [Mat
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046).

Having a golden cup in her hand - As if to entice lovers. See the notes
on [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008).

Full of abominations - Of abominable things; of things suited to excite
abhorrence and disgust; things unlawful and forbidden. The word, in the
Scriptures, is commonly used to denote the impurities and abominations
of idolatry. See the notes on [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027). The meaning here is, that it
seemed to be a cup filled with wine, but it was in fact a cup full of
all abominable drugs, leading to all kinds of corruption. How much in
accordance this is with the fascinations of the papacy, it is not
necessary now to say, after the ample illustrations of the same thing
already furnished in these notes.

And filthiness of her fornication - The image here is that of papal
Rome, represented as an abandoned woman in gorgeous attire, alluring by
her arts the nations of the earth, and seducing them into all kinds of
pollution and abomination. It is a most remarkable fact that the papacy,
as if designing to furnish a fulfillment of this prophecy, has chosen to
represent itself almost precisely in this manner - as a female extending
an alluring cup to passers by - as will be seen by the engraving on this
page. Far as the design of striking this medal may have been from
confirming this portion of the Book of Revelation, yet no one can fail
to see that if this had been the design, no more happy illustration
could have been adopted. Apostate churches, and guilty nations, often
furnish the very proofs necessary to confirm the truth of the
Scriptures.

[Revelation 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 17:5</span></span>

And upon her forehead - In a circlet around her forehead. That is, it
was made prominent and public, as if written on the forehead in blazing
capitals. In [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) it is said that
"the name of blasphemy" was written on the "heads" of the beast. The
meaning in both places is substantially the same, that it was prominent,
and unmistakable. See the notes on that verse. Compare the note on [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001).

Was a name written - A title, or something that would properly indicate
her character.

Mystery - It is proper to remark that there is nothing in the original
as written by John, so far as now known, that corresponded with what is
implied in placing this inscription in capital letters; and the same
remark may be made of the "title" or inscription that was placed over
the head of the Saviour on the cross, [Mat
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037); [Mar
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#026); [Luk
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038); [Joh
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019). Our translators have adopted
this form, apparently for the sole purpose of denoting that it was an
inscription or title. On the meaning of the word "mystery," see the
notes on [Co1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007). Compare the notes
on [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016). Here it seems to be used
to denote that there was something hidden, obscure, or enigmatical,
under the title adopted; that is, the word "Babylon," and the word
"mother," were symbolical. Our translators have printed and pointed the
word "mystery" as if it were part of the inscription. It would probably
be better to regard it as referring to the inscription, thus: "a name
was written - a mysterious name, to wit, Babylon," etc. Or, "a name was
written mysteriously." According to this, it would mean, not that there
was any wonderful "mystery" about the thing itself, whatever might be
true on that point, but that the name was enigmatical or symbolical; or
that there was something hidden or concealed under the name. It was not
to be literally understood.

Babylon the great - papal Rome, the nominal head of the Christian world,
as Babylon had been of the pagan world. See the notes on [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008).

The mother of harlots -

\(a\) Of that spiritual apostasy from God which, in the language of the
prophets, might be called adultery. See the notes on [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008).

\(b\) The promoter of lewdness by her institutions. See the notes on
[Rev 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021). In both these senses, there
never was a more expressive or appropriate title than the one here
employed.

And abominations of the earth - Abominable things that prevail on the
earth, [Rev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004). Compare the notes on
[Rev 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020).

[Revelation 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 17:6</span></span>

And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints - A reeling,
intoxicated harlot, for that is the image which is kept up all along. In
regard to the phrase "drunken with blood," compare [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010). "The phraseology is derived
from the barbarous custom (still extant among many pagan nations) of
drinking the blood of the enemies slain in the way of revenge. The
effect of drinking blood is said to be to exasperate, and to intoxicate
with passion and a desire of revenge" (Prof. Stuart, in loco). The
meaning here is, that the persecuting power referred to had shed the
blood of the saints; and that, in its fury, it had, as it were, drunk
the blood of the slain, and had become, by drinking that blood,
intoxicated and infuriated. No one need say how applicable this has been
to the papacy. Compare, however, the [Dan
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021), [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025) notes; [Rev
12:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013); [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015) notes.

And with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus - Especially with their
blood. The meaning is, that the warfare, in which so much blood was
shed, was directed against the saints as such, and that, in fact, it
terminated particularly on those who, amidst cruel sufferings, were
faithful witnesses for the Lord Jesus, and deserved to be called, by way
of eminence, "martyrs." Compare the notes on [Rev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013); [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009); [Rev
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#005), [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007). How applicable this is to the
papacy, let the blood shed in the valleys of Piedmont; the blood shed in
the Low Countries by the Duke of Alva; the blood shed on Bartholomew's
day; and the blood shed in the Inquisition, testify.

And when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration - I was astonished
at her appearance, at her apparel, and at the things which were so
significantly symbolized by her.

[Revelation 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 17:7</span></span>

And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel? - He was
doubtless struck with the appearance of John as he stood fixed in
astonishment. The question asked him, "why" he wondered, was designed to
show him that the cause of his surprise would be removed or lessened,
for that he would proceed so to explain this that he might have a
correct view of its design.

I will tell thee the mystery of the woman - On the word "mystery," see
the notes on [Rev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005). The sense is,
"I will explain what is meant by the symbol - the hidden meaning that is
couched under it." That is, he would so far explain it that a just view
might be obtained of its signification. The explanation follows, [Rev
17:8-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008).

And of the beast that carrieth her, ... - [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).

[Revelation 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 17:8</span></span>

The beast that thou sawest was, and is not - In the close of the verse
it is added, "and yet is" - "the beast that was, and is not, and yet
is." There are three things affirmed here: first, that there is a sense
in which it might be said of the power here referred to, that it "was,"
or that, before this, it had an existence; second, that there was a
sense in which it might be said that it is "not," that is, that it had
become practically extinct; and third, that there is a sense in which
that power would be so revived that it might be said that it "still is."
The "beast" here referred to is the same that is mentioned in [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003), and in [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003),[Rev
13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011). That is, there was one great
formidable power, having essentially the same origin, though manifested
under somewhat different modifications, to one and all of which might,
in their different manifestations, be given the same name, "the beast."

And shall ascend out of the bottomless pit - ἐκ τῆς ἀβύσσου ek tēs
abussou. On the meaning of the word here used, see the notes on [Rev
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001). The meaning here is, that this
power would seem to come up from the nether world. It would appear at
one time to be extinct, but would revive again as if coming from the
world over which Satan presides, and would, in its revived character, be
such as might be expected from such an origin.

And go into perdition - That is, its end will be destruction. It will
not be permanent, but will be overthrown and destroyed. The word
perdition here is properly rendered by Prof. Stuart "destruction," but
nothing is indicated by the word of the "nature" of the destruction that
would come upon it.

And they that dwell on the earth - The inhabitants of the earth
generally; that is, the matter referred to will be so remarkable as to
attract general attention.

Shall wonder - It will be so contrary to the regular course of events,
so difficult of explanation, so remarkable in itself, as to excite
attention and surprise.

Whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of
the world - See this explained in the notes on [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008). The idea seems to be, that those
whose names are written in the book of life, or who are truly the
friends of God, would not be drawn off in admiration of the beast, or in
rendering homage to it.

When they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is - That is,
the power that once was mighty; that had declined to such a state that
it became, as it were, extinct; and that was revived again with so much
of its original strength, that it might be said that it still exists.
The fact of its being revived in this manner, as well as the nature of
the power itself, seemed suited to excite this admiration.

[Revelation 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 17:9</span></span>

And here is the mind which hath wisdom - Here is what requires wisdom to
interpret it; or, here is a case in which the mind that shows itself
able to explain it will evince true sagacity. So in [Rev
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018). See the notes on that place.
Prof. Stuart renders this, "Here is a meaning which compriseth wisdom."
It is undoubtedly implied that the symbol might be understood - whether
in the time of John, or afterward, he does not say; but it was a matter
which could not be determined by ordinary minds, or without an earnest
application of the understanding.

The seven heads are seven mountains - Referring, undoubtedly, to Rome -
the seven-hilled city - Septicollis Roma. See the notes on [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003). (d).

On which the woman sitteth - The city represented as a woman, in
accordance with a common usage in the Scriptures. See the notes on [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008).

[Revelation 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 17:10</span></span>

And there are seven kings - That is, seven in all, as they are
enumerated in this verse and the next. An eighth is mentioned in [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011), but it is, at the same time,
said that this one so pertains to the seven, or is so properly in one
sense of the number seven, though, in another sense, to be regarded as
an eighth, that it may be properly reckoned as the seventh. The word
"kings" - βασιλεῖς basileis - may be understood, so far as the meaning
of the word is concerned:

\(a\) literally, as denoting a king, or one who exercises royal
authority;

\(b\) in a more general sense, as denoting one of distinguished honor -
a viceroy, prince, leader, chief, [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001), [Mat
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003),[Mat
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009); [Luk
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005); [Act
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001);

\(c\) in a still larger sense, as denoting a dynasty, a form of
government, a mode of administration, as what, in fact, "rules."

See the notes on [Dan 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024), where the
word "king" undoubtedly denotes a "dynasty," or "form of rule." The
notion of ruling, or of authority, is undoubtedly in the word, for the
verb βασιλεύω basileuō means "to rule," but the word may be applied to
anything in which sovereignty resides. Thus it is applied to a king's
son, to a military commander, to the gods, to a Greek archon, etc. See
Passow. It would be contrary to the whole spirit of this passage, and to
what is demanded by the proper meaning of the word, to insist that the
word should denote literally kings, and that it could not be applied to
emperors, or to dictators, or to dynasties.

Five are fallen - Have passed away as if fallen; that is, they have
disappeared. The language would be applicable to rulers who have died,
or who had been dethroned; or to dynasties or forms of government that
had ceased to be. In the fulfillment of this, it would be necessary to
find five such successive kings or rulers who had died, and who
pertained to one sovereignty or nation; or five such dynasties or forms
of administrations that had successively existed, but which had ceased.

And one is - That is, there is one - a sixth - that now reigns. The
proper interpretation of this would be, that this existed in the time of
the writer; that is, according to the view taken of the time of the
writing of the Apocalypse (see Intro., section 2), at the close of the
first century.

And the other is not yet come - The sixth one is to be succeeded by
another in the same line, or occupying the same dominion.

And when he cometh - When that form of dominion is set up. No intimation
is yet given as to the time when this would occur.

He must continue a short space - ὀλίγον oligon. A short time; his
dominion will be of short duration. It is observable that this
characteristic is stated as applicable only to this one of the seven;
and the fair meaning would seem to be, that the time would be short as
compared with the six that preceded, and as compared with the one that
followed - the eighth - into which it was to be merged, [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011).

[Revelation 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 17:11</span></span>

And the beast that was, and is not - That is, the one power that was
formerly mighty; that died away so that it might be said to be extinct;
and yet [Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008) that "still is," or
has a prolonged existence. It is evident that, by the "beast" here,
there is some one power, dominion, empire, or rule, whose essential
identity is preserved through all these changes, and to which it is
proper to give the same name. It finds its termination, or its last
form, in what is here called the "eighth"; a power which, it is
observed, sustains such a special relation to the seven, that it may be
said to be "of the seven," or to be a mere prolongation of the same
sovereignty.

Even he is the eighth - The eighth in the succession. This form of
sovereignty, though a mere prolongation of the former government, so
much so as to be, in fact, but keeping up the same empire in the world,
appears in such a novelty of form, that, in one sense, it deserves to be
called the eighth in order, and yet is so essentially a mere
concentration and continuance of the one power, that, in the general
reckoning [Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010), it might be
regarded as pertaining to the former. There was a sense in which it was
proper to speak of it as the eighth power; and yet, viewed in its
relation to the whole, it so essentially combined and concentrated all
that there was in the seven, that, in a general view, it scarcely
merited a separate mention. We should look for the fulfillment of this
in some such concentration and embodiment of all that it was, in the
previous forms of sovereignty referred to, that it perhaps would deserve
mention as an eighth power, but that it was, nevertheless, such a mere
prolongation of the previous forms of the one power, that it might be
said to be "of the seven"; so that, in this view, it would not claim a
separate consideration. This seems to be the fair meaning, though there
is much that is enigmatical in the form of the expression.

And goeth into perdition - See the notes on [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008).

In inquiring now into the application of this very difficult passage, it
may be proper to suggest some of the principal opinions which have been
held, and then to endeavor to ascertain the true meaning:

I. The principal opinions which have been held may be reduced to the
following:

\(1\) That the seven kings here refer to the succession of Roman
emperors, yet with some variation as to the manner of reckoning. Prof.
Stuart begins with Julius Caesar, and reckons them in this manner: the
"five that are fallen" are Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula,
Claudius. Nero, who, as he supposes, was the reigning prince at the time
when the book was written, he regards as the sixth; Galba, who succeeded
him, as the seventh. Others, who adopt this literal method of explaining
it, suppose that the time begins with Augustus, and then Galba would be
the sixth, and Otho, who reigned but three months, would be the seventh.
The expression, "the beast that was, and is not, who is the eighth,"
Prof. Stuart regards as referring to a general impression among the
pagan and among Christians, in the time of the persecution under Nero,
that he would again appear after it was reported that he was dead, or
that he would rise from the dead and carry on his persecution again. See
Prof. Stuart, Com. vol. ii., Excur. 3. The beast, according to this
view, denotes the Roman emperors, specifically Nero, and the reference
in [Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008) is to "the well known
hariolation respecting Nero, that he would be assassinated, and would
disappear for a while, and then make his appearance again to the
confusion of all his enemies." "What the angel," says he, "says, seems
to be equivalent to this - 'The beast means the Roman emperors,
specifically Nero, of whom the report spread throughout the empire that
he will revive, after being apparently slain, and will come, as it were,
from the abyss or Hades, but he will perish, and that speedily,'" vol.
ii. p. 323.

\(2\) That the word "kings" is not to be taken literally, but that it
refers to forms of government, dynasties, or modes of administration.
The general opinion among those who hold this view is, that the first
six refer to the forms of the Roman government:

\(1\) kings;

\(2\) consuls;

\(3\) dictators;

\(4\) decemvirs;

\(5\) military tribunes;

\(6\) the imperial form, beginning with Augustus.

This has been the common Protestant interpretation, and in reference to
these six forms of government there has been a general agreement. But,
while the mass of Protestant interpreters have supposed that the "six"
heads refer to these forms of administration, there has been much
diversity of opinion as to the seventh; and here, on this plan of
interpretation, the main, if not the sole difficulty lies. Among the
opinions held are the following:

\(a\) That of Mr. Mede. He makes the seventh head what he calls the
"Demi-Caesar," or the "Western emperor who reigned after the division of
the empire into East and West, and which continued, after the last
division, under Honorius and Arcadius, about sixty years - a short
space" (Works, book iii. ch. 8; book v. ch. 12).

\(b\) That of Dr. Newton, who regards the sixth or imperial "head" as
continuing uninterruptedly through the line of Christian as well as
pagan emperors, until Augustulus and the Heruli; and the seventh to be
the Dukedom of Rome, established soon after under the exarchate of
Ravenna (Prophecies, pp. 575, 576).

\(c\) That of Dr. More and Mr. Cunninghame, who suppose the Christian
emperors, from Constantine to Augustulus, to constitute the seventh
head, and that this had its termination by the sword of the Heruli.

\(d\) That of Mr. Elliott, who supposes the seventh head or power to
refer to a new form of administration introduced by Diocletian, changing
the administration from the original imperial character to that of an
absolute Asiatic sovereignty. For the important changes introduced by
Diocletian that justify this remark, see the Decline and Fall, vol. i.
pp. 212-217.

Numerous other solutions may be found in Poole's Synopsis, but these
embrace the principal, and the most plausible that have been proposed.

II\. I proceed, then, to state what seems to me to be the true
explanation. This must be found in some facts that will accord with the
explanation given of the meaning of the passage:

\(1\) There can be no doubt that this refers to Rome, either pagan,
Christian, or papal. All the circumstances combine in this; all
respectable interpreters agree in this. This would be naturally
understood by the symbols used by John, and by the explanations
furnished by the angel. See [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018); "And the woman which thou
sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth."
Every circumstance combines here in leading to the conclusion that Rome
is intended. There was no other power or empire on the earth to which
this could be properly applied; there was everything in the
circumstances of the writer to lead us to suppose that this was referred
to; there is an utter impossibility now in applying the description to
anything else.

\(2\) it was to be a revived power; not a power in its original form and
strength. This is manifest, because it is said [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008) that the power represented by the
beast "was, and is not, and yet is" - that is, it was once a mighty
power; it then declined so that it could be said that "it is not"; and
yet there was so much remaining vitality in it, or so much revived
power, that it could be said that it "still is" - καίπερ ἐστίν kaiper
estin. Now, this is strictly applicable to Rome when the papal power
arose. The old Roman might had departed; the glory and strength evinced
in the days of the consuls, the dictators, and the emperors, had
disappeared, and yet there was a lingering vitality, and a reviving of
power under the papacy, which made it proper to say that it still
continued, or that that mighty power was prolonged. The civil power
connected with the papacy was a revived Roman power - the Roman power
prolonged under another form - for it is susceptible of clear
demonstration that, if it had not been for the rise of the papal power,
the sovereignty of Rome, as such, would have been wholly extinct. For
the proof of this, see the passages quoted in the notes on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). Compare the notes on [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003), [Rev
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012), [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015).

\(3\) it was to be a power emanating from the "abyss," or that would
seem to ascend from the dark world beneath. See [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008). This was true in regard to the
papacy, either:

\(a\) as apparently ascending from the lowest state and the most
depressed condition, as if it came up from below (see the notes on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003), compare [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)); or,

\(b\) as, in fact, having its origin in the world of darkness, and being
under the control of the prince of that world, which, according to all
the representations of that formidable anti-Christian power in the
Scriptures, is true, and which the whole history of the papacy, and of
its influence on religion, confirms.

\(4\) one of the powers referred to sustained the other. "The seven
heads are seven mountains on which the woman sitteth," [Rev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009). That is, the power represented
by the harlot was sustained or supported by the power represented by the
seven heads or the seven mountains. Literally, applied, this would mean
that the papacy, as an ecclesiastical institution, was sustained by the
civil power, with which it was so closely connected. For the
illustration and support of this, see the notes on [Rev
13:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002), [Rev
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012), [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015). In the notes on these passages
it is shown that the support was mutual; that while the papacy, in fact,
revived the almost extinct Roman civil power, and gave it new vitality,
the price of that was, that it should be, in its turn, sustained by that
revived Roman civil power. All history shows that that has been the
fact; that in all its aggressions, assumptions, and persecutions, it
has, in fact, and professedly, leaned on the arm of the civil power.

\(5\) a more important inquiry, and a more serious difficulty, remains
in respect to the statements respecting the "seven kings," [Rev
17:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010). The statements on this point
are, that the whole number properly was seven; that of this number five
had fallen or passed away; that one was in existence at the time when
the author wrote; that another one was yet to appear who would continue
for a little time; and that the general power represented by all these
would be embodied in the "beast that was, and is not," and that might,
in some respects, be regarded as an "eighth." These points may be taken
up in their order:

\(a\) The first inquiry relates to the five that were fallen and the one
that was then in existence - the first six. These may be taken together,
for they are manifestly of the same class, and have the same
characteristics, at least so far as to be distinguished from the
"seventh" and the "eighth." The meaning of the word "kings" here has
been already explained, [Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010). It
denotes ruling power, or forms of power; and, so far as the
signification of the word is concerned, it might be applicable to
royalty, or to any other form of administration. It is not necessary,
then, to find an exact succession of princes or kings that would
correspond with this - five of whom were dead, and one of whom was then
on the throne, and all soon to be succeeded by one more, who would soon
die.

The true explanation of this seems to be what refers this to the forms
of the Roman government or administration. These six "heads," or forms
of administration, were, in their order, Kings, Consuls, Dictators,
Decemvirs, Military Tribunes, and Emperors. Of these, five had passed
away in the time when John wrote the Apocalypse; the sixth, the
imperial, was then in power, and had been from the time of Augustus
Caesar. The only questions that can be raised are, whether these forms
of administration were so distinct and prominent, and whether in the
times previous to John they so embraced the whole Roman power, as to
justify this interpretation - that is, whether these forms of
administration were so marked in this respect that it may be supposed
that John would use the language here employed in describing them. As
showing the probability that he would use this language, I refer to the
following arguments, namely:

\(1\) The authority of Livy, lib. 6:cap. 1. Speaking of the previous
parts of his history, and of what he had done in writing it, he says:
"Quae ab condita urbe Roma a.d. captam eandem urbem, Romani sub regibus
primum, consulibus deinde ac dictatoribus, decemviris ac tribunis
consularibus gessere, foris bella, domi seditiones, quinque libris
exposui." That is, "In five books I have related what was done at Rome,
pertaining both to foreign wars and domestic strifes, from the
foundation of the city to the time when it was taken, as it was governed
by kings, by consuls, by dictators, by the decemvirs, and by consular
tribunes." Here he mentions five forms of administration under which
Rome had been governed in the earlier periods of its history. The
imperial power had a later origin, and did not exist until near the time
of Livy himself.

\(2\) the same distribution of power, or forms of government, among the
Romans, is made by Tacitus, Annual. lib. i. cap. 1: "Urbem Romam a
principio reges habuere. Libertatem et consulatum L. Brutus instituit.
Dictaturae a.d. tempus sumebantur. Neque decemviralis potestas ultra
biennium, neque tribunorum militum consulure jus diu valuit. Non Cinnae,
non Syllae longa dominatio: et Pompeii Crassique potentia cito in
Caesarem, Lepidi atque Antonii arma in Augustum cessere; qui cuncta,
discordiis civilibus fessa, nomine principis sub imperium accepit." That
is, "In the beginning, Rome was governed by kings. Then L. Brutus gave
to her liberty and the consulship. A temporary power was conferred on
the dictators. The authority of the decemvirs did not continue beyond
the space of two years: neither was the consular power of the military
tribunes of long duration. The rule of Cinna and Sylla was brief; and
the power of Pompey and Crassus passed into the hands of Caesar; and the
arms of Lepidus and Antony were surrendered to Augustus, who united all
things, broken by civil discord, under the name of prince in the
imperial government." Here Tacitus distinctly mentions the six forms of
administration that had prevailed in Rome, the last of which was the
imperial. It is true, also, that he mentions the brief rule of certain
men - as Cinna, Sylla, Antony, and Lepidus; but these are not forms of
administration, and their temporary authority did not indicate any
change in the government - for some of these men were dictators, and
none of them, except Brutus and Augustus, established any permanent form
of administration.

\(3\) the same thing is apparent in the usual statements of history, and
the books that describe the forms of government at Rome. In so common a
book as Adam's Roman Antiquities, a description may be found of the
forms of Roman administration that corresponds almost precisely with
this. The forms of supreme power in Rome, as enumerated there, are what
are called ordinary and extraordinary magistrates. Under the former are
enumerated kings, consuls, praetors, censors, quaestors, and tribunes of
the people. But of these, in fact, the supreme power was vested in two;
for there were, under this, but two forms of administration - that of
kings and consuls; the offices of praetor, censor, quaestor, and tribune
of the people being merely subordinate to that of the consuls, and no
more a new form of administration than the offices of secretary of the
state, of war, of the navy, of the interior, are now. Under the latter -
that of extraordinary magistrates - are enumerated dictators, decemvirs,
military tribunes, and the interrex. But the interrex did not constitute
a form of administration, or a change of government, anymore than, when
the President or Vice-president of the United States should die, the
performance of the duties of the office of president by the speaker of
the senate would indicate a change, or than the regency of the Prince of
Wales in the time of George III constituted a new form of government. So
that, in fact, we have enumerated, as constituting the supreme power at
Rome, kings, consuls, dictators, decemvirs, and military tribunes - five
in number. The imperial power was the sixth.

\(4\) in confirmation of the same thing, I may refer to the authority of
Bellarmine, a distinguished Roman Catholic writer. In his work De
Pontiff., cap. 2, he thus enumerates the changes which the Roman
government had experienced, or the forms of administration that had
existed there:

1\. Kings;

2\. Consuls;

3\. Decemvirs;

4\. Dictators;

5\. Military Tribunes with consular power;

6\. Emperors.

See Poole's Synoptists, in loco. And,

\(5\) it may be added, that this would be understood by the
contemporaries of John in this sense. These forms of government were so
marked that, in connection with the mention of the "seven mountains,"
designating the city, there could be no doubt as to what was intended.
Reference would at once be made to the imperial power as then existing,
and the mind would readily and easily turn back to the five main forms
of the supreme administration which had existed before.

\(b\) The next inquiry is, what is denoted by "the seventh." If the word
"kings" here refers, as is supposed (see the notes on [Rev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)), to a form of government or
administration; if the "five" refer to the forms previous to the
imperial, and the "sixth" to the imperial; and if John wrote during the
imperial government, then it follows that this must refer to some form
of administration that was to succeed the imperial. If the papacy was
"the eighth," and of the "seventh," then it is clear that this must
refer to some form of civil administration lying between the decline of
the imperial and the rise of the papal power: that "short space" - for
it was a short space that intervened. Now, there can be no difficulty, I
think, in referring this to that form of administration over Rome that
"dukedom" under the exarchate of Ravenna, which succeeded the decline of
the imperial power, and which preceded the rise of the papal power;
between the year 566 or 568, when Rome was reduced to a dukedom, under
the exarchate of Ravenna, and the time when the city revolted from this
authority and became subject to that of the pope, about the year 727.

This period continued, according to Mr. Gibbon, about two hundred years.
He says, "During a period of two hundred years, Italy was unequally
divided between the kingdom of the Lombards and the exarchate of
Ravenna. The offices and professions, which the jealousy of Constantine
had separated, were united by the indulgence of Justinian; and eighteen
successive exarchs were invested, in the decline of the empire, with the
full remains of civil, of military, and even of ecclesiastical power.
Their immediate jurisdiction, which was afterward consecrated as the
patrimony of Peter, extended over the modern Romagna, the marshes or
valleys of Ferrara and Commachic, five maritime cities from Rimini to
Ancona, and a second inland Pentapolis, between the Adriatic coast and
the hills of the Apennine. The duchy of Rome appears to have included
the Tuscan, Sabine, and Latian conquests, of the first four hundred
years of the city; and the limits may be distinctly traced along the
coast, from Civita Vecchia to Terracina, and with the course of the
Tiber from Ameria and Narni to the port of Ostia" (Dec. and Fall,
3:202).

How accurate is this if it be regarded as a statement of a new power or
form of administration that succeeded the imperial - a power that was,
in fact, a prolongation of the old Roman authority, and that was
designed to constitute and embody it all! Could Mr. Gibbon have
furnished a better commentary on the passage if he had adopted the
interpretation of this portion of the Apocalypse above proposed, and if
he had designed to describe this as the seventh power in the successive
forms of the Roman administration? It is worthy of remark, also, that
this account in Mr. Gibbon's history immediately precedes the account of
the rise of the papacy; the record respecting the exarchate, and that
concerning Gregory the Great, described by Mr. Gibbon as "the Saviour of
Rome," occurring in the same chapter, vol. iii. 202-211.

\(c\) This was to "continue for a short space" - for a little time. If
this refers to the power to which in the remarks above it is supposed to
refer, it is easy to see the propriety of this statement. Compared with
the previous form of administration - the imperial - it was of short
duration; absolutely considered, it was brief. Mr. Gibbon (iii. 202) has
marked it as extending through "a period of two hundred years"; and if
this is compared with the form of administration which preceded it,
extending to more than five hundred years, and more especially with that
which followed - the papal form - which has extended now some twelve
hundred years, it will be seen with what propriety this is spoken of as
continuing for a "short space."

\(d\) "The beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of
the seven," [Rev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011). If the
explanations above given are correct, there can be no difficulty in the
application of this to the papal power; for:

\(1\) all this power was concentrated in the papacy, all that revived or
prolonged Roman power had now passed into the papacy, constituting that
mighty dominion which was to be set up for so many centuries over what
had been the Roman world. See the statements of Mr. Gibbon (iii.
207-211), as quoted in the notes on [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). Compare also, particularly, the
remarks of Augustine Steuchus, a Roman Catholic writer, as quoted in the
notes on that verse: "The empire having been overthrown, unless God had
raised up the pontificate, Rome, resuscitated and restored by none,
would have become uninhabitable, and been thenceforward a most foul
habitation of cattle. But in the pontificate it revived as with a second
birth; its empire in magnitude not indeed equal to the old empire, but
its form not very dissimilar: because all nations, from East and from
West, venerate the pope, not otherwise than they before obeyed the
emperor."

\(2\) this was an eighth power or form of administration - for it was
different, in many respects, from that of the kings, the consuls, the
dictators, the decemvirs, the military tribunes, the emperors, and the
dukedom - though it comprised substantially the power of all. Indeed, it
could not have been spoken of as identical with either of the previous
forms of administration, though it concentrated the power which had been
wielded by them all.

\(3\) it was "of the seven"; that is, it pertained to them; it was a
prolongation of the same power. It had the same central seat - Rome; it
extended over the same territory, and it embraced sooner or latter the
same nations. There is not one of those forms of administration which
did not find a prolongation in the papacy; for it aspired after, and
succeeded in obtaining, all the authority of kings, dictators, consuls,
emperors. It was in fact still the Roman scepter swayed over the world;
and with the strictest propriety it could be said that it was "of the
seven," as having sprung out of the seven, and as perpetuating the sway
of this mighty domination. For full illustration of this, see the Dan. 7
notes; and Rev. 13 notes.

\(4\) it would "go into perdition"; that is, it would be under this form
that this mighty domination that had for so many ages ruled over the
earth would die away, or this would be the last in the series. The Roman
dominion, as such, would not be extended to a ninth, or tenth, or
eleventh form, but would finally expire under the eighth. Every
indication shows that this is to be so, and that with the decline of the
papal power the whole Roman domination, that has swayed a scepter for
two thousand five hundred years, will have come forever to an end. If
this is so, then we have found an ample and exact application of this
passage even in its most minute specifications.

[Revelation 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 17:12</span></span>

And the ten horns which thou sawest - On the scarlet-colored beast, [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).

Are ten kings - Represent or denote ten kings - that is, kingdoms or
powers. See the notes on [Dan 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024).

Which have received no kingdom as yet - That is, they were not in
existence when John wrote. It is implied, that during the period under
review they would arise, and would become connected, in an important
sense, with the power here represented by the "beast." For a full
illustration respecting the ten "kings," or kingdoms here referred to,
see the notes on Dan. 7, at the close of the chapter, II. (2).

But receive power - It is not said from what source this power is
received, but it is simply implied that it would in fact be conferred on
them.

As kings - That is, the power would be what is usually exercised by
kings.

One hour - It cannot be supposed that this is to be taken literally. The
meaning clearly is, that this would be brief and temporary; that is, it
was a form of administration which would be succeeded by one more fixed
and permanent. Anyone can see that, in fact, this is strictly applicable
to the governments, as referred to in the notes on Daniel, which sprang
up after the incursion of the northern barbarians, and which were
finally succeeded by the permanent forms of government in Europe. Most
of them were very brief in their duration, and they were soon remodelled
in the forms of permanent administration. Thus, to take the arrangement
proposed by Sir Isaac Newton:

\(1\) the kingdom of the Vandals and Alans in Spain and Africa;

\(2\) the kingdom of the Suevians in Spain;

\(3\) the kingdom of the Visigoths;

\(4\) the kingdom of the Alans in Gallia;

\(5\) the kingdom of the Burgundians;

\(6\) the kingdom of the Franks;

\(7\) the kingdom of the Britons;

\(8\) the kingdom of the Huns;

\(9\) the kingdom of the Lombards;

\(10\) the kingdom of Ravenna - how temporary were most of these; how
soon they passed into the more permanent forms of administration which
succeeded them in Europe!

With the beast - With that rising papal power. They would exercise their
authority in connection with that, and under its influence.

[Revelation 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 17:13</span></span>

These have one mind - That is, they are united in the promotion of the
same object. Though in some respects wholly independent of each other,
yet they may be regarded as, in fact, so far united that they tend to
promote the same ultimate end. As a fact in history, all these kingdoms,
though of different origin, and though not infrequently engaged in war
with each other, became Roman Catholics, and were united in the support
of the papacy. It was with propriety, therefore, that they should be
regarded as so closely connected with that power that they could be
represented as "ten horns" on the seven-headed monster.

And shall give their power and strength unto the beast - Shall lend
their influence to the support of the papacy, and become the upholders
of that power. The meaning, according to the interpretation above
proposed, is, that they would all become papal kingdoms, and supporters
of the papal power. It is unnecessary to pause to show how true this has
been in history. At first, most of the people out of whom these kingdoms
sprang were pagans; then many of them embraced Christianity under the
prevailing form of Arianism, and this fact was for a time a bar to their
perfect adhesion to the Roman see; but they were all ultimately brought
wholly under its influence, and became its supporters. In 496 a.d.,
Clovis, the king of the Franks, on occasion of his victory over the
Allemanni, embraced the Catholic faith, and so received the title,
transmitted downward through nearly thirteen hundred years to the French
kings as his successors, of "the oldest son of the church"; in the
course of the sixth century, the kings of Burgundy, Bavaria, Spain,
Portugal, England, embraced the same religion, and became the defenders
of the papacy. It is well known that each one of the powers above
enumerated as constituting these ten kingdoms, became subject to the
papacy, and continued so during their separate existence, or when merged
into some other power, until the Reformation in the sixteenth century.
All "their power and strength was given unto the beast"; all was made
subservient to the purposes of papal Rome.

[Revelation 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 17:14</span></span>

These shall make war with the Lamb - The Lamb of God - the Lord Jesus
(See the notes at [Rev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)); that is,
they would combine with the papacy in opposing evangelical religion. It
is not meant that they would openly and avowedly proclaim war against
the Son of God, but that they would practically do this in sustaining a
persecuting power. It is unnecessary to show how true this has been in
history; how entirely they sustained the papacy in all its measures of
persecution.

And the Lamb shall overcome them - Shall ultimately gain the victory
over them. The meaning is, that they would not be able to extinguish the
true religion. In spite of all opposition and persecution, that would
still live in the world, until it would be said that a complete triumph
was gained.

For he is Lord of lords, and King of kings - He has supreme power over
all the earth, and all kings and princes are subject to his control.
Compare [Rev 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).

And they that are with him - The reference is to the persecuted saints
who have adhered to him as his faithful followers in all these
protracted conflicts.

Are called - That is, called by him to be his followers; as if he had
selected them out of the world to maintain his cause. See the notes on
[Rom 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

And chosen - See the [Joh 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016) note,
and [Pe1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002) note. In their steadfast
adherence to the truth, they had shown that they were truly chosen by
the Saviour, and could be relied on in the warfare against the powers of
evil.

And faithful - They had shown themselves faithful to him in times of
persecution, and in the hour of darkness.

[Revelation 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 17:15</span></span>

And he saith unto me - The angel, [Rev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007). This commences the more
"literal" statement of what is meant by these symbols. See the Analysis
of the chapter.

The waters which thou sawest - See the notes on [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001).

Are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues - For an
explanation of these terms, see the notes on [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009). The meaning here is:

\(a\) that these waters represent a multitude of people. This is a
common and an obvious symbol - for outspread seas or raging floods would
naturally represent such a multitude. See [Isa
8:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007); [Isa
17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012); [Jer
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002). Compare Iliad, v. 394. The sense
here is, that vast numbers of people would be subject to the power here
represented by the woman.

\(b\) They would be composed of different nations, and would be of
different languages, It is unnecessary to show that this, in both
respects, is applicable to the papacy. Nations have been, and are
subject to its control, and nations speaking a large part of the
languages of the world. Perhaps under no one government - not even the
Babylonian, the Macedonian, or the ancient Roman - was there so great a
diversity of people, speaking so many different languages, and having so
different an origin.

[Revelation 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 17:16</span></span>

And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast - [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). The ten powers or kingdoms
represented by those horns. See the notes on [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012).

These shall hate the whore - There seems to be some incongruity between
this statement and what was previously made. In the former [Rev
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), these ten governments are
represented as in alliance with the beast; as "giving all their power
and strength" unto it; and as uniting with it in making war with the
Lamb. What is here said must, therefore, refer to some subsequent
period, indicating some great change in their feelings and policy. We
have seen the evidence of the fulfillment of the former statements. This
statement will be accomplished if these same powers, represented by the
ten horns, that were formerly in alliance with the papacy, shall become
its enemy, and contribute to its final overthrow. That is, it will be
accomplished if the nations of Europe, embraced within the limits of
those ten kingdoms, shall become hostile to the papacy, and shall
combine for its overthrow. Is anything more probable than this? France
(see the notes on Rev. 16) has already struck more than one heavy blow
on that power; England has been detached from it; many of the states of
Italy are weary of it, and are ready to rise up against it; and nothing
is more probable than that Spain, Portugal, France, Lombardy, and the
papal States themselves, will yet throw off the yoke forever, and put an
end to a power that has so long ruled over people. It was with the
utmost difficulty, in 1848, that the papal power was sustained, and this
was done only by foreign swords; the papacy could not probably be
protected in another such outbreak. And this passage leads us to
anticipate that the period will come - and that probably not far in the
future - when those powers that have for so many ages sustained the
papacy will become its determined foes, and will rise in their might and
bring it forever to an end.

And shall make her desolate and naked - Strip her of all her power and
all her attractiveness. That is, applied to papal Rome, all that is so
gorgeous and alluring - her wealth, and pomp, and splendor - shall be
taken away, and she will be seen as she is, without anything to dazzle
the eye or to blind the mind.

And shall eat her flesh - Shall completely destroy her - as if her flesh
were consumed. Perhaps the image is taken from the practice of cannibals
eating the flesh of their enemies slain in battle. If so, nothing could
give a more impressive idea of the utter destruction of this formidable
power, or of the feelings of those by whom its end would be brought
about.

And burn her with fire - Another image of total destruction. Perhaps the
meaning may be, that after her flesh was eaten, such parts of her as
remained would be thrown into the fire and consumed. If this be the
meaning, the image is a very impressive one to denote absolute and total
destruction. Compare the notes on [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008).

[Revelation 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 17:17</span></span>

For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will - That is, in regard
to the destruction of this mighty power. They would be employed as his
agents in bringing about his designs. Kings and princes are under the
control of God, and, whatever may be their own designs, they are in fact
employed to accomplish his purposes, and are instruments in his hands.
See the notes on [Isa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007). Compare
[Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010).

And to agree - See [Rev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013). That
is, they act harmoniously in their support of this power, and so they
will in its final destruction.

And give their kingdom unto the beast - See the notes at [Rev
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013).

Until the words of God shall be fulfilled - Not forever; not as a
permanent arrangement. God has fixed a limit to the existence of this
power. When his purposes are accomplished, these kingdoms will withdraw
their support, and this mighty power will fall to rise no more.

[Revelation 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 17:18</span></span>

And the woman which thou sawest - [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003).

Is that great city - Represents that great city.

Which reigneth over the kings of the earth - Rome would of course be
understood by this language in the time of John, and all the
circumstances, as we have seen, combined to show that Rome, in some form
of its dominion, is intended. Even the name could hardly have designated
it more clearly, and all expositors agree in supposing that Rome, either
as pagan or as Christian, is referred to. The chapter shows that its
power is limited; and that, although for purposes which he saw to be
wise, God allows it to have a wide influence over the nations of the
earth, yet, in his own appointed time, the very powers that have
sustained it will become its foes, and combine for its overthrow. Europe
needs but little further provocation, and the fires of liberty, which
have been so long pent up, will break forth, and that storm of
indignation which has expelled the Jesuits from all the courts of
Europe; which has abolished the Inquisition; which has more than once
led hostile armies to the very gates of papal Rome, will again be
aroused in a manner which cannot be allayed, and that mighty power,
which has controlled so large a part of the nations of Europe for more
than a thousand years of the world's history, will come to an end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 18](rev018)

</div>
