<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev020)  [Next](rev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 21:0</span></span>

Analysis Of Revelation 21 And Revelation 22:1-5

The whole of Rev. 21, and the first five verses of Rev. 22, relate to
scenes beyond the judgment, and are descriptive of the happy and
triumphant state of the redeemed church, when all its conflicts shall
have ceased, and all its enemies shall have been destroyed. That happy
state is depicted under the image of a beautiful city, of which
Jerusalem was the emblem, and it was disclosed to John by a vision of
that city - the New Jerusalem - descending from heaven. Jerusalem was
regarded as the unique dwelling-place of God, and to the Hebrews it
became thus the natural emblem or symbol of the heavenly world. The
conception having occurred of describing the future condition of the
righteous under the image of a beautiful city, all that follows is in
"keeping" with that, and is merely a carrying out of the image. It is a
city with beautiful walls and gates; a city that has no temple - for it
is all a temple; a city that needs no light - for God is its light; a
city into which nothing impure ever enters; a city filled with trees,
and streams, and fountains, and fruits - the "Paradise Regained."

The description of that blessed state comprises the following parts:

I. A vision of a new heaven and a new earth, as the final abode of the
blessed, [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001). The first heaven
and the first earth passed away at the judgment [Rev
20:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011), to be succeeded by a new
heaven and earth suited to be the abode of the blessed.

II\. A vision of the holy city - the New Jerusalem - descending from
heaven, as the abode of the redeemed, prepared as a bride adorned for
her husband - representing the fact that God would truly abide with men,
[Rev 21:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002). Now all the effects of
the apostasy will cease; all tears will be wiped away, and in that
blessed state there will be no more death, or sorrow, or pain. This
contains the "general" statement of what will be the condition of the
redeemed in the future world. God will be there; and all sorrow will
cease.

III\. A command to make a record of these things, [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005).

IV\. A general description of those who should dwell in that future
world of blessedness, [Rev 21:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006). It
is for all who are athirst; for all who desire it, and long for it; for
all who "overcome" their spiritual enemies, who maintain a steady
conflict with sin, and gain a victory over it. But all who are fearful
and unbelieving - all the abominable, and murderers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and liars - shall have their part in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone. That is, that world will be pure and holy.

V. A minute description of the city representing the happy abode of the
redeemed, Rev. 21:9-26. This description embraces many particulars:

\(1\) Its general appearance, [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011), [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018), [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021). It is bright and splendid -
like a precious jasper-stone, clear as crystal, and composed of pure
gold.

\(2\) its walls, [Rev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012), [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018). The walls are represented as
"great and high," and as composed of "jasper."

\(3\) its gates, [Rev 21:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012), [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021). The gates are twelve in number,
three on each side; and are each composed of a single pearl.

\(4\) its foundations, [Rev 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014),
[Rev 21:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018). There are twelve
foundations, corresponding to the number of the apostles of the Lamb.
They are all composed of precious stones - jasper, sapphire, chalcedony,
emerald, sardonyx, sardius, chrysolite, beryl, topaz, chrysoprasus,
jacinth, and amethyst.

\(5\) its size; [Rev 21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015). It is
square - the length being as great as the breadth, and its height the
same. The extent of each dimension is twelve thousand furlongs - a
length on each side and in height of three hundred and seventy-five
miles. It would seem, however, that though the "city" was of that
height, the "wall" was only an hundred and forty-four cubits, or about
two hundred and sixteen feet high. The idea seems to be that the city -
the dwellings within it - towered high above the wall that was thrown
around it for protection. This is not uncommon in cities that are
surrounded by walls.

\(6\) its light, [Rev 21:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). It has no need of the sun, or of
the moon, or of a lamp [Rev 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005) to
lighten it; and yet there is no night there [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005), for the glory of God gives light
to it.

\(7\) it is a city without a temple, [Rev
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022). There is no one place in it
that is especially sacred, or where the worship of God will be
exclusively celebrated. It will be all a temple, and the worship of God
will be celebrated in all parts of it.

\(8\) it is always open, [Rev 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025).
There will be no need of closing it as walled cities on earth are closed
to keep enemies out, and it will not be shut to prevent those who dwell
there from going out and coming in when they please. The inhabitants
will not be prisoners, nor will they be in danger, or be alarmed by the
prospect of an attack from an enemy.

\(9\) its inhabitants will all be pure and holy, [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027). There will in no wise enter
there anything that defiles, or that works abomination, or that is
false. They only shall dwell there whose names are written in the Lamb's
book of life.

\(10\) its enclosures and environs, [Rev
22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001). A stream of water, pure as
crystal, proceeds from the throne of God and the Lamb. That stream flows
through the city, and on its banks is the tree of life constantly
bearing fruit - fruit to be partaken of freely. It is Paradise regained
- a holy and beautiful abode, of which the garden of Eden was only an
imperfect emblem, where there is no prohibition, as there was there, of
anything that grows, and where there is no danger of falling into sin.

\(11\) it is a place free, consequently, from the curse that was
pronounced on man when he forfeited the blessings of the first Eden, and
when he was driven out from the happy abodes where God had placed him.

\(12\) it is a place where the righteous shall reign forever, [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). Death shall never enter there,
and the presence and glory of God shall fill all with peace and joy.

Such is an outline of the figurative and glowing description of the
future blessedness of the redeemed; the eternal abode of those who shall
be saved. It is poetic and emblematical; but it is elevating, and
constitutes a beautiful and appropriate close, not only of this single
book, but of the whole sacred volume - for to this the saints are
everywhere directed to look forward; this is the glorious termination of
all the struggles and conflicts of the church; this is the result of the
work of redemption in repairing the evils of the fall, and in bringing
man to more than the bliss which he lost in Eden. The mind rests with
delight on this glorious prospect; the Bible closes, as a revelation
from heaven should, in a manner that calms down every anxious feeling;
that fills the soul with peace, and that leads the child of God to look
forward with bright anticipations, and to say, as John did, "Come, Lord
Jesus," [Rev 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020).

[Revelation 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rev 21:27</span></span>

And there shall in no wise - On no account; by no means. This strong
language denotes the absolute exclusion of all that is specified in the
verse.

Anything that defileth - Literally, anything "common." See the notes on
[Act 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014). It means here that nothing
will be found in that blessed abode which is unholy or sinful. It will
be a pure world, [Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013).

Neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie - See the notes
on [Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008).

But they which are written in the Lamb's book of life - Whose names are
there recorded. See the notes on [Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005). Compare the notes on [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008).

[Revelation 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 21:1</span></span>

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth - Such a heaven and earth that
they might properly be called new; such transformations, and such
changes in their appearance, that they seemed to be just created. He
does not say that they were created now, or anew; that the old heavens
and earth were annihilated; but all that he says is, that there were
such changes that they seemed to be new. If the earth is to be renovated
by fire, such a renovation will give an appearance to the globe as if it
were created anew, and might be attended with such an apparent change in
the heavens that they might be said to be new. The description here [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001) relates to scenes after the
general resurrection and the judgment - for those events are detailed in
the close of the previous chapter. In regard to the meaning of the
language here, see the notes on [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013). Compare, also, "The Religion of
Geology and its Connected Sciences," by Edward Hitchcock, D. D., LL. D.,
pp. 370-408.

For the first heaven and the first earth were passed away - They had
passed away by being changed, and a renovated universe had taken their
place. See the notes on [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010).

And there was no more sea - This change struck John more forcibly, it
would appear, than anything else. Now, the seas and oceans occupy about
three-fourths of the surface of the globe, and, of course, to that
extent prevent the world from being occupied by people - except by the
comparatively small number that are mariners. There, the idea of John
seems to be, the whole world will be inhabitable, and no part will be
given up to the wastes of oceans. In the present state of things, these
vast oceans are necessary to render the world a fit abode for human
beings, as well as to give life and happiness to the numberless tribes
of animals that find their homes in the waters. In the future state, it
would seem, the present arrangement will be unnecessary; and if man
dwells upon the earth at all, or if he visits it as a temporary abode
(see the notes on [Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013)), these
vast wastes of water will be needless. It should be remembered that the
earth, in its changes, according to the teachings of geology, has
undergone many revolutions quite as remarkable as it would be if all the
lakes, and seas, and oceans of the earth should disappear. Still, it is
not certain that it was intended that this language should be understood
literally as applied to the material globe. The object is to describe
the future blessedness of the righteous; and the idea is, that that will
be a world where there will be no such wastes as those produced by
oceans.

[Revelation 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 21:2</span></span>

And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of
heaven - See the Analysis of the chapter. On the phrase "new Jerusalem,"
see the [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026) note, and [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022) note. Here it refers to the
residence of the redeemed, the heavenly world, of which Jerusalem was
the type and symbol. It is here represented as "coming down from God out
of heaven." This, of course, does not mean that this great city was
"literally" to descend upon the earth, and to occupy any one part of the
renovated world; but it is a symbolical or figurative representation,
designed to show that the abode of the righteous will be splendid and
glorious. The idea of a city literally descending from heaven, and being
set upon the earth with such proportions - three hundred and seventy
miles high [Rev 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016), made of gold,
and with single pearls for gates, and single gems for the foundations -
is absurd. No man can suppose that this is literally true, and hence
this must be regarded as a figurative or emblematic description. It is a
representation of the heavenly state under the image of a beautiful
city, of which Jerusalem was, in many respects, a natural and striking
emblem.

Prepared as a bride adorned for her husband - See the notes on [Isa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018); [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010). The purpose here is, to
represent it as exceedingly beautiful. The comparison of the church with
a bride, or a wife, is common in the Scriptures. See the [Rev
19:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007) notes, and [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021) note. It is also common in the
Scriptures to compare a city with a beautiful woman, and these images
here seem to be combined. It is a beautiful city that seems to descend,
and this city is itself compared with a richly-attired bride prepared
for her husband,

[Revelation 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 21:3</span></span>

And I heard a great voice out of heaven - As if uttered by God himself
or the voice, of angels.

Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men - The tabernacle, as that word
is commonly used in the Scriptures, referring to the sacred "tent"
erected in the wilderness, was regarded as the unique dwelling-place of
God among his people - as the temple was afterward, which was also
called a "tabernacle." See the notes on [Heb
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002). The meaning here is, that God
would now dwell with the redeemed, as if in a tabernacle, or in a house
specially prepared for his residence among them. It is not said that
this would be "on the earth," although that may be; for it is possible
that the earth, as well as other worlds, may yet become the abode of the
redeemed. See the notes on [Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013).

And he will dwell with them - As in a tent, or tabernacle - σκηνώσει
skēnōsei. This is a common idea in the Scriptures.

And they shall be his people - He will acknowledge them in this public
way as his own, and will dwell with them as such.

And God himself shall be with them - Shall be permanently with them;
shall never leave them.

And be their God - Shall manifest himself as such, in such a manner that
there shall be no doubt.

[Revelation 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 21:4</span></span>

And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes - This will be one of
the characteristics of that blessed state, that not a tear shall ever be
shed there. How different will that be from the condition here - for who
is there here who has not learned to weep? See the notes on [Rev
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017). Compare the notes on [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008).

And there shall be no more death - In all that future world of glory,
not one shall ever die; not a grave shall ever be dug! What a view do we
begin to get of heaven, when we are told there shall be no "death"
there! How different from earth, where death is so common; where it
spares no one; where our best friends die; where the wise, the good, the
useful, the lovely die; where fathers, mothers, wives, husbands, sons,
daughters, all die; where we habitually feel that we must die. Assuredly
we have here a view of heaven most glorious and animating to those who
dwell in a world like this, and to whom nothing is more common than
death. In all their endless and glorious career, the redeemed will never
see death again; they will never themselves die. They will never follow
a friend to the tomb, nor fear that an absent friend is dead. The slow
funeral procession will never be witnessed there; nor will the soil ever
open its bosom to furnish a grave. See the notes on [Co1
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055).

Neither sorrow - The word "sorrow" here - πένθος penthos - denotes
sorrow or grief of any kind; sorrow for the loss of property or friends;
sorrow for disappointment, persecution, or care; sorrow over our sins,
or sorrow that we love God so little, and serve him so unfaithfully;
sorrow that we are sick, or that we must die. How innumerable are the
sources of sorrow here; how constant is it on the earth! Since the fall
of man there has not been a day, an hour, a moment, in which this has
not been a sorrowful world; there has not been a nation, a tribe - a
city or a village - nay, not a family, where there has not been grief.
There has been no individual who has been always perfectly happy. No one
rises in the morning with any certainty that he may not end the day in
grief; no one lies down at night with any assurance that it may not be a
night of sorrow. How different would this world be if it were announced
that henceforward there would be no sorrow! How different, therefore,
will heaven be when we shall have the assurance that henceforward grief
shall be at an end!

Nor crying - κραυγὴ kraugē." This word properly denotes a cry, an
outcry, as in giving a public notice; a cry in a tumult - a clamor, [Act
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009); and then a cry of sorrow, or
wailing. This is evidently its meaning here, and it refers to all the
outbursts of grief arising from affliction, from oppression, from
violence. The sense is, that as none of these causes of wailing will be
known in the future state, all such wailing will cease. This, too, will
make the future state vastly different from our condition here; for what
a change would it produce on the earth if the cry of grief were never to
be heard again!

Neither shall there be any more pain - There will be no sickness, and no
calamity; and there will be no mental sorrow arising from remorse, from
disappointment, or from the evil conduct of friends. And what a change
would this produce - for how full of pain is the world now! How many lie
on beds of languishing; how many are suffering under incurable diseases;
how many are undergoing severe surgical operations; how many are pained
by the loss of property or friends, or subjected to acuter anguish by
the misconduct of those who are loved! How different would this world
be, if all pain were to cease forever; how different, therefore, must
the blessed state of the future be from the present!

For the former things are passed away - The world as it was before the
judgment.

[Revelation 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 21:5</span></span>

And he that sat upon the throne said - Probably the Messiah, the
dispenser of the rewards of heaven. See the notes on [Rev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011).

Behold, I make all things new - A new heaven and new earth [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001), and an order of things to
correspond with that new creation. The former state of things when sin
and death reigned will be changed, and the change consequent on this
must extend to everything.

And he said unto me, Write - Make a record of these things, for they are
founded in truth, and they are adapted to bless a suffering world.
Compare the notes on [Rev 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013). See
also [Rev 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019).

For these words are true and faithful - They are founded in truth, and
they are worthy to be believed. See the notes on [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009). Compare also notes on [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004).

[Revelation 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 21:6</span></span>

And he said unto me - That is, he that sat on the throne - the Messiah.

It is done - It is finished, complete; or, still more expressively, "it
is" - γέγοναν gegonan. An expression remarkably similar to this occurs
in [Joh 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030), when the Saviour on the
cross said, "It is finished." The meaning in the passage before us
evidently is, "The great work is accomplished; the arrangement of human
affairs is complete. The redeemed are gathered in; the wicked are cut
off; truth is triumphant, and all is now complete - prepared for the
eternal state of things."

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end - This language makes it
morally certain that the speaker here is the Lord Jesus, for it is the
very language which he uses of himself in [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011). See its meaning explained in the
notes on [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008). If it is applied to
him here, it proves that he is divine, for in the following verse (7)
the speaker says that he would be a God to him who should "overcome."
The meaning of the language as used here, regarded as spoken by the
Redeemer at the consummation of all things, and as his people are about
entering into the abodes of blessedness, is, "I am now indeed the Alpha
and the Omega - the first and the last. The attributes implied in this
language which I claimed for myself are now verified in me, and it is
seen that these properly belong to me. The scheme for setting up a
kingdom in the lost world began in me, and it ends in me - the glorious
and triumphant king."

I will give unto him that is athirst - See the [Mat
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006) note; [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014); [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037) notes.

Of the fountain of the water of life - An image often used in the
Scriptures to represent salvation. It is compared with a fountain that
flows in abundance, where all may freely slake their thirst.

Freely - Without money and without price ([Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001) note; [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037) note); the common representation
in the Scriptures. The meaning here is, not that he would do this in the
future, but that he had shown that this was his character, as he had
claimed, in the same way as he had shown that he was the Alpha and the
Omega. The freeness and the fulness of salvation will be one of the most
striking things made manifest when the immense hosts of the redeemed
shall be welcomed to their eternal abodes.

[Revelation 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 21:7</span></span>

He that overcometh - See the notes on [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007).

Shall inherit all things - Be an heir of God in all things. See the
notes on [Rom 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017). Compare [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007), [Rev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011), [Rev
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017), [Rev
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026); [Rev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005), [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012), [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021).

And I will be his God - That is, forever. He would be to them all that
is properly implied in the name of God; he would bestow upon them all
the blessings which it was appropriate for God to bestow. See the [Co2
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#018) note; [Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010) note.

And he shall be my son - He shall sustain to me the relation of a son,
and shall be treated as such. He would ever onward sustain this
relation, and be honored as a child of God.

[Revelation 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 21:8</span></span>

But the fearful - Having stated, in general terms, who they were who
would be admitted into that blessed world, he now states explicitly who
would not. The "fearful" denote those who had not firmness boldly to
maintain their professed principles, or who were afraid to avow
themselves as the friends of God in a wicked world. They stand in
contrast with those who "overcome," [Rev
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007).

And unbelieving - Those who have not true faith; avowed infidels;
infidels at heart; and all who have not the sincere faith of the gospel.
See the notes on [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016).

And the abominable - The verb from which this word is derived means to
excite disgust; to feel disgust at; to abominate or abhor; and hence the
participle - "the abominable" - refers to all who are detestable, to
wit, on account of their sins; all whose conduct is offensive to God.
Thus it would include those who live in open sin; who practice
detestable vices; whose conduct is suited to excite disgust and
abhorrence. These must all, of course, be excluded from a pure and holy
world; and this description, alas! would embrace a lamentably large
portion of the world as it has hitherto been. See the notes on [Rom
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026) ff.

And murderers - See the [Rom 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029)
note; [Gal 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#021) note.

And whoremongers - See the notes on [Gal
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019).

And sorcerers - See the word used here - φαρμακεῦσι pharmakeusi -
explained in the notes on [Gal 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019),
under the word "witchcraft."

And idolaters - [Co1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009); [Gal
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019).

And all liars - All who are false in their statements, their promises,
their contracts. The word would embrace all who are false toward God
[Act 5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001), and false toward human
beings. See [Rom 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#031).

Shall have their part in the lake which burneth, ... - notes on [Rev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014). That is, they will be excluded
from heaven, and punished for ever. See the [Co1
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009) notes; [Gal
5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019) notes.

[Revelation 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 21:9</span></span>

And there came unto me one of the seven angels ... - See the notes on
[Rev 16:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006). Why one of these angels
was employed to make this communication is not stated. It may be that as
they had been engaged in bringing destruction on the enemies of the
church, and securing its final triumph, there was a propriety that that
triumph should be announced by one of their number.

And talked with me - That is, in regard to what he was about to show me.

I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife - I will show you what
represents the redeemed church now to be received into permanent union
with its Lord - as a bride about to be united to her husband. See the
notes on ver. 2. Compare [Rev 19:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007).

[Revelation 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 21:10</span></span>

And he carried me away in the spirit - Gave him a vision of the city;
seemed to place him where he could have a clear view of it as it came
down from heaven. See the notes on [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).

To a great and high mountain - The elevation, and the unobstructed range
of view, gave him an opportunity to behold it in its glory.

And showed me that great city, ... - As it descended from heaven. See
the notes on [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

[Revelation 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 21:11</span></span>

Having the glory of God - A glory or splendor such as became the
dwelling place of God. The nature of that splendor is described in the
following verses.

And her light - In [Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023) it is
said that "the glory of God did lighten it." That is, it was made light
by the visible symbol of the Deity - the "Shekinah." See the [Luk
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009) note; [Act
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003) note. The word here rendered
"light" - φωστὴρ phōstēr - occurs nowhere else in the New Testament
except in [Phi 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015). It means,
properly, a light, a lightgiver, and, in profane writers, means commonly
a "window." It is used here to denote the brightness or shining of the
divine glory, as supplying the place of the sun, or of a window.

Like unto a stone most precious - A stone of the richest or most costly
nature.

Even like a jasper stone - On the jasper, see the notes on [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). It is used there for the same
purpose as here, to illustrate the majesty and glory of God.

Clear as crystal - Pellucid or resplendent like crystal. There are
various kinds of jasper - as red, yellow, and brown, brownish yellow,
etc. The stone is essentially a quartz, and the word "crystal" here is
used to show that the form of it referred to by John was clear and
bright.

[Revelation 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 21:12</span></span>

And had a wall great and high - Ancient cities were always surrounded
with walls for protection, and John represents this as enclosed in the
usual manner. The word "great" means that it was thick and strong. Its
height also is particularly noticed, for it was unusual. See [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016).

And had twelve gates - Three on each side. The number of the gates
correspond to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and to
the number of the apostles. The idea seems to be that there would be
ample opportunity of access and egress.

And at the gates twelve angels - Stationed there as guards to the New
Jerusalem. Their business seems to have been to watch the gates that
nothing improper should enter; that the great enemy should not make an
insidious approach to this city as he did to the earthly paradise.

And names written thereon - On the gates.

Which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel - So
in the city which Ezekiel saw in vision, which John seems also to have
had in his eye. See [Eze 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#031). The
inscription in Ezekiel denoted that that was the residence of the people
of God; and the same idea is denoted here. The New Jerusalem is the
eternal residence of the children of God, and this is indicated at every
gate. None can enter who do not belong to that people; all who are
within are understood to be of their number.

[Revelation 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 21:13</span></span>

On the east three gates ... - The city was square [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016), and the same number of gates is
assigned to each quarter. There does not appear to be any special
significancy in this fact, unless it be to denote that there is access
to this city from all quarters of the world, and that they who dwell
there will have come from each of the great divisions of the earth -
that is, from every land,

[Revelation 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 21:14</span></span>

And the wall of the city had twelve foundations - It is not said whether
these foundations were twelve rows of stones placed one above another
under the city, and extending round it, or whether they were twelve
stones placed at intervals. The former would seem to be the most
probable, as the latter would indicate comparative feebleness and
liability to fall. Compare the notes on [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019).

And in them - In the foundation of stones. That is, the names of the
apostles were cut or carved in them so as to be conspicuous.

The names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb - Of the Lamb of God; the
Messiah. For an illustration of this passage, see the notes on [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020).

[Revelation 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 21:15</span></span>

And he that talked with me - The angel, [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009).

Had a golden reed to measure the city - See the notes on [Rev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001). The reed, or measuring rod,
here, is of gold, because all about the city is of the most rich and
costly materials. The rod is thus suited to the personage who uses it,
and to the occasion. Compare a similar description in [Eze
40:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003); [Eze
43:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#016). The object of this measuring is
to show that the city has proper architectural proportions.

And the gates thereof, ... - To measure every part of the city, and to
ascertain its exact dimensions.

[Revelation 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 21:16</span></span>

And the city lieth four-square - It was an exact square. That is, there
was nothing irregular about it; there were no crooked walls; there was
no jutting out, and no indentation in the walls, as if the city had been
built at different times without a plan, and had been accommodated to
circumstances. Most cities have been determined in their outline by the
character of the ground - by hills, streams, or ravines; or have grown
up by accretions, where one part has been joined to another, so that
there is no regularity, and so that the original plan, if there was any,
has been lost sight of. The New Jerusalem, on the contrary, had been
built according to a plan of the utmost regularity, which had not been
modified by the circumstances, or varied as the city grew. The idea here
may be, that the church, as it will appear in its state of glory, will
be in accordance with an eternal plan, and that the great original
design will have been fully carried out.

And the length is as large as the breadth - The height also of the city
was the same - so that it was an exact square.

And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs - As
eight furlongs make a mile, the extent of the walls, therefore, must
have been three hundred and seventy-five miles. Of course, this must
preclude all idea of there being such a city literally in Palestine.
This is clearly a figurative or symbolical representation; and the idea
is, that the city was on the most magnificent scale, and with the
largest proportions, and the description here is adopted merely to
indicate this vastness, without any idea that it would be understood
"literally."

The length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal - According
to this representation, the height of the city, not of the walls
(compare [Rev 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#017)), would be three
hundred and seventy-five miles. Of course, this cannot be understood
literally, and the very idea of a literal fulfillment of this shows the
absurdity of that method of interpretation. The idea intended to be
conveyed by this immense height would seem to be that it would contain
countless numbers of inhabitants. It is true that such a structure has
not existed, and that a city of such a height may seem to be out of all
proportion; but we are to remember:

\(a\) that this is a "symbol"; and,

\(b\) that, considered as one mass or pile of buildings, it may not seem
to be out of proportion. It is no uncommon thing that a house should be
as high as it is long or broad.

The idea of vastness and of capacity is the main idea designed to be
represented. The image before the mind is, that the numbers of the
redeemed will be immense.

[Revelation 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 21:17</span></span>

And he measured the wall thereof - In respect to its "height." Of
course, its length corresponded with the extent of the city.

An hundred and forty and four cubits - This would be, reckoning the
cubit at eighteen inches, two hundred and sixteen feet. This is less
than the height of the walls of Babylon, which Herodotus says were three
hundred and fifty feet high. See the introduction to chapter 13 of
Isaiah. As the walls of a city are designed to protect it from external
foes, the height mentioned here gives all proper ideas of security; and
we are to conceive of the city itself as towering immensely above the
walls. Its glory, therefore, would not be obscured by the wall that was
thrown around it for defense.

According to the measure of a man - The measure usually employed by men.
This seems to be added in order to prevent any mistake as to the size of
the city. It is an "angel" who makes the measurement, and without this
explanation it might perhaps be supposed that he used some measure not
in common use among people, so that, after all, it would be impossible
to form any definite idea of the size of the city.

That is, of the angel - That is, "which is the measure employed by the
angel." It was, indeed, an angel who measured the city, but the measure
which he employed was that in common use among people.

[Revelation 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 21:18</span></span>

And the building of the wall of it - The material of which the wall was
composed. This means the wall above the foundation, for that was
composed of twelve rows of precious stones, [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014), [Rev
21:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019). The height of the foundation
is not stated, but the entire wall above was composed of jasper.

Was of jasper - See the notes on [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). Of course, this cannot be taken
literally; and an attempt to explain all this literally would show that
that method of interpreting the Apocalypse is impracticable.

And the city was pure gold - The material of which the edifices were
composed.

Like unto clear glass - The word rendered "glass" in this place - ὕαλος
hualos - occurs in the New Testament only here and in [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021). It means, properly, "anything
transparent like water"; as, for example, any transparent stone or gem,
or as rock-salt, crystal, glass (Robinson, Lexicon). Here the meaning
is, that the golden city would be so bright and burnished that it would
seem to be glass reflecting the sunbeams. Would the appearance of a
city, as the sun is setting, when the reflection of its beams from
thousands of panes of glass gives it the appearance of burnished gold,
represent the idea here? If we were to suppose a city made entirely of
glass, and the setting sunbeams falling on it, it might convey the idea
represented here. It is certain that, as nothing could be more
magnificent, so nothing could more beautifully combine the two ideas
referred to here - that of "gold and glass."

Perhaps the reflection of the sunbeams from the "Crystal Palace,"
erected for the late "industrial exhibition" in London, would convey a
better idea of what is intended to be represented here than anything
which our world has furnished. The following description from one who
was an eyewitness, drawn up by him at the time, and without any
reference to this passage, and furnished at my request, will supply a
better illustration of the passage before us than any description which
I could give: "Seen as the morning vapors rolled around its base - its
far-stretching roofs rising one above another, and its great transept,
majestically arched, soaring out of the envelope of clouds - its
pillars, window-bars, and pinnacles, looked literally like a castle in
the air; like some palace, such as one reads of in idle tales of Arabian
enchantment, having about it all the ethereal softness of a dream.
Looked at from a distance at noon, when the sunbeams came pouring upon
the terraced and vaulted roof, it resembles a regal palace of silver,
built for some Eastern prince; 'when the sun at eventide sheds on its
sides his parting rays, the edifice is transformed into a temple of gold
and rubies;' and in the calm hours of night, when the moon walketh in
her brightness, the immense surface of glass which the building presents
looks like a sea, or like throwing back, in flickering smile, the
radiant glances of the queen of heaven."

[Revelation 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 21:19</span></span>

And the foundations of the wall of the city - notes on [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014).

Were garnished - Were adorned, or decorated. That is, the foundations
were composed of precious stones, giving them this highly ornamented and
brilliant appearance.

The first foundation - The first "row, layer, or course." notes on [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014).

Was jasper - See the notes on [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003).

The second, sapphire - This stone is not elsewhere mentioned in the New
Testament. It is a precious stone, next in hardness to the diamond,
usually of an azure or sky-blue color, but of various shades.

The third, a chalcedony - This word occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament. The stone referred to is an uncrystallized translucent
variety of quartz, having a whitish color, and of a luster nearly like
wax. It is found covering the sides of cavities, and is a deposit from
filtrated silicious waters. When it is arranged in "stripes," it
constitutes "agate"; and if the stripes are horizontal, it is the
"onyx." The modern "carnelian" is a variety of this. The carnelian is of
a deep flesh red, or reddishwhite color. The name chalcedony is from
"Chalcedon," a town in Asia Minor, opposite to Byzantium, or
Constantinople, where this stone was probably first known (Webster's
Dictionary).

The fourth, an emerald - See the notes on [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). The emerald is green.

[Revelation 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 21:20</span></span>

The fifth, sardonyx - This word does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. The "name" is derived from "Sardis," a city in Asia Minor
(notes on [Rev 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)), and ὄνυξ onux, a
nail - so named, according to Pliny, from the resemblance of its color
to the flesh and the nail. It is a silicious stone or gem, nearly allied
to the onyx. The color is a reddish yellow, nearly orange (Webster,
Dictionary).

The sixth, sardius - This word does not elsewhere occur in the New
Testament. It is also derived from "Sardis," and the name was probably
given to the gem because it was found there. It is a stone of a
blood-red or flesh color, and is commonly known as a "carnelian." It is
the same as the sardine stone mentioned in [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). See the notes on that place.

The seventh, chrysolite - This word does not elsewhere occur in the New
Testament. It is derived from χρυσὸς chrusos, "gold," and λίθος lithos,
"stone," and means "golden stone," and was applied by the ancients to
all gems of a golden or yellow color, probably designating particularly
the topaz of the moderns (Robinson, Lexicon). But in Webster's
Dictionary it is said that its prevalent color is green. It is sometimes
transparent. This is the "modern" chrysolite. The ancients undoubtedly
understood by the name a "yellow" gem.

The eighth, beryl - This word occurs nowhere else in the New Testament.
The beryl is a mineral of great hardness, and is of a green or
bluish-green color. It is identical with the emerald, except in the
color, the emerald having a purer and richer green color, proceeding
from a trace of oxide of chrome. Prisms of beryl are sometimes found
nearly two feet in diameter in the state of New Hampshire (Webster).

The ninth, a topaz - This word does not elsewhere occur in the New
Testament. The topaz is a well-known mineral, said to be so called from
"Topazos," a small island in the Arabian Gulf. It is generally of a
yellowish color, and pellucid, but it is also found of greenish, bluish,
or brownish shades.

The tenth, a chrysoprasus - This word χρυσόπρασος chrusoprasos does not
occur elsewhere in the New Testament. It is derived from χρυσὸς chrusos,
"gold," and πράσον prason, "a leek," and denotes a precious stone of
greenish golden color, like a leek; that is, "apple-green passing into a
grass-green" (Robinson, Lexicon). "It is a variety of quartz. It is
commonly apple-green, and often extremely beautiful. It is translucent,
or sometimes semi-transparent; its hardness little inferior to flint"
(Webster, Dictionary).

The eleventh, a jacinth - The word does not occur elsewhere in the New
Testament. It is the same word as "hyacinth" - ὑάκινθος huakinthos - and
denotes properly the well-known flower of that name, usually of a deep
purple or reddish blue. Here it denotes a gem of this color. It is a red
variety of "zircon." See Webster's Dictionary under the word "hyacinth."

The twelfth, an amethyst - This word, also, is found only in this place
in the New Testament. It denotes a gem of a deep purple or violet color.
The word is derived from α a, the alpha privative ("not"), and μεθύω
methuō, to be intoxicated, because this gem was supposed to be an
antidote against drunkenness. It is a species of quartz, and is used in
jewelry.

[Revelation 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 21:21</span></span>

And the twelve gates - [Rev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012).

Were twelve pearls - See the [Rev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)
note; [Mat 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#046) note.

Every several gate was of one pearl - Each gate. Of course, this is not
to be understood literally. The idea is that of ornament and beauty, and
nothing could give a more striking view of the magnificence of the
future abode of the saints.

And the street of the city was pure gold - Was paved with gold; that is,
all the vacant space that was not occupied with buildings was of pure
gold. See the notes on [Rev 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018).

[Revelation 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 21:22</span></span>

And I saw no temple therein - No structure reared expressly for the
worship of God; no particular place where he was adored. It was all
temple - nothing but a temple. It was not like Jerusalem, where there
was but one house reared expressly for divine worship, and to which the
inhabitants repaired to praise God; it was all one great temple reared
in honor of his name, and where worship ascended from every part of it.
With this explanation, this passage harmonizes with what is said in [Rev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012); [Rev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015).

For the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it - They are
present in all parts of it in their glory; they fill it with light; and
the splendor of their presence may be said to be the temple. The idea
here is, that it would be a holy world - all holy. No particular portion
would be set apart for purposes of public worship, but in all places God
would be adored, and every portion of it devoted to the purposes of
religion.

[Revelation 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 21:23</span></span>

And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it
- This imagery seems to be derived from [Isa
9:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#019). See notes on those verses. No
language could give a more striking or beautiful representation of the
heavenly state than what is here employed.

For the glory of God did lighten it - By the visible splendor of his
glory. See the notes on [Rev 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011).
That supplied the place of the sun and the moon.

And the Lamb is the light thereof - The Son of God; the Messiah. See the
[Rev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006) note; [Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019) note.

[Revelation 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 21:24</span></span>

And the nations of them which are saved - All the nations that are
saved; or all the saved considered as nations. This imagery is doubtless
derived from that in Isaiah, particularly [Isa
60:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003). See the notes on that passage.

Shall walk in the light of it - Shall enjoy its splendor, and be
continually in its light.

And the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it - All
that they consider as constituting their glory, treasures, crowns,
scepters, robes. The idea is, that all these will be devoted to God in
the future days of the church in its glory, and will be, as it were,
brought and laid down at the feet of the Saviour in heaven. The language
is derived, doubtless, from the description in [Isa
60:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003). Compare [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023).

[Revelation 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rev 21:25</span></span>

And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day - It shall be
constantly open, allowing free ingress and egress to all who reside
there. The language is derived from [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011). See the notes on that place.
Applied to the future state of the blessed, it would seem to mean, that
while this will be their permanent abode, yet that the dwellers there
will not be prisoners. The universe will be open to them. They will be
permitted to go forth and visit every world, and survey the works of God
in all parts of his dominions.

For there shall be no night there - It shall be all day; all unclouded
splendor. When, therefore, it is said that the gates should not be "shut
by day," it means that they would never be shut. When it is said that
there would be no night there, it is, undoubtedly, to be taken as
meaning that there would be no literal darkness, and nothing of which
night is the emblem: no calamity, no sorrow, no bereavement, no darkened
windows on account of the loss of friends and kindred. Compare the notes
on [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004).

[Revelation 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rev 21:26</span></span>

And they shall bring ... - See the notes on [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024). That blessed world shall be
made up of all that was truly valuable and pure on the earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 22](rev022)

</div>
