<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev013)  [Next](rev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 14:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

In the previous chapters Rev. 12-13 there is a description of the woes
and sorrows which, for a long period, would come upon the church, and
which would threaten to destroy it. It was proper that this gloomy
picture should be relieved, and accordingly this chapter, having much of
the aspect of an episode, is thrown in to comfort the hearts of those
who should see those troublous times. There were bright scenes beyond,
and it was important to direct the eye to them, that the hearts of the
sad might be consoled. This chapter, therefore, contains a succession of
symbolical representations designed to show the ultimate result of all
these things - "to hold out the symbols of ultimate and certain victory"
(Prof. Stuart). Those symbols are the following:

\(1\) The vision of the hundred and forty-four thousand on Mount Zion,
as emblematical of the final triumph of the redeemed, [Rev
14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001). They have the Father's name in
their foreheads [Rev 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); they sing a
song of victory [Rev 14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002); they are
found without fault before God - representatives, in this respect, of
all that will be saved, [Rev 14:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004).

\(2\) the vision of the final triumph of the gospel, [Rev
14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006). An angel is seen flying in the
midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to all that
dwell upon the earth, and announcing that the end is near - a
representation designed to show that the gospel will be thus preached
among all nations; and when that is done, the time will draw on when the
affairs of the world will be wound up.

\(3\) the fall of Babylon, the mighty anti-Christian power, [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). An angel is seen going forth
announcing the glad tidings that this mighty power is overthrown, and
that, therefore, its oppressions are come to an end. This, to the church
in trouble and persecution, is one of the most comforting of all the
assurances that God makes in regard to the future.

\(4\) the certain and final destruction of all the upholders of that
anti-Christian power, [Rev 14:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009).
Another angel is seen making proclamation that all the supporters and
abettors of this formidable power would drink of the wine of the wrath
of God; that they would be tormented with fire and brimstone; and that
the smoke of their torment would ascend up forever and ever.

\(5\) the blessedness of all those who die in the Lord; who, amidst the
persecutions and trials that were to come upon the church, would be
found faithful unto death, [Rev 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013).
They would rest from their labors; the works of mercy which they had
done on the earth would follow them to the future world, securing rich
and eternal blessings there.

\(6\) the final overthrow of all the enemies of the church, [Rev
14:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014). This is the grand
completion; to this all things are tending; this will be certainly
accomplished in due time. This is represented under various emblems:

\(a\) The Son of man appears seated on a cloud, having on his head a
golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle - emblem of gathering in
the great harvest of the earth, and of his own glorious reign in heaven,
[Rev 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014).

\(b\) An angel is seen coming out of the temple, announcing that the
time had come, and calling on the great Reaper to thrust in his sickle,
for the harvest of the world was ripe, [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015).

\(c\) He that has the sickle thrusts in his sickle to reap the great
harvest, [Rev 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#016).

\(d\) Another angel is seen representing the final judgment of God on
the wicked, [Rev 14:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017). He also has
a sharp sickle; he is commanded by an angel that has power over fire to
thrust in his sickle into the earth; he goes forth and gathers the
clusters of the vine of the earth, and casts them into the great
wine-press of the wrath of God.

This whole chapter, therefore, is designed to relieve the gloom of the
former representations. The action of the grand moving panorama is
stayed that the mind may not be overwhelmed with gloomy thoughts, but
that it may be cheered with the assurance of the final triumph of truth
and righteousness. The chapter, viewed in this light, is introduced with
great artistic skill, as well as great beauty of poetic illustration;
and, in its place, it is adapted to set forth this great truth, that, to
the righteous, and to the church at large, in the darkest times, and
with the most threatening prospect of calamity and sorrow, there is the
certainty of final victory, and that this should be allowed to cheer and
sustain the soul.

[Revelation 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 14:1</span></span>

And I looked - My attention was drawn to a new vision. The eye was
turned away from the beast and his image to the heavenly world - the
Mount Zion above.

And, lo, a Lamb - See the notes on [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006).

Stood on the mount Zion - That is, in heaven. See the notes on [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022). Zion, literally the southern
hill in the city of Jerusalem, was a name also given to the whole city;
and, as that was the seat of the divine worship on earth, it became an
emblem of heaven - the dwelling-place of God. The scene of the vision
here is laid in heaven, for it is a vision of the ultimate triumph of
the redeemed, designed to sustain the church in view of the trials that
had already come upon it, and of those which were yet to come.

And with him an hundred forty and four thousand - These are evidently
the same persons that were seen in the vision recorded in [Rev
7:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003), and the representation is made
for the same purpose - to sustain the church in trial, with the
certainty of its future glory. See the notes on [Rev
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004).

Having his Father's name written in their foreheads - Showing that they
were his. See the notes on [Rev 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003);
[Rev 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016). In [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003), it is merely said that they were
"sealed in their foreheads"; the passage here shows how they were
sealed. They had the name of God so stamped or marked on their foreheads
as to show that they belonged to him. Compare the notes on [Rev
7:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003).

[Revelation 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 14:2</span></span>

And I heard a voice from heaven - Showing that the scene is laid in
heaven, but that John in the vision was on the earth.

As the voice of many waters - As the sound of the ocean, or of a mighty
cataract. That is, it was so loud that it could be heard from heaven to
earth. No comparison could express this more sublimely than to say that
it was like the roar of the ocean.

As the voice of a great thunder - As the loud sound of thunder.

And I heard the voice of harpers - In heaven: the song of redemption
accompanied with strains of sweet instrumental music. For a description
of the harp, see the notes on [Isa
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012).

Harping with their harps - Playing on their harps. This image gives new
beauty to the description. Though the sound was loud and swelling, so
loud that it could be heard on the earth, yet it was not mere shouting,
or merely a tumultuous cry. "It was like the sweetness of symphonious
harps." The music of heaven, though elevated and joyous, is sweet and
harmonious; and perhaps one of the best representations of heaven on
earth, is the effect produced on the soul by strains of sweet and solemn
music.

[Revelation 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 14:3</span></span>

And they sung as it were a new song - See the notes on [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). It was proper to call this "new,"
because it was on a new occasion, or pertained to a new object. The song
here was in celebration of the complete redemption of the church, and
was the song to be sung in view of its final triumph over all its foes.
Compare notes on [Rev 7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009).

Before the throne - The throne of God in heaven. See the notes on [Rev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002).

And before the four beasts - See the notes on [Rev
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006).

And the elders - See the notes on [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004).

And no man could learn that song, ... - None could understand it but the
redeemed. That is, none who had not been redeemed could enter fully into
the feelings and sympathies of those who were. A great truth is taught
here. To appreciate fully the songs of Zion; to understand the language
of praise; to enter into the spirit of the truths which pertain to
redemption; one must himself have been redeemed by the blood of Christ.
He must have known what it is to be a sinner under the condemnation of a
holy law; he must have known what it is to be in danger of eternal
death; he must have experienced the joys of pardon, or he can never
understand, in its true import, the language used by the redeemed. And
this is only saying what we are familiar with in other things. He who is
saved from peril; he who is rescued from long captivity; he who is
pardoned at the foot of the scaffold; he who is recovered from dangerous
illness; he who presses to his bosom a beloved child just rescued from a
watery grave, will have an appreciation of the language of joy and
triumph which he can never understand who has not been placed in such
circumstances: but of all the joy ever experienced in the universe, so
far as we can see, that must be the most sublime and transporting, which
will be experienced when the redeemed shall stand on Mount Zion above,
and shall realize that they are saved.

[Revelation 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 14:4</span></span>

These are they - In this verse, and in the following verse, the writer
states the leading characteristics of those who are saved. The general
idea is, that they are chaste; that they are the followers of the Lamb;
that they are redeemed from among people; and that they are without
guile.

Which were not defiled with women - Who were chaste. The word "defiled"
here determines the meaning of the passage, as denoting that they were
not guilty of illicit sexual intercourse with women. It is unnecessary
to show that this is a virtue everywhere required in the Bible, and
everywhere stated as among the characteristics of the redeemed. On no
point are there more frequent exhortations in the Scriptures than on
this; on no point is there more solicitude manifested that the professed
friends of the Saviour should be without blame. Compare the [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020) note; [Rom
1:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024) notes; [Co1
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018) note; [Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004) note. See also [Co1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001); [Co1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013); [Gal
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019); [Eph
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003); [Col
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005); [Th1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003). This passage cannot be adduced in
favor of celibacy, whether among the clergy or laity, or in favor of
monastic principles in any form; for the thing that is specified is,
that they were not "defiled with women," and a lawful connection of the
sexes, such as marriage, is not defilement. See the notes on [Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004). The word rendered here "defiled"
- ἐμολύνθησαν emolunthēsan, from μολύνω molunō - is a word that cannot
be applied to the marriage relation. It means properly to "soil, to
stain, to defile." [Co1 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007); "their
conscience being weak, is defiled." [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); "which have not defiled their
garments." The word does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament,
except in the passage before us, and it will be seen at once that it
cannot be applied to that which is lawful and proper, and consequently
that it cannot be construed as an expression against marriage and in
favor of celibacy. It is a word that is properly expressive of illicit
sexual intercourse - of impurity and unchastity of life - and the
statement is, that they who are saved are not impure and unchaste.

For they are virgins - παρθένοι parthenoi. This is the masculine form,
but this form is found in the later Greek and in the Christian fathers.
See Suidas and Suicer, Thes. The meaning of the word, when found in the
feminine form, is well understood. It denotes a virgin, a maiden, and
thence it is used to denote what is chaste and pure: virgin modesty;
virgin gold; virgin soil; virgin blush; virgin shame. The word in the
masculine form must have a similar meaning as applied to men, and may
denote:

\(a\) those who are unmarried;

\(b\) those who are chaste and pure in general.

The word is applied by Suidas to Abel and Melchizedek. "The sense," says
DeWette, in loco, "cannot be that all these 144,000 had lived an
unmarried life; for how could the apostle Peter, and others who were
married, have been excluded? But the reference must be to those who held
themselves from all impurity - "unkeuschheit und hurerei" - which, in
the view of the apostles, was closely connected with idolatry." Compare
Bleek, Beitr. i. 185. Prof. Stuart supposes that the main reference here
is to those who had kept themselves from idolatry, and who were thus
pure. It seems to me, however, that the most obvious meaning is the
correct one, that it refers to the redeemed as chaste, and thus brings
into view one of the prominent things in which Christians are
distinguished from the devotees of nearly every other form of religion,
and, indeed, exclusively from the world at large. This passage, also,
cannot be adduced in favor of the monastic system, because:

\(a\) whatever may be said anywhere of the purity of virgins, there is
no such commendation of it as to imply that the married life is impure;

\(b\) it cannot be supposed that God meant in any way to reflect on the
married life as in itself impure or dishonorable;

\(c\) the language does not demand such an interpretation; and,

\(d\) the facts in regard to the monastic life have shown that it has
had very little pretensions to a claim of virgin purity.

These are they which follow the Lamb - This is another characteristic of
those who are redeemed - that they are followers of the Lamb of God.
That is, they are his disciples; they imitate his example; they obey his
instructions; they yield to his laws; they receive him as their
counselor and their guide. See the notes on [Joh
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003), [Joh
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027).

Whithersoever he goeth - As sheep follow the shepherd. Compare [Psa
23:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001). It is one characteristic of
true Christians that they follow the Saviour wherever he leads them. Be
it into trouble, into danger, into difficult duty; be it in Christian or
pagan lands; be it in pleasant paths, or in roads rough and difficult,
they commit themselves wholly to his guidance, and submit themselves
wholly to his will.

These were redeemed from among men - This is another characteristic of
those who are seen on Mount Zion. They are there because they are
redeemed, and they have the character of the redeemed. They are not
there in virtue of rank or blood [Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013); not on the ground of their own
works [Tit 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005); but because they are
redeemed unto God by the blood of his Son. See the notes on [Rev
5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). None will be there of whom it
cannot be said that they are "redeemed"; none will be absent who have
been truly redeemed from sin.

Being the first-fruits unto God - On the meaning of the word
"first-fruits," see the notes on [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020). The meaning here would seem to
be, that the hundred and forty-four thousand were not to be regarded as
the whole of the number that was saved, but that they were
representatives of the redeemed. They had the same characteristics which
all the redeemed must have; they were a pledge that all the redeemed
would be there. Prof. Stuart supposes that the sense is, that they were,
as it were, "an offering especially acceptable to God." The former
explanation, however, meets all the circumstances of the case, and is
more in accordance with the usual meaning of the word.

And to the Lamb - They stood there as redeemed by him, thus honoring him
as their Redeemer, and showing forth his glory.

[Revelation 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 14:5</span></span>

And in their mouth was found no guile - No deceit, fraud, hypocrisy.
They were sincerely and truly what they professed to be - the children
of God. This is the last characteristic which is given of them as
redeemed, and it is not necessary to say that this is always represented
as one of the characteristics of the true children of God. See the notes
on [Joh 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047).

For they are without fault before the throne of God - The word here
rendered "without fault" - ἄμωμοι amōmoi - means, properly, "spotless,
without blemish," [Pe1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019). See the
notes on [Col 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022). This cannot be
construed as meaning that they were by nature pure and holy, but only
that they were pure as they stood before the throne of God in heaven -
"having washed their robes, and made them pure in the blood of the
Lamb." See the notes on [Rev 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014). It
will be certainly true that all who stand there will be, in fact, pure,
for nothing impure or unholy shall enter there, [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027).

The "design" of this portion of the chapter was evidently to comfort
those to whom the book was addressed, and, in the same way, to comfort
all the children of God in times of persecution and trial. Those living
in the time of John were suffering persecution, and, in the previous
chapters, he had described more fearful trials yet to come on the
church. In these trials, therefore, present and prospective, there was a
propriety in fixing the thoughts on the final triumph of the redeemed -
that glorious state in heaven where all persecution shall cease, and
where all the ransomed of the Lord shall stand before his throne. What
could be better suited than this view to sustain the souls of the
persecuted and the sorrowful? And how often since in the history of the
church in the dark times of religious declension and of persecution -
has there been occasion to seek consolation in this bright view of
heaven? How often in the life of each believer, when sorrows come upon
him like a flood, and earthly consolation is gone, is there occasion to
look to that blessed world where all the redeemed shall stand before
God; where all tears shall be wiped away from every face; and where
there shall be the assurance that the last pang has been endured, and
that the soul is to be happy forever?

[Revelation 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 14:6</span></span>

And I saw another angel - This must, of course, mean a different one
from someone mentioned before; but no such angel is referred to in the
previous chapters, unless we go back to [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). It is not necessary, however, to
suppose that John refers to a particular angel immediately preceding
this. In the course of these visions he had seen many angels; and now,
accustomed to these visions, he says that he saw "another" one employed
in a remarkable embassy, whose message was suited to cheer the hearts of
the desponding, and to support the souls of the persecuted and the sad -
for his appearing was the pledge that the gospel would be ultimately
preached to all that dwell upon the earth. The design of this vision is,
therefore, substantially the same as the former - to cheer the heart,
and to sustain the courage and the faith of the church, in the
persecutions and trials which were yet to come, by the assurance that
the gospel would be ultimately triumphant.

Fly in the midst of heaven - In the air; so as to appear to be moving
along the face of the sky. The scene cannot be in heaven, as the gospel
is not to be preached there; but the word must denote "heaven" as it
appears to us - the sky. Prof. Stuart renders it correctly "mid-air." He
is represented as flying, to denote the rapidity with which the gospel
would spread through the world in that future period referred to.
Compare the notes on [Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002).

Having the everlasting gospel - The gospel is here called everlasting or
eternal:

\(a\) because its great truths have always existed, or it is conformed
to eternal truth;

\(b\) because it will forever remain unchanged - not being liable to
fluctuation like the opinions held by people;

\(c\) because its effects will be everlasting - in the redemption of the
soul and the joys of heaven. In all the glorious eternity before the
redeemed, they will be but developing the effects of that gospel on
their own hearts, and enjoying the results of it in the presence of God.

To preach unto them that dwell on the earth - To all people - as is
immediately specified. Compare [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019); [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015).

And to every nation, and kindred, ... - To all classes and conditions of
people; to all human beings, without any distinction or exception. See
the notes on [Rev 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009). The truth here
taught is, that the gospel is to be preached to all people as on an
equality, without any reference to their rank, their character, or their
complexion; and it is implied also, that at the time referred to this
will be done. When that time will be the writer does not intimate
further, than that it would be after the beast and his adherents had
attempted to stay its progress; and for the fulfillment of this,
therefore, we are to look to a period subsequent to the rise and fall of
that great anti-Christian power symbolized by the beast and his image.
This is in entire accordance with the prediction in Daniel. See the
notes on [Dan 7:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019).

[Revelation 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 14:7</span></span>

Saying with a loud voice - As if all the nations were summoned to hear.

Fear God - That is, reverence, honor, obey God. Render homage not to the
beast, to his image, or to any idol, but to the only true God. This is
the substance of the gospel - its end and design - to turn people from
all forms of idol worship and superstition, to the worship of the only
true God.

And give glory to him - To give glory to him is to acknowledge him as
the only true God; to set up his pure worship in the heart; and to
praise him as the great Ruler of heaven and earth.

For the hour of his judgment is come - His judgment on the beast and on
those who worship him. The imagery here is substantially the same as in
[Dan 7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009), [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014), [Dan
7:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026); and there can be no doubt
that there is reference to the same subject. See the notes on those
verses. The main idea is, that when God shall be about to cause his
gospel to spread through the world, there will be, as it were, a solemn
judgment on that anti-Christian power which had so long resisted his
truth and persecuted his saints, and that on the fall of that power his
own kingdom will be set up on the earth; that is, in the language of
Daniel, "the kingdom, and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of
the Most High."

And worship him that made heaven, and earth, ... - The true God, the
Creator of all things. As already remarked, this is the ultimate design
of the gospel, and, when this is accomplished, the great end for which
it was revealed will be reached.

The design of this portion of the chapter [Rev
14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), also, was to comfort those to
whom the book was addressed, and in the same way to comfort the church
in all the persecution and opposition which the truth would encounter.
The ground of consolation then was, that a time was predicted when the
"everlasting gospel" would be made to fly speedily through the earth,
and when it would be announced that a final judgment had come upon the
anti-Christian power which had prevented its being before diffused over
the face of the world. The same ground of encouragement and consolation
exists now, and the more so as we see the day approaching; and in all
times of despondency we should allow our hearts to be cheered as we see
that great anti-Christian power waning, and as we see evidence that the
way is thus preparing for the rapid and universal diffusion of the pure
gospel of Christ.

[Revelation 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 14:8</span></span>

And there followed another angel - That is, in the vision. It is not
necessary to suppose that this would, in the fulfillment, succeed the
other in time. The chapter is made up of a number of representations,
all designed to illustrate the same general thing, and to produce the
same general effect on the mind - that the gospel would be finally
triumphant, and that, therefore, the hearts of the troubled and the
afflicted should be comforted. The representation in this verse, bearing
on this point, is, that Babylon, the great enemy, would fall to rise no
more.

Babylon - This is the first time that the word "Babylon" occurs in this
book, though it is repeatedly mentioned afterward, [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019); [Rev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005); [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002), [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010), [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021). In reference to the literal
Babylon, the word is used, in the New Testament, in [Mat
1:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#011); [Act
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043); [Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013). See Intro. to 1 Peter, section
2. Babylon was a well-known city on the Euphrates (for a full
description of which see the notes on Isaiah, analysis of chapters 13
and 14), and was, in the days of its pride and glory, the head of the
pagan world. In reference to the meaning of the word in this place, it
may be remarked:

\(1\) That the general characteristics of Babylon were, that it was
proud, haughty, insolent, oppressive. It was chiefly known and
remembered by the Hebrew people as a power that had invaded the Holy
Land; that had reduced its capital and temple to ruins; that had
destroyed the independence of their country, subjecting it to the
condition of a province, and that had carried away the inhabitants into
a long and painful captivity. It became, therefore, the emblem of all
that was haughty and oppressive, and especially of all that persecuted
the church of God.

\(2\) the word must be used here to denote some power that resembled the
ancient and literal Babylon in these characteristics. The literal
Babylon was no more; but the name might be properly used to denote a
similar power. We are to seek, therefore, in the application of this,
for some power that had the same general characteristics which the
literal Babylon had.

\(3\) in inquiring, then, what is referred to here by the word
"Babylon," we may remark:

\(a\) that it could not be the literal Babylon on the Euphrates, for the
whole representation here is of something future, and the literal
Babylon had long since disappeared, never, according to the prophecies,
to be rebuilt. See the notes on [Isa
13:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020).

\(b\) All the circumstances require us to understand this of Rome, at
some period of its history: for Rome, like Babylon, was the seat of
empire, and the head of the pagan world; Rome was characterized by many
of the same attributes as Babylon, being arrogant, proud, oppressive;
Rome, like Babylon, was distinguished for its conquests, and for the
fact that it made all other nations subject to its control; Rome had
been, like Babylon, a desolating power, having destroyed the capital of
the Holy Land, and burnt its beautiful temple, and reduced the country
to a province. Rome, like Babylon of old, was the most formidable power
with which the church had to contend. Yet.

\(c\) it is not, I suppose, Rome considered as pagan that is here meant,
but Rome considered as the prolongation of the ancient power in the
papal form. Alike in this book and in Daniel, Rome, pagan and papal, is
regarded as one power, standing in direct opposition to the gospel of
Christ, resisting its progress in the world, and preventing its final
prevalence. See the notes on Dan. 7. When that falls, the last enemy of
the church will be destroyed, and the final triumph of the true religion
will be speedy and complete. See [Dan
7:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026).

\(d\) So it was understood among the early Christians. Mr. Gibbon,
speaking of the expectations of the early Christians about the end of
the world, and the glory of the literal reign of the Messiah, says,
"While the happiness and glory of a temporal reign were promised to the
disciples of Christ, the most dreadful calamities were denounced against
an unbelieving world. The edification of the New Jerusalem was to
advance by equal steps with the destruction of the mystic Babylon; and
as long as the emperors who reigned before Constantine persisted in the
profession of idolatry, the epithet of Babylon was applied to the city
and to the empire of Rome," vol. i. p. 263.

Is fallen - That is, an event appeared in vision as if a mighty city
fell to rise no more.

Is fallen - This is repeated to give emphasis to the declaration, and to
express the joyousness of that event.

That great city - Babylon in its glory was the largest city of the
world. Rome, in its turn, also became the largest; and the expression
used here denotes that the power here referred to would be properly
represented by cities of their magnitude.

Because she made all nations drink of the wine - This language is
probably taken from [Jer 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007);
"Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord's hand, that made all the
earth drunken: the nations have drunk of the wine, therefore the nations
are mad." Babylon here, in accordance with the usual custom of the
sacred writers when speaking of cities (see the notes on [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)), is represented as a female -
here a female of abandoned character, holding in her hand a cup of wine
to attract her lovers; that is, she allures and intoxicates them. This
is a beautiful image to denote the influence of a great and corrupt
city, and especially a city corrupt in its religion and devoted to
idolatry and superstition, and may well be applied either to Babylon or
Rome, literal or mystical.

Of the wrath - There seems an incongruity in the use of this word here,
and Prof. Stuart proposes to render it "the inflammatory wine of her
fornication"; that is, inebriating wine - wine that excited the passions
and that led to uncleanness. He supposes that the word here used - θυμός
thumos - means "heat, inflammation," corresponding to the Hebrew חמה
chēmaah There are no instances, however, in the New Testament in which
the word is used in this sense. The common and proper meaning is mind,
soul, then mind agitated with passion or under the influence of desire -
a violent commotion of mind, as wrath, anger, indignation (Robinson,
Lexicon). The ground of the representation here seems to be that Yahweh
is often described as giving to the nations in his wrath an intoxicating
cup so that they should reel and stagger to their destruction. Compare
[Jer 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015); [Jer
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007). The meaning here is, that the
nations had drunk of that cup which brought on the wrath of God on
account of her "fornication." Babylon is represented as a harlot, with a
cup of wine in her hand, and the effect of drinking that cup was to
expose them to the wrath of God, hence, called "the wine of the wrath of
her fornication" - the alluring cup that was followed by wrath on
account of her fornication.

Of her fornication - Due to her fornication. The word "fornication" here
is used to denote spiritual uncleanness; that is, pagan and
superstitious rites and observances. The term is often used in the
Scriptures as applicable to idolatry and superstition. The general
meaning here is, that Rome - papal Rome - would employ all forms of
voluptuous allurements to bring the nations to the worship of the beast
and his image, and that the "wrath" of God would be poured out on
account of these abominations. The design of this verse also is to
impart consolation by the assurance that this great enemy - this mighty,
formidable, persecuting power - would be entirely overthrown. This is
everywhere held up as the brightest hope of the church, for with this
will fall its last great enemy, and the grand obstruction to the final
triumph of the gospel on earth will be removed.

[Revelation 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 14:9</span></span>

And the third angel followed them - This was a new vision designed to
represent the removal of all the obstructions to the final prevalence of
the gospel. We are not necessarily to suppose that this event would
succeed those mentioned before in the order of time, though this would
be the natural construction. The design of this is to show that the
worshippers of the beast and his image would be certainly and finally
destroyed.

Saying with a loud voice - Making a loud proclamation. [Rev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007).

If any man worship the beast and his image - See the notes on [Rev
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#004), [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008), [Rev
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012), [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015). This declaration is universal,
affirming of all who thus render idolatrous reverence to the power
represented by the beast and his image that they should drink of the
wine of the wrath of God. The general meaning is, that they were guilty
of idolatry of a gross form; and wherever this existed they who were
guilty of it would come under the denunciations in the Scriptures
against idolaters. And why should not such denunciations fall on
idolaters under the papacy as well as on others? Is it not true that
there is as real idolatry there as in the pagan world? Is not the
idolatry as gross and debasing? Is it not attended with as real
corruption in the heart and the life? Is it not encompassed with as many
things to inflame the passions, corrupt the morals, and alienate the
soul from God? And is it not all the worse for being a perversion of
Christianity, and practiced under the forms of the religion of the
Saviour? On what principle should idolatry be denounced and condemned
anywhere if it is not in papal Rome? Compare the notes on [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004).

And receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand - See the notes on
[Rev 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016). The word "receive" here
implies that there was, on their part, some degree of voluntariness: it
was not a mark impressed by force, but a mark received. This is true in
respect to all idolatry; and this lays the ground for condemnation.
Whatever art is used to induce people to worship the beast and his
image, it is still true that the worshippers are voluntary, and that,
being voluntary, it is right that they should be treated as such. It is
on this ground only that any idolaters, or any sinners of any kind, can
be, in the proper sense of that term, published.

[Revelation 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 14:10</span></span>

The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God - See notes on [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). The "wine of the wrath of God"
is the cup in the hand of the Lord, which, when drunk, makes them reel
and fall. The image would seem to have been taken from the act of
holding out a cup of poison to a condemned man that he might drink and
die. See the sentiment here expressed illustrated in the notes on [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017).

Which is poured out without mixture - Without being diluted with water -
that is, in its full strength. In other words, there would be no
mitigation of the punishment.

Into the cup of his indignation - The cup held in his hand, and given
them to drink. This is expressive of his indignation, as it causes them
to reel and fall. The sentiment here is substantially the same, though
in another form, as what is expressed in [Th2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012). See the notes on that verse.

And he shall be tormented - Shall be punished in a manner that would be
well represented by being burned with fire and brimstone. On the meaning
of this word see the notes on [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005); [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010). Compare also [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007), [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010), [Rev
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015); [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010); [Mat
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029); [Mar
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#007); [Luk
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#028). The word commonly denotes
"severe torture."

With fire and brimstone - As if with burning sulphur. See the notes on
[Luk 17:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#028). Compare [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006); [Job
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#015); [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033); [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022). The imagery is taken from the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024). The common representation of
the punishment of the wicked is, that it will be in the manner here
represented, [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022); [Mat
13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042); [Mat
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009); [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041); [Mar
9:44-48](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044); [Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007); [Jde
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007); [Rev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014). Compare the [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022) note; [Mar
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044) note.

In the presence of the holy angels - This may mean either:

\(a\) that the angels will be present at their condemnation [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031), or.

\(b\) that the punishment will be actually witnessed by the angels, as
it is most probable it will be. Compare [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024); [Luk
16:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023).

And in the presence of the Lamb - The Lamb of God - the final Judge.
This also may mean either that the condemnation will occur in his
presence, or that the punishment will be under his eye. Both of these
things will be true in regard to him; and it will be no small
aggravation of the punishment of the wicked, that it will occur in the
very presence of their slighted and rejected Saviour.

[Revelation 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 14:11</span></span>

And the smoke of their torment - The smoke proceeding from their place
of torment. This language is probably derived from the account of the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, [Gen
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#028); "And he (Abraham) looked toward
Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld,
and lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace." The
destruction of these cities is regarded as an emblem of the destruction
of the wicked, and the smoke that ascended from them as a representation
of what ascends from the place where the wicked suffer forever. See the
notes on [Jde 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007).

Ascendeth up - Continually rises from that world of woe.

For ever and ever - See the notes on [Jde
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007). This does not indeed affirm that
their individual sufferings would be eternal, since it is only a
declaration that "the smoke of their torment ascends," but it is such
language as would be used on the supposition that they would suffer
forever, and as can be explained only on that supposition. It implies
that their torments continued, and were the cause of that ascending
smoke; that is, that they were tormented while it ascended; and, as this
is declared to be "forever and ever," it implies that the sufferings of
the wicked will be eternal: and this is such language as would not, and
could not have been used in a revelation from God, unless the punishment
of the wicked is eternal. Compare the notes on [Mat
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046).

And they have no rest day nor night - "Day and night" include all time;
and hence, the phrase is used to denote perpetuity - "always." The
meaning here is, that they never have any rest - any interval of pain.
This is stated as a circumstance strongly expressive of the severity of
their torment. Here, rest comes to the sufferer. The prisoner in his
cell lies down on his bed, though hard, and sleeps; the overworked slave
has also intervals of sleep; the eyes of the mourner are locked in
repose, and for moments, if not hours, he forgets his sorrows; no pain
that we endure on earth can be so certain and prolonged that nature will
not, sooner or later, find the luxury of sleep, or will find rest in the
grave. But it will be one of the bitterest ingredients in the cup of
woe, in the world of despair, that this luxury will be denied forever,
and that they who enter that gloomy prison sleep no more, never know the
respite of a moment, never even lose the consciousness of their heavy
doom. Oh how different from the condition of sufferers here! And oh how
sad and strange that any of our race will persevere in sin, and go down
to those unmitigated and unending sorrows!

Who worship the beast and his image - See the notes on [Rev
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#004), [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015).

And whosoever receiveth the mark of his name - See the notes on [Rev
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#017). The meaning here is, that such
worshippers will receive the punishment which other idolaters and
sinners do. No exception will be made in favor of an idolater, though he
worships idols under the forms of an abused Christianity; none will be
made in favor of a sinner because he practiced iniquity under the garb
of religion.

[Revelation 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 14:12</span></span>

Here is the patience of the saints - See the notes on [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010).

Here are they that keep the commandments of God - That is, in exercising
such patience. Those who exercise that "patience" in these
long-continued persecutions and trials, will show that they belong to
those who keep the commandments of God, and are his true children. Or
perhaps the meaning may be, "Here is a disclosure respecting the final
destiny of these persecutors, which is adapted to comfort and sustain
the saints in the trials which they will endure; an encouragement to
constancy in obeying the commands of God, and in evincing the meek faith
of the gospel."

And the faith of Jesus - To encourage persevering faith in the Saviour.
In these times of trial it will be shown who are the friends of the
Saviour; and in the prospect of the certain overthrow of all the enemies
of God and his cause, there is a ground of encouragement for continued
attachment to him.

The design of this portion of the chapter [Rev
14:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009) is to encourage Christians in
their trials by the assurance, that this formidable anti-Christian power
would be overthrown, and that all the enemies of God would receive their
just doom in the world of despair. Fearful as that doctrine is, and
terrible as is the idea of the everlasting suffering of any of the
creatures of God, yet the final overthrow of the wicked is necessary to
the triumph of truth and holiness, and there is consolation in the
belief that religion will ultimately triumph. The desire for its triumph
necessarily supposes that the wicked will be overthrown and punished;
and indeed it is the aim of all governments, and of all administrations
of law, that the wicked shall be overthrown, and that truth and justice
shall prevail. What would be more consolatory in a human government than
the idea that all the wicked would be arrested and punished as they
deserve? For what else is government instituted? For what else do
magistrates and police-officers discharge the functions of their office?

[Revelation 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 14:13</span></span>

And I heard a voice from heaven - A voice that seemed to speak from
heaven.

Saying unto me, Write - Make a record of this truth. We may suppose that
John was engaged in making a record of what he saw in vision; he was now
instructed to make a record of what he heard. This passage may be
referred to as a proof that he wrote this book while in Patmos, or as
the heavenly disclosures were made to him, and not afterward from
memory.

Blessed are the dead - That is, the condition of those who die in the
manner which is immediately specified, is to be regarded as a blessed or
happy one. It is much to be able to say of the dead that they are
"blessed." There is much in death that is sad; we so much dread it by
nature; it cuts us off from so much that is dear to us; it blasts so
many hopes; and the grave is so cold and cheerless a resting place, that
we owe much to a system of religion which will enable us to say and to
feel, that it is a blessed thing to die. Assuredly we should be grateful
for any system of religion which will enable us thus to speak of those
who are dead; which will enable us, with corresponding feeling, to look
forward to our own departure from this world.

Which die in the Lord - Not all the dead; for God never pronounces the
condition of the wicked who die, blessed or happy. Religion guards this
point, and confines the declaration to those who furnish evidence that
they are prepared for heaven. The phrase "to die in the Lord" implies
the following things:

\(1\) That they who thus die are the friends of the Lord Jesus. The
language "to be in the Lord" is often used to denote true attachment to
him, or close union with him. Compare [Joh
15:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004); [Rom
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#013), [Rom
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022); [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017); [Co1
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039); [Phi
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#014); [Col
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007). The assurance, then, is limited
to those who are sincere Christians; for this the language properly
implies, and we are authorized to apply it only as there is evidence of
true religion.

\(2\) to "die in the Lord" would seem also to imply that there should
be, at the time, the evidence of his favor and friendship. This would
apply:

\(a\) to those who die as martyrs, giving their lives as a testimony to
the truth of religion, and as an evidence of their love for it; and,

\(b\) to those who have the comforting evidence of his presence and
favor on the bed of death.

From henceforth - ἀπάρτι aparti. This word has given no little
perplexity to expositors, and it has been variously rendered. Some have
connected it with the word "blessed" - "Blessed henceforth are the dead
who die in the Lord"; that is, they will be ever-onward blessed: some
with the word "die," referring to the time when the apostle was writing
- "Blessed are they who, after this time, die in the Lord"; designing to
comfort those who were exposed to death, and who would die as martyrs:
some as referring to the times contemplated in these visions - "Blessed
will they be who shall die in those future times." Witsius understands
this as meaning that, from the time of their death, they would be
blessed, as if it had been said, immediately after their dissolution
they would be blessed. Doddridge renders it, "Henceforth blessed are the
dead." The language is evidently not to be construed as implying that
they who had died in the faith before were not happy, but that in the
times of trial and persecution that were to come, they were to be
regarded as especially blessed who should escape from these sorrows by a
Christian death. Scenes of woe were indeed to occur, in which many
believers would die. But their condition was not to be regarded as one
of misfortune, but of blessedness and joy, for:

\(a\) they would die in an honorable cause;

\(b\) they would emerge from a world of sorrow; and,

\(c\) they would rise to eternal life and peace.

The design, therefore, of the verse is to impart consolation and support
to those who would be exposed to a martyr's death, and to those who, in
times of persecution, would see their friends exposed to such a death.
It may be added that the declaration here made is true still, and ever
will be. It is a blessed thing to die in the Lord.

Yea, saith the Spirit - The Holy Spirit; "the Spirit by whose
inspiration and command I record this" (Doddridge).

That they may rest from their labours - The word rendered here "labor" -
κόπος kopos - means properly "wailing, grief," from κόπτω KOPTOO, "to
beat," and hence, a beating of the breast as in grief. Then the word
denotes "toil, labor, effort," [Joh
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#038); [Co1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008); [Co1
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058); [Co2
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005); [Co2
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015); [Co2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023), [Co2
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027). It is used here in the sense of
wearisome toil in doing good, in promoting religion, in saving souls, in
defending the truth. From such toils the redeemed in heaven will be
released; for although there will be employment there, it will be
without the sense of fatigue or weariness. And in view of such eternal
rest from toil, we may well endure the labors and toils incident to the
short period of the present life, for, however arduous or difficult, it
will soon be ended.

And their works do follow them - That is, the rewards or the
consequences of their works will follow them to the eternal world, the
word works here being used for the rewards or results of their works. In
regard to this, considered as an encouragement to labor, and as a
support in the trials of life, it may be remarked:

\(a\) that all that the righteous do and suffer here will be
appropriately recompensed there.

\(b\) This is all that can follow a man to eternity. He can take with
him none of his gold, his lands, his raiment; none of the honors of this
life; none of the means of sensual gratification. All that will go with
him will be his character, and the results of his conduct here, and, in
this respect, eternity will be but a prolongation of the present life.

\(c\) It is one of the highest honors of our nature that we can make the
present affect the future for good; that by our conduct on the earth we
can lay the foundation for happiness million of ages hence.

In no other respect does man appear so dignified as in this; nowhere do
we so clearly see the grandeur of the soul as in the fact, that what we
do today may determine our happiness in that future period, when all the
affairs of this world shall which cannot now be numbered shall have
rolled by. It is then a glorious thing to live, and will be a glorious
thing to die. Compare the notes on [Co1
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#058).

[Revelation 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 14:14</span></span>

And I looked - See the notes on [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001). His attention is arrested by a
new vision. The Son of man himself comes forth to close the scene, and
to wind up the affairs of the world. This, too, is of the nature of an
episode, and the design is the same as the previous visions - to support
the mind in the prospect of the trials that the church was to
experience, by the assurance that it would be finally triumphant, and
that every enemy would be destroyed.

And behold a white cloud - Bright, splendid, dazzling - appropriate to
be the seat of the Son of God. Compare the [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005) note; [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007) note. See also [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064); [Luk
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#027); [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009); [Th1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017); [Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001).

And upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man - Compare the [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013) note; [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013) note. It is probable that there
is here a designed reference to the passage in Daniel. The meaning is,
that one appeared on the cloud in a human form, whom John at once
recognized as he to whom the appellation of "the Son of man" especially
belonged - the Lord Jesus. The meaning of that term had not been fixed
in the time of [Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013); subsequently
it was appropriated by the Saviour, and was the favorite term by which
he chose to speak of himself, [Mat
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020); [Mat
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006); [Mat
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023); [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019); [Mat
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008), [Mat
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032), [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040), et al.

Having on his head a golden crown - Appropriate to him as king. It was
mainly in virtue of his kingly power and office that the work was to be
done which John is now about to describe.

And in his hand a sharp sickle - The word "sickle" here - δρέπανον
drepanon - means a crooked knife or scythe for gathering the harvest, or
vintage, by cutting off the clusters of grapes. See [Rev
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017). The image of a harvest is often
employed in the New Testament to describe moral subjects, [Mat
9:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037); [Mat
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030), [Mat
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039); [Mar
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#029); [Luk
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002); [Joh
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035). Here the reference is to the
consummation of all things, when the great harvest of the world will be
reaped, and when all the enemies of the church will be cut off - for
that is the grand idea which is kept before the mind in this chapter. In
various forms, and by various images, that idea had already been
presented to the mind, but here it is introduced in a grand closing
image; as if the grain of the harvest-field were gathered in -
illustrating the reception of the righteous into the kingdom - and the
fruit of the vineyard were thrown into the wine-press, representing the
manner in which the wicked would be crushed, [Rev
14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#019).

[Revelation 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 14:15</span></span>

And another angel - The fourth in order, [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), [Rev
14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008).

Came out of the temple - See the notes on [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019). Came, as it were, from the
immediate presence of God; for the temple was regarded as his unique
dwelling-place.

Crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud - To the Messiah,
[Rev 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014). That is, the command was
borne directly from God by the angel to the Messiah, to go forth and
reap the great harvest of the world. It is not a command of the angel,
but a command from God the Father to the Son. This is in accordance with
all the representations in the New Testament, that the Son, as Messiah
or Redeemer, is subordinate to the Father, and performs the work which
has been given him to do. See [Joh
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016); [Joh
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019); [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018); [Joh
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049); [Joh
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031). Compare the notes on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

Thrust in thy sickle, and reap - Into the great harvest of the world.

For the time is come for thee to reap - That is, "the harvest which thou
art to reap is ripe; the seed which thou hast sown has grown up; the
earth which thou hast cultivated has produced this golden grain, and it
is fit that thou shouldst now gather it in." This language is
appropriately addressed to the Son of God, for all the fruits of
righteousness on the earth may be regarded as the result of his culture.

For the harvest of the earth is ripe - The "harvest" in reference to the
righteous - fruit of the good seed sown by the Saviour and his apostles
and ministers. The time alluded to here is the end of the world, when
the affairs of earth shall be about to he wound up. The design is to
state that the Redeemer will then gather in a great and glorious
harvest, and by this assurance to sustain the hearts of his people in
times of trial and persecution.

[Revelation 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 14:16</span></span>

And he that sat on the cloud - The Saviour, [Rev
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014).

Thrust in his sickle on the earth - To cut down the harvest - that is,
to gather his people to himself.

And the earth was reaped - So far as the righteous were concerned. The
end had come; the church was redeemed; the work contemplated was
accomplished; and the results of the work of the Saviour were like a
glorious harvest.

[Revelation 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 14:17</span></span>

And another angel - The fifth in order. This angel came for a different
purpose - with reference to the cutting off of the enemies of God,
represented by the gathering of a vintage. Compare [Mat
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041); [Mat
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031).

Came out of the temple which is in heaven - Sent or commissioned by God.
See the notes on [Rev 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015).

He also having a sharp sickle - On the word "sickle," see the notes on
[Rev 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014).

[Revelation 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 14:18</span></span>

And another angel - The sixth in order. He came, like the angel in [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015), with a command to him who had
the sickle to go forth and execute his commission.

Came out from the altar - This stood in the front of the temple (see the
notes on [Mat 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012); compare the notes
on [Mat 5:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023)), and was the place
where burnt-sacrifices were made. As the work now to be done was a work
of destruction, this was an appropriate place in the representation.

Which had power over fire - As if he kept the fire on the altar. Fire is
the usual emblem of destruction; and as the work now to be done was
such, it was proper to represent this angel as engaged in it.

And cried with a loud cry, ... - See [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015). That is, he came forth, as with
a command from God, to call on him who was appointed to do the work of
destruction, now to engage in performing it. The time had fully come.

Thrust in thy sharp sickle - [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015).

And gather the clusters of the vine of the earth - That portion of the
earth which might be represented by a vineyard in which the grapes were
to be gathered and crushed. The image here employed occurs elsewhere to
denote the destruction of the wicked. See the very beautiful description
in [Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), respecting the
destruction of Edom, and the notes on that passage.

For her grapes are fully ripe - That is, the time has come for the
ingathering; or, to apply the image, for the winding up of human affairs
by the destruction of the wicked. The time here, as in the previous
representation, is the end of the world; and the design is, to comfort
the church in its trials and persecutions, by the assurance that all its
enemies will be cut off.

[Revelation 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 14:19</span></span>

And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth - That is, into that
part of the earth which might be represented by a vineyard; or the earth
considered as having been the abode of wicked men.

And cast it into the great wine-press of the wrath of God - See [Isa
63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001). That is, the wine-press where
the grapes are crushed, and where the juice, resembling blood, flows
out, may be used as a symbol to denote the destruction of the wicked in
the last day; and as the numbers will be immensely great, it is called
the "great wine-press of divine wrath." The symbol appears to be used
here alike with reference to the color of the wine resembling blood, and
the pressure necessary to force it out; and thus employed it is one of
the most striking emblems conceivable to denote the final destruction of
the wicked.

[Revelation 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 14:20</span></span>

And the wine-press was trodden without the city - The representation was
made as if it were outside of the city - that is, the city of Jerusalem,
for that is represented as the abode of the holy. The word "trodden"
refers to the manner in which wine was usually prepared, by being
trodden by the feet of people. See the notes on [Isa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#002). The wine-press was usually in
the vineyard - not in the city - and this is the representation here. As
appearing to the eye of John, it was not within the walls of any city,
but standing without.

And blood came out of the wine-press - The representation is, that there
would be a great destruction which would be well represented by the
juice flowing from a wine-press.

Even unto the horse bridles - Deep, as blood would be in a field of
slaughter where it would come up to the very bridles of the horses. The
idea is, that there would be a great slaughter.

By the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs - That is, two
hundred miles; covering a space of two hundred miles square - a lake of
blood. This is designed to represent a great slaughter; but why the
space here employed to describe it was chosen is unknown. Some have
supposed it was in allusion to the length of Palestine. Prof. Stuart
supposes that it refers to the breadth of Italy, and that the allusion
is to the attack made on the city of the beast. But it is impossible to
determine why this space was chosen, and it is unnecessary. The idea is,
that there would be a slaughter so great, as it were, as to produce a
lake or sea of blood; that the enemies of the church would be completely
and finally overthrown, and that the church, therefore, delivered from
all its enemies, would be triumphant.

The "design" of this, as of the previous representations in this
chapter, is to show that all the enemies of God will be destroyed, and
that, therefore, the hearts of the friends of religion should be cheered
and consoled in the trials and persecutions which were to come upon it.
What could be better suited to sustain the church in the time of trial,
than the assurance that every foe will be ultimately cut off? What is
better suited to sustain the heart of the individual believer, than the
assurance that all his foes will be quelled, and that he will ere long
be safe in heaven?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 15](rev015)

</div>
