<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev008)  [Next](rev010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 9:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

The three remaining trumpets Rev. 9-11 are usually called the
woe-trumpets, in reference to the proclamation of woes, [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013) (Prof. Stuart). The three extend,
as I suppose, to the end of time, or, as it is supposed by the writer
himself [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015), to the period when
"the kingdoms of this world shall have become the kingdoms of Christ,"
embracing a succinct view of the most material events that were to
occur, particularly in a secular point of view. See the Analysis
prefixed to the book. In [Rev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019),
as I understand it, a new view is commenced, referring to the church
internally; the rise of Antichrist, and the effect of the rise of that
formidable power on the internal history of the church, to the time of
its overthrow, and the triumphant establishment of the kingdom of God.
This, of course, synchronizes in its beginning and its close with the
portion already passed over, but with a different view. See the Analysis
prefixed to [Rev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019) ff.

This chapter Rev. 9 contains properly three parts. First, a description
of the first of those trumpets, or the fifth in the order of the whole,
[Rev 9:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001). This woe is represented
under the figure of calamities brought upon the earth by an immense army
of locusts. A star is seen to fall from heaven representing some mighty
chieftain, and to him is given the key of the bottomless pit. He opens
the pit, and then comes forth an innumerable swarm of locusts that
darken the heavens, and they go forth upon the earth. They have a
command given them to do a certain work. They are not to hurt the earth,
or any green thing, but they are sent against those people which have
not the seal of God on their foreheads. Their main business, however,
was not to kill them, but to torment them for a limited time - for five
months. A description of the appearance of the locusts then follows.
Though they are called locusts, because in their general appearance, and
in the ravages they commit, they resemble them, yet, in the main, they
are imaginary beings, and combine in themselves qualities which are
never found united in reality.

They had a strong resemblance to horses prepared for battle; they wore
on their heads crowns of gold; they had the faces of men but the hair of
women and the teeth of lions. They had breastplates of iron, and tails
like scorpions, with stings in their tails. They had a mighty king at
their head, with a name significant of the destruction which he would
bring upon the world. These mysterious beings had their origin in the
bottomless pit, and they are summoned forth to spread desolation upon
the earth. Second, a description of the second of these trumpets, the
sixth in order, [Rev 9:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#013). When
this is sounded, a voice is heard from the four horns of the altar which
is before God. The angel is commanded to loose the four angels which are
bound in the great river Euphrates. These angels are loosed - angels
which had been prepared for a definite period - a day, and a month, and
a year, to slay the third part of people.

The number of the army that would appear - composed of cavalry - is
stated to amount to two hundred thousand, and the uniqueness qualities
of these horsemen are then stated. They are remarkable for having
breastplates of fire, and jacinth, and brimstone; the heads of the
horses resemble lions; and they breathe forth fire and brimstone. A
third part of people fall before them, by the fire, and the smoke, and
the brimstone. Their power is in their mouth and in their tails, for
their tails are like serpents. Third, a statement of the effect of the
judgments brought upon the world under these trumpets, [Rev
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020). The effect, so far as the
reasonable result could have been anticipated, is lost. The nations are
not turned from idolatry. Wickedness still abounds, and there is no
disposition to repent of the abominations which had been so long
practiced on the earth.

[Revelation 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 9:1</span></span>

And the fifth angel sounded - See the notes on [Rev
8:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006).

And I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth - This denotes, as was
shown in the notes on [Rev 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010), a
leader, a military chieftain, a warrior. In the fulfillment of this, as
in the former case, we look for the appearance of some mighty prince and
warrior, to whom is given power, as it were, to open the bottomless pit,
and to summon forth its legions. That some such agent is denoted by the
star is further apparent from the fact that it is immediately added,
that "to him (the star) was given the key of the bottomless pit." It
could not be meant that a key would be given to a literal star, and we
naturally suppose, therefore, that some intelligent being of exalted
rank, and of baleful influence, is here referred to Angels, good and
bad, are often called stars; but the reference here, as in [Rev
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010), seems to me not to be to angels,
but to some mighty leader of armies, who was to collect his hosts, and
to go through the world in the work of destruction.

And to him was given the key of the bottomless pit - Of the under-world,
considered particularly of the abode of the wicked. This is represented
often as a dark prison-house, enclosed with walls, and accessible by
gates or doors. These gates or doors are fastened, so that none of the
inmates can come out, and the key is in the hand of the keeper or
guardian. In [Rev 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018) it is said that
the keys of that world are in the hand of the Saviour (compare the notes
on that passage); here it is said that for a time, and for a temporary
purpose, they are committed to another. The word "pit" - φρέαρ phrear -
denotes properly a well, or a pit for water dug in the earth; and then
any pit, cave, abyss. The reference here is doubtless to the nether
world, considered as the abode of the wicked dead, the prison-house of
the guilty. The word "bottomless," ἀβύσσος abussos - whence our word
"abyss" means properly "without any bottom" (from Α a, the alpha
privative (not), and βύθος buthos, depth, bottom). It would be applied
properly to the ocean, or to any deep and dark dell, or to any obscure
place whose depth was unknown. Here it refers to Hades - the region of
the dead the abode of wicked spirits - as a deep, dark place, whose
bottom was unknown. Having the key to this, is to have the power to
confine those who are there, or to permit them to go at large. The
meaning here is, that this master-spirit would have power to evoke the
dead from these dark regions; and it would be fulfilled if some mighty
genius, that could be compared with a fallen star, or a lurid meteor,
should summon forth followers which would appear like the dwellers in
the nether world called forth to spread desolation over the earth.

[Revelation 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 9:2</span></span>

And he opened the bottomless pit - It is represented before as wholly
confined, so that not even the smoke or vapor could escape.

And there arose a smoke out of the pit - Compare [Rev
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011). The meaning here is that the
pit, as a place of punishment, or as the abode of the wicked, was filled
with burning sulphur, and consequently that it emitted smoke and vapor
as soon as opened. The common image of the place of punishment, in the
Scriptures, is that of a "lake that burns with fire and brimstone."
Compare [Rev 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010); [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020); [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010); [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008). See also [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006); [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033); [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022). It is not improbable that this
image was taken from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024). Such burning sulphur would
produce, of course, a dense smoke or vapor; and the idea here is, that
the pit had been closed, and that as soon as the door was opened a dense
column escaped that darkened the heavens. The purpose of this is,
probably, to indicate the origin of the plague that was about to come
upon the world. It would be of such a character that it would appear as
if it had been emitted from hell; as if the inmates of that dark world
had broke loose upon the earth. Compare notes on [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008).

As the smoke of a great furnace - So in [Gen
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#028), whence probably this image is
taken: "And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and all the land of the
plain, and beheld and lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke
of a furnace."

And the sun and the air were darkened, ... - As will be the case when a
smoke ascends from a furnace. The meaning here is, that an effect would
be produced as if a dense and dark vapor should ascend from the
under-world. We are not, of course, to understand this literally.

[Revelation 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 9:3</span></span>

And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth - That is, they
escaped from the pit with the smoke. At first they were mingled with the
smoke, so that they were not distinctly seen, but when the smoke cleared
away they appeared in great numbers. The idea seems to be, that the
bottomless pit was filled with vapor and with those creatures, and that
as soon as the gate was opened the whole contents expanded and burst
forth upon the earth. The sun was immediately darkened, and the air was
full, but the smoke soon cleared away, so that the locusts became
distinctly visible. The appearance of these locusts is described in
another part of the chapter, [Rev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007)
ff. The locust is a voracious insect belonging to the grasshopper or
grylli genus, and is a great scourge in Oriental countries. A full
description of the locust may be seen in Robinson's Calmet, and in
Kitto's Encyclo. vol. ii. pp. 258ff. There are ten Hebrew words to
denote the locust, and there are numerous references to the destructive
habits of the insect in the Scriptures. In fact, from their numbers and
their destructive habits, there was scarcely any other plague that was
so much dreaded in the East. Considered as a symbol, or emblem, the
following remarks may be made in explanation:

\(1\) The symbol is Oriental, and would most naturally refer to
something that was to occur in the East. As locusts have appeared
chiefly in the East, and as they are in a great measure an Oriental
plague, the mention of this symbol would most naturally turn the
thoughts to that portion of the earth. The symbols of the first four
trumpets had no special locality, and would suggest no particular part
of the world; but on the mention of this, the mind would be naturally
turned to the East, and we should expect to find that the scene of this
woe would be located in the regions where the ravages of locusts most
abounded. Compare, on this point, Elliott, Horae Apoc. i. 394-406. He
has made it probable that the prophets, when they used symbolical
language to denote any events, commonly, at least, employed those which
had a local or geographical reference; thus, in the symbols derived from
the vegetable kingdom, when Judah is to be symbolized, the olive, the
vine, and the fig-tree are selected; when Egypt is referred to, the reed
is chosen; when Babylon, the willow. And so, in the animal kingdom, the
lion is the symbol of Judah; the wild ass, of the Arabs; the crocodile,
of Egypt, etc. Whether this theory could be wholly carried out or not,
no one can doubt that the symbol of locusts would most naturally suggest
the Oriental world, and that the natural interpretation of the passage
would lead us to expect its fulfillment there.

\(2\) locusts were remarkable for their numbers - so great often as to
appear like clouds, and to darken the sky. In this respect they would
naturally be symbolical of numerous armies or hosts of men. This natural
symbol of numerous armies is often employed by the prophets. Thus, in
[Jer 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023);

"Cut down her forests (i. e. her people, or cities), saith Jehovah,

That it may not be found on searching;

Although they surpass the locusts in multitude,

And they are without number."

So in [Nah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015);

"There shall the fire devour thee;

The sword shall cut thee off; it shall devour thee as the locust,

Increase thyself as the numerous locusts."

So also in [Nah 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#017);

"Thy crowned princes are as the numerous locusts,

And thy captains as the grasshoppers;

Which encamp in the fences in the cold day,

But when the sun ariseth they depart,

And their place is not known where they were."

See also [Deu 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038), [Deu
28:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#042); [Psa
78:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046); [Amo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001). Compare [Jdg
6:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003); [Jdg
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#012); and [Joe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002).

\(3\) locusts are an emblem of desolation or destruction. No symbol of
desolation could be more appropriate or striking than this, for one of
the most remarkable properties of locusts is, that they devour every
green thing and leave a land perfectly waste. They do this even when
what they destroy is not necessary for their own sustenance. "Locusts
seem to devour not so much from a ravenous appetite as from a rage for
destroying. Destruction, therefore, and not food, is the chief impulse
of their devastations, and in this consists their utility; they are, in
fact, omnivorous. The most poisonous plants are indifferent to them;
they will prey even upon the crowfoot, whose causticity burns even the
hides of beasts. They simply consume everything, without predilection -
vegetable matter, linens, woolens, silk, leather, etc.; and Pliny does
not exaggerate when he says, fores quoque tectorum - 'even the doors of
houses' - for they have been known to consume the very varnish of
furniture. They reduce everything indiscriminately to shreds, which
become manure" (Kitto's Encyclopedia ii. 263). Locusts become,
therefore, a most striking symbol of an all-devouring army, and as such
are often referred to in Scripture. So also in Josephus, de Bello Jude
book v. ch. vii.: "As after locusts we see the woods stripped of their
leaves, so, in the rear of Simon's army, nothing but devastation
remained." The natural application of this symbol, then, is to a
numerous and destructive army, or to a great multitude of people
committing ravages, and sweeping off everything in their march.

And unto them was given power - This was something that was imparted to
them beyond their ordinary nature. The locust in itself is not strong,
and is not a symbol of strength. Though destructive in the extreme, yet
neither as individuals, nor as combined, are they distinguished for
strength. Hence, it is mentioned as a remarkable circumstance that they
had such power conferred on them.

As the scorpions of the earth have power - The phrase "the earth" seems
to have been introduced here because these creatures are said to have
come up from "the bottomless pit," and it was natural to compare them
with some well-known objects found on the earth. The scorpion is an
animal with eight feet, eight eyes, and a long, jointed tail, ending in
a pointed weapon or sting. It is the largest and the most malignant of
all the insect tribes. It somewhat resembles the lobster in its general
appearance, but is much more hideous. See the notes on [Luk
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019). Those found in Europe seldom
exceed four inches in length, but in tropical climates, where they
abound, they are often found twelve inches long. There are few animals
more formidable, and none more irascible, than the scorpion. Goldsmith
states that Maupertuis put about a hundred of them together in the same
glass, and that as soon as they came into contact they began to exert
all their rage in mutual destruction, so that in a few days there
remained but fourteen, which had killed and devoured all the rest.

The sting of the scorpion, Dr. Shaw states, is not always fatal; the
malignity of their venom being in proportion to their size and
complexion. The torment of a scorpion, when he strikes a man, is thus
described by Dioscorides, lib. 7:cap. 7, as cited by Mr. Taylor: "When
the scorpion has stung, the place becomes inflamed and hardened; it
reddens by tension, and is painful by intervals, being now chilly, now
burning. The pain soon rises high, and rages, sometimes more, sometimes
less. A sweating succeeds, attended by a shivering and trembling; the
extremities of the body become cold, the groin swells, the hair stands
on end, the members become pale, and the skin feels throughout the
sensation of a perpetual pricking, as if by needles" (Fragments to
Calmet's Dic. vol. iv. p. 376, 377). "The tail of the scorpion is long,
and formed after the manner of a string of beads, the last larger than
the others, and longer; at the end of which are, sometimes, two stings
which are hollow, and filled with a cold poison, which it ejects into
the part which it stings" (Calmet's Dic.). The sting of the scorpion,
therefore, becomes the emblem of what causes acute and dangerous
suffering. On this comparison with scorpions see the remark of Niebuhr,
quoted in the notes on [Rev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007).

[Revelation 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 9:4</span></span>

And it was commanded them - The writer does not say by whom this command
was given, but it is clearly by someone who had the direction of them.
As they were evoked from the "bottomless pit" by one who had the key to
that dark abode, and as they are represented in [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011) as under the command of one who
is there called Abaddon, or Apollyon - the Destroyer - it would seem
most probable that the command referred to is one that is given by him;
that is, that this expresses one of the principles on which he would act
in his devastations. At all events, this denotes what would be one of
the characteristics of these destroyers. Their purpose would be to vex
and trouble people; not to spread desolation over vineyards,
olive-yards, and fields of grain.

That they should not hurt the grass of the earth, ... - See the notes on
[Rev 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007). The meaning here is plain.
There would be some sense in which these invaders would be characterized
in a manner that was not common among invaders, to wit, that they would
show particular care not to carry their devastations into the vegetable
world. Their warfare would be with people, and not with orchards and
green fields.

But only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads -
See the notes on [Rev 7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002). They
commenced war against that part of the human race only. The language
here properly denotes those who were not the friends of God. It may here
refer, however, either to those who in reality were not such, or to
those who were regarded by him who gave this command as not being such.
In the former case, the commission would have respect to real infidels
in the sight of God - that is, to those who rejected the true religion;
in the latter it would express the sentiment of the leader of this host,
as referring to those who in his apprehension were infidels or enemies
of God. The true interpretation must depend on the sense in which we
understand the phrase "it was commanded"; whether as referring to God,
or to the leader of the host himself. The language, therefore, is
ambiguous, and the meaning must be determined by the other parts of the
passage. Either method of understanding the passage would be in
accordance with its fair interpretation.

[Revelation 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 9:5</span></span>

And to them it was given - There is here the same indefiniteness as in
the former verse, the impersonal verb being here also used. The writer
does not say by whom this power was given, whether by God, or by the
leader of the host. It may be admitted, however, that the most natural
interpretation is to suppose that it was given them by God, and that
this was the execution of his purpose in this case. Still it is
remarkable that this is not directly affirmed, and that the language is
so general as to admit of the other application. The fact that they did
not kill them, but tormented them - if such a fact should be found to
exist - would be in every sense a fulfillment of what is here said.

That they should not kill them - This is in accordance with the nature
of the symbol. The locusts do not themselves destroy any living
creature; and the sting of the scorpion, though exceedingly painful, is
not usually fatal. The proper fulfillment of this would be found in what
would not be generally fatal, but which would diffuse misery and
wretchedness. (Compare [Rev 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#006).)
Perhaps all that would be necessarily meant by this would be, not that
individual people would not be killed, but that they would be sent to
inflict plagues and torments rather than to take life, and that the
characteristic effects of their appearing would be distress and
suffering rather than death. There may be included in the fair
interpretation of the words, "general distress" and "sorrow"; acts of
oppression, cruelty, and violence; such a condition of public suffering
that people would regard death as a relief if they could find it.

But that they should be tormented - That is, that they should be
subjected to ills and troubles which might be properly compared with the
sting of a scorpion.

Five months - So far as the words here are concerned this might be taken
literally, denoting five months or one hundred and fifty days; or as a
prophetic reckoning, where a day stands for a year. Compare the notes on
[Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024) ff. The latter is
undoubtedly the correct interpretation here, for it is the character of
the book thus to reckon time. See the notes on [Rev
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#015). If this be the true method of
reckoning here, then it will be necessary to find some events which will
embrace about the period of one hundred and fifty years, during which
this distress and sorrow would continue. The proper laws of
interpretation demand that one or the other of these periods should be
found - either that of five months literally, or that of 150 years. It
may be true, as Prof. Stuart suggests (in loco), that "the usual time of
locusts is from May to September inclusive - five months." It may be
true, also, that this symbol was chosen partly because that was the
fact, and they would, from that fact, be well adapted to symbolize a
period that could be spoken of as "five months"; but still the meaning
must be more than simply it was "a short period," as he supposes. The
phrase a few months might designate such a period; but if that had been
the writer's intention, he would not have selected the definite number
five.

And their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, ... - See the notes
on [Rev 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003). That is, it would be
painful, severe, dangerous.

[Revelation 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 9:6</span></span>

And in those days shall men seek death ... - See the notes on [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005). It is very easy to conceive of
such a state of things as is here described, and, indeed, this has not
been very uncommon in the world. It is a state where the distress is so
great that people would consider death a relief, and where they
anxiously look to the time when they may be released from their
sufferings by death. In the case before us it is not intimated that they
would lay violent hands on themselves, or that they would take any
positive measures to end their sufferings; and this, perhaps, may be a
circumstance of some importance to show that the persons referred to
were servants of God. When it is said that "they would seek death," it
can only be meant that they would look out for it - or desire it - as
the end of their sorrows. This is descriptive, as we shall see, of a
particular period of the world; but the language is beautifully
applicable to what occurs in all ages and in all lands.

There is always a great number of sufferers who are looking forward to
death as a relief. In cells and dungeons; on beds of pain and
languishing; in scenes of poverty and want; in blighted hopes and
disappointed affections, how many are there who would be glad to die,
and who have no hope of an end of suffering but in the grave! A few, by
the pistol, by the halter, by poison, or by drowning, seek thus to end
their woes. A large part look forward to death as a release, when, if
the reality were known, death would furnish no such relief, for there
are deeper and longer woes beyond the grave than there are this side of
it. Compare the notes on [Job 3:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020).
But to a portion death will be a relief. It will be an end of
sufferings. They will find peace in the grave, and are assured they
shall suffer no more. Such bear their trials with patience, for the end
of all sorrow to them is near, and death will come to release their
spirits from the suffering clay, and to bear them in triumph to a world
where a pang shall never be felt, and a tear never shed.

[Revelation 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 9:7</span></span>

And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared for battle
- The resemblance between the locust and the horse, dissimilar as they
are in most respects, has been often remarked. Dr. Robinson (Bib.
Research. i. 59) says: "We found today upon the shrubs an insect, either
a species of black locust, or much resembling them, which our Bedouin
called Farras el Jundy, 'soldiers' horses.' They said these insects were
common on Mount Sinai, of a green color, and were found on dead trees,
but did them no injury." The editor of the Pictorial Bible makes the
following remarks: - "The first time we saw locusts browsing with their
wings closed, the idea of comparing them to horses arose spontaneously
to our minds - as we had not previously met with such a comparison, and
did not at that time advert to the present text [Joe
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004). The resemblance in the head first
struck our attention; and this notion having once arisen, other
analogies were found or imagined in its general appearance and action in
feeding. We have since found the observation very common. The Italians,
indeed, from this resemblance, called the locust cavaletta, or little
horse. Sir W. Ouseley reports: 'Zakaria Cazvine divides the locusts into
two classes, like horsemen and footmen - mounted and pedestrian.'
Niebuhr says that he heard from a Bedouin, near Bussorah, a particular
comparison of the locust to other animals; but as this passage of
Scripture did not occur to him at the time he thought it a mere fancy of
the Arab's, until he heard it repeated at Baghdad. He compared the head
of the locust to that of the horse; the feet to those of the camel; the
belly with that of a serpent; the tail with that of a scorpion; and the
feelers (if Niebuhr remembered rightly) to the hair of a virgin" (Pict.
Bib. on [Joe 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004)). The resemblance to
horses would naturally suggest the idea of cavalry, as being referred to
by the symbol.

And on their heads were as it were crowns like gold - The writer does
not say either that these were literally crowns, or that they were
actually made of gold. They were "as it were" (ὡς hōs) "crowns," and
they were like (ὅμοιοι homoioi) "gold." That is, as seen by him, they
had a resemblance to crowns or diadems, and they also resembled gold in
their color and brilliancy. The word "crown" - στέφανος stephanos -
means properly a circlet, chaplet, encircling the head:

\(a\) as an emblem of royal dignity, and as worn by kings;

\(b\) as conferred on victors in the public games - a chaplet, a wreath;

\(c\) as an ornament, honor, or glory, [Phi
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001).

No particular shape is designated by the word στέφανος stephanos and
perhaps the word "crown" does not quite express the meaning. The word
"diadem" would come nearer to it. The true notion in the word is that of
something that is passed around the head, and that encircles it, and as
such it would well describe the appearance of a turban as seen at a
distance. On the supposition that the symbolic beings here referred to
had turbans on their heads, and on the supposition that something was
referred to which was not much worn in the time of John, and, therefore,
that had no name, the word στέφανος stephanos, or diadem, would be
likely to be used in describing it. This, too, would accord with the use
of the phrase "as it were" - ὡς hōs. The writer saw such head-ornaments
as he was accustomed to see. They Were not exactly crowns or diadems,
but they had a resemblance to them, and he therefore uses this language:
"and on their heads were as it were crowns." Suppose that these were
turbans, and that they were not in common use in the time of John, and
that they had, therefore, no name, would not this be the exact language
which he would use in describing them? The same remarks may be made
respecting the other expression.

Like gold - They were not pure gold, but they had a resemblance to it.
Would not a yellow turban correspond with all that is said in this
description?

And their faces were as the faces of men - They had a human countenance.
This would indicate that, after all, they were human beings that the
symbol described, though they had come up from the bottomless pit.
Horsemen, in strange apparel, with a strange head-dress, would be all
that would be properly denoted by this.

[Revelation 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 9:8</span></span>

And they had hair as the hair of women - Long hair; not such as men
commonly wear, but such as women wear. See the notes on [Co1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014). This struck John as a
peculiarity, that, though warriors, they should have the appearance of
effeminacy indicated by allowing their hair to grow long. It is clear
from this, that John regarded their appearance as unusual and
remarkable. Though manifestly designed to represent an army, yet it was
not the usual appearance of men who went forth to battle. Among the
Greeks of ancient times, indeed, long hair was not uncommon (see the
notes above referred to on [Co1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)), but this was by no means the
usual custom among the ancients; and the fact that these warriors had
long hair like women was a circumstance that would distinguish them
particularly from others. On this comparison of the appearance of the
locusts with the hair of women see the remarks of Niebuhr, in the notes
on [Rev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007).

And their teeth were as the teeth of lions - Strong; suited to devour.
The teeth of the locust are by no means prominent, though they are
strong, for they readily cut down and eat up all vegetable substances
that come in their way. But it is evident that John means to say that
there was much that was unusual and remarkable in the teeth of these
locusts. They would be ravenous and fierce, and would spread terror and
desolation like the lions of the desert.

[Revelation 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 9:9</span></span>

And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron - Hard,
horny, impenetrable, as if they were made of iron. The locust has a firm
and hard cuticle on the forepart of the breast, which serves for a
shield or defense while it moves in the thorny and furzy vegetation. On
those which John saw this was especially hard and horny, and would thus
be well adapted to be an emblem of the breastplates of iron commonly
worn by ancient warriors. The meaning is, that the warriors referred to
would be well clad with defensive armor.

And the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses
running to battle - The noise made by locusts is often spoken of by
travelers, and the comparison of that noise with that of chariots
rushing to battle, is not only appropriate, but also indicates clearly
what was symbolized. It was an army that was symbolized, and everything
about them served to represent hosts of men well armed, rushing to
conflict. The same thing here referred to is noticed by Joel [Joe
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004), [Joe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007);

"The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses;

And as horsemen so shall they run.

Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains, shall they leap;

Like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble;

As a strong people set in battle array.

They shall run like mighty men;

They shall climb the wall like men of war;

And they shall march every one his ways,

And shall not break their ranks," etc.

It is remarkable that Volney, who had no intention of illustrating the
truth of Scripture, has given a description of locusts, as if he meant
to confirm the truth of what is here said. "Syria," says he, "as well as
Egypt, Persia, and almost all the south of Asia, is subject to another
calamity no less dreadful (than earthquakes); I mean those clouds of
locusts so often mentioned by travelers. The quantity of these insects
is incredible to all who have not themselves witnessed their astounding
numbers; the whole earth is covered with them for the space of several
leagues. The noise they make in browsing on the trees and herbage may be
heard to a great distance, and resembles that of an army foraging in
secret" (Travels in Egypt and Syria, vol. i. pp. 283, 284).

[Revelation 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 9:10</span></span>

And they had tails like unto scorpions - The fancy of an Arab now often
discerns a resemblance between the tail of the locust and the scorpion.
See the remark of Niebuhr, quoted in the notes on [Rev
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007).

And there were stings in their tails - Like the stings of scorpions. See
the notes on [Rev 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003). This made the
locusts which appeared to John the more remarkable, for though the fancy
may imagine a resemblance between the tail of a locust and a scorpion,
yet the locusts have properly no sting. The only thing which they have
resembling a sting is a hard bony subsubstance like a needle, with which
the female punctures the bark and wood of trees in order to deposit her
eggs. It has, however, no adaptation, like a sting, for conveying poison
into a wound. These, however, appeared to be armed with stings properly
so called.

And their power was to hurt men - Not primarily to kill people, but to
inflict on them various kinds of tortures. See the notes on [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005). The word used here - ἀδικῆσαι
adikēsai, rendered "to hurt" - is different from the word in [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005) - βασανισθῶσιν basanisthōsin,
rendered "should be tormented." This word properly means "to do wrong,
to do unjustly, to injure, to hurt"; and the two words would seem to
convey the idea that they would produce distress by doing wrong to
others, or by deeding unjustly with them. It does not appear that the
wrong would be by inflicting bodily torments, but would be characterized
by that injustice toward others which produces distress and anguish.

Five months - See the notes on [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005); (also Editor's Preface).

[Revelation 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 9:11</span></span>

And they had a king over them - A ruler who marshalled their hosts.
Locusts often, and indeed generally, move in bands, though they do not
appear to be under the direction of anyone as a particular ruler or
guide. In this case it struck John as a remarkable peculiarity that they
had a king - a king who, it would seem, had the absolute control, and to
whom was to be traced all the destruction which would ensue from their
emerging from the bottomless pit.

Which is the angel of the bottomless pit - See the notes on [Rev
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001). The word "angel" here would seem
to refer to the chief of the evil angels, who presided over the dark and
gloomy regions from whence the locusts seemed to emerge. This may either
mean that this evil angel seemed to command them personally, or that his
spirit was infused into the leader of these hosts.

Whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon - The name Abaddon means
literally "destruction," and is the same as Apollyon.

But in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon - From ἀπόλλυμι apollumi
- "to destroy." The word properly denotes "a destroyer," and the name is
given to this king of the hosts, represented by the locusts, because
this would be his principal characteristic.

After this minute explanation of the literal meaning of the symbol, it
may be useful, before attempting to apply it, and to ascertain the
events designed to be represented, to have a distinct impression of the
principal image - the locust. It is evident that this is, in many
respects, a creature of the imagination, and that we are not to expect
the exact representation to be found in any forms of actual existence in
the animal creation. The following engraving, prepared by Mr. Elliott
(vol. i. p. 410), will give a sufficiently accurate representation of
this symbolical figure as it appeared to John.

The question now is, whether any events occurred in history, subsequent
to and succeeding those supposed to be referred to in the fourth
trumpet, to which this symbol would be applicable. Reasons have already
been suggested for supposing that there was a transfer of the seat of
the operations to another part of the world. The first four trumpets
referred to a continual series of events of the same general character,
and having a proper close. These have been explained as referring to the
successive shocks which terminated in the downfall of the Western
empire. At the close of that series there is a pause in the
representation [Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013), and a solemn
proclamation that other scenes were to open distinguished for woe. These
were to be symbolized in the sounding of the remaining three trumpets,
embracing the whole period until the consummation of all things - or
sketching great and momentous events in the future, until the volume
sealed with the seven seals [Rev 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)
should have been wholly unrolled and its contents disclosed. The whole
scene now is changed. Rome has fallen. It has passed into the hands of
strangers. The power that had spread itself over the world has, in that
form, come to an end, and is to exist no more - though, as we shall see
(Rev. 11ff), another power, quite as formidable, existing there, is to
be described by a new set of symbols. But here Rev. 9 a new power
appears. The scenery is all Oriental, and clearly has reference to
events that were to spring up in the East. With surprising unanimity,
commentators have agreed in regarding this as referring to the empire of
the Saracens, or to the rise and progress of the religion and the empire
set up by Muhammed. The inquiry now is, whether the circumstances
introduced into the symbol find a proper fulfillment in the rise of the
Saracenic power, and in the conquests of the Prophet of Mecca:

\(1\) "The country where the scene is laid." As already remarked the
scene is Oriental - for the mention of locusts naturally suggests the
East - that being the part of the world where they abound, and they
being in fact especially an Oriental plague. It may now be added, that
in a more strict and proper sense Arabia may be intended; that is, if it
be admitted that the design was to symbolize events pertaining to
Arabia, or the gathering of the hosts of Arabia for conquest, the symbol
of locusts would have been employed for the locust, the groundwork of
the symbol is especially Arabic. It was the east wind which brought the
locusts on Egypt [Exo 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013), and they
must therefore have come from some portion of Arabia - for Arabia is the
land that lies over against Egypt in the east. Such, too, is the
testimony of Volney; "the most judicious," as Mr. Gibbon calls him, "of
modern travelers." "The inhabitants of Syria," says he, "have remarked
that locusts come constantly from the desert of Arabia," ch. 20:sect. 5.

All that is necessary to say further on this point is, that on the
supposition that it was the design of the Spirit of inspiration in the
passage before us to refer to the followers of Muhammed, the image of
the locusts was that which would be naturally selected. There was no
other one so appropriate and so striking; no one that would so naturally
designate the country of Arabia. As some confirmation of this, or as
showing how natural the symbol would be, a remark may be introduced from
Mr. Forster. In his Mohammedanism Unveiled, vol. i. p. 217, he says, "In
the Bedoween romance of Antar, the locust is introduced as the national
emblem of the Ishmaelites. And it is a remarkable coincidence that
Muslim tradition speaks of locusts having dropped into the hands of
Muhammed, bearing on their wings this inscription - 'We are the army of
the Great God.'" These circumstances will show the propriety of the
symbol on the supposition that it refers to Arabia and the Saracens.

\(2\) the people. The question is, whether there was anything in the
symbol, as described by John, which would properly designate the
followers of Muhammed, on the supposition that it was designed to have
such a reference:

\(a\) As to numbers. "They (the Midianite Arabs) came as locusts for
multitude," [Joh 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005). See the notes on
[Rev 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003). Nothing would better
represent the numbers of the Saracenic hordes that came out of Arabia,
and that spread over the East - over Egypt, Libya, Mauritania, Spain,
and that threatened to spread over Europe - than such an army of
locusts. "One hundred years after his flight (Muhammed) from Mecca,"
says Mr. Gibbon, "the arms and the reign of his successors extended from
India to the Atlantic Ocean, over the various and distant provinces
which may be comprised under the names of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa,
and Spain," vol. iii. p. 410. "At the end of the first century of the
Hegira the caliphs were the most potent and absolute monarchs on the
globe. Under the last of the Ommiades the Arabian empire extended two
hundred days' journey from east to west, from the confines of Tartary
and India to the shores of the Atlantic Ocean" (ibid. p. 460). In regard
to the immense hosts employed in these conquests, an idea may be formed
by a perusal of the whole fifty-first chapter in Gibbon (vol. iii. pp.
408-461). Those hosts issued primarily from Arabia, and in their numbers
would be well compared with the swarms of locusts that issued from the
same country, so numerous as to darken the sky.

\(b\) The description of the people.

"Their faces were as the faces of men" This would seem to be in contrast
with other people, or to denote something that was unique in the
appearance of the persons represented. In other words, the meaning would
seem to be, that there was something manly and warlike in their
appearance, so far as their faces were concerned. It is remarkable that
the appearance of the Goths (represented, as I suppose, under the
previous trumpets) is described by Jerome (compare on Isa. 8) as quite
the reverse. They are described as having faces shaven and smooth;
faces, in contrast with the bearded Romans, like women's faces. Is it
fancy to suppose that the reference here is to the beard and moustache
of the Arabic hosts? We know with what care they regarded the beard; and
if a representation was made of them, especially in contrast with
nations that shaved their faces, and who thus resembled women, it would
be natural to speak of those represented in the symbol as "having faces
as the faces of men."

"They had hair as the hair of women" A strange mingling of the
appearance of effeminacy with the indication of manliness and courage.
See the notes on [Rev 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#008). And yet
this strictly accords with the appearance of the Arabs or Saracens.
Pliny, the contemporary of John, speaks of the Arabs then as having the
hair long and uncut, with the moustache on the upper lip, or the beard:
Arabes mitrati sunt, aut intoso crine. Barba abraditur, praeterquam in
superiore labro. Aliis et haec intonsa (Nat. Hist. vol. 6, p. 28). So
Solinus describes them in the third century (Plurimis crinis intonsus,
mitrata capita, pars rasa in cutem barba, 100:53); so Ammianus
Marcellinus, in the fourth century (Crinitus quidam a Saracenorum cuneo,
vol. xxxi. p. 16); and so Claudian, Theodore of Mopsuesta, and Jerome,
in the fifth. Jerome lived about two centuries before the great Saracen
invasion; and as he lived at Bethlehem, on the borders of Arabia, he
must have been familiar with the appearance of the Arabs. Still later,
in that most characteristic of Arab poems, Antar, a poem written in the
time of Muhammed's childhood, we find the moustache, and the beard, and
the long flowing hair on the shoulder, and the turban, all specified as
characteristic of the Arabians: "He adjusted himself properly, twisted
his whiskers, and folded up his hair under his turban, drawing it from
off his shoulders," vol. i. p. 340. "His hair flowed down on his
shoulders," vol. i. p. 169. "Antar cut off Maudi's hair in revenge and
insult," vol. iii. p. 117. "We will hang him up by his hair," vol. iv.
p. 325. See Elliott, vol. i. pp. 411, 412. Compare Newton on the
Prophecies, p. 485.

"And on their heads were as it were crowns of gold" See the notes on
[Rev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007). That is, diadems, or
something that appeared like crowns, or chaplets. This will agree well
with the turban worn by the Arabs or Saracens, and which was quite
characteristic of them in the early periods when they became known. So
in the passage already quoted, Pliny speaks of them as Arabes mitrati;
so Solinus, mitrata capita; so in the poem of Antar, "he folded up his
hair under his turbans." It is remarkable also that Ezekiel [Eze
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042) describes the turbans of the
Sabean or Keturite Arabs under the very appellation used here by John:
"Sabeans from the wilderness, which put beautiful crowns upon their
heads." So in the preface to Antar, it is said, "It was a usual saying
among them, that God had bestowed four special things on the Arabs; that
their turbans should be unto them instead of diadems, their tents
instead of walls and houses, their swords instead of intrenchments, and
their poems instead of written laws." Mr. Forster, in his Mohammedanism
Unveiled, quotes as a precept of Muhammed; "Make a point of wearing
turbans, because it is the way of angels." Turbans might then with
propriety be represented as crowns, and no doubt these were often so
gilded and ornamented that they might be spoken of as "crowns of gold."

"They had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron" See the notes
on [Rev 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009). As a symbol, this would
be properly descriptive of the Arabians or Saracens. In the poem Antar
the steel and iron cuirasses of the Arab warriors are frequently
noticed: "A warrior immersed in steel armor," vol. ii. p. 203. "Fifteen
thousand men armed with cuirasses, and well accoutred for war," vol. ii.
p. 42. "They were clothed in iron armor, and brilliant cuirasses," vol.
i. p. 23. "Out of the dust appeared horsemen clad in iron," vol. iii. p.
274. The same thing occurs in the Koran: "God hath given you coats of
mail to defend you in your wars," vol. ii. p. 104. In the history of
Muhammed we read expressly of the cuirasses of himself and of his Arab
troops. Seven cuirasses are noted in the list of Muhammed's private
armory (Gagnier, vol. iii. p. 328-334). In his second battle with the
Koreish, seven hundred of his little army are spoken of by Mr. Gibbon as
armed with cuirasses. See Elliott, vol. i. p. 413. These illustrations
will show with what propriety the locusts in the symbol were represented
as having breastplates like breastplates of iron. On the supposition
that this referred to the Arabs and the Saracens this would have been
the very symbol which would have been used. Indeed, all the features in
the symbol are precisely such as would properly be employed on the
supposition that the reference was to them. It is true that beforehand
it might not have been practicable to describe exactly what people were
referred to, but:

\(a\) it would be easy to see that some fearful calamity was to be
anticipated from the ravages of hosts of fearful invaders; and,

\(b\) when the events occurred, there would be no difficulty in
determining to whom this application should be made.

\(3\) "the time when this would occur." As to this there can be no
difficulty in the application to the Saracens. On the supposition that
the four first trumpets refer to the downfall of the Western empire,
then the proper time supposed to be represented by this symbol is
subsequent to that; and yet the manner in which the last three trumpets
are introduced [Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013) shows that
there would be an interval between the sounding of the last of the four
trumpets and the sounding of the fifth. The events referred to, as I
have supposed, as represented by the fourth trumpet, occurred in the
close of the fifth century (476-490 a.d.). The principal events in the
seventh century were connected with the invasions and conquests of the
Saracens. The interval of a century is not more than the fair
interpretation of the proclamation in [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013) would justify.

\(4\) "the commission given to the symbolical locusts." This embraces
the following things:

\(a\) They were not to hurt the grass of the earth, nor any green thing;

\(b\) they were especially to go against those who had not the seal of
God in their foreheads;

\(c\) they were not to kill them, but were to torment them.

"They were not to hurt the grass of the earth, ..." see the notes at
[Rev 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004). This agrees remarkably with
an express command in the Koran. The often-quoted order of the Caliph
Aboubekir, the father-in-law and successor of Muhammed, issued to the
Saracen hordes on their invasion of Syria, shows what was understood to
be the spirit of their religion: "Remember that you are always in the
presence of God, on the verge of death, in the assurance of judgment,
and the hope of paradise. Avoid injustice and oppression; consult with
your brethren, and study to preserve the love and confidence of your
troops. When you fight the battles of the Lord, acquit yourselves like
men, without turning your backs; but let not the victory be stained with
the blood of women or children. Destroy no palm-trees, nor burn any
fields of grain. Cut down no fruit-trees, nor do any mischief to cattle,
only such as you kill to eat. When you make any covenant or article,
stand to it, and be as good as your word. As you go on, you will find
some religious persons who live retired in monasteries, and propose to
themselves to serve God in that way; let them alone, and neither kill
them ('and to them it was given that they should not kill them,' ver 5),
nor destroy their monasteries," etc. (Gibbon, iii. 417, 418).

So Mr. Gibbon notices this precept of the Koran: "In the siege of
Tayaf," says he, "sixty miles from Mecca, Muhammed violated his own laws
by the extirpation of the fruit-trees," ii. 392. The same order existed
among the Hebrews, and it is not improbable that Muhammed derived his
precept from the command of Moses [Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019), though what was mercy among the
Hebrews was probably mere policy with him. This precept is the more
remarkable because it has been the usual custom in war, and particularly
among barbarians and semi-barbarians, to destroy grain and fruit, and
especially to cut down fruit-trees, in order to do greater injury to an
enemy. Thus, we have seen (notes on [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007)), that in the invasion of the
Goths their course was marked by desolations of this kind. Thus, in more
modern times, it has been common to carry the desolations of war into
gardens, orchards, and vineyards. In the single province of Upper
Messenia the troops of Muhammed Ali, in the war with Greece, cut down
half a million of olive-trees, and thus stripped the country of its
means of wealth. So Scio was a beautiful spot, the seat of delightful
villas, and gardens, and orchards; and in one day all this beauty was
destroyed. On the supposition, therefore, that this prediction had
reference to the Saracens, nothing could be more appropriate. Indeed, in
all the history of barbarous and savage warfare it would be difficult to
find another distinct command that no injury should be done to gardens
and orchards.

\(d\) Their commission was expressly against "those men who had not the
seal of God in their foreheads." See the notes on [Rev
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004). That is, they were to go either
against those who were not really the friends of God, or those who in
their estimation were not. Perhaps, if there were nothing in the
connection to demand a different interpretation, the former would be the
most natural explanation of the passage; but the language way be
understood as referring to the purpose which they considered themselves
as called upon to execute: that is, that they were to go against those
whom they regarded as being strangers to the true God, to wit,
idolaters. Now it is well known that Muhammed considered himself called
upon, principally, to make war with idolaters, and that he went forth,
professedly, to bring them into subjection to the service of the true
God. "The means of persuasion," says Mr. Gibbon, "had been tried, the
season of forbearance was elapsed, and he was now commanded to propagate
his religion by the sword, to destroy the monuments of idolatry, and,
without regarding the sanctity of days or months, to pursue the
unbelieving nations of the earth," iii. 387. "The fair option of
friendship, or submission, or battle, was proposed to the enemies of
Muhammed" (ibid.). "The sword," says Muhammed, "is the key of heaven and
hell; a drop of blood shed in the cause of God, a night spent in arms,
is of more avail than two months of fasting and prayer: whosoever falls
in battle, his sins are forgiven; at the day of judgment his wounds
shall be resplendent as vermilion, and odoriferous as musk; and the loss
of his limbs shall be supplied by the wings of angels and cherubim"
(Gibbon, iii. 387) The first conflicts waged by Muhammed were against
the idolaters of his own country - those who can, on no supposition, be
regarded as "having the seal of God in their foreheads"; his subsequent
wars were against infidels of all classes; that is, against those whom
he regarded as not having the "seal of God in their foreheads," or as
being the enemies of God.

\(e\) The other part of the commission was "not to kill, but to torment
them." See the notes at [Rev 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005).
Compare the quotation from the command of Aboubekir, as quoted above:
"Let not the victory be stained with the blood of women and children."
"Let them alone, and neither kill them nor destroy their monasteries."
The meaning of this, if understood as applied to their commission
against Christendom, would seem to be, that they were not to go forth to
"kill," but to "torment" them; to wit, by the calamities which they
would bring upon Christian nations for a definite period. Indeed, as we
have seen above, it was an express command of Aboubekir that they should
not put those to death who were found leading quiet and peaceable lives
in monasteries, though against another class he did give an express
command to "cleave their skulls." See Gibbon, iii. 418. As applicable to
the conflicts of the Saracens with Christians, the meaning here would
seem to be, that the power conceded to those who are represented by the
locusts was not to cut off and to destroy the church, but it was to
bring upon it various calamities to continue for a definite period.

Accordingly, some of the severest afflictions which have come upon the
church have undoubtedly proceeded from the followers of the Prophet of
Mecca. There were times in the early history of that religion when, to
all human appearance, it would universally prevail, and wholly supplant
the Christian church. But the church still survived, and no power was at
any time given to the Saracenic hosts to destroy it altogether. In
respect to this, some remarkable facts have occurred in history. The
followers of the false prophet contemplated the subjugation of Europe,
and the destruction of Christianity, from two quarters - the East and
the West - expecting to make a junction of the two armies in the north
of Italy, and to march down to Rome. Twice did they attack the vital
part of Christendom by besieging Constantinople: first, in the seven
years' siege, which lasted from 668 a.d. to 675 a.d.; and, secondly, in
the years 716-718, when Leo the Isaurian was on the imperial throne.

But on both occasions they were obliged to retire defeated and disgraced
- Gibbon, iii. 461ff. Again, they renewed their attack on the West.
Having conquered Northern Africa, they passed over into Spain, subdued
that country and Portugal, and extended their conquests as far as the
Loire. At that time they designed to subdue France, and having united
with the forces which they expected from the East, they intended to make
a descent on Italy, and complete the conquest of Europe. This purpose
was defeated by the valor of Charles Martel, and Europe and the
Christian world were saved from subjugation (Gibbon, iii. 467,
following). "A victorious line of march," says Mr. Gibbon, "had been
prolonged above a thousand miles, from the rock of Gibraltar to the
banks of the Loire; the repetition of an equal space would have carried
the Saracens to the confines of Poland and the Highlands of Scotland.
The Rhine is not more impassable than the Nile or the Euphrates, and the
Arabian fleet might have sailed without a naval combat into the mouth of
the Thames. Perhaps the interpretation of the Koran would now be taught
in the schools of Oxford, and her pulpits might demonstrate to a
circumcised people the sanctity and truth of the revelation of
Muhammed." The arrest of the Saracen hosts before Europe was subdued,
was what there was no reason to anticipate, and it even yet perplexes
historians to be able to account for it.

The calm historian," says Mr. Gibbon, "who strives to follow the rapid
course of the Saracens, must study to explain by what means the church
and state were saved from this impending, and, as it should seem,
inevitable danger." "These conquests," says Mr. Hallam, "which astonish
the careless and superficial, are less perplexing to a calm inquirer
than their cessation - the loss of half the Roman empire than the
preservation of the rest" (Middle Ages, ii. 3, 169). These illustrations
may serve to explain the meaning of the symbol - that their grand
commission was not to annihilate or root out, but to annoy and afflict.
Indeed, they did not go forth with a primary design to destroy. The
announcement of the Mussulman always was "the Koran, the tribute, or the
sword," and when there was submission, either by embracing his religion
or by tribute, life was always spared. "The fair option of friendship,
or submission, or battle," says Mr. Gibbon (iii. 387), "was proposed to
the enemies of Muhammed." Compare also vol. iii. 453, 456. The torment
mentioned here, I suppose, refers to the calamities brought upon the
Christian world - on Egypt, and Northern Africa, and Spain, and Gaul,
and the East - by the hordes which came out of Arabia, and which swept
over all those countries like a troublesome and destructive host of
locusts. Indeed, would any image better represent the effects of the
Saracenic invasions than such a countless host of locusts? Even now, can
we find an image that would better represent this?

\(5\) the leader of this host:

\(a\) He was like a star that fell from heaven, [Rev
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001), a bright and illustrious prince,
as if heaven-endowed, but fallen. Would anything better characterize the
genius, the power, and the splendid but perverted talent of Muhammed?
Muhammed was, moreover, by birth, of the princely house of the Koreish,
governors of Mecca, and to no one could the term be more appropriate
than to one of that family.

\(b\) He was a king. That is, there was to be one monarch - one ruling
spirit to which all these hosts were subject. And never was anything
more appropriate than this title as applied to the leader of the Arabic
hosts. All those hosts were subject to one mind - to the command of the
single leader that originated the scheme.

\(c\) The name Abaddon, or Apollyon - Destroyer, [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011). This name would be appropriate
to one who spread his conquests so far over the world; who wasted so
many cities and towns; who overthrew so many kingdoms; and who laid the
foundation of ultimate conquests by which so many human beings were sent
to the grave.

\(d\) The description of the leader "as the angel of the bottomless
pit," [Rev 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011). If this be regarded
as meaning that "the angel of the bottomless pit" - the spirit of
darkness himself - originated the scheme, and animated these hosts, what
term would better characterize the leader? And if it be a poetic
description of Muhammed as sent out by that presiding spirit of evil,
how could a better representative of the spirit of the nether world have
been sent out upon the earth than he was - one more talented, more
sagacious, more powerful, more warlike, more wicked, more suited to
subdue the nations of the earth to the dominion of the Prince of
Darkness, and to hold them for ages under his yoke?

\(6\) the duration of the torment. It is said [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005) that this would be five months;
that is, prophetically, 150 years. See the notes on [Rev
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005). The Hegira, or flight of
Muhammed, occurred 622 a.d.; the Saracens first issued from the desert
into Syria, and began their series of wars on Christendom, 629 a.d.
Reckoning from these periods respectively, the five months, or 150
years, would extend to 772 or 779 a.d. It is not necessary to understand
this period of 150 years of the actual continued existence of the bodies
symbolized by the locusts, but only of the period in which they would
inflict their "torment" - "that they should be tormented five months."
That is, this would be the period of the intensity of the woe inflicted
by them; there would be at that time some marked intermission of the
torrent. The question then is, whether, in the history of the Saracens,
there was any period after their career of conquest had been continued
for about a hundred and fifty years, which would mark the intermission
or cessation of these "torments."

If so, then this is all that is necessary to determine the applicability
of the symbol to the Arabian hordes. Now, in reply to this question, we
have only to refer to Mr. Gibbon. The table of contents profixed to
chapters forty-one and forty-two of his work would supply all the
information desired. I looked at that table, after making the estimate
as to what period the "five months," or hundred and fifty years, would
conduct us to, to see whether anything occurred at about that time in
the Muhammedan power and influence, which could be regarded as marking
the time of the intermission or cessation of the calamities inflicted by
the Arabic hordes on the Christian world. After Mr. Gibbon had recorded
in detail (vol. iii. 360-460) the character and conquests of the Arabian
hordes under Muhammed and his successors, I find the statement of the
decline of their power at just about the period to which the hundred and
fifty years would lead us, for at that very time an important change
came over the followers of the prophet of Mecca turning them from the
love of conquest to the pursuits of literature and science.

From that period they ceased to be formidable to the church; their
limits were gradually contracted; their power diminished; and the
Christian world, in regard to them, was substantially at peace. This
change in the character and purposes of the Saracens is thus described
by Mr. Gibbon, at the close of the reign of the caliph Abdalrahman,
whose reign commenced 755 a.d., and under whom the peaceful sway of the
Ommiades of Spain began, which continued for a period of two hundred and
fifty years. "The luxury of the caliphs, so useless to their private
happiness, relaxed the nerves, and terminated the progress, of the
Arabian empire. Temporal and spiritual conquest had been the sole
occupation of the first successors of Muhammed; and after supplying
themselves with the necessaries of life, the whole revenue was
scrupulously devoted to that salutary work. The Abassides were
impoverished by the multitude of their needs, and their contempt of
economy. Instead of pursuing the great object of ambition, their
leisure, their affections, and the powers of their minds were diverted
by pomp and pleasure: the rewards of valor were embezzled by women and
eunuchs, and the royal camp was encumbered by the luxury of the palace.
A similar temper was diffused among the subjects of the caliph. Their
stern enthusiasm was softened by time and prosperity: they sought riches
in the occupations of industry, fame in the pursuits of literature, and
happiness in the tranquility of domestic life.

War was no longer the passion of the Saracens; and the increase of pay,
the repetition of donatives, were insufficient to allure the posterity
of those voluntary champions who had crowded to the standard of
Aboubekir and Omar for the hopes of spoil and of paradise," iii. 477,
478. Of the Ommiades, or princes who succeeded Abdalrahman, Mr. Gibbon
remarks in general - "Their mutual designs or declarations of war
evaporated without effect; but instead of opening a door to the conquest
of Europe, Spain was dissevered from the trunk of the monarchy, engaged
in perpetual hostility with the East, and inclined to peace and
friendship with the Christian sovereigns of Constantinople and France,"
iii. p. 472. How much does this look like some change occurring by which
they would cease to be a source of "torment" to the nations with whom
they now dwelt! From this period they gave themselves to the arts of
peace; cultivated literature and science; lost entirely their spirit of
conquest, and their ambition for universal dominion, until they
gradually withdrew, or were driven, from those parts of the Christian
world where they had inspired most terror, and which in the days of
their power and ambition they had invaded. By turning merely to the
"table of contents" of Mr. Gibbon's history, the following periods,
occurring at about the time that would be embraced in the "five months,"
or hundred and fifty years, are distinctly marked:

"a.d. 668-675 First siege of Constantinople by the Arabs. 677 Peace and
tribute. 716-718 Second siege of Constantinople. 716-718 Failure and
retreat of the Saracens. 716-718 Invention and use of the Greek fire.
721 Invasion of France by the Arabs. 732 Defeat of the Saracens by
Charles Martel. 732 They retreat before the Franks. 746-750 The
elevation of the Abassides. 750 Fall of the Ommiades. 755 Revolt of
Spain. 755 Triple division of the caliphate. 750-960 Magnificence of the
caliphs. 750-960 Its consequences on private and public happiness. 754
etc. Introduction of learning among the Arabians. 754 etc. Their real
progress in the sciences."

It will be seen from this that the decline of their military and civil
power; their defeats in their attempts to subjugate Europe; their
turning their attention to the peaceful pursuits of literature and
science, synchronize remarkably with the period that would be indicated
by the five months, or 150 years. It should be added, also, that in the
year 762, Almanzor, the caliph, built Bagdad, and made it the capital of
the Saracen empire. Henceforward that became the seat of Arabic
learning, luxury, and power, and the wealth and talent of the Saracen
empire were gradually drawn to that capital, and they ceased to vex and
annoy the Christian world. The building of Bagdad occurred within just
ten years of the time indicated by the "five months" - reckoning that
from the Hegira, or flight of Muhammed; or reckoning from the time when
Muhammed began to preach (609 ad - Gibbon, iii. 383), it wanted only
three years of coinciding exactly with the period.

These considerations show with what propriety the fifth trumpet - the
symbol of the locusts - is referred to the Arabian hordes under the
guidance of Muhammed and his successors. On the supposition that it was
the design of John to symbolize these events, the symbo has been chosen
which of all others was best adapted to the end. If, now that these
events are past, we should endeavor to find some symbol which would
appropriately represent them, we could not find one that would be more
striking or appropriate than what is here employed by John.

[Revelation 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 9:12</span></span>

One woe is past - The woe referred to in [Rev
9:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001). In [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013) three woes are mentioned which
were to occur successively, and which were to embrace the whole of the
period comprised in the seven seals and the seven trumpets. Under the
last of the seals we have considered four successive periods, referring
to events connected with the downfall of the Western empire; and then we
have found one important event worthy of a place in noticing the things
which would permanently affect the destiny of the world - the rise, the
character, and the conquests of the Saracens. This was referred to by
the first woe-trumpet. We enter now on the consideration of the second.
This occupies the remainder of the chapter, and in illustrating it the
same method will be pursued as heretofore: first, to explain the literal
meaning of the words, phrases, and symbols; and then to inquire what
events in history, if any, succeeding the former, occurred, which would
correspond with the language used.

And, behold, there come two woes more hereafter - Two momentous and
important events that will be attended with sorrow to mankind. It cannot
be intended that there would be no other evils that would visit mankind;
but the eye, in glancing along the future, rested on these as having a
special pre-eminence in affecting the destiny of the church and the
world.

[Revelation 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 9:13</span></span>

And the sixth angel sounded - See the notes on [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002), [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007).

And I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is
before God - In the language used here there is an allusion to the
temple, but the scene is evidently laid in heaven. The temple in its
arrangements was designed, undoubtedly, to be in important respects a
symbol of heaven, and this idea constantly occurs in the Scriptures.
Compare the Epistle to the Hebrews passim. The golden altar stood in the
holy place, between the table of show-bread and the golden candlestick.
See the notes on [Heb 9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001). This
altar, made of shittim or acacia wood, was ornamented at the four
corners, and overlaid throughout with laminae of gold. Hence, it was
called "the golden altar," in contradistinction from the altar for
sacrifice, which was made of stone. Compare the notes on [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012), following on its four corners
it had projections which are called horns [Exo
30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#002), which seem to have been
intended mainly for ornaments. See Jahn, Arch. 332; Joseph. Ant. iii. 6,
8. When it is said that this was "before God," the meaning is, that it
was directly before or in front of the symbol of the divine presence in
the most holy place. This image, in the vision of John, is transformed
to heaven. The voice seemed to come from the very presence of the Deity;
from the place where offerings are made to God.

[Revelation 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 9:14</span></span>

Saying to the sixth angel, which had the trumpet - See the notes at [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002).

Loose, ... - This power, it would seem, was given to the sixth angel in
addition to his office of blowing the trumpet. All this, of course, was
in vision, and cannot be literally interpreted. The meaning is, that the
effect of his blowing the trumpet would be the same as if angels that
had been bound should be suddenly loosed and suffered to go forth over
the earth; that is, some event would occur which would be properly
symbolized by such an act.

The four angels - Compare the notes at [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002). It was customary to represent
important events as occurring under the ministry of angels. The general
meaning here is, that in the vicinity of the river Euphrates there were
mighty powers which had been bound or held in check, which were now to
be let loose upon the world. What we are to look for in the fulfillment
is evidently this - some power that seemed to be kept back by an
invisible influence as if by angels, now suddenly let loose and suffered
to accomplish the purpose of desolation mentioned in the subsequent
verses. It is not necessary to suppose that angels were actually
employed in these restraints, though no one can demonstrate that their
agency was not concerned in the transactions here referred to. Compare
the notes on [Dan 10:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012). It has
been made a question why the number four is specified, and whether the
forces were in any sense made up of four divisions, nations, or people.
While nothing certain can be determined in regard to that, and while the
number four may be used merely to denote a great and strong force, yet
it must be admitted that the most obvious interpretation would be to
refer it to some combination of forces, or to some union of powers, that
was to accomplish what is here said. If it had been a single nation, it
would have been more in accordance with the usual method in prophecy to
have represented them as restrained by an angel, or by angels in
general, without specifying any number.

Which are bound - That is, they seemed to be bound. There was something
which held them, and the forces under them, in check, until they were
thus commanded to go forth. In the fulfillment of this it will be
necessary to look for something of the nature of a check or restraint on
these forces, until they were commissioned to go forth to accomplish the
work of destruction.

In the great river Euphrates - The well-known river of that name,
commonly called, in the Scriptures, "the great river," and, by way of
eminence, "the river," [Exo 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031);
[Isa 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007). This river was on the east
of Palestine; and the language used here naturally denotes that the
power referred to under the sixth trumpet would spring up in the East,
and that it would have its origin in the vicinity of that river. Those
interpreters, therefore, who apply this to the invasion of Judaea by the
Romans have great difficulty in explaining this - as the forces employed
in the destruction of Jerusalem came from the West, and not from the
East. The fair interpretation is, that there were forces in the vicinity
of the Euphrates which were, up to this period, bound or restrained, but
which were now suffered to spread woe and sorrow over a considerable
portion of the world.

[Revelation 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 9:15</span></span>

And the four angels were loosed - Who had this mighty host under
restraint. The loosening of the angels was, in fact, also a letting
loose of all these hosts, that they might accomplish the work which they
were commissioned to do.

Which were prepared - See [Rev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007).
The word used here properly refers to what is made ready, suited up,
arranged for anything: as persons prepared for a journey, horses for
battle, a road for travelers, food for the hungry, a house to live in,
etc. See Robinson's Lexicon, sub. voce Ἑτοιμάζω Hetoimazō. As used here,
the word means "that whatever was necessary to prepare these angels" -
the leaders of this host - for the work which they were commissioned to
perform, was now done, and that they stood in a state of readiness to
execute the design. In the fulfillment of this it will be necessary to
look for some arrangements existing in the vicinity of the Euphrates, by
which these restrained hosts were in a state of readiness to be summoned
forth to the execution of this work, or in such a condition that they
would go forth spontaneously if the restraints existing were removed.

For an hour, ... - Margin, "at." The Greek - εἰς eis - means properly
"unto, with reference to"; and the sense is, that, with reference to
that hour, they had all the requisite preparation. Prof. Stuart explains
it as meaning that they were "prepared for the particular year, month,
day, and hour, destined by God for the great catastrophe which is to
follow." The meaning, however, rather seems to be that they were
prepared, not for the commencement of such a period, but they were
prepared for the whole period indicated by the hour, the day, the month,
and the year; that is, that the continuance of this "woe" would extend
along through the whole period. For:

\(a\) this is the natural interpretation of the word "for" - εἰς eis;

\(b\) it makes the whole sentence intelligible - for though it might be
proper to say of anything that it was "prepared for an hour," indicating
the commencement of what was to be done, it is not usual to say of
anything that it is "prepared for an hour, a month, a day, a year," when
the design is merely to indicate the beginning of it; and,

\(c\) it is in accordance with the prediction respecting the first "woe"
[Rev 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005), where the time is specified
in language similar to this, to wit, "five months." It seems to me,
therefore, that we are to regard the time here mentioned as a prophetic
indication of the period during which this woe would continue.

An hour, and a day, and a month, and a year - If this were to be taken
literally, it would, of course, be but little more than a year. If it be
taken, however, in the common prophetic style, where a day is put for a
year (see the notes on [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024) ff;
also Editor's Preface, p. xxv. etc.), then the amount of time (360 + 30
+ 1 + an hour) would be 391 years, and the portion of a year indicated
by an hour - a twelfth part or twenty-fourth part, according as the day
was supposed to be divided into twelve or twenty-four hours. That this
is the true view seems to be clear, because this accords with the usual
style in this book; because it can hardly be supposed that the
"preparation" here referred to would have been for so brief a period as
the time would be if literally interpreted; and because the mention of
so small a portion of time as an "hour," if literally taken, would be
improbable in so great transactions. The fair interpretation, therefore,
will require us to find some events that will fill up the period of
about 391 years.

For to slay the third part of men - Compare [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007), [Rev
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009),[Rev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012). The meaning here is, that the
immense host which was restrained on the Euphrates would, when loosed,
spread desolation over about a third part of the world. We are not to
suppose that this is to be understood in exactly a literal sense; but
the meaning is, that the desolation would be so widespread that it would
seem to embrace a third of the world. No such event as the cutting off
of a few thousands of Jews in the siege of Jerusalem would correspond
with the language here employed, and we must look for events more
general and more disastrous to mankind at large.

[Revelation 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 9:16</span></span>

And the number of the army of the horsemen - It is to be observed here
that the strength of the army seemed to be cavalry. In the former
plagues there is no distinct mention of horsemen; but here what struck
the beholder was the immense and unparalleled number of horsemen.

Were two hundred thousand thousand - A thousand thousand is one million,
and consequently the number here referred to would be 200 million. This
would be a larger army than was ever assembled, and it cannot be
supposed that it is to be taken literally. That it would be a very large
host - so large that it would not be readily numbered - is clear. The
expression in the original, while it naturally conveys the idea of an
immense number, would seem also to refer to some uniqueness in the
manner of reckoning them. The language is, "two myriads of myriads" -
δύο μυριάδες μυριάδων duo muriades muriadōn. The myriad was ten
thousand. The idea would seem to be this. John saw an immense host of
cavalry. They appeared to be divided into large bodies that were in some
degree separate, and that might be reckoned by ten thousands. Of these
different squadrons there were many, and to express their great and
unusual numbers he said that there seemed to be myriads of them - two
myriads of myriads, or twice ten thousand myriads. The army thus would
seem to be immense - an army, as we should say, to be reckoned by tens
of thousands.

And I heard the number of them - They were so numerous that he did not
pretend to be able to estimate the number himself, for it was beyond his
power of computation; but he heard it stated in these round numbers,
that there were "two myriads of myriads" of them.

[Revelation 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 9:17</span></span>

And thus I saw the horses in the vision - That is, he saw them as he
proceeds to describe them, for the word "thus" - οὕτως houtōs - refers
to what follows. Compare Robinson's Lexicon on the word (b), and see
[Mat 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018); [Mat
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005); [Joh
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001); [Heb
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#004). Prof. Stuart, however, refers to
what precedes. The meaning, as it seems to me, is, that he fixed his
attention on the appearance of the immense army - the horses and their
riders, and proceeded to describe them as they struck him.

And them that sat on them - He fixed the attention on horse and rider.
Their appearance was unusual, and deserved a particular description.

Having breastplates of fire - That is, those who sat on them had such
breastplates. The word rendered here as "breastplate" denoted properly a
coat of mail that covered the body from the neck to the thighs. See the
notes on [Eph 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014). This would be a
prominent object in looking at a horseman. This was said to be composed
of "fire, and jacinth, and brimstone"; that is, the part of the body
usually incased in the coat of mail had these three colors. The word
"fire" here simply denotes red. It was burnished and bright, and seemed
to be a blaze of fire. The word "jacinth" - ὑακινθίνους huakinthinous -
means "hyacinthine." The color denoted is that of the hyacinth - a
flower of a deep purple or reddish blue. Then it refers to a gem of the
same color, nearly related to the zircon of the mineralogists, and the
color mentioned here is deep purple or reddish blue. The word rendered
"brimstone" - θειώδης theiōdēs - means properly "sulphurous," that is,
made of sulphur, and means here simply yellow. The meaning of the whole
then is, that these horsemen appeared to be clad in a special kind of
armor - armor that shone like fire, mingled with blue and yellow. It
will be necessary to look for the fulfillment of this in cavalry that
was so caparisoned.

And the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions - Resembled, in
some respects, the heads of lions. He does not say that they were the
heads of lions, or that the riders were on monsters, but only that they,
in some respects, resembled the heads of lions. It would he easy to give
this general appearance by the way in which the head-dress of the horses
was arrayed.

And out of their mouths issued - That is, appeared to issue. It is not
necessary to understand this as affirming that it actually came from
their months, but only that, to one looking on such an approaching army,
it would have this appearance. The pagan poets often speak of horses
breathing out fire and smoke (Virgil, Geor. vol. ii. p. 140; iii. 85;
Ovid, Met. vol. vii. p. 104), meaning that their breath seemed to be
mingled smoke and fire. There is an image superadded here not found in
any of the classic descriptions, that this was mingled with brimstone.
All this seemed to issue from their mouths - that is, it was breathed
forth in front of the host, as if the horses emitted it from their
mouths.

Fire and smoke and brimstone - The exact idea, whether that was intended
or not, would be conveyed by the discharge of musketry or artillery. The
fire, the smoke, and the sulphurous smell of such a discharge would
correspond precisely with this language; and if it be supposed that the
writer meant to describe such a discharge, this would be the very
language that would be used. Moreover, in describing a battle nothing
would be more proper than to say that this appeared to issue from the
horses' mouths. If, therefore, it should be found that there were any
events where firearms were used, in contradistinction from the ancient
mode of warfare, this language would be appropriate to describe that;
and if it were ascertained that the writer meant to refer to some such
fact, then the language used here would be what he would adopt. One
thing is certain, that this is not language which would be employed to
describe the onset of ancient cavalry in the mode of warfare which
prevailed then. No one describing a charge of cavalry among the
Persians, the Greeks, or the Romans, when the only armor was the sword
and the spear, would think of saying that there seemed to be emitted
from the horses' mouths fire, and smoke, and brimstone.

[Revelation 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 9:18</span></span>

By these three - Three things - explained immediately as referring to
the fire, the smoke, and the brimstone.

Was the third part of men killed - See the notes on [Rev
8:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007), on each of which verses we
have notices of calamities that came upon the third part of the race, of
the sea, of rivers, etc. We are not to suppose that this is to be taken
literally, but the description is given as it appeared to John. Those
immense numbers of horsemen would sweep over the world, and a full third
part of the race of people would seem to fall before them.

[Revelation 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 9:19</span></span>

For their power is in their mouth - That is, as described in the fire,
smoke, and brimstone that proceeded out of their mouths. What struck the
seer as remarkable on looking on the symbol was, that this immense
destruction seemed to proceed out of their mouths. It was not that they
trampled down their enemies; nor that they destroyed them with the
sword, the bow, or the spear: it was some new and remarkable power in
warfare - in which the destruction seemed to proceed from fire, and
smoke, and sulphur issuing from the mouths of the horses themselves.

And in their tails - The tails of the horses. This, of course, was
something unusual and remarkable in horses, for naturally they have no
power there. The power of a fish, or a scorpion, or a wasp, may be said
to be in their tails, for their strength or their means of defense or of
injury are there; but we never think of speaking in this way of horses.
It is not necessary, in the interpretation of this, to suppose that the
reference is literally to the tails of the horses, anymore than it is to
suppose that the smoke, and fire, and brimstone literally proceeded from
their mouths. John describes things as they appeared to him in looking
at them from a considerable distance. From their mouths the horses
belched forth fire, and smoke, and sulphur, and even their tails seemed
to be armed for the work of death.

For their tails were like unto serpents - Not like the tails of
serpents, but like serpents themselves.

And had heads - That is, there was something remarkable in the position
and appearance of their heads. All serpents, of course, have heads; but
John saw something unusual in this - or something so unique in their
heads as to attract special attention. It would seem most probable that
the heads of these serpents appeared to extend in every direction - as
if the hairs of the horses' tails had been converted into snakes,
presenting a most fearful and destructive image. Perhaps it may
illustrate this to suppose that there is reference to the Amphisbaena,
or two-headed snake. It is said of this reptile that its tail resembles
a head, and that with this it throws out its poison (Lucan, vol. ix. p.
179; Pliny's Hist. Nat. vol. viii. p. 35). It really has but one head,
but its tail has the appearance of a head, and it has the power of
moving in either direction to a limited degree. If we suppose these
snakes fastened to the tail of a horse, the appearance of heads would be
very prominent and remarkable. The image is that of the power of
destruction. They seemed like ugly and poisonous serpents instead of
tails.

And with them they do hurt - Not the main injury, but they have the
power of inflicting some injury by them.

[Revelation 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 9:20</span></span>

And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues ... - One
third part is represented as swept off, and it might have been expected
that a salutary effect would have been produced on the remainder, in
reforming them, and restraining them from error and sin. The writer
proceeds to state, however, that these judgments did not have the effect
which might reasonably have been anticipated. No reformation followed;
there was no abandonment of the prevailing forms of iniquity; there was
no change in their idolatry and superstition. In regard to the exact
meaning of what is here stated [Rev
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020), it will be a more convenient
arrangement to consider it after we have ascertained the proper
application of the passage relating to the sixth trumpet. What is here
stated [Rev 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020) pertains to the
state of the world after the desolations which would occur under this
woe-trumpet; and the explanation of the words may be reserved,
therefore, with propriety, until the inquiry shall have been instituted
as to the general design of the whole.

With respect to the fulfillment of this symbol - the sixth trumpet - it
will be necessary to inquire whether there has been any event, or class
of events occurring at such a time, and in such a manner, as would be
properly denoted by such a symbol. The examination of this question will
make it necessary to go over the leading points in the symbol, and to
endeavor to apply them. In doing this I shall simply state, with such
illustrations as may occur, what seems to me to have been the design of
the symbol. It would be an endless task to examine all the explanations
which have been proposed, and it would be useless to do so.

The reference, then, seems to me to be to the Turkish power, extending
from the time of the first appearance of the Turks in the neighborhood
of the Euphrates, to the final conquest of Constantinople in 1453. The
general reasons for this opinion are such as the following:

\(a\) If the previous trumpet referred to the Saracens, or to the rise
of the Muhammedan power among the Arabs, then the Turkish dominion,
being the next in succession, would be what would most naturally be
symbolized.

\(b\) The Turkish power rose on the decline of the Arabic, and was the
next important power in affecting the destinies of the world.

\(c\) This power, like the former, had its seat in the East, and would
be properly classified under the events occurring there as affecting the
destiny of the world.

\(d\) The introduction of this power was necessary, in order to complete
the survey of the downfall of the Roman empire - the great object kept
in view all along in these symbols.

In the first four of these trumpets, under the seventh seal, we found
the decline and fall of the Western empire; in the first of the
remaining three - the fifth in order - we found the rise of the
Saracens, materially affecting the condition of the Eastern portion of
the Roman world; and the notice of the Turks, under whom the empire at
last fell to rise no more, seemed to be demanded in order to the
completion of the picture. As a leading design of the whole vision was
to describe the ultimate destiny of that formidable power - the Roman -
which, in the time when the Revelation was given to John ruled over the
whole world; under which the church was then oppressed; and which,
either as a civil or ecclesiastical power, was to exert so important an
influence on the destiny of the church, it was proper that its history
should be sketched until it ceased - that is, until the conquest of the
capital of the Eastern empire by the Turks. Here the termination of the
empire, as traced by Mr. Gibbon, closes; and these events it was
important to incorporate in this series of visions.

The rise and character of the Turkish people may be seen stated in full
in Gibbon, Decline and Fall, iii. 101-103, 105, 486; iv. 41, 42, 87, 90,
91, 93, 100, 127, 143, 151, 258, 260, 289, 350. The leading facts in
regard to the history of the Turks, so far as they are necessary to be
known before we proceed to apply the symbols, are the following:

\(1\) The Turks, or Turkmans, had their origin in the vicinity of the
Caspian Sea, and were divided into two branches, one on the east, and
the other on the west. The latter colony, in the 10th century, could
muster 40,000 soldiers; the other numbered 100,000 families (Gibbon, iv.
90). By the latter of these, Persia was invaded and subdued, and soon
Bagdad also came into their possession, and the seat of the caliph was
occupied by a Turkish prince. The various details respecting this, and
respecting their conversion to the faith of the Koran, may be seen in
Gibbon, iv. 90-93. A mighty Turkish and Moslem power was thus
concentrated under Togrul, who had subdued the caliph, in the vicinity
of the Tigris and the Euphrates, extending east over Persia and the
countries adjacent to the Caspian Sea, but it had not yet crossed the
Euphrates to carry its conquests to the west. The conquest of Bagdad by
Togrul, the first prince of the Seljuk race, was an important event, not
only in itself, but as it was by this event that the Turk was
constituted temporal lieutenant of the prophet's vicar, and so the head
of the temporal power of the religion of Islam. "The conqueror of the
East kissed the ground, stood some time in a modest posture, and was led
toward the throne by the vizier and an interpreter. After Togrul had
seated himself on another throne his commission was publicly read, which
declared him the temporal lieutenant of the prophet. He was successively
invested with seven robes of honor, and presented with seven slaves, the
natives of the seven climates of the Arabian empire, etc. Their alliance
(of the sultan and the caliph) was cemented by the marriage of Togrul's
sister with the successor of the prophet," etc. (Gibbon, iv. 93).

The conquest of Persia, the subjugation of Bagdad, the union of the
Turkish power with that of the caliph, the successor of Muhammed, and
the foundation of this powerful kingdom in the neighborhood of the
Euphrates, is all that is necessary to explain the sense of the phrase
"which were prepared for an hour," etc., [Rev
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#015). The arrangements were then made
for the important series of events which were to occur when that
formidable power should be summoned from the East, to spread the
predicted desolation over so large a part of the world. A mighty
dominion had been forming in the East that had subdued Persia, and that,
by union with the caliphs, by the subjugation of Bagdad, and by
embracing the Muhammedan faith, had become "prepared" to play its
subsequent important part in the affairs of the world.

\(2\) the next important event in their history was the crossing of the
Euphrates, and the invasion of Asia Minor. The account of this invasion
can be best given in the words of Mr. Gibbon: "Twenty-five years after
the death of Basil (the Greek emperor), his successors were suddenly
assaulted by an unknown race of barbarians, who united the Scythian
valor with the fanaticism of new proselytes, and the art and riches of a
powerful monarchy. The myriads of Turkish horse overspread a frontier of
600 miles from Taurus to Arzeroum, and the blood of one hundred and
thirty thousand Christians was a grateful sacrifice to the Arabian
prophet. Yet the arms of Togrul did not make any deep or lasting
impression on the Greek empire. The torrent rolled away from the open
country; the sultan retired without glory or success from the siege of
an Armenian city; the obscure hostilities were continued or suspended
with a vicissitude of events; and the bravery of the Macedonian legions
renewed the fame of the conqueror of Asia. The name of Alp Arslan, the
valiant lion, is expressive of the popular idea of the perfection of
man; and the successor of Togrul displayed the fierceness and generosity
of the royal animal. ('The heads of the horses were as the heads of
lions.') He passed the Euphrates at the head of the Turkish cavalry, and
entered Caesarea, the metropolis of Cappadocia, to which he had been
attracted by the fame and the wealth of the temple of Basil" (vol. iv.
93, 94; compare also p. 95).

\(3\) the next important event was the establishing of the kingdom of
Roum in Asia Minor. After a succession of victories and defeats; after
being driven once and again from Asia Minor, and compelled to retire
beyond its limits; and after subjecting the East to their arms (Gibbon,
iv. 95-100) in the various contests for the crown of the Eastern empire,
the aid of the Turks was invoked by one party or the other until they
secured for themselves a firm foothold in Asia Minor, and established
themselves there in a permanent kingdom - evidently with the purpose of
seizing upon Constantinople itself when an opportunity should be
presented (Gibbon, iv. 100, 101). Of this kingdom of Roum Mr. Gibbon
(iv. 101) gives, the following description, and speaks thus of the
effect of its establishment on the destiny of the Eastern empire: "Since
the first conquests of the caliphs, the establishment of the Turks in
Anatolia, or Asia Minor, was the most deplorable loss which the church
and empire had sustained. By the propagation of the Moslem faith Soliman
deserved the name of Gazi, a holy champion; and his new kingdom of the
Romans, or of Roum, was added to the table of Oriental geography. It is
described as extending from the Euphrates to Constantinople, from the
Black Sea to the confines of Syria; pregnant with mines of silver and
iron, of alum and copper, fruitful in grain and wine, and productive of
cattle and excellent horses. The wealth of Lydia, the arts of the
Greeks, the splendor of the Augustan age, existed only in books and
ruins, which were equally obscure in the eyes of the Scythian
conquerors. By the choice of the Sultan, Nice, the metropolis of
Bithynia, was preferred for his palace and fortress - the seat of the
Seljukian dynasty of Roum was planted one hundred miles from
Constantinople; and the divinity of Christ was denied and derided in the
same temple in which it had been pronounced by the first general synod
of the Catholics. The unity of God and the mission of Muhammed were
preached in the mosques; the Arabian learning was taught in the schools;
the cadis judged according to the law of the Koran; the Turkish manners
and language prevailed in the cities; and Turkman camps were scattered
over the plains and mountains of Anatolia," etc.

\(4\) the next material event in the history of the Turkish power was
the conquest of Jerusalem. See this described in Gibbon, iv. 102-106. By
this the attention of the Turks was turned for a time from the conquest
of Constantinople - an event at which the Turkish power all along aimed,
and in which they doubtless expected to be ultimately successful. Had
they not been diverted from it by the wars connected with the Crusades,
Constantinople would have fallen long before it did fall, for it was too
feeble to defend itself if it had been attacked.

\(5\) the conquest of Jerusalem by the Turks, and the oppressions which
Christians experienced there, gave rise to the Crusades, by which the
destiny of Constantinople was still longer delayed. The war of the
Crusades was made on the Turks, and as the crusaders mostly passed
through Constantinople and Anatolia, all the power of the Turks in Asia
Minor was requisite to defend themselves, and they were incapable of
making an attack on Constantinople until after the final defeat of the
crusaders and restoration of peace. See Gibbon, iv. 106-210.

\(6\) The next material event in the history of the Turks was the
conquest of Constantinople in 1453 ad - an event which established the
Turkish power in Europe and completed the downfall of the Roman empire
(Gibbon, iv. 333-359).

After this brief reference to the general history of the Turkish power,
we are prepared to inquire more particularly whether the symbol in the
passage before us is applicable to this series of events. This may be
considered in several particulars:

\(1\) "The time." If the first woe-trumpet referred to the Saracens,
then it would be natural that the rise and progress of the Turkish power
should be symbolized as the next great fact in history, and as that
under which the empire fell. As we have seen, the Turkish power rose
immediately after the power of the Saracens had reached its height, and
identified itself with the Muhammedan religion; and was, in fact, the
next great power that affected the Roman empire, the welfare of the
church, and the history of the world. There can be no doubt, therefore,
that the time is such as is demanded in the proper interpretation of the
symbol.

\(2\) "the place." We have seen (in the remarks on [Rev
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#014)) that this was on or near the
river Euphrates, and that this power was long forming and consolidating
itself on the east of that river before it crossed it in the invasion of
Asia Minor. It had spread over Persia, and had even invaded the region
of the East as far as the Indies; it had secured, under Togrul, the
conquest of Bagdad, and had united itself with the caliphate, and was,
in fact, a mighty power "prepared" for conquest before it moved to the
west. Thus, Mr. Gibbon (iv. 92) says, "The more rustic, perhaps the
wisest, portion of the Turkmans continued to dwell in the tents of their
ancestors; and from the Oxus to the Euphrates these military colonies
were protected and propagated by their native princes." So again,
speaking of Alp Arslan, the son and successor of Togrul, he says (iv.
94), "He passed the Euphrates at the head of the Turkish cavalry, and
entered Caesarea, the metropolis of Cappadocia, to which he was
attracted by the fame and the wealth of the temple of Basil." If it be
admitted that it was intended by John to refer to the Turkish power, it
could not have been better represented than as a power that had been
forming in the vicinity of that great river, and that was prepared to
precipitate itself on the Eastern empire. To one contemplating it in the
time of Togrul or Alp Arslan, it would have appeared as a mighty power
growing up in the neighborhood of the Euphrates.

\(3\) "the four angels:" "Loose the four angels which are bound." That
is, loose the powers which are in the vicinity of the Euphrates, as if
they were under the control of four angels. The most natural
construction of this would be, that under the mighty power that was to
sweep over the world, there were four subordinate powers, or that there
were such subdivisions that it might be supposed they were ranged under
four angelic powers or leaders. The question is, whether there was any
such division or arrangement of the Turkish power, that, to one looking
on it at a distance, there would seem to be such a division. In the
"History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" (iv. 100) we find
the following statement: "The greatness and unity of the Turkish empire
expired in the person of Malek Shah. The vacant throne was disputed by
his brother and his four sons; and, after a series of civil wars, the
treaty which reconciled the surviving candidates confirmed a lasting
separation in the Persian dynasty, the oldest and principal branch of
the house of Seljuk. The three younger dynasties were those of Kerman,
of Syria, and of Roum; the first of these commanded an extensive, though
obscure dominion, on the shores of the Indian Ocean; the second expelled
the Arabian princes of Aleppo and Damascus: and the third (our special
care) invaded the Roman provinces of Asia Minor. The generous policy of
Malek contributed to their elevation; he allowed the princes of his
blood, even those whom he had vanquished in the field, to seek new
kingdoms worthy of their ambition; nor was he displeased that they
should draw away the more ardent spirits who might have disturbed the
tranquility of his reign.

As the supreme head of his family and nation, the great Sultan of Persia
commanded the obedience and tribute of his royal brethren: the thrones
of Kerman and Nice, of Aleppo and Damascus; the atabeks and emirs of
Syria and Mesopotamia erected their standards under the shadow of his
scepter, and the hordes of Turkmans overspread the plains of Western
Asia. After the death of Malek the bands of union and subordination were
gradually relaxed and dissolved; the indulgence of the house of Seljuk
invested their slaves with the inheritance of kingdoms; and, in the
Oriental style, a crowd of princes arose from the dust of their feet."
Here it is observable, that, at the period when the Turkman hordes were
about to precipitate themselves on Europe, and to advance to the
destruction of the Eastern empire, we have distinct mention of four
great departments of the Turkish power: the original power that had
established itself in Persia, under Malek Shah, and the three
subordinate powers that sprung out of that of Kerman, Syria, and Roum.
It is observable:

\(a\) that this occurs at the period when that power would appear in the
East as advancing in its conquests to the West;

\(b\) that it was in the vicinity of the great river Euphrates;

\(c\) that it had never before occurred - the Turkish power having been
before united as one; and,

\(d\) that it never afterward occurred - for, in the words of Mr.
Gibbon, "after the death of Malek the bands of union and subordination
were relaxed and finally dissolved."

It would not be improper, then, to look upon this one mighty power as
under the control of four spirits that were held in cheek in the East,
and that were "prepared" to pour their energies on the Roman empire.

\(4\) "the preparation:" "Prepared for an hour," etc. That is, arranged;
made ready - as if by previous discipline - for some mighty enterprise.
Applied to the Turkmans, this would mean that the preparation for the
ultimate work which they executed had been making as that power
increased and became consolidated under Togrul, Alp Arslan, and Malek
Shah. In its successful strides Persia and the East had been subdued;
the caliph at Bagdad had been brought under the control of the sultan; a
union had been formed between the Turks and the Saracens; and the
sultanies of Kerman, Syria, and Roum had been established embracing
together all the countries of the East, and constituting this by far the
most mighty nation on the globe. All this would seem to be a work of
preparation to do what was afterward done as seen in the visions of
John.

\(5\) "the fact that they were bound:" "Which are bound in the great
river Euphrates." That is, they were, as it were, restrained and kept
back for a long time in that vicinity. It would have been natural to
suppose that that vast power would at once move on toward the West to
the conquest of the capital of the Eastern empire. Such had been the
case with the Huns, the Goths, and the Vandals. But these Turkish hordes
had been long restrained in the East. They had subdued Persia. They had
then achieved the conquest of India. They had conquered Bagdad, and the
entire East was under their control. Yet for a long time they had now
been inactive, and it would seem as if they had been bound or restrained
by some mighty power from moving in their conquests to the West.

\(6\) "the material that composed the army:" "And the number of the army
of the horsemen." "And thus I saw the horses in the vision. And the
heads of the horses were as the heads of lions." From this it appears
that this vast host was composed mainly of cavalry; and it is hardly
necessary to say that this description would apply better to the Turkish
hordes than to any other body of invaders known in history. Thus, Mr.
Gibbon (vol. iv. p. 94) says, "The myriads of the Turkish horse
overspread a frontier of six hundred miles, from Taurus to Arzeroum,"
1050 ad. So again, speaking of Togrul (vol. iv. p. 94), "He passed the
Euphrates at the head of the Turkish cavalry" (ibid.). So again (vol.
iii. p. 95), "Alp Arslan flew to the scene of action at the head of
forty thousand horse." 1071 a.d. So in the attack of the crusaders on
Nice, the capital of the Turkish kingdom of Roum, Mr. Gibbon (vol. iv.
p. 127) says of the sultan Soliman: "Yielding to the first impulse of
the torrent, he deposited his treasure and family in Nice; retired to
the mountains with fifty thousand horse," etc. And so again (ibid.),
speaking of the Turks who rallied to oppose the "strange" invasion of
"the Western barbarians," he says, "The Turkish emirs obeyed the call of
loyalty or religion; the Turkman hordes encamped round his standard; and
his whole force is loosely stated by the Christians at two hundred, or
even three hundred and sixty thousand horse," 1097 a.d. Every student of
history knows that the Turks, or Turkmans, in the early periods of their
history, were remarkable for their cavalry.

\(7\) "their numbers:" "And the number of the army of the horsemen were
two hundred thousand thousand." That is, it was vast, or it was such as
to be reckoned by myriads, or by tens of thousands - δύο μυριάδες
μυριάδων duo muriades muriadōn - "two myriads of myriads." Thus, Mr.
Gibbon (vol. iv. p. 94) says, "The myriads of Turkish horse overspread,"
etc. It has been suggested by Daubuz that in this there may be probably
an allusion to the Turkman custom of numbering by tomans, or myriads.
This custom, it is true, has existed elsewhere, but there is probably
none with whom it has been so familiar as with the Tartars and Turks. In
the Seljukian age the population of Samarcand was rated at seven tomans
(myriads), because it could send out 70,000 warriors. The dignity and
rank of Tamerlane's father and grandfather was thus described, that
"they were the hereditary chiefs of a toman, or 10,000 horse" - a myriad
(Gibbon, vol. iv. p. 270); so that it is not without his usual propriety
of language that Mr. Gibbon speaks of the myriads of the Turkish horse,
or of the cavalry of the earlier Turks of Mount Altai, "being, both men
and horses, proudly computed by myriads." One thing is clear, that to no
other invading hosts could the language used here be so well applied,
and if it were supposed that John was writing after the event, this
would be the language which he would be likely to employ - for this is
nearly the identical language employed by the historian Gibbon.

\(8\) "their personal appearance:" "Them that sat on them having
breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone" - as explained
above, in a "uniform" of red, and blue, and yellow. This might,
undoubtedly, be applicable to other armies besides the Turkish hordes;
but the proper question here is, whether it would be applicable to them.
The fact of the application of the symbol to the Turks in general must
be determined from other points in the symbol which designate them
clearly; the only natural inquiry here is, whether this description
would apply to the Turkish hosts; for if it would not, that would be
fatal to the whole interpretation. On the application of this passage to
the Turks Mr. Daubuz justly remarks, that "from their first appearance
the Ottomans have affected to wear warlike apparel of scarlet, blue, and
yellow - a descriptive trait the more marked from its contrast to the
military appearance of the Greeks, Franks, or Saracens contemporarily."
Mr. Elliott adds: "It only needs to have seen the Turkish cavalry (as
they were before the late innovations), whether in war itself, or in the
djerrid war's mimicry, to leave an impression of the absolute necessity
of some such notice of their rich and varied colorings, in order to give
in description at all a just impression of their appearance," vol. i. p.
481.

\(9\) "The remarkable appearance of the cavalry:" "Having breastplates
of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone; and the heads of the horses were
as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke,
and brimstone." It was remarked in the exposition of this passage that
this is just such a description as would be given of an army to which
the use of gunpowder was known, and which made use of it in these wars.
Looking now upon a body of cavalry in the heat of an engagement, it
would seem, if the cause were not known, that the horses belched forth
smoke and sulphurous flame. The only question now is, whether in the
warfare of the Turks there was anything which would especially or
remarkably justify this description. And here it is impossible not to
advert to the historical fact that they were among the first to make use
of gunpowder in their wars, and that to the use of this destructive
element they owed much of their success and their ultimate triumphs.

The historical truth of this it is necessary now to advert to, and this
will be done by a reference to Mr. Gibbon, and to the account which he
has given of the final conquest of Constantinople by the Turks. It will
be seen how he puts this new instrumentality of war into the foreground
in his account; how prominent this seemed to him to be in describing the
victories of the Turks; and how probable, therefore, it is that John, in
describing an invasion by them, would refer to the "fire and smoke and
brimstone," that seemed to be emitted from the mouths of their horses.
As preparatory to the account of the siege and conquest of
Constantinople by the Turks, Mr. Gibbon gives a description of the
invention and use of gunpowder. "The chemists of China or Europe had
found, by casual or elaborate experiments, that a mixture of saltpetre,
sulpher, and charcoal produces, with a spark of fire, a tremendous
explosion. It was soon observed that if the expansive force were
compressed in a strong tube, a ball of stone or iron might be expelled
with irresistible add destructive velocity. The precise era of the
invention and application of gunpowder is involved in doubtful
traditions and equivocal language; yet we may clearly discern that it
was known before the middle of the fourteenth century; and that before
the end of the same the use of artillery in battles and sieges, by sea
and land, was familiar to the states of Germany, Italy, Spain, France,
and England. The priority of nations is of small account; none could
derive any exclusive benefit from their previous or superior knowledge;
and in the common improvement they stood on the same level of relative
power and military science.

Nor was it possible to circumscribe the secret within the pale of the
church; it was disclosed to the Turks by the treachery of apostates and
the selfish policy of rivals; and the sultans had sense to adopt, and
wealth to reward, the talents of a Christian engineer. By the Venetians
the use of gunpowder was communicated without reproach to the sultans of
Egypt and Persia, their allies against the Ottoman power; the secret was
soon propagated to the extremities of Asia; and the advantage of the
European was confined to his easy victories over the savages of the New
World," vol. iv. p. 291. In the description of the conquest of
Constantinople Mr. Gibbon makes frequent mention of their artillery, and
of the use of gunpowder, and of its important agency in securing their
final conquests, and in the overthrow of the Eastern empire. "Among the
implements of destruction he (the Turkish sultan) studied with special
care the recent and tremendous discovery of the Latins; and his
artillery surpassed whatever had yet appeared in the world. A founder of
cannon, a Dane or Hungarian, who had almost starved in the Greek
service, deserted to the Moslems, and was liberally entertained by the
Turkish sultan. Muhammed was satisfied with the answer to his first
question, which he eagerly pressed on the artist: 'Am I able to cast a
cannon capable of throwing a ball or stone of sufficient size to batter
the walls of Constantinople? I am not ignorant of their strength, but,
were they more solid than those of Babylon, I could oppose an engine of
superior power; the position and management of that engine must be left
to your engineers.' On this assurance a foundry was established at
Adrianople; the metal was prepared; and at the end of three months Urban
produced a piece of brass ordnance of stupendous and almost incredible
magnitude: a measure of twelve palms is assigned to the bore; and the
stone bullet weighed above six hundred pounds.

A vacant place before the new palace was chosen for the first
experiment; but to prevent the sudden and mischievous effects of
astonishment and fear, a proclamation was issued that the cannon would
be discharged the ensuing day. The explosion was felt or heard in a
circuit of 100 furlongs; the ball, by force of gunpowder, was driven
above a mile; and on the spot where it fell it buried itself a fathom
deep in the ground," vol. iv. p. 339. So, in speaking of the siege of
Constantinople by the Turks, Mr. Gibbon says of the defense by the
Christians (vol. iv. p. 343): "The incessant volleys of lances and
arrows were accompanied with the smoke, the sound, and the fire of their
musketry and cannon." "The same destructive secret," he adds, "had been
revealed to the Moslems, by whom it was employed with the superior
energy of zeal, riches, and despotism. The great cannon of Muhammed has
been separately noticed - an important and visible object in the history
of the times; but that enormous engine was flanked by two follows almost
of equal magnitude; the long order of the Turkish artillery was pointed
against the walls; fourteen battories thundered at once on the most
accessible places; and of one of these it is ambiguously expressed that
it was mounted with one hundred and thirty guns, or that it discharged
one hundred and thirty bullets," vol. iv. pp. 343, 344.

Again: "The first random shots were productive of more sound than
effect; and it was by the advice of a Christian that the engineers were
taught to level their aim against the two opposite sides of the salient
angles of a bastion. However imperfect, the weight and repetition of the
fire made some impression on the walls," vol. iv. p. 344. And again: "A
circumstance that distinguishes the siege of Constantinople is the
reunion of the ancient and modern artillery. The cannon were
intermingled with the mechanical engines for casting stones and darts,
the bullet and the battering-ram were directed against the same walls;
nor had the discovery of gunpowder superseded the use of the liquid and
inextinguishable fire," vol. iv. p. 344. So again, in the description of
the final conflict when Constantinople was taken, Mr. Gibbon says, "From
the lines, the galleys, and the bridge, the Ottoman artillery thundered
on all sides; and the camp and city, the Greeks and the Turks, were
involved in a cloud of smoke which could only be dispelled by the final
deliverance or destruction of the Roman empire," vol. iv. p. 350.
Assuredly, if such was the fact in the conquests of the Turks, it was
not unnatural in one who was looking on these warriors in vision to
describe them as if they seemed to belch out "fire and smoke and
brimstone." If Mr. Gibbon had designed to describe the conquest of the
Turks as a fulfillment of the prediction, could he have done it in a
style more clear and graphic than what he has employed? If this had
occurred in a Christian writer, would it not have been charged on him
that he had shaped his facts to meet his notions of the meaning of the
prophecy?

\(10\) the statement that "their power was in their mouth, and in their
tails," [Rev 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#019). The former part of
this has been illustrated. The inquiry now is, what is the meaning of
the declaration that "their power was in their tails?" In [Rev
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#019) their tails are described as
resembling "serpents, having heads," and it is said that "with them they
do hurt." See the notes on that verse. The allusion to the "serpents"
would seem to imply that there was something in the horses' tails, as
compared with them, or in some use that was made of them, which would
make this language proper; that is, that their appearance would so
suggest the idea of death and destruction, that the mind would easily
imagine they were a bundle of serpents. The following remarks may show
how applicable this was to the Turks:

\(a\) In the Turkish hordes there was something, whatever it was, that
naturally suggested some resemblance to serpents. Of the Turkmans when
they began to spread their conquests over Asia, in the eleventh century,
and an effort was made to rouse the people against them, Mr. Gibbon
makes the following remark: "Massoud, the son and successor of Mahmoud,
had too long neglected the advice of his wisest Omrahs. 'Your enemies'
(the Turkmans), they repeatedly urged, 'were in their origin a swarm of
ants; they are now little snakes; and unless they be instantly crushed,
they will acquire the venom and magnitude. of serpents," vol. iv. p. 91.

\(b\) It is a remarkable fact that the horse's tail is a well-known
Turkish standard - a symbol of office and authority. "The pashas are
distinguished, after a Tartar custom, by three horsetails on the side of
their tents, and receive by courtesy the title of beyler beg, or prince
of princes. The next in rank are the pashas of two tails, the beys who
are honored with one tail" - Edin. Ency. (art. "Turkey"). In the times
of their early warlike career the principal standard was once lost in
battle, and the Turkman commander, in default, cut off his horse's tail,
lifted it on a pole, made it the rallying ensign, and so gained the
victory. So Tournefort in his Travels states. The following is
Ferrario's account of the origin of this ensign: "An author acquainted
with their customs says, that a general of theirs, not knowing how to
rally his troops that had lost their standards, cut off a horse's tail,
and fixed it to the end of a spear; and the soldiers rallying at that
signal, gained the victory."

He adds further, that whereas "on his appointment a pasha of the three
tails used to receive a drum and a standard, now for the drum there have
been substituted three horses' tails, tied at the end of a spear, round
a gilded haft. One of the first officers of the palace presents him
these three tails as a standard" (Elliott, vol. i. pp. 485, 486). This
remarkable standard or ensign is found only among the Turks, and, if
there was an intended reference to them, the symbol here would be the
proper one to be adopted. The meaning of the passage where it is said
that "their power is in their tails" would seem to be, that their tails
were the symbol or emblem of their authority - as in fact the horse's
tail is in the appointment of a pasha. The image before the mind of John
would seem to have been, that he saw the horses belching out fire and
smoke, and, what was equally strange, he saw that their power of
spreading desolation was connected with the tails of horses. Anyone
looking on a body of cavalry with such banners or ensigns would be
struck with this unusual and remarkable appearance, and would speak of
their banners as concentrating and directing their power. The above
engraving, representing the standard of a Turkish pasha, will illustrate
the passage before us.

\(11\) the number slain, [Rev 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#018).
That is said to have been "the third part of men." No one in reading the
accounts of the wars of the Turks, and of the ravages which they have
committed, would be likely to feel that this is an exaggeration. It is
not necessary to suppose that it is literally accurate, but it is such a
representation as would strike one in looking over the world, and
contemplating the effect of their invasions. If the other specifications
in the symbol are correct, there would be no hesitation in admitting the
propriety of this.

\(12\) the time of the continuance of this power. This is a material,
and a more difficult point. It is said [Rev
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#015) to be "an hour, and a day, and a
month, and a year"; that is, as explained, three hundred and ninety-one
years, and the portion of a year indicated by the expression "an hour";
to wit, an additional twelfth or twenty-fourth part of a year. The
question now is, whether, supposing the time to which this reaches to be
the capture of Constantinople, and the consequent downfall of the Roman
empire - the object, in view in this series of visions - in reckoning
back from that period for 391 years, we should reach an epoch that would
properly denote the moving forward of this power toward its final
conquest; that is, whether there was any such marked epoch that, if the
391 years were added to it, it would reach the year of the conquest of
Constantinople, 1453 a.d. The period that would be indicated by taking
the number 391 from 1453 would be 1062 - and that is the time in which
we are to look for the event referred to. This is on the supposition
that the year consisted of 360 days, or twelve months of thirty days
each. If, however, instead of this, we reckon 365 days and six hours,
then the length of time would be found to amount to 396 years and 106
days.

This would make the time of the "loosening of the angels," or the moving
forward of this power, to be 1057 a.d. In the uncertainty on this point,
and in the unsettled state of ancient chronology, it would, perhaps, be
vain to hope for minute accuracy, and it is not reasonable to demand it
of an interpreter. On any fair principle of interpretation it would be
sufficient if at about one of these periods - 1062 a.d. or 1057 ad -
there was found such a definite or strongly marked event as would
indicate a movement of the hitherto restrained power toward the West.
This is the real point, then, to be determined. Now, in a common work on
chronology I find this record: "1055 a.d., Turks reduce Bagdad, and
overturn the empire of the caliphs." In a work still more important to
our purpose (Gibbon, iv. 92, 93), under the date of 1055 a.d., I find a
series of statements which will show the propriety of referring to that
event as the one by which this power, so long restrained, was "let
loose"; that is, was placed in such a state that its final conquest of
the Eastern empire certainly followed.

The event was the union of the Turkish power with the caliphate in such
a way that the sultan was regarded as "the temporal lieutenant of the
vicar of the prophet." Of this event Mr. Gibbon gives the following
account. After mentioning the conversion of the Turks to the Moslem
faith, and especially the zeal with which the son of Seljuk had embraced
that faith, he proceeds to state the manner in which the Turkish sultan
Togrul came in possession of Bagdad, and was invested With the high
office of the "temporal lieutenant of the vicar of the prophet." There
were two caliphs, those of Bagdad and Egypt, and "the sublime character
of the successor of the prophet" was "disputed" by them, iv. 93. Each of
them became "solicitous to prove his title in the judgment of the strong
though illiterate barbarians." Mr. Gibbon then says, "Mahmoud the
Gaznevide had declared himself in favor of the line of Abbas; and had
treated with indignity the robe of honor which was presented by the
Fatimite ambassador. Yet the ungrateful Hashemite had changed with the
change of fortune; he applauded the victory of Zendecan, and named the
Seljukian sultan his temporal vicegerent over the Moslem world. As
Togrul executed and enlarged this important trust, he was called to the
deliverance of the caliph Cayem, and obeyed the holy summons, which gave
a new kingdom to his arms. In the palace of Bagdad the commander of the
faithful still slumbered, a venerable phantom. His servant or master,
the prince of the Bowides, could no longer protect him from the
insolence of meaner tyrants; and the Euphrates and the Tigris were
oppressed by the revolt of the Turkish and Arabian emirs.

The presence of a conqueror was implored as a blessing; and the
transient mischiefs of fire and sword were excused as the sharp but
salutary remedies which alone could restore the health of the republic.
At the head of an irresistible force the sultan of Persia marched from
Hamadan; the proud were crushed, the prostrate were spared; the prince
of the Bowides disappeared; the heads of the most obstinate rebels were
laid at the feet of Togrul; and he inflicted a lesson of obedience on
the people of Mosul and Bagdad. After the chastisement of the guilty,
and the restoration of peace, the royal shepherd accepted the reward of
his labors; and a solemn comedy represented the triumph of religious
prejudice over barbarian power. The Turkish sultan embarked on the
Tigris, landed at the gate of Racca, and made his public entry on
horseback. At the palace gate he respectfully dismounted, and walked on
foot preceded by his emirs without arms.

The caliph was seated behind his black veil; the black garment of the
Abbassides was cast over his shoulders, and he held in his hand the
staff of the Apostle of God. The conqueror of the East kissed the
ground, stood some time in a modest posture, and was led toward the
throne by the vizier and an interpreter. After Togrul had seated himself
on another throne, his commission was publicly read, which declared him
the temporal lieutenant of the vicar of the prophet. He was successively
invested with seven robes of honor, and presented with seven slaves, the
natives of the seven climates of the Arabian empire. His mystic veil was
perfumed with musk; two crowns were placed on his head; two scimetars
were girded to his side, as the symbols of a double reign over the East
and West. Their alliance was cemented by the marriage of Togrul's sister
with the successor of the prophet," iv. 93, 94. This event, so
described, was of sufficient importance, as constituting a union of the
Turkish power with the Moslem faith, as making it practicable to move in
their conquests toward the West, and as connected in its ultimate
results with the downfall of the Eastern empire, to make it an epoch in
the history of nations. In fact, it was the point which one would have
particularly looked at, after describing the movements of the Saracens
([Rev 9:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001)), as the next event that
was to change the condition of the world.

Happily we have also the means of fixing the exact date of this event,
so as to make it accord with singular accuracy with the period supposed
to be referred to. The general time specified by Mr. Gibbon is 1055 a.d.
This, according to the two methods referred to of determining the period
embraced in the "hour, and day, and month, and year," would reach, if
the period were 391 years, to 1446 a.d.; if the other method were
referred to, making it 396 years and 106 days to 1451 a.d., with 106
days added, within less than two years of the actual taking of
Constantinople. But there is a more accurate calculation as to the time
than the general one thus made. In vol. iv. 93 Mr. Gibbon makes this
remark: "Twenty-five years after the death of Basil his successors were
suddenly assaulted by an unknown race of barbarians, who united the
Scythian valor with the fanaticism of new proselytes, and the art and
riches of a powerful monarchy."

He then proceeds (pp. 94ff) with an account of the invasions of the
Turks. In vol. iii. 307 we have an account of the death of Basil. "In
the sixty-eighth year of his age his martial spirit urged him to embark
in person for a holy war against the Saracens of Sicily; he was
prevented by death, and Basil, surnamed the slayer of the Bulgarians,
was dismissed from the world, with the blessings of the clergy and the
curses of the people." This occurred 1025 a.d. "Twenty-five years" after
this would make 1050 a.d. To this add the period here referred to, and
we have respectively, as above, the years 1446 a.d., or 1451 a.d., and
106 days. Both periods are near the time of the taking of Constantinople
and the downfall of the Eastern empire (1453 a.d.), and the latter
strikingly so; and, considering the general nature of the statement of
Mr. Gibbon, and the great indefiniteness of the dates in chronology, may
be considered as remarkable. - But we have the means of a still more
accurate calculation.

It is by determining the exact period of the investiture of Togrul with
the authority of caliph, or as the "temporal lieutenant of the vicar of
the prophet." The time of this investiture, or coronation, is mentioned
by Abulfeda as occurring on the 25th of Dzoulcad, in the year of the
Hegira 449; and the date of Elmakin's narrative, who has given an
account of this, perfectly agrees with this. Of this transaction Elmakin
makes the following remark: "There was now none left in Irak or
Chorasmia who could stand before him." The importance of this
investiture will be seen from the charge which the caliph is reported by
Abulfeda to have given to Togrul on this occasion: "The caliph commits
to your care all that part of the world which God has committed to his
care and dominion; and entrusts to thee, under the name of vicegerent,
the guardianship of the pious, faithful, and God-serving citizens." The
exact time of this investiture is stated by Abulfeda, as above, to be
the 25th of Dzoulcad, A.H. 449.

Now, reckoning this as the time, and we have the following result: The
25th of Dzoulcad, A.H. 449, would answer to February 2, 1058 a.d. From
this to May 29, 1453, the time when Constantinople was taken, would be
395 years and 116 days. The prophetic period, as above, is 396 years and
106 days - making a difference only of 1 year and 10 days - a result
that cannot but be considered as remarkable, considering the difficulty
of fixing ancient dates. Or if, with Mr. Elliott (i. 495-499), we
suppose that the time is to be reckoned from the period when the Turkman
power went forth from Bagdad on a career of conquest, the reckoning
should be from the year of the Hegira 448, the year before the formal
investiture, then this would make a difference of only 24 days. The date
of that event was the 10th of Dzoulcad, A.H. 448. That was the day in
which Togrul with his Turkmans, now the representative and head of the
power of Islamism, quitted Bagdad to enter on a long career of war and
conquest. "The part allotted to Togrul himself in the fearful drama soon
to open against the Greeks was to extend and establish the Turkman
dominion over the frontier countries of Irak and Mesopotamia, that so
the requisite strength might be attained for the attack ordained of
God's counsels against the Greek empire. The first step to this was the
siege and capture of Moussul; his next of Singara. Nisibis, too, was
visited by him; that frontier fortress that had in other days been so
long a bulwark to the Greeks. Everywhere victory attended his banner - a
presage of what was to follow."

Reckoning from that time, the coincidence between the period that
elapsed from that, and the conquest of Constantinople, would be 396
years and 130 days - a period that corresponds, with only a difference
of 24 days, with that specified in the prophecy according to the
explanation already given. It could not be expected that a coincidence
more accurate than this could be made out on the supposition that the
prophecy was designed to refer to these events; and if it did refer to
them, the coincidence could have occurred only as a prediction by Him
who sees with perfect accuracy all the future.

\(13\) The effect. This is stated, in [Rev
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020), to be that those who survived
these plagues did not repent of their wickedness, but that the
abominations which existed before still remained. In endeavoring to
determine the meaning of this, it will be proper, first, to ascertain
the exact sense of the words used, and then to inquire whether a state
of things existed subsequent to the invasions of the Turks which
corresponded with the description here:

\(a\) The explanation of the language used in [Rev
9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020).

The rest of the men - That portion of the world on which these plagues
did not come. One third of the race, it is said, would fall under these
calamities, and the writer now proceeds to state what would be the
effect on the remainder. The language used - "the rest of the people" -
is not such as to designate with certainty any particular portion of the
world, but it is implied that the things mentioned were of very general
prevalence.

Which were not killed by these plagues - The two-thirds of the race
which were spared. The language here is such as would be used on the
supposition that the crimes here referred to abounded in all those
regions which came within the range of the vision of the apostle.

Yet repented not of the works of their hands - To wit, of those things
which are immediately specified.

That they should not worship devils - Implying that they practiced this
before. The word used here - δαιμόνιον daimonion - means properly "a
god, deity"; spoken of the pagan gods, [Act
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018); then a genius, or tutelary
demon, e. g., that of Socrates; and, in the New Testament, a demon in
the sense of an evil spirit. See the word fully explained in the notes
on [Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020). The meaning of the
passage here, as in [Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020), "they
sacrifice to devils," is not that they literally worshipped devils in
the usual sense of that term, though it is true that such worship does
exist in the world, as among the Yezidis (see Layard, Nineveh and its
Remains, vol. i. pp. 225-254, and Rosenmuller, Morgenland, iii.
212-216); but that they worshipped beings which were inferior to the
Supreme God; created spirits of a rank superior to human beings, or the
spirits of people that had been enrolled among the gods. This last was a
common form of worship among the pagan, for a large portion of the gods
whom they adored were heroes and benefactors who had been enrolled among
the gods - as Hercules, Bacchus, etc. All that is necessarily implied in
this word is, that there prevailed in the time referred to the worship
of spirits inferior to God, or the worship of the spirits of departed
people. This idea would be more naturally suggested to the mind of a
Greek by the use of the word than the worship of evil spirits as such -
if indeed it would have conveyed that idea at all; and this word would
be properly employed in the representation if there was any homage
rendered to departed human spirits which came in the place of the
worship of the true God. Compare a dissertation on the meaning of the
word used here, in Elliott on the Apocalypse, Appendix I. vol. ii.

And idols of gold, and silver, ... - Idols were formerly, as they are
now in pagan lands, made of all these materials. The most costly would,
of course, denote a higher degree of veneration for the god, or greater
wealth in the worshipper, and all would be employed as symbols or
representatives of the gods whom they adored. The meaning of this
passage is, that there would prevail, at that time, what would be
properly called idolatry, and that this would be represented by the
worship paid to these images or idols. It is not necessary to the proper
understanding of this, to suppose that the images or idols worshipped
were acknowledged pagan idols, or were erected in honor of pagan gods,
as such. All that is implied is, that there would be such images -
εἴδωλα eidōla - and that a degree of homage would be paid to them which
would be in fact idolatry. The word used here - εἴδωλον eidōlon, εἴδωλα
eidōla - properly means an image, spectre, shade; then an idol-image, or
what was a representative of a pagan god; and then the idol-god itself -
a pagan deity. So far as the word is concerned, it may be applied to any
kind of image-worship.

Which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk - The common representation of
idol-worship in the Scriptures, to denote its folly and stupidity. See
Ps. 115; compare [Isa 44:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009).

Neither repented they of their murders - This implies that, at the time
referred to, murders would abound; or that the times would be
characterized by what deserved to be called murder.

Nor of their sorceries - The word rendered "sorceries" - φαρμακεία
pharmakeia - whence our word "pharmacy," means properly "the preparing
and giving of medicine," Eng. "pharmacy" (Robinson's Lexicon). Then, as
the art of medicine was supposed to have magical power, or as the
persons who practiced medicine, in order to give themselves and their
art greater importance, practiced various arts of incantation, the word
came to be connected with the idea of magic sorcery, or enchantment. See
Schleusner, Lexicon. In the New Testament the word is never used in a
good sense, as denoting the preparation of medicine, but always in this
secondary sense, as denoting sorcery, magic, etc. Thus, in [Gal
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020), "the works of the flesh -
idolatry, witchcraft," etc. [Rev 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021),
"of their sorceries." [Rev 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023), "for
by thy sorceries were all nations deceived." [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008), "Whoremongers, and sorcerers."
The word does not elsewhere occur in the New Testament; and the meaning
of the word would be fulfilled in anything that purposed to accomplish
an object by sorcery, by magical arts, by trick, by cunning, by sleight
of hand, or "by deceiving the senses in any way." Thus, it would be
applicable to all jugglery and to all pretended miracles.

Nor of their fornication - Implying that this would be a prevalent sin
in the times referred to, and that the dreadful plagues which are here
predicted would make no essential change in reference to its prevalence.

Nor of their thefts - Implying that this, too, would be a common form of
iniquity. The word used here - κλέμμα klemma - is the common word to
denote theft. The true idea in the word is that of privately,
unlawfully, and feloniously taking the goods or movables of another
person. In a larger and in the popular sense, however, this word might
embrace all acts of taking the property of another by dishonest arts, or
on false pretence, or without an equivalent.

\(b\) The next point then is, the inquiry whether there was any such
state of things as is specified here existing in the time of the rise of
the Turkish power, and in the time of the calamities which that
formidable power brought upon the world. There are two things implied in
the statement here:

\(1\) that these things had an existence before the invasion and
destruction of the Eastern empire by the Turkish power; and,

\(2\) that they continued to exist after that, or were not removed by
these fearful calamities.

The supposition all along in this interpretation is, that the eye of the
prophet was on the Roman world, and that the design was to mark the
various events which would characterize its future history. We look,
then, in the application of this, to the state of things existing in
connection with the Roman power, or that portion of the world which was
then pervaded by the Roman religion. This will make it necessary to
institute an inquiry whether the things here specified prevailed in that
part of the world before the invasions of the Turks, and the conquest of
Constantinople, and whether the judgments inflicted by that formidable
Turkish invasion made any essential change in this respect:

\(1\) The statement that they worshipped devils; that is, as explained,
demons, or the deified souls of people. Homage rendered to the spirits
of departed people, and substituted in the place of the worship of the
true God, would meet all that is properly implied here. We may refer,
then, to the worship of saints in the Roman Catholic communion as a
complete fulfillment of what is here implied in the language used by
John. The fact cannot be disputed that the invocation of saints took the
place, in the Roman Catholic communion, of the worship of sages and
heroes in pagan Rome, and that the canonization of saints took the place
of the ancient deification of heroes and public benefactors. The same
kind of homage was rendered to them; their aid was invoked in a similar
manner, and on similar occasions; the effect on the popular mind was
substantially the same; and the one interfered as really as the other
with the worship of the true God. The decrees of the seventh general
council, known as the second council of Nice, 787 a.d., authorized and
established the worshipping (προσκυνέω proskuneō - the same word used
here - προσκυνήσωσι τὰ δαιμόνια proskunēsōsi ta daimonia) of the saints
and their images.

This occurred after the exciting scenes, the debates, and the disorders
produced by the Iconoclasts, or image-breakers, and after the most
careful deliberation on the subject. In that celebrated council it was
decreed, according to Mr. Gibbon (iii. 341), "unanimously," "that the
worship of images is agreeable to Scripture and reason, to the fathers
and councils of the church; but they hesitate whether that worship be
relative or direct; whether the Godhead and the figure of Christ be
entitled to the same mode of adoration." This worship of the "saints,"
or prayer to the saints, asking for their intercession, it is well
known, has from that time everywhere prevailed in the papal communion.
Indeed, a large part of the actual prayers offered in their services is
addressed to the Virgin Mary. Mr. Maitland, "the able and learned
advocate of the Dark Ages," says, "The superstition of the age supposed
the glorified saint to know what was going on in the world; and to feel
a deep interest, and to possess a considerable power, in the church
militant on earth. I believe that they who thought so are altogether
mistaken; and I lament, abhor, and am amazed at the superstition,
blasphemies, and idolatries, which have grown out of that opinion"
(Elliott, ii. p. 10).

As to the question whether this continued after the judgments brought
upon the world by the hordes "loosed on the Euphrates," or whether they
repented and reformed on account of the judgments, we have only to look
into the Roman Catholic religion everywhere. Not only did the old
practice of "daemonolatry," or the worship of departed saints, continue,
but new "saints" have been added to the number, and the list of those
who are to receive this homage has been continually increasing. Thus, in
the year 1460, Catharine of Sienna was canonized by Pope Pius II; in
1482, Bonaventura; the blasphemer, by Sixtus IV; in 1494, Anselm by
Alexander VI. Alexander's bull, in language more pagan than Christian,
avows it to be the pope's duty thus to choose out, and to hold up the
illustrious dead, as their merits claim, for adoration and worship.

\(2\) the statement that idolatry was practiced, and continued to be
practiced, after this invasion: "Repented not that they should not
worship idols of gold, silver, and brass." On this point, perhaps it
would be sufficient to refer to what has been already noticed in regard
to the homage paid to the souls of the departed; but it may be further
and more clearly illustrated by a reference to the worship of images in
the Roman Catholic communion. Anyone familiar with church history will
recollect the long conflicts which prevailed respecting the worship of
images; the establishment of images in the churches; the destruction of
images by the "Iconoclasts"; and the debars on the subject by the
council at Hiera; and the final decision in the second council of Nice,
in which the propriety of image-worship was affirmed and established.
See, on this subject, Bowers' History of the Popes, ii. 98ff, 144ff;
Gibbon, vol. iii. pp. 322-341.

The importance of the question respecting image-worship may be seen from
the remarks of Mr. Gibbon, iii. 322. He speaks of it as "a question of
popular superstition which produced the revolt of Italy, the temporal
power of the popes, and the restoration of the Roman empire in the
West." A few extracts from Mr. Gibbon - who may be regarded as an
impartial witness on this subject - will show what was the popular
belief, and will confirm what is said in the passage before us in
reference to the prevalence of idolatry. "The first introduction of a
symbolic worship was in the veneration of the cross, and of relics. The
saints and martyrs, when intercession was implored, were seated on the
right hand of God; but the gracious, and often supernatural favors,
which, in the popular belief, were showered round their tombs, conveyed
an unquestionable sanction of the devout pilgrims who visited, and
touched, and kissed these lifeless remains, the memorials of their
merits and sufferings. But a memorial, more interesting than the skull
or the sandals of a departed worthy, is a faithful copy of his person
and features delineated by the arts of painting or sculpture. In every
age such copies, so congenial to human feelings, have been cherished by
the zeal of private friendship or public esteem; the images of the Roman
emperors were adored with civil and almost religious honors; a
reverence, less ostentatious, but more sincere, was applied to the
statues of sages and patriots; and these profane virtues, these splendid
sins, disappeared in the presence of the holy people who had died for
their celestial and everlasting country.

At first the experiment was made with caution and scruple, and the
venerable pictures were discreetly allowed to instruct the ignorant, to
awaken the cold, and to gratify the prejudices of the pagan proselytes.
By a slow, though inevitable progression, the honors of the original
were transferred to the copy; the devout Christian prayed before the
image of a saint, and the pagan rites of genuflexion, luminaries, and
incense again stole into the Catholic Church. The scruples of reason or
piety were silenced by the strong evidence of visions and miracles; and
the pictures which speak, and move, and bleed, must be endowed with a
divine energy, and may be considered as the proper objects of religious
adoration. The most audacious pencil might tremble in the rash attempt
of defining, by forms and colors, the infinite Spirit, the eternal
Father, who pervades and sustains the universe. But the superstitious
mind was more easily reconciled to paint and worship the angels, and
above all, the Son of God, under the human shape, which on earth they
have condescended to assume.

The Second Person of the Trinity had been clothed with a real and mortal
body, but that body had ascended into heaven; and had not some
similitude been presented to the eyes of his disciples, the spiritual
worship of Christ might have been obliterated by the visible relies and
representations of the saints. A similar indulgence was requisite, and
propitious, for the Virgin Mary; the place of her burial was unknown;
and the assumption of her soul and body into heaven was adopted by the
credulity of the Greeks and Latins. The use, and even the worship of
images, was firmly established before the end of the sixth century; they
were fondly cherished by the warm imagination of the Greeks and
Asiatics; the Pantheon and the Vatican were adorned with the emblems of
a new superstition; but this semblance of idolatry was more coldly
entertained by the rude barbarians and the Arian clergy of the West,"
vol. iii. p. 323.

Again: "Before the end of the sixth century these images, made without
hands (in Greek it is a single word - ἀχειροποίητος acheiropoiētos),
were propagated in the camps and cities of the Eastern empire; they were
the objects of worship, and the instruments of miracles; and in the hour
of dangler or tumult their venerable presence could revive the hope,
rekindle the courage, or repress the fury of the Roman legions," vol.
iii. pp. 324, 325. So again (vol. iii. pp. 340ff): - "While the popes
established in Italy their freedom and dominion, the images, the first
cause of their revolt, were restored in the Eastern empire. Under the
reign of Constantine the Fifth, the union of civil and ecclesiastical
power had overthrown the tree, without extirpating the root, of
superstition. The idols, for such they were now held, were secretly
cherished by the order and the sex most prone to devotion; and the fond
alliance of the monks and females obtained a final victory over the
reason and the authority of man."

Under Irene a council was convened - the second council of Nice, or the
seventh general council - in which, according to Mr. Gibbon (iii. 341),
it was "unanimously pronounced that the worship of images is agreeable
to Scripture and reason, to the fathers and councils of the church." The
arguments which were urged in favor of the worship of images, in the
council above referred to, may be seen in Bowers' Lives of the Popes,
vol. ii. pp. 152-158, Dr. Cox's edition. The answer of the bishops in
the council to the question of the empress Irene, whether they agreed to
the decision which had been adopted in the council, was in these words:
"We all agree to it; we have all freely signed it; this is the faith of
the apostles, of the fathers, and of the Catholic church; we all salute,
honor, worship, and adore the holy and venerable images; be they
accursed who do not honor, worship, and adore the adorable images"
(Bowers' Lives of the Popes, ii. 159). As a matter of fact, therefore,
no one can doubt that these images were worshipped with the honor that
was due to God alone - or that the sin of idolatry prevailed; and no one
can doubt that that has been continued, and is still, in the papal
communion.

\(3\) the next point specified is murders [Rev
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021); "Neither repented they of their
murders." It can hardly be necessary to dwell on this to show that this
was strictly applicable to the Roman power, and extensively prevailed,
both before and after the Turkish invasion, and that that invasion had
no tendency to produce repentance. Indeed, in nothing has the papacy
been more remarkably characterized than in the number of murders
perpetrated on the innocent in persecution. In reference to the
fulfillment of this we may refer to the following things:

\(a\) Persecution. This has been particularly the characteristic of the
Roman communion, it need not be said, in all ages. The persecutions of
the Waldenses, if there were nothing else, show that the spirit here
referred to prevailed in the Roman communion, or that the times
preceding the Turkish conquest were characterized by what is here
specified. In the third Lateran council, 1179 a.d., an anathema was
declared against certain dissentients and heretics, and then against the
Waldenses themselves in papal bulls of the years 1183, 1207, 1208.
Again, in a decree of the fourth Lateran council, 1215 a.d., a crusade,
as it was called, was proclaimed against them, and "plenary absolution
promised to such as should perish in the holy war, from the day of their
birth to the day of their death." "And never," says Sismondi, "had the
cross been taken up with more unanimous consent." It is supposed that in
this crusade against the Waldenses a million people perished.

\(b\) That this continued to be the characteristic of the papacy after
the judgments brought upon the Roman world by the Turkish invasion, or
that those judgments had no tendency to produce repentance and
reformation, is well known, and is manifest from the following things:

\(1\) The continuance of the spirit of persecution.

\(2\) the establishment of the Inquisition. 150,000 persons perished by
the Inquisition in thirty years; and from the beginning of the order of
the Jesuits in 1540 to 1580, it is supposed that nine hundred thousand
persons were destroyed by persecution.

\(3\) the same spirit was manifested in the attempts to suppress the
true religion in England, in Bohemia, and in the Low Countries. Fifty
thousand persons were hanged, burned, beheaded, or buried alive, for the
crime of heresy, in the Low Countries, chiefly under the Duke of Alva,
from the edict of Charles V against the Protestants to the peace of
Chateau Cambresis in 1559. Compare the notes on [Dan
7:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024). To these are to be added all
that fell in France on the revocation of the edict of Nantz; all that
perished by persecution in England in the days of Mary; and all that
have fallen in the bloody wars that have been waged in the propagation
of the papal religion. The number is, of course, unknown to mortals,
though efforts have been made by historians to form some estimate of the
amount. It is supposed that fifty million of persons have perished in
these persecutions of the Waldenses, Albigenses, Bohemian Brethren,
Wycliffites, and Protestants; that some fifteen million of Indians
perished in Cuba, Mexico, and South America, in the wars of the
Spaniards, professedly to propagate the Catholic faith; that three
million and a half of Moors and Jews perished, by Catholic persecution
and arms, in Spain; and that thus, probably no less than sixty-eight
million and five hundred thousand human beings have been put to death by
this one persecuting power. See Dr. Berg's Lectures on Romanism, pp. 6,
7. Assuredly, if this be true, it would be proper to characterize the
times here referred to, both before and after the Turkish invasion, as a
time when murders would prevail.

\(4\) the fourth point specified is sorceries. It can hardly be
necessary to go into detail to prove that this also abounded; and that
delusive appeals to the senses; false and pretended miracles; arts
adapted to deceive through the imagination; the supposed virtue and
efficacy of relics; and frauds calculated to impose on mankind, have
characterized those portions of the world where the Roman religion has
prevailed, and been one of the principal means of its advancement. No
Protestant surely would deny this, no intelligent Catholic can doubt it
himself. All that is necessary to be said in regard to this is, that in
this, as in other respects, the Turkish invasion, and the judgments that
came upon the world, made no change. The very recent imposture of the
"holy coat of Treves" is a full proof that the disposition to practice
such arts still exists, and that the power to impose on a large portion
of the world in that denomination has not died away.

\(5\) the fifth thing specified is fornication. This has abounded
everywhere in the world; but the use of the term in this connection
implies that there would be something special here, and perhaps that it
would be associated with the other things referred to. It is as
unnecessary as it would be improper to go into any detail on this point.
Anyone who is acquainted with the history of the Middle Ages - the
period here supposed to be referred to - must be aware of the widespread
licentiousness which then prevailed, especially among the clergy.
Historians and poets, ballads, and acts of councils, alike testify to
this fact. It is to be remarked also, as illustrating the subject, that
the dissoluteness of the Middle Ages was closely, and almost
necessarily, connected with the worship of the images and the saints
above referred to.

The character of many of those who were Worshipped as saints, like the
character of many of the gods of the pagan Romans, was just such as to
be an incentive to every species of licentiousness and impurity. On this
point Mr. Hallam makes the following remarks: "That the exclusive
worship of saints, under the guidance of an artful though illiterate
priesthood, degraded the understanding, and begat a stupid credulity and
fanaticism, is sufficiently evident. But it was also so managed as to
loosen the bonds of religion, and pervert the standard of morality"
(Middle Ages, vol. ii. pp. 249, 250; edit. Phil. 1824). He then, in a
note, refers to the legends of the saints as abundantly confirming his
statements. See particularly the stories in the Golden Legend. So, in
speaking of the monastic orders, Mr. Hallam (Middle Ages, vol. ii. 253)
says: "In vain new rules of discipline were devised, or the old
corrected by reforms. Many of their worst vices grew so naturally out of
their mode of life that a stricter discipline would have no tendency to
extirpate them. Their extreme licentiousness was sometimes hardly
concealed by the cowl of sanctity."

In illustration of this we may introduce here a remark of Mr. Gibbon,
made in immediate connection with his statement about the decrees
respecting the worship of images. "I shall only notice," says he, "the
judgment of the bishops on the comparative merit of image-worship and
morality. A monk had concluded a truce with the demon of fornication, on
condition of interrupting his daily prayers to a picture that hung in
his cell. His scruples prompted him to consult the abbot. 'Rather than
abstain from adoring Christ and his mother in their holy images, it
would be better for you,' replied the casuist, 'to enter every brothel,
and visit every prostitute in the city,'" iii. 341. So again, Mr.
Gibbon, speaking of the pope, John XII., says: "His open simony might be
the consequence of distress; and his blasphemous invocation of Jupiter
and Venus, if it be true, could not possibly be serious. But we read
with some surprise that the worthy grandson of Marozia lived in public
adultery with the matrons of Rome; that the Lateran palace was turned
into a place for prostitution, and that his rapes (if virgins and of
widows had deterred the female pilgrims from visiting the tomb of Peter,
lest, in the devout act, they should be violated by his successor," iii.
353. Again, the system of indulgences led directly to licentiousness. In
the pontificate of John XXII, about 1320 a.d., there was invented the
celebrated Tax of Indulgences, of which more than forty editions are
extant. According to this, incest was to cost, if not detected, five
groschen; if known and flagrant, six. A certain price was affixed in a
similar way to adultery, infanticide, etc. See Merle D'Aubigne's
Reformation, vol. i. p. 41. And further, the very pilgrimages to the
shrines of the saints, which were enjoined as a penance for sin, and
which were regarded as a ground of merit, were occasions of the grossest
licentiousness.

So Hallam, Middle Ages, says: "This licensed vagrancy was naturally
productive of dissoluteness, especially among the women. Our English
ladies, in their zeal to obtain the spiritual treasuries of Rome, are
said to have relaxed the necessary caution about one that was in their
own custody," vol. ii. 255. The celibacy of the clergy also tended to
licentiousness, and is known to have been everywhere productive of the
very sin which is mentioned here. The state of the nunneries in the
middle ages is well known. In the fifteenth century Gerson, the French
orator so celebrated at the council of Constance, called them Prostibula
meretricum. Clemangis, a French theologian, also contemporary, and a man
of great eminence, thus speaks of them: Quid aliud sunt hoc tempore
puellarum monasteria, nisi quaedam non dico Dei sanctuaria, sed veneris
execranda prostibula; ut idem sit hodie puellam velare, quod et publice
a.d. scortandum exponere (Hallam, Middle Ages, ii. 253). To this we may
add the fact that it was a habit, not infrequent, to license the clergy
to live in concubinage (see the proof in Elliott, i. 447, note), and
that the practice of auricular confession necessarily made "the tainting
of the female mind an integral part of Roman priest-craft, and gave
consecration to the communings of impurity." It hardly needs any proof
that these practices continued after the invasions of the Turkish
hordes, or that those invasions made no changes in the condition of the
world in this respect. In proof of this we need refer only to Pope
Innocent VIII, elected in 1484 to the papacy.

His character is told in the well-known epigram:

Octo nocens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas;

Hunc merito potuit dicere Roma patrem.

It was to Alexander VI, his successor, who at the close of the fifteenth
century stood before the world a monster, notorious to all, of impurity
and vice; and to the general well-known character of the Roman Catholic
clergy. "Most of the ecclesiastics," says the historian Infessura, "had
their mistresses; and all the convents of the capital were houses of ill
fame."

\(6\) the sixth thing specified [Rev
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021) is thefts; that is, as explained,
the taking of the property of others by dishonest arts, on false
pretences, or without any proper equivalent. In the inquiry as to the
applicability of this to the times supposed to be here referred to, we
may notice the following things, as instances in which money was
extorted from the people:

\(a\) The value fraudulently assigned to relics. Mosheim, in his
historical sketch of the twelfth century, observes: "The abbots and
monks carried about the country the carcasses and relics of saints, in
solemn procession, and permitted the multitude to behold, touch, and
embrace the sacred remains, at fixed prices."

\(b\) The exaltation of the miracle-working merit of particular saints,
and the consecration of new saints, and dedication of new images, when
the popularity of the former died away. Thus, Mr. Hallam says: "Every
cathedral or monastery had its tutelar saint, and every saint his
legend; fabricated in order to enrich the churches under his protection;
by exaggerating his virtues and his miracles, and consequently his power
of serving those who paid liberally for his patronage."

\(c\) The invention and sale of indulgences - well known to have been a
vast source of revenue to the church. Wycliffe declared that indulgences
were mere forgeries whereby the priesthood "rob people of their money; a
subtle merchandise of Antichrist's clerks, whereby they magnify their
own fictitious power, and instead of causing people to dread sin,
encourage people to wallow therein as hogs."

\(d\) The prescription of pilgrimages as penances was another prolific
source of gain to the church that deserves to be classed under the name
of thefts. Those who made such pilgrimage were expected and required to
make an offering at the shrine of the saint; and as multitudes went on
such pilgrimages, especially on the jubilee at Rome, the income from
this source was enormous. An instance of what was offered at the shrine
of Thomas Becket will illustrate this. Through his reputation Canterbury
became the Rome of England. A jubilee was celebrated every fiftieth year
to his honor, with plenary indulgence to all such as visited his tomb;
of whom one hundred thousand were registered at one time. Two large
volumes were filled with accounts of the miracles performed at his tomb.
The following list of the value of offerings made in two successive
years to his shrine, the Virgin Mary's, and Christ's, in the cathedral
at Canterbury, will illustrate at the same time the gain from these
sources, and the relative respect shown to Becket, Mary, and the Saviour

First Year British shillings d. pounds Christ's Altar 3 2 6 Virgin
Mary's 63 5 6 Becket's 832 12 9 Next Year Christ's Altar 0 0 0 Virgin
Mary's 4 1 8 Becket's 954 6 3

Of the jubilee of 1300 a.d. Muratori relates the result as follows:
"Papa innumerabilem pecuniam ab iisdem recepit; quia die et nocte duo
elerici stabant a.d. altare Sancti Pauli, tenentes in eorum manibus
rastellos, rastellantes pecuniam infinitam. " "The pope received from
them a countless amount of money; for two clerks stood at the altar of
Paul night and day, holding in their hands little rakes, collecting an
infinite amount of money" (Hallam).

\(e\) Another source of gain of this kind was the numerous testamentary
bequests with which the church was enriched obtained by the arts and
influence of the clergy. In Wycliffe's time there were in England 53,215
faeda milltum, of which the religious had 28,000 - more than one-half.
Blackstone says that, but for the intervention of the legislature, and
the statute of mortmain, the church would have appropriated in this
manner the whole of the land of England, vol. 4, p. 107.

\(f\) The money left by the dying to pay for masses, and that paid by
survivors for masses to release the souls of their friends from
purgatory all of which deserve to be classed under the word "thefts" as
already explained - was another source of vast wealth to the church; and
the practice was systematized on a large scale, and, with the other
things mentioned, deserves to be noticed as a characteristic of the
times. It is scarcely necessary to add, that the judgments which were
brought upon the world by the Turkish invasions made no essential
change, and worked no repentance or reformation, and hence that the
language here is strictly applicable to these things: "Neither repented
they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication,
nor of their thefts."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 10](rev010)

</div>
