<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 22:0</span></span>

For the analysis of the first five verses of this chapter see the
analysis of Rev. 21. The chapter comprises the remainder of the
description of the "New Jerusalem" - the blessed abode of the saints
[Rev 22:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001), and then Rev. 22:6-21 the
conclusion or epilogue of the whole book. It is difficult to conceive
what induced the author of the division of the New Testament into
chapters, to separate the first five verses of this chapter from the
preceding chapter. A new chapter should have commenced at [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006); for the remainder properly
comprises the conclusion of the whole book. Compare the introduction to
the notes on the Gospels.

Analysis Of Chapter 22:6-20

This portion of the Book of Revelation is properly the epilogue, or
conclusion. The main purposes of the vision are accomplished; the
enemies of the church are quelled; the church is triumphant; the affairs
of the world are wound up; the redeemed are received to their blissful,
eternal abode; the wicked are cut off; the earth is purified, and the
affairs of the universe are fixed on their permanent foundation. A few
miscellaneous matters, therefore, close the book:

\(1\) A solemn affirmation on the part of him who had made these
revelations, that they are true, and that they will be speedily
accomplished, and that he will be blessed or happy who shall keep the
sayings of the book, [Rev 22:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006).

\(2\) the effect of all these things on John himself, leading him, as in
a former case [Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010), to a
disposition to worship him who had been the medium in making to him such
extraordinary communications, [Rev
22:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008).

\(3\) a command not to seal up what had been revealed, since the time
was near. These things would soon have their fulfillment, and it was
proper that the prophecies should be unsealed, or open, both that the
events might be compared with the predictions, and that a persecuted
church might be able to see what would be the result of all these
things, and to find consolation in the assurance of the final triumph of
the Son of God, [Rev 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010).

\(4\) the fixed and unchangeable state of the righteous and the wicked,
[Rev 22:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011).

\(5\) the blessedness of those who keep the commandments of God, and who
enter into the New Jerusalem, [Rev
22:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014).

\(6\) Jesus, the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and
morning star, proclaims himself to be the Author of all these
revelations by the instrumentality of an angel, [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016).

\(7\) the universal invitation of the gospel - the language of Jesus
himself - giving utterance to his strong desire for the salvation of
people, [Rev 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017).

\(8\) a solemn command not to change anything that had been revealed in
this book, either by adding to it or taking from it, [Rev
22:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018).

\(9\) the assurance that he who had made these revelations would come
quickly, and the joyous assent of John to this, and prayer that his
advent might soon occur, [Rev 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020).

\(10\) the benediction, [Rev 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#021).

[Revelation 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 22:1</span></span>

And he showed me a pure river of water of life - In the New Jerusalem;
the happy abode of the redeemed. The phrase "water of life," means
living or running water, like a spring or fountain, as contrasted with a
stagnant pool. See the notes on [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014). The allusion here is doubtless
to the first Eden, where a river watered the garden ([Gen
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#010), seq.), and as this is a
description of Eden recovered, or Paradise regained, it was natural to
introduce a river of water also, yet in such a way as to accord with the
general description of that future abode of the redeemed. It does not
spring up, therefore, from the ground, but flows from the throne of God
and the Lamb. Perhaps, also, the writer had in his eye the description
in [Eze 47:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001), where a stream issues
from under the temple, and is parted in different directions.

Clear as crystal - See the notes on [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006).

Proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb - Flowing from the
foot of the throne. Compare [Rev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006).
This idea is strictly in accordance with Oriental imagery. In the East,
fountains and running streams constituted an essential part of the image
of enjoyment and prosperity (see the notes on [Isa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006)), and such fountains were common
in the courts of Oriental houses. Here, the river is an emblem of peace,
happiness, plenty; and the essential thought in its flowing from the
throne is, that all the happiness of heaven proceeds from God.

[Revelation 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 22:2</span></span>

In the midst of the street of it - Prof. Stuart renders this, "between
the street thereof and the river"; and says that "the writer conceives
of the river as running through the whole city; then of streets parallel
to it on either side; and then, on the banks of the river, between the
water and the street, the whole stream is lined on either side with two
rows of the tree of life." The more common interpretation, however, is
doubtless admissible, and would give a more beautiful image; that in the
street, or streets of the city, as well as on the banks of the river,
the tree of life was planted. It abounded everywhere. The city had not
only a river passing through it, but it was pervaded by streets, and all
those streets were lined and shaded with this tree. The idea in the mind
of the writer is that of Eden or Paradise; but it is not the Eden of the
book of Genesis, or the Oriental or Persian Paradise: it is a picture
where all is combined, that in the view of the writer would constitute
beauty, or contribute to happiness.

And on either side of the river - As well as in all the streets. The
writer undoubtedly conceives of a single river running through the city
- probably as meandering along - and that river lined on both sides with
the tree of life. This gives great beauty to the imagery.

Was there the tree of life - Not a single tree, but it abounded
everywhere - on the banks of the river, and in all the streets. It was
the common tree in this blessed Paradise - of which all might partake,
and which was everywhere the emblem of immortality. In this respect,
this new Paradise stands in strong contrast with that in which Adam was
placed at his creation, where there seems to have been a single tree
that was designated as the tree of life, [Gen
3:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022). In the future state of the
blessed, that tree will abound, and all may freely partake of it; the
emblem, the pledge of immortal life, will be constantly before the eyes,
whatever part of the future abode may be traversed, and the inhabitants
of that blessed world may constantly partake of it.

Which bare twelve manner of fruits - "Producing twelve fruit-harvests;
not (as our version) twelve manner of fruits" (Prof. Stuart). The idea
is not that there are twelve kinds of fruit on the same tree, for that
is not implied in the language used by John. The literal rendering is,
"producing twelve fruits" - ποιοῦν καρποὺς δώδεκα poioun karpous dōdeka.
The word "manner" has been introduced by the translators without
authority. The idea is, that the tree bore every month in the year, so
that there were twelve fruit-harvests. It was not like a tree that bears
but once a year, or in one season only, but it constantly bore fruit -
it bore every month. The idea is that of abundance, not variety. The
supply never fails; the tree is never barren. As there is but a single
class of trees referred to, it might have been supposed, perhaps, that,
according to the common method in which fruit is produced, there would
be sometimes plenty and sometimes want; but the writer says that, though
there is but one kind, yet the supply is ample. The tree is everywhere;
it is constantly producing fruit.

And yielded her fruit every month - The word "and" is also supplied by
the translators, and introduces an idea which is not in the original, as
if there was not only a succession of harvests, which is in the text,
but that each one differed from the former, which is not in the text.
The proper translation is, "producing twelve fruits, yielding or
rendering its fruit in each month." Thus there is, indeed, a succession
of fruit-crops, but it is the same kind of fruit. We are not to infer,
however, that there will not be variety in the occupations and the joys
of the heavenly state, for there can be no doubt that there will be
ample diversity in the employments, and in the sources of happiness, in
heaven; but the single thought expressed here is, that the means of life
will be abundant: the trees of life will be everywhere, and they will be
constantly yielding fruit.

And the leaves of the tree - Not only the fruit will contribute to give
life, but even the leaves will be salutary. Everything about it will
contribute to sustain life.

Were for the healing - That is, they contribute to impart life and
health to those who had been diseased. We are not to suppose that there
will be sickness, and a healing process in heaven, for that idea is
expressly excluded in [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004); but
the meaning is, that the life and health of that blessed world will have
been imparted by partaking of that tree; and the writer says that, in
fact, it was owing to it that they who dwell there had been healed of
their spiritual maladies, and had been made to live forever.

Of the nations - Of all the nations assembled there, [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024). There is a close resemblance
between the language used here by John and that used by Ezekiel [Eze
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#012), and it is not improbable that
both these writers refer to the same thing. Compare also in the
Apocrypha, 2 Esdras 2:12; 8:52-54.

[Revelation 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 22:3</span></span>

And there shall be no more curse - This is doubtless designed to be in
strong contrast with our present abode; and it is affirmed that what now
properly comes under the name of a curse, or whatever is part of the
curse pronounced on man by the fall, will be there unknown. The earth
will be no more cursed, and will produce no more thorns and thistles;
man will be no more compelled to earn his bread by the sweat of his
brow; woman will be no more doomed to bear the sufferings which she does
now; and the abodes of the blessed will be no more cursed by sickness,
sorrow, tears, and death.

But the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it - God will reign
there forever; the principles of purity and love which the Lamb of God
came to establish, will pervade that blessed abode to all eternity.

And his servants shall serve him - All his servants that are there; that
is, all the inhabitants of that blessed world. For the meaning of this
passage, see the notes on [Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015).

[Revelation 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 22:4</span></span>

And they shall see his face - See the notes on [Mat
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010). They would be constantly in his
presence, and be permitted continually to behold his glory.

And his name shall be in their foreheads - They shall be designated as
his. See the notes on [Rev 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012); [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003); [Rev
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016).

[Revelation 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 22:5</span></span>

And there shall be no night there - notes on [Rev
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025).

And they need no candle - No lamp; no artificial light, as in a world
where there is night and darkness.

Neither light of the sun; for the Lord God, ... - See the notes on [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023).

And they shall reign forever and ever - That is, with God; they shall be
as kings. See the notes on [Rev 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010);
[Rev 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006). Compare the [Rom
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016) note; [Ti2
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011) note.

Remarks On Revelation 21:1-5 And Revelation 22:1-5

This portion of the Apocalypse contains the most full and complete
continuous description of the state of the righteous, in the world of
blessedness, that is to be found in the Bible. It seems to be proper,
therefore, to pause on it for a moment, and to state in a summary manner
what will be the principal features of that blessedness. All can see
that, as a description, it occupies an appropriate place, not only in
regard to this book, but to the volume of revealed truth. In reference
to this particular book, it is the appropriate close of the account of
the conflicts, the trials, and the persecutions of the church; in
reference to the whole volume of revealed truth, it is appropriate
because it occurs in the last of the inspired books that was written. It
was proper that a volume of revealed truth given to mankind, and
designed to describe a great work of redeeming mercy, should close with
a description of the state of the righteous after death.

The principal features in the description are the following:

\(1\) There will be a new heaven and a new earth: a new order of things,
and a world adapted to the condition of the righteous. There will be
such changes produced in the earth, and such abodes suited up for the
redeemed, that it will be proper to say that they are "new," [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001).

\(2\) the locality of that abode is not determined. No particular place
is revealed as constituting heaven; nor is it intimated that there would
be such a place. For anything that appears, the universe at large will
be heaven - the earth and all worlds; and we are left free to suppose
that the redeemed will yet occupy any position of the universe, and be
permitted to behold the special glories of the divine character that are
manifested in each of the worlds that he has made. Compare the notes on
[Pe1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012). That there may be some one
place in the universe that will be their permanent home, and that will
be more properly called heaven, where the glory of their God and Saviour
will be especially manifested, is not improbable; but still there is
nothing to prevent the hope and the belief that in the infinite duration
that awaits them they will be permitted to visit all the worlds that God
has made, and to learn in each, and from each, all that he has
especially manifested of his own character and glory there.

\(3\) that future state will be entirely and forever free from all the
consequences of the apostasy as now seen on the earth. There will be
neither tears, nor sorrow, nor death, nor crying, nor pain, nor curse,
[Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004); [Rev
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003). It will, therefore, be a
perfectly happy abode.

\(4\) it will be pure and holy. Nothing will ever enter there that shall
contaminate and defile, [Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008),
[Rev 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027). On this account, also, it
will be a happy world, for:

\(a\) all real happiness has its foundation in holiness; and,

\(b\) the source of all the misery that the universe has experienced is
sin. Let that be removed, and the earth would be happy; let it be
extinguished from any world, and its happiness will be secure.

\(5\) it will be a world of perfect light, [Rev
21:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). There will be:

\(a\) literally no night there:

\(b\) spiritually and morally there will be no darkness - no error, no
sin.

Light will be cast on a thousand subjects now obscure; and on numerous
points pertaining to the divine government and dealings which now
perplex the mind there will be poured the splendor of perfect day. All
the darkness that exists here will be dissipated there; all that is now
obscure will be made light. And in view of this fact, we may well submit
for a little time to the mysteries which hang over the divine dealings
here. The Christian is destined to live forever and ever. He is capable
of an eternal progression in knowledge. He is soon to be ushered into
the splendors of that eternal abode where there is no need of the light
of the sun or the moon, and where there is no night. In a little time -
a few weeks or days - by removal to that higher state of being, he will
have made a degree of progress in true knowledge compared with which all
that can be learned here is a nameless trifle. In that future abode he
will be permitted to know all that is to be known in those worlds that
shine upon his path by day or by night; all that is to be known in the
character of their Maker, and the principles of his government; all that
is to be known of the glorious plan of redemption; all that is to be
known of the reasons why sin and woe were permitted to enter this
beautiful world. There, too, he will be permitted to enjoy all that
there is to be enjoyed in a world without a cloud and without a tear;
all that is beatific in the friendship of God the Father, of the
Ascended Redeemer, of the Sacred Spirit; all that is blessed in the
goodly fellowship of the angels, of the apostles, of the prophets; all
that is rapturous in reunion with those that were loved on the earth.
Well, then, may he bear with the darkness and endure the trials of this
state a little longer.

\(6\) it will be a world of surpassing splendor. This is manifest by the
description of it in [Rev 20:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001), as
a gorgeous city, with ample dimensions, with most brilliant colors, set
with gems, and composed of pure gold. The writer, in the description of
that abode, has accumulated all that is gorgeous and magnificent, and
doubtless felt that even this was a very imperfect representation of
that glorious world.

\(7\) that future world will be an abode of the highest conceivable
happiness. This is manifest, not only from the fact stated that there
will be no pain or sorrow here, but from the positive description in
[Rev 22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001). It was, undoubtedly, the
design of the writer, under the image of a "Paradise," to describe the
future abode of the redeemed as one of the highest happiness - where
there would be an ample and a constant supply of every want, and where
the highest ideas of enjoyment would be realized. And,

\(8\) All this will be eternal. The universe, so vast and so wonderful,
seems to have been made to be suited to the eternal contemplation of
created minds, and in this universe there is an adaptation for the
employment of mind forever and ever.

If it be asked now why John, in the account which he has given of the
heavenly state, adopted this figurative and emblematic mode of
representation, and why it did not please God to reveal any were
respecting the nature of the employments and enjoyments of the heavenly
world, it may be replied:

\(a\) That this method is eminently in accordance with the general
character of the book, as a book of symbols and emblems.

\(b\) He has stated enough to give us a general and a most attractive
view of that blessed state.

\(c\) It is not certain that we would have appreciated it, or could have
comprehended it, if a more minute and literal description had been
given.

That state may be so unlike this that it is doubtful whether we could
have comprehended any literal description that could have been given.
How little of the future and the unseen can ever be known by a mere
description; how faint and imperfect a view can we ever obtain of
anything by the mere use of words, and especially of objects which have
no resemblance to anything which we have seen! Who ever obtained any
adequate idea of Niagara by a mere description? To what Greek or Roman
mind, however cultivated, could there have been conveyed the idea of a
printing-press, of a locomotive engine, of the magnetic telegraph, by
mere description? Who can convey to one born blind an idea of the
prismatic colors; or to the deaf an idea of sounds? If we may imagine
the world of insect tribes to be endowed with the power of language and
thought, how could the happy and gilded butterfly that today plays in
the sunbeam impart to its companions of yesterday - low and grovelling
worms - any adequate idea of that new condition of being into which it
had emerged? And how do we know that we could comprehend any description
of that world where the righteous dwell, or of employments and
enjoyments so unlike our own?

I cannot more appropriately close this brief notice of the revelations
of the heavenly state than by introducing an ancient poem, which seems
to be founded on this portion of the Apocalypse, and which is the
original of one of the most touching and beautiful hymns, now used in
Protestant places of worship - the well-known hymn which begins,
"Jerusalem! my happy home!" This hymn is deservedly a great favorite,
and is an eminently beautiful composition. It is, however, of Roman
Catholic origin. It is found in a small volume of miscellaneous poetry,
sold at Mr. Bright's sale of manuscripts in 1844, which has been placed
in the British Museum, and now forms the additional ms. 15,225. It is
referred, by the lettering on the book, to the age of Elizabeth, but it
is supposed to belong to the subsequent reign. The volume seems to have
been formed by or for some Roman Catholic, and contains many devotional
songs or hymns, interspersed with others of a more general character.
See Littell's Living Age, vol. xxviii. pp. 333-336. The hymn is as
follows:

A Song Made by F. B. P.

To the tune of "Diana"

Jerusalem! my happy home!

When shall I come to thee?

When shall my sorrows have an end -

Thy joys when shall I see?

O happy harbor of the saints -

O sweet and pleasant soil!

In thee no sorrow may be found,

No grief, no care, no toil.

In thee no sickness may be seen,

No hurt, no ache, no sore;

There is no death, no ugly deil\*,

There's life forevermore.

No dampish mist is seen in thee,

No cold nor darksome night;

There every soul shines as the sun,

There God himself gives light.

There lust and lucre cannot dwell,

There envy hears no sway;

There is no hunger, heat, nor cold,

But pleasure every way.

Jerusalem! Jerusalem!

God grant I once may see.

Thy endless joys, and of the same.

Partaker aye to be.

Thy walls are made of precious stones,

Thy bulwarks diamonds square;

Thy gates are of right orient pearl,

Exceeding rich and rare.

Thy turrets and thy pinnacles.

With carbuncles to shine;

Thy very streets are paved with gold,

Surpassing clear and fine.

Thy houses are of ivory,

Thy windows crystal clear;

Thy tiles are made of beaten gold -

O God, that I were there!

Within thy gates no thing doth come.

That is not passing clean;

No spider's web, no dirt, no dust,

No filth may there be seen.

Ah, my sweet home, Jerusalem!

Would God I were in thee;

Would God my woes were at an end,

Thy joys that I might see!

Thy saints are crown'd with glory great,

They see God face to face;

They triumph still, they still rejoice -

Most happy is their case.

We that are here in banishment.

Continually do moan;

We sigh and sob, we weep and wail,

Perpetually we groan.

Our sweet is mixed with bitter gall,

Our pleasure is but pain;

Our joys scarce last the looking on,

Our sorrows still remain.

But there they live in such delight,

Such pleasure, and such play,

As that to them a thousand years.

Doth seem as yesterday.

Thy vineyards said thy orchards are.

Most beautiful and fair;

Full furnished with trees and fruits,

Most wonderful and rare.

Thy gardens and thy gallant walks.

Continually are green;

There grow such sweet and pleasant flowers.

As nowhere else are seen.

There's nectar and ambrosia made,

There's musk and civet sweet;

There many a fair and dainty drug.

Are trodden under feet.

There cinnamon, there sugar grows,

There nard and balm abound;

What tongue can tell, or heart conceive,

The joys that there are found?

Quite through the streets, with silver sound,

The flood of life doth flow;

Upon whose banks, on every side,

The wood of life doth grow.

There trees forevermore bear fruit,

And evermore do spring;

There evermore the angels sit,

And evermore do sing.

There David stands with harp in hand,

As master of the quire;

Ten thousand times that man were blest.

That might this music\*\* hear.

Our Lady sings Magnificat,

With tune surpassing sweet;

And all the virgins bear their parts,

Sitting above her feet.

Te Deun doth Saint Ambrose sing,

Saint Austin doth the like;

Old Simeon and Zachary.

Have not their song to seek.

There Magdalene hath left her moan,

And cheerfully doth sing.

With blessed saints, whose harmony.

In every street doth ring.

Jerusalem, my happy home!

Would God I were in thee;

Would God my woes were at an end,

Thy joys that I might see!

\*devil, in ms., but it must have been pronounced Scotic, "deil."

\*\*Musing, in ms.

[Revelation 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 22:6</span></span>

And he said unto me - The angel-interpreter, who had showed John the
vision of the New Jerusalem, [Rev
21:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009). As these visions are now at
an end, the angel comes to John directly, and assures him that all these
things are true - that there has been no deception of the senses in
these visions, but that they were really divine disclosures of what
would soon and certainly occur.

These sayings are faithful and true - These communications - all that
has been disclosed to you by symbols, or in direct language. See the
notes on [Rev 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005).

And the Lord God of the holy prophets - The same God who inspired the
ancient prophets.

Sent his angel - See the notes on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

To show unto his servants - To all his servants - that is, to all his
people, by the instrumentality of John. The revelation was made to him,
and he was to record it for the good of the whole church.

The things which must shortly be done - The beginning of which must soon
occur - though the series of events extended into distant ages, and even
into eternity. See the notes on [Rev
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

[Revelation 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 22:7</span></span>

Behold, I come quickly - See the notes on [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003). The words used here are
undoubtedly the words of the Redeemer, although they are apparently
repeated by the angel. The meaning is, that they were used by the angel
as the words of the Redeemer. See [Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012), [Rev
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020).

Blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book -
That receives them as a divine communication; that makes use of them to
comfort himself in the days of darkness, persecution, and trial; and
that is obedient to the precepts here enjoined. See the notes on [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003).

[Revelation 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 22:8</span></span>

And I John saw these things, and heard them - That is, I saw the parts
that were disclosed by pictures, visions, and symbols; I heard the parts
that were communicated by direct revelation.

And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of
the angel, ... - As he had done on a former occasion. See the notes on
[Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010). John appears to have been
entirely overcome by the extraordinary nature of the revelations made to
him, and not improbably entertained some suspicion that it was the
Redeemer himself who had manifested himself to him in this remarkable
manner.

[Revelation 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 22:9</span></span>

Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not - See the notes on [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010).

For I am thy fellow-servant - notes on [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010).

And of thy brethren the prophets - In [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010), it is "of thy brethren that
have the testimony of Jesus." Here the angel says that, in the capacity
in which he appeared to John, he belonged to the general rank of the
prophets, and was no more entitled to worship than any of the prophets
had been. Like them, he had merely been employed to disclose important
truths in regard to the future; but as the prophets, even the most
eminent of them, were not regarded as entitled to worship on account of
the communications which they had made, no more was he.

And of them which keep the sayings of this book - "I am a mere creature
of God." I, like human beings, am under law, and am bound to observe the
law of God. The "sayings of this book" which he says he kept, must be
understood to mean those great principles of religion which it enjoined,
and which are of equal obligation on human beings and angels.

Worship God - Worship God only. See the notes on [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010).

[Revelation 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 22:10</span></span>

And he saith unto me - The angel.

Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book - That is, seal not
the book itself, for it may be regarded altogether as a prophetic book.
On the sealing of a book, see the notes on [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001) . Isaiah ([Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016); [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008)) and Daniel ([Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026); [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004), [Dan
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#009)) were commanded to seal up their
prophecies. Their prophecies related to far-distant times, and the idea
in their being commanded to seal them was, that they should make the
record sure and unchangeable; that they should finish it, and lay it up
for future ages; so that, in far-distant times, the events might be
compared with the prophecy, and it might be seen that there was an exact
correspondence between the prophecy and the fulfillment. Their
prophecies would not be immediately demanded for the use of persecuted
saints, but would pertain to future ages. On the other hand, the events
which John had predicted, though in their ultimate development they were
to extend to the end of the world, and even into eternity, were about to
begin to be fulfilled, and were to be of immediate use in consoling a
persecuted church. John, therefore, was directed not to seal up his
predictions; not to lay them away, to be opened, as it were, in distant
ages; but to leave them open, so that a persecuted church might have
access to them, and might, in times of persecution and trial, have the
assurance that the principles of their religion would finally triumph.
See the notes on [Rev 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#002).

For the time is at hand - That is, they are soon to commence. It is not
implied that they would be soon completed. The idea is, that as the
scenes of persecution were soon to open upon the church, it was
important that the church should have access to these prophecies of the
final triumph of religion, to sustain it in its trials. Compare the
notes on [Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003).

[Revelation 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 22:11</span></span>

He that is unjust, let him be unjust still - This must refer to the
scenes beyond the judgment, and must be intended to affirm an important
truth in regard to the condition of people in the future state. It
cannot refer to the condition of human beings on this side the grave,
for there is no fixed and unchangeable condition in this world. At the
close of this book, and at the close of the whole volume of revealed
truth, it was proper to declare, in the most solemn manner, that when
these events were consummated, everything would be fixed and unchanging;
that all who were then found to be righteous would remain so forever;
and that none who were impenitent, impure, and wicked, would ever change
their character or condition. That this is the meaning here seems to me
to be plain; and this sentiment accords with all that is said in the
Bible of the final condition of the righteous and the wicked.

See [Mat 25:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#046); [Rom
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006); [Th1
1:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007); [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002); [Ecc
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#003). Every assurance is held out in
the Bible that the righteous will be secure in holiness and happiness,
and that there will be no danger - no possibility - that they will fall
into sin, and sink to woe; and by the same kind of arguments by which it
is proved that their condition will be unchanging, is it demonstrated
that the condition of the wicked will be unchanging also. The argument
for the eternal punishment of the wicked is as strong as that for the
eternal happiness of the righteous; and if the one is open to doubt,
there is no security for the permanence of the other. The word "unjust"
here is a general term for an unrighteous or wicked man. The meaning is,
that he to whom that character properly belongs, or of whom it is
properly descriptive, will remain so forever. The design of this seems
to be, to let the ungodly and the wicked know that there is no change
beyond the grave, and by this solemn consideration to warn them now to
flee from the wrath to come. And assuredly no more solemn consideration
can ever be presented to the human mind than this.

And he which is filthy, let him be filthy still - The word "filthy" here
is, of course, used with reference to moral defilement or pollution. It
refers to the sensual, the corrupt, the profane; and the meaning is,
that, their condition will be fixed, and that they will remain in this
state of pollution forever. There is nothing more awful than the idea
that a polluted soul will be always polluted; that a heart corrupt will
be always corrupt; that the defiled will be put forever beyond the
possibility of being cleansed from sin.

And he that is righteous, let him be righteous still - The just, the
upright man - in contradistinction from the unjust mentioned in the
first part of the verse.

And he that is holy, let him be holy still - He that is pure, in
contradistinction from the filthy mentioned in the former part of the
verse. The righteous and the holy will be confirmed in their character
and condition, as well as the wicked. The affirmation that their
condition will be fixed is as strong as that that of the wicked will be
- and no stronger; the entire representation is, that all beyond the
judgment will be unchanging forever. Could anymore solemn thought be
brought before the mind of man?

[Revelation 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 22:12</span></span>

And behold, I come quickly - See the notes on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003). These are undoubtedly the words
of the Redeemer; and the meaning is, that the period when the unchanging
sentence would be passed on each individual - on the unjust, the filthy,
the righteous, and the holy - would not be remote. The design of this
seems to be to impress on the mind the solemnity of the truth that the
condition hereafter will soon be fixed, and to lead people to prepare
for it. In reference to each individual, the period is near when it is
to be determined whether he will be holy or sinful to all eternity. What
thought could there be more adapted to impress on the mind the
importance of giving immediate attention to the concerns of the soul?

And my reward is with me - I bring it with me to give to every man:
either life or death; heaven or hell; the crown or the curse. He will be
prepared immediately to execute the sentence. Compare Mat. 25:31-46.

To give every man according as his work shall be - See the [Mat
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027) note; [Rom
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006) note; [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010) note.

[Revelation 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 22:13</span></span>

I am Alpha and Omega ... - See the notes on [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011). The idea here is, that he will
thus show that he is the first and the last - the beginning and the end.
He originated the whole plan of salvation, and he will determine its
close; he formed the world, and he will wind up its affairs. In the
beginning, the continuance, and the end, he will be recognized as the
same being presiding over and controlling all.

[Revelation 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 22:14</span></span>

Blessed are they that do his commandments - See the notes on [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003); [Rev
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007).

That they may have right - That they may be entitled to approach the
tree of life; that this privilege may be granted to them. It is not a
right in the sense that they have merited it, but in the sense that the
privilege is conferred on them as one of the rewards of God, and that,
in virtue of the divine arrangements, they will be entitled to this
honor. So the word used here - ἐξουσία exousia - means in [Joh
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012), rendered "power." The reason why
this right or privilege is conferred is not implied in the use of the
word. In this case it is by grace, and all the right which they have to
the tree of life is founded on the fact that God has been pleased
graciously to confer it on them.

To the tree of life - See the notes on [Rev
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002). They would not be forbidden to
approach that tree as Adam was, but would be permitted always to partake
of it, and would live forever.

And may enter in through the gates into the city - The New Jerusalem,
[Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002). They would have free access
there; they would be permitted to abide there forever.

[Revelation 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 22:15</span></span>

For without are dogs - The wicked, the depraved, the vile: for of such
characters the dogs, an unclean animal among the Jews, was regarded as a
symbol, [Deu 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018). On the meaning of
the expression, see the notes on [Phi
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002). The word "without" means that
they would not be admitted into the heavenly city, the New Jerusalem,
[Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008), [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027).

And sorcerers, ... - All these characters are specified in [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008), as excluded from heaven. See the
notes on that verse. The only change is, that those who "love and make a
lie" are added to the list; that is, who delight in lies, or what is
false.

[Revelation 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 22:16</span></span>

I Jesus - Here the Saviour appears expressly as the speaker - ratifying
and confirming all that had been communicated by the instrumentality of
the angel.

Have sent mine angel - See the notes on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

To testify unto you - That is, to be a witness for me in communicating
these things to you.

In the churches - Directly and immediately to the seven churches in Asia
Minor [Rev 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#003); remotely and
ultimately to all churches to the end of time. Compare the notes on [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011).

I am the root - Not the root in the sense that David sprang from him, as
a tree does from a root, but in the sense that he was the "root-shoot"
of David, or that he himself sprang from him, as a sprout starts up from
a decayed and fallen tree - as of the oak, the willow, the chestnut,
etc. See this explained in the notes on [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). The meaning then is, not that he
was the ancestor of David, or that David sprang from him, but that he
was the offspring of David, according to the promise in the Scripture,
that the Messiah should be descended from him. No argument, then, can be
derived from this passage in proof of the pre-existence, or the divinity
of Christ.

And the offspring - The descendant; the progeny of David; "the seed of
David according to the flesh." See the notes on [Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003). It is not unusual to employ two
words in close connection to express the same idea with some slight
shade of difference.

And the bright and morning star - See the notes on [Rev
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028). It is not uncommon to compare a
prince, a leader, a teacher, with that bright and beautiful star which
at some seasons of the year precedes the rising of the sun, and leads on
the day. Compare the notes on [Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012). The reference here is to that
star as the harbinger of day; and the meaning of the Saviour is, that he
sustains a relation to a dark world similar to this beautiful star. At
one time he is indeed compared with the sun itself in giving light to
the world; here he is compared with that morning star rather with
reference to its beauty than its light. May it not also have been one
object in this comparison to lead us, when we look on that star, to
think of the Saviour? It is perhaps the most beautiful object in nature;
it succeeds the darkness of the night; it brings on the day - and as it
mingles with the first rays of the morning, it seems to be so joyous,
cheerful, exulting, bright, that nothing can be better adapted to remind
us of Him who came to lead on eternal day. Its place - the first thing
that arrests the eye in the morning - might serve to remind us that the
Saviour should be the first object that should draw the eye and the
heart on the return of each day. In each trial - each scene of sorrow -
let us think of the bright star of the morning as it rises on the
darkness of the night - emblem of the Saviour rising on our sorrow and
our gloom.

[Revelation 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 22:17</span></span>

And the Spirit and the bride say, Come - That is, come to the Saviour;
come and partake of the blessings of the gospel; come and be saved. The
construction demands this interpretation, as the latter part of the
verse shows. The design of this whole verse is, evidently, to show the
freeness of the offers of the gospel; to condense in a summary manner
all the invitations of mercy to mankind; and to leave on the mind at the
close of the book a deep impression of the ample provision which has
been made for the salvation of a fallen race. Nothing, it is clear,
could be more appropriate at the close of this book, and at the close of
the whole volume of revealed truth, than to announce, in the most clear
and attracting form, that salvation is free to all, and that whosoever
will may be saved.

The Spirit - The Holy Spirit. He entreats all to come. This he does:

\(a\) in all the recorded invitations in the Bible - for it is by the
inspiration of that Spirit that these invitations are recorded;

\(b\) by all his influences on the understandings, the consciences, and
the hearts of people;

\(c\) by all the proclamations of mercy made by the preaching of the
gospel, and by the appeal which friend makes to friend, and neighbor to
neighbor, and stranger to stranger - for all these are methods in which
the Spirit invites people to come to the Saviour.

And the bride - The church. See the notes at [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002), [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009). That is, the church invites all
to come and be saved. This it does:

\(a\) by its ministers, whose main business it is to extend this
invitation to mankind;

\(b\) by its ordinances - constantly setting forth the freeness of the
gospel;

\(c\) by the lives of its consistent members - showing the excellency
and the desirableness of true religion;

\(d\) by all its efforts to do good in the world;

\(e\) by the example of those who are brought into the church - showing
that all, whatever may have been their former character, may be saved;
and,

\(f\) by the direct appeals of its individual members.

Thus a Christian parent invites his children; a brother invites a
sister, and a sister invites a brother; a neighbor invites his neighbor,
and a stranger a stranger; the master invites his servant, and the
servant his master. The church on earth and the church in heaven unite
in the invitation, saying, Come. The living father, pastor, friend,
invites - and the voice of the departed father, pastor, friend, now in
heaven, is heard re-echoing the invitation. The once-loved mother that
has gone to the skies still invites her children to come; and the
sweet-smiling babe that has been taken up to the Saviour stretches out
its arms from heaven, and says to its mother - "Come."

Say, Come - That is, come to the Saviour; come into the church; come to
heaven.

And let him that heareth say, Come - Whoever hears the gospel, let him
go and invite others to come. Nothing could more strikingly set forth
the freeness of the invitation of the gospel than this. The authority to
make the invitation is not limited to the ministers of religion; it is
not even confined to those who accept it themselves. All persons, even
though they should not accept of it, are authorized to tell others that
they may be saved. One impenitent sinner may go and tell another
impenitent sinner that if he will he may find mercy and enter heaven.
How could the offer of salvation be made more freely to mankind?

And let him that is athirst come - Whoever desires salvation, as the
weary pilgrim desires a cooling fountain to allay his thirst, let him
come as freely to the gospel as that thirsty man would stoop down at the
fountain and drink. See the notes on [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001). Compare the [Mat
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006) note; [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037) note; [Rev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006) note.

And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely - [Rev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006). Every one that is disposed to
come, that has any sincere wish to be saved, is assured that he may
live. No matter how unworthy he is; no matter what his past life has
been; no matter how old or how young, how rich or how poor; no matter
whether sick or well, a freeman or a slave; no matter whether educated
or ignorant; no matter whether clothed in purple or in rags - riding in
state or laid at the gate of a rich man full of sores, the invitation is
freely made to all to come and be saved. With what more appropriate
truth could a revelation from heaven be closed?

[Revelation 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 22:18</span></span>

For I testify - The writer does not specify who is meant by the word "I"
in this place. The most natural construction is to refer it to the
writer himself, and not to the angel, or the Saviour. The meaning is, "I
bear this solemn witness, or make this solemn affirmation, in
conclusion." The object is to guard his book against being corrupted by
any interpolation or change. It would seem not improbable, from this,
that as early as the time of John, books were liable to be corrupted by
additions or omissions, or that at least there was felt to be great
danger that mistakes might be made by the carelessness of transcribers.
Against this danger, John would guard this book in the most solemn
manner. Perhaps he felt, too, that as this book would be necessarily
regarded as obscure from the fact that symbols were so much used, there
was great danger that changes would be made by well-meaning persons with
a view to make it appear more plain.

Unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book - The
word "heareth" seems here to be used in a very general sense. Perhaps in
most cases persons would be made acquainted with the contents of the
book by hearing it read in the churches; but still the spirit of the
declaration must include all methods of becoming acquainted with it.

If any man shall add unto these things - With a view to furnish a more
full and complete revelation; or with a profession that new truth had
been communicated by inspiration. The reference here is to the book of
Revelation only - for at that time the books that now constitute what we
call the Bible were not collected into a single volume. This passage,
therefore, should not be adduced as referring to the whole of the sacred
Scriptures. Still, the principle is one that is thus applicable; for it
is obvious that no one has a right to change any part of a revelation
which God makes to man; to presume to add to it, or to take from it, or
in any way to modify it. Compare the notes at [Ti2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016).

God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book - These
"plagues" refer to the numerous methods described in this book as those
in which God would bring severe judgment upon the persecutors of the
church and the corrupters of religion. The meaning is, that such a
person would be regarded as an enemy of his religion, and would share
the fearful doom of all such enemies.

[Revelation 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 22:19</span></span>

And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy - If he shall reject the book altogether; if he shall, in
transcribing it, designedly strike any part of it out. It is conceivable
that, from the remarkable nature of the communications made in this
book, and the fact that they seemed to be unintelligible, John supposed
there might be those who would be inclined to omit some portions as
improbable, or that he apprehended that when the portions which describe
antichrist were fulfilled in distant ages, those to whom those portions
applied would be disposed to strike them from the sacred volume, or to
corrupt them. He thought proper to guard against this by this solemn
declaration of the consequence which would follow such an act. The whole
book was to be received - with all its fearful truths - as a revelation
from God; and however obscure it might seem, in due time it would be
made plain; however faithfully it might depict a fearful apostasy, it
was important, both to show the truth of divine inspiration and to save
the church, that these disclosures should be in their native purity in
the possession of the people of God.

God shall take away his part out of the book of life - Perhaps there is
here an intimation that this would be most likely to be done by those
who professed to be Christians, and who supposed that their names were
in the book of life. In fact, most of the corruptions of the sacred
Scriptures have been attempted by those who have professed some form of
Christianity. Infidels have but little interest in attempting such
changes, and but little influence to make them received by the church.
It is most convenient for them, as it is most agreeable to their
feelings, to reject the Bible altogether. When it said here that "God
would take away his part out of the book of life," the meaning is not
that his name had been written in that book, but that he would take away
the part which he might have had, or which he professed to have in that
book. Such corruption of the divine oracles would show that they had no
true religion, and would be excluded from heaven. On the phrase "book of
life," see the notes on [Rev 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005).

And out of the holy city - Described in Rev. 21. He would not be
permitted to enter that city; he would have no part among the redeemed.

And from the things which are written in this book - The promises that
are made; the glories that are described.

[Revelation 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 22:20</span></span>

He which testifieth these things - The Lord Jesus; for he it was that
had, through the instrumentality of the angel, borne this solemn witness
to the truth of these things, and this book was to be regarded as his
revelation to mankind. See the notes on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001); [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016). He here speaks of himself, and
vouches for the truth and reality of these things by saying that he
"testifies" of them, or bears witness to them. Compare [Joh
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037). The fact that Jesus himself
vouches for the truth of what is here revealed, shows the propriety of
what John had said in the previous verses about adding to it, or taking
from it.

Saith, Surely I come quickly - That is, the development of these events
will soon begin - though their consummation may extend into far distant
ages, or into eternity. See the notes on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003); [Rev
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), [Rev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010).

Amen - A word of solemn affirmation or assent. See the notes on [Mat
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013). Here it is to be regarded as the
expression of John, signifying his solemn and cheerful assent to what
the Saviour had said, that he would come quickly. It is the utterance of
a strong desire that it might be so. He longed for his appearing.

Even so - These, too, are the words of John, and are a response to what
the Saviour had just said. In the original, it is a response in the same
language which the Saviour had used, and the beauty of the passage is
marred by the translation "Even so." The original is, "He which
testifieth to these things saith, Yea - ναὶ nai - I come quickly. Amen.
Yea - ναὶ nai - come, Lord Jesus." It is the utterance of desire in the
precise language which the Saviour had used - heart responding to heart.

Come, Lord Jesus - That is, as here intended, "Come in the manner and
for the objects referred to in this book." The language, however, is
expressive of the feeling of piety in a more extended sense, and may be
used to denote a desire that the Lord Jesus would come in any and every
manner; that he would come to impart to us the tokens of his presence;
that he would come to bless his truth and to revive his work in the
churches; that he would come to convert sinners, and to build up his
people in holiness; that he would come to sustain us in affliction, and
to defend us in temptation; that he would come to put a period to
idolatry, superstition, and error, and to extend the knowledge of his
truth in the world; that he would come to set up his kingdom on the
earth, and to rule in the hearts of people; that he would come to
receive us to his presence, and to gather his redeemed people into his
everlasting kingdom. It was appropriate to the aged John, suffering
exile in a lonely island, to pray that the Lord Jesus would speedily
come to take him to himself; and there could have been no more suitable
close of this marvelous book than the utterance of such a desire. And it
is appropriate for us as we finish its contemplation, disclosing so much
of the glories of the heavenly world, and the blessedness of the
redeemed in their final state, when we think of the earth, with its
sorrows, trials, and cares, to respond to the prayer, and to say, "Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly." For that glorious coming of the Son of God,
when he shall gather his redeemed people to himself, may all who read
these notes be finally prepared. Amen.

[Revelation 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 22:21</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen - The usual
benediction of the sacred writers. See the notes on [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020).
