<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev003)  [Next](rev005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 4:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

This chapter [Rev 4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001) properly
commences the series of visions respecting future events, and introduces
those remarkable symbolical descriptions which were designed to cheer
the hearts of those to whom the book was first sent, in their trials,
and the hearts of all believers in all ages, with the assurance of the
final triumph of the gospel. See the Introduction.

In regard to the nature of these visions, or the state of mind of the
writer, there have been different opinions. Some have supposed that all
that is described was made only to pass before the mind, with no visible
representation; others, that there were visible representations so made
to him that he could copy them; others, that all that is said or seen
was only the production of the author's imagination. The latter is the
view principally entertained by German writers on the book. All that
would seem to be apparent on the face of the book - and that is all that
we can judge by - is, that the following things occurred:

\(1\) The writer was in a devout frame of mind - a state of holy
contemplation - when the scenes were represented to him, [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).

\(2\) the representations were supernatural; that is, they were
something which was disclosed to him, in that state of mind, beyond any
natural reach of his faculties.

\(3\) these things were so made to pass before him that they had the
aspect of reality, and he could copy and describe them as real. It is
not necessary to suppose that there was any representation to the bodily
eye; but they had, to his mind, such a reality that he could describe
them as pictures or symbols - and his office was limited to that. He
does not attempt to explain them, nor does he intimate that he
understood them; but his office pertains to an accurate record - a fair
transcript - of what passed before his mind. For anything that appears,
he may have been as ignorant of their signification as any of his
readers, and may have subsequently studied them with the same kind of
attention which we now give to them (compare the notes on [Pe1
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)), and may have, perhaps,
remained ignorant of their signification to the day of his death. It is
no more necessary to suppose that he understood all that was implied in
these symbols, than it is that one who can describe a beautiful
landscape understands all the laws of the plants and flowers in the
landscape; or, that one who copies all the designs and devices of
armorial bearings in heraldry, should understand all that is meant by
the symbols that are used; or, that one who should copy the cuneiform
inscriptions of Persepolis, or the hieroglyphics of Thebes, should
understand the meaning of the symbols. All that is demanded or expected,
in such a case, is, that the copy should be accurately made; and, when
made, this copy may be as much an object of study to him who made it as
to anyone else.

\(4\) yet there was a sense in which these symbols were real; that is,
they were a real and proper delineation of future events. They were not
the mere workings of the imagination. He who saw them in vision though
there may have been no representation to the eye, had before him what
was a real and appropriate representation of coming events. If not, the
visions are as worthless as dreams are.

The visions open [Rev 4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001) with a
Theophany, or a representation of God. John is permitted to look into
heaven, and to have a view of the throne of God, and of the worship
celebrated there. A door (θύρα thura) or opening is made into heaven, so
that he, as it were, looks through the concave above, and sees what is
beyond. He sees the throne of God, and him who sits on the throne, and
the worshippers there; he sees the lightnings play around the throne,
and hears the thunder's roar; he sees the rainbow that encompasses the
throne, and hears the songs of the worshippers. In reference to this
vision, at the commencement of the series of symbols which he was about
to describe, and the reason why this was vouchsafed to him, the
following remarks may be suggested:

\(1\) There is, in some respects, a striking resemblance between this
and the visions of Isaiah Rev. 6 and Ezekiel Ezek. 1. As those prophets,
when about to enter on their office, were solemnly inaugurated by being
permitted to have a vision of the Almighty, so John was inaugurated to
the office of making known future things - the last prophet of the world
- by a similar vision. We shall see, indeed, that the representation
made to John was not precisely the same as what was made to Isaiah or
what was made to Ezekiel; but the most striking symbols are retained,
and that of John is as much adapted to impress the mind as either of the
others. Each of them describes the throne, and the attending
circumstances of sublimity and majesty; each of them Speaks of one on
the throne, but neither of them has attempted any description of the
Almighty. There is no delineation of an image, or a figure representing
God, but everything respecting him is veiled in such obscurity as to
fill the mind with awe.

\(2\) the representation is such as to produce deep solemnity on the
mind of the writer and the reader. Nothing could have been better
adapted to prepare the mind of John for the important communications
which he was about to make than to be permitted to look, as it were,
directly into heaven, and to see the throne of God. And nothing is
better suited to impress the mind of the reader than the view which is
furnished, in the opening vision, of the majesty and glory of God.
Brought, as it were, into his very presence; permitted to look upon his
burning throne; seeing the reverent and profound worship of the
inhabitants of heaven, we feel our minds awed, and our souls subdued, as
we hear the God of heaven speak, and as we see seal after seal opened,
and hear trumpet after trumpet utter its voice.

\(3\) the form of the manifestation - the opening vision - is eminently
suited to show us that the communications in this book proceed from
heaven. Looking into heaven, and seeing the vision of the Almighty, we
are prepared to feel that what follows has a higher than any human
origin; that it has come direct from the throne of God. And,

\(4\) there was a propriety that the visions should open with a
manifestation of the throne of God in heaven, or with a vision of
heaven, because that, also, is the termination of the whole; it is that
to which all the visions in the book tend. It begins in heaven, as seen
by the exile in Patmos; it terminates in heaven, when all enemies of the
church are subdued, and the redeemed reign triumphant in glory.

The substance of the introductory vision in this chapter can be stated
in few words:

\(a\) A door is opened, and John is permitted to look into heaven, and
to see what is passing there, [Rev
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001).

\(b\) The first thing that strikes him is a throne, with one sitting on
the throne, [Rev 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002).

\(c\) The appearance of him who sits upon the throne is described, [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). He is "like a jasper and a
sardine stone." There is no attempt to portray his form; there is no
description from which an image could be formed that could become an
object of idolatrous worship - for who would undertake to chisel
anything so indefinite as what is merely "like a jasper or a sardine
stone?" And yet the description is distinct enough to fill the mind with
emotions of awe and sublimity, and to leave the impression that he who
sat on the throne was a pure and holy God.

\(d\) Round about the throne there was a bright rainbow: a symbol of
peace, [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003).

\(e\) Around the throne are gathered the elders of the church, having on
their heads crowns of gold: symbols of the ultimate triumph of the
church, [Rev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004).

\(f\) Thunder and lightning, as at Sinai, announce the presence of God,
and seven burning lamps before the throne represent the Spirit of God,
in his diversified operations, as going forth through the world to
enlighten, sanctify, and save, [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005).

\(g\) Before the throne there is a pellucid pavement, as of crystal,
spread out like a sea: emblem of calmness, majesty, peace, and wide
dominion, [Rev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006).

\(h\) The throne is supported by four living creatures, full of eyes:
emblems of the all-seeing power of him that sits upon the throne, and of
his ever-watchful providence, [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006).

\(i\) To each one of these living creatures there is a unique symbolic
face: respectively emblematic of the authority, the power, the wisdom of
God, and of the rapidity with which the purposes of Providence are
executed, [Rev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007). All are furnished
with wings: emblematic of their readiness to do the will of God [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008), but each one individually with a
special form.

\(j\) All these creatures pay ceaseless homage to God, whose throne they
are represented as supporting: emblematic of the fact that all the
operations of the divine government do, in fact, promote his glory, and,
as it were, render him praise, [Rev
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008).

\(k\) To this the elders, the representatives of the church, respond:
representing the fact that the church acquiesces in all the arrangements
of Providence, and in the execution of all the divine purposes, and
finds in them all ground for adoration and thanksgiving, [Rev
4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#010).

[Revelation 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 4:1</span></span>

After this - Greek, "After these things"; that is, after what he had
seen, and after what he had been directed to record in the preceding
chapters. How long after these things this occurred, he does not say -
whether on the same day, or at some subsequent time; and conjecture
would be useless. The scene, however, is changed. Instead of seeing the
Saviour standing before him Rev. 1, the scene is transferred to heaven,
and he is permitted to look in upon the throne of God, and upon the
worshippers there.

I looked - Greek, "I saw" - εἶδον eidon. Our word "look" would rather
indicate purpose or intentions, as if he had designedly directed his
attention to heaven, to see what could be discovered there. The meaning,
however, is simply that he saw a new vision, without intimating whether
there was any design on his part, and without saying how his thoughts
came to be directed to heaven.

A door was opened - That is, there was apparently an opening in the sky
like a door, so that he could look into heaven.

In heaven - Or, rather, in the expanse above - in the visible heavens as
they appear to spread out over the earth. So [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001), "The heavens were opened, and I
saw visions of God." The Hebrews spoke of the sky above as a solid
expanse; or as a curtain stretched out; or as an extended arch above the
earth - describing it as it appears to the eye. In that expanse, or
arch, the stars are set as gems (compare the notes on [Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)); through apertures or windows in
that expanse the rain comes down, [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011); and that is opened when a
heavenly messenger comes down to the earth, [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016). Compare [Luk
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021); [Act
7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056); [Act
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011). Of course, all this is
figurative, but it is such language as all people naturally use. The
simple meaning here is, that John had a vision of what is in heaven as
if there had been such an opening made through the sky, and he had been
permitted to look into the world above.

And the first voice which I heard - That is, the first sound which he
heard was a command to come up and see the glories of that world. He
afterward heard other sounds - the sounds of praise; but the first notes
that fell on his ear were a direction to come up there and receive a
revelation respecting future things. This does not seem to me to mean,
as Prof. Stuart, Lord, and others suppose, that he now recognized the
voice which had first, or formerly spoken to him [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010), but that this was the first in
contradistinction from other voices which he afterward heard. It
resembled the former "voice" in this, that it was "like the sound of a
trumpet," but besides that there does not seem to have been anything
that would suggest to him that it came from the same source. It is
certainly possible that the Greek would admit of that interpretation,
but it is not the most obvious or probable.

Was as it were of a trumpet - It resembled the sound of a trumpet, [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).

Talking with me - As of a trumpet that seemed to speak directly to me.

Which said - That is, the voice said.

Come up hither - To the place whence the voice seemed to proceed -
heaven.

And I will show thee things which must be hereafter - Greek, "after
these things." The reference is to future events; and the meaning is,
that there would be disclosed to him events that were to occur at some
future period. There is no intimation here when they would occur, or
what would be embraced in the period referred to. All that the words
would properly convey would be, that there would be a disclosure of
things that were to occur in some future time.

[Revelation 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 4:2</span></span>

And immediately I was in the Spirit - See the notes on [Rev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010). He does not affirm that he was
caught up into heaven, nor does he say what impression was on his own
mind, if any, as to the place where he was; but he was at once absorbed
in the contemplation of the visions before him. He was doubtless still
in Patmos, and these things were made to pass before his mind as a
reality; that is, they appeared as real to him as if he saw them, and
they were in fact a real symbolical representation of things occurring
in heaven.

And, behold, a throne was set in heaven - That is, a throne was placed
there. The first thing that arrested his attention was a throne. Tiffs
was "in heaven" - an expression which proves that the scene of the
vision was not the temple in Jerusalem, as some have supposed. There is
no allusion to the temple, and no imagery drawn from the temple. Isaiah
had his vision [Isa 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) in the holy
of holies of the temple; Ezekiel [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001), by the river Chebar; but John
looked directly into heaven, and saw the throne of God, and the
encircling worshippers there.

And one sat on the throne - It is remarkable that John gives no
description of him who sat on the throne, nor does he indicate who he
was by name. Neither do Isaiah or Ezekiel attempt to describe the
appearance of the Deity, nor are there any intimations of that
appearance given from which a picture or an image could be formed. So
much do their representations accord with what is demanded by correct
taste; and so sedulously have they guarded against any encouragement of
idolatry.

[Revelation 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 4:3</span></span>

And he that sat was to look upon - Was in appearance; or, as I looked
upon him, this seemed to be his appearance. He does not describe his
form, but his splendor.

Like a jasper - ἰάσπιδι iaspidi The jasper, properly, is "an opaque,
impure variety of quartz, of red, yellow, and also of some dull colors,
breaking with a smooth surface. It admits of a high polish, and is used
for vases, seals, snuff-boxes, etc. When the colors are in stripes or
bands, it is called striped jasper" (Dana, in Webster's Dictionary). The
color here is not designated, whether red or yellow. As the red was,
however, the common color worn by princes, it is probable that that was
the color that appeared, and that John means to say that he appeared
like a prince in his royal robes. Compare [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001).

And a sardine stone - σαρδίῳ sardiō This denotes a precious stone of a
bloodred, or sometimes of a flesh-color, more commonly known by the name
of carnelian (Robinson's Lexicon). Thus, it corresponds with the jasper,
and this is only an additional circumstance to convey the exact idea in
the mind of John, that the appearance of him who sat on the throne was
that of a prince in his scarlet robes. This is all the description which
he gives of his appearance; and this is:

\(a\) entirely appropriate, as it suggests the idea of a prince or a
monarch; and,

\(b\) it is well adapted to impress the mind with a sense of the majesty
of Him who cannot be described, and of whom no image should be
attempted. Compare [Deu 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012); "Ye
heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude."

And there was a rainbow round about the throne - This is a beautiful
image, and was probably designed to be emblematical as well as
beautiful. The previous representation is that of majesty and splendor;
this is adapted to temper the majesty of the representation. The rainbow
has always, from its own nature, and from its associations, been an
emblem of peace. It appears on the cloud as the storm passes away. It
contrasts beautifully with the tempest that has just been raging. It is
seen as the rays of the sun again appear clothing all things with beauty
- the more beautiful from the fact that the storm has come, and that the
rain has fallen. If the rain has been gentle, nature smiles serenely,
and the leaves and flowers refreshed appear clothed with new beauty: if
the storm has raged violently, the appearance of the rainbow is a pledge
that the war of the elements has ceased, and that God smiles again upon
the earth. It reminds us, too, of the "covenant" when God did "set his
bow in the cloud," and solemnly promised that the earth should no more
be destroyed by a flood, [Gen 9:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009).
The appearance of the rainbow, therefore, around the throne, was a
beautiful emblem of the mercy of God, and of the peace that was to
pervade the world as the result of the events that were to be disclosed
to the vision of John. True, there were lightnings and thunderings and
voices, but there the bow abode calmly above them all, assuring him that
there was to be mercy and peace.

In sight like unto an emerald - The emerald is green, and this color so
predominated in the bow that it seemed to be made of this species of
precious stone. The modified and mild color of green appears to everyone
to predominate in the rainbow. Ezekiel ([Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028)) has introduced the image of the
rainbow, also, in his description of the vision that appeared to him,
though not as calmly encircling the throne, but as descriptive of the
general appearance of the scene. "As is the appearance of the bow that
is on the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the
brightness round about." Milton, also, has introduced it, but it is also
as a part of the coloring of the throne:

"Over their heads a crystal firmament,

Whereon a sapphire throne, inlaid with pure.

Amber, and colors of the showery arch."

\- Paradise Lost, b. vii.

[Revelation 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 4:4</span></span>

And round about the throne were four and twenty seats - Or rather,
"thrones" - θρόνοι thronoi - the same word being used as what is
rendered "throne" - θρόνος thronos. The word, indeed, properly denotes a
seat, but it came to be employed to denote particularly the seat on
which a monarch sat, and is properly translated thus in [Rev
4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002). So it is rendered in [Mat
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034); [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028); [Mat
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#022); [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031); [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032); and uniformly elsewhere in the
New Testament (53 places in all), except in [Luk
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052); [Rev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013); [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004); [Rev
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016); [Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010), where it is rendered "seat and
seats." It should have been rendered "thrones" here, and is so
translated by Prof. Stuart. Coverdale and Tyndale render the word "seat"
in each place in [Rev 4:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002). It was
undoubtedly the design of the writer to represent those who sat on those
seats as, in some sense, kings - for they have on their heads crowns of
gold - and that idea should have been retained in the translation of
this word.

And upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting - Very various
opinions have been entertained in respect to those who thus appeared
sitting around the throne, and to the question why the number
twenty-four is mentioned. Instead of examining those opinions at length,
it will be better to present, in a summary manner, what seems to be
probable in regard to the intended reference. The following points,
then, would appear to embrace all that can be known on this subject:

\(1\) These elders have a regal character, or are of a kingly order.
This is apparent:

\(a\) because they are represented as sitting on "thrones," and

\(b\) because they have on their heads "crowns of gold."

\(2\) they are emblematic. They are designed to symbolize or represent
some class of persons. This is clear:

\(a\) because it cannot be supposed that so small a number would compose
the whole of those who are in fact around the throne of God, and,

\(b\) because there are other symbols there designed to represent
something pertaining to the homage rendered to God, as the four living
creatures and the angels, and this supposition is necessary in order to
complete the symmetry and harmony of the representation.

\(3\) they are human beings, and are designed to have some relation to
the race of man, and somehow to connect the human race with the worship
of heaven. The four living creatures have another design; the angels
[Rev 5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001) have another; but these
are manifestly of our race - persons from this world before the throne.

\(4\) they are designed in some way to be symbolic of the church as
redeemed. Thus, they say [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009),
"Thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood."

\(5\) they are designed to represent the whole church in every land and
every age of the world. Thus, they say [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009), "Thou hast redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation."
This shows, further, that the whole representation is emblematic; for
otherwise in so small a number - twenty-four - there could not be a
representation out of every nation.

\(6\) they represent the church triumphant - the church victorious.
Thus, they have crowns on their heads; they have harps in their hands
[Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); they say that they are
"kings and priests," and that they will "reign on the earth," [Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010).

\(7\) the design, therefore, is to represent the church triumphant -
redeemed - saved - as rendering praise and honor to God; as uniting with
the hosts of heaven in adoring him for his perfections and for the
wonders of his grace; As representatives of the church, they are
admitted near to him; they encircle his throne; they appear victorious
over every foe; and they come, in unison with the living creatures, and
the angels, and the whole universe [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013), to ascribe power and dominion to
God.

\(8\) as to the reason why the number "twenty-four" is mentioned,
perhaps nothing certain can be determined. Ezekiel, in his vision [Eze
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016); [Eze
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001), saw twenty-five men between the
porch and the altar, with their backs toward the temple, and their faces
toward the earth - supposed to be representations of the twenty-four
"courses" into which the body of priests was divided 1 Chr. 24:3-19,
with the high priest among them, making up the number twenty-five. It is
possible that John in this vision may have designed to refer to the
church considered as a priesthood (compare the notes on [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)), and to have alluded to the fact
that the priesthood under the Jewish economy was divided into
twenty-four courses, each with a presiding officer, and who was a
representative of that portion of the priesthood over which he presided.
If so, then the ideas which enter into the representation are these:

\(a\) That the whole church may be represented as a priesthood, or a
community of priests - an idea which frequently occurs in the New
Testament.

\(b\) That the church, as such a community of priests, is employed in
the praise and worship of God - an idea, also, which finds abundant
countenance in the New Testament.

\(c\) That, in a series of visions having a designed reference to the
church, it was natural to introduce some symbol or emblem representing
the church, and representing the fact that this is its office and
employment. And,

\(d\) that this would be well expressed by an allusion derived from the
ancient dispensation - the division of the priesthood into classes, over
each one of which there presided an individual who might be considered
as the representative of his class.

It is to be observed, indeed, that in one respect they are represented
as" kings," but still this does not forbid the supposition that there
might have been intermingled also another idea, that they were also
"priests." Thus, the two ideas are blended by these same elders in [Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010); "And hath made us unto our God
kings and priests." Thus understood, the vision is designed to denote
the fact that the representatives of the church, ultimately to be
triumphant, are properly engaged in ascribing praise to God. The word
"elders" here seems to be used in the sense of aged and venerable men,
rather than as denoting office. They were such as by their age were
qualified to preside over the different divisions of the priesthood.

Clothed in white raiment - Emblem of purity, and appropriate, therefore,
to the representatives of the sanctified church. Compare [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011); [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009).

And they had on their heads crowns of gold - Emblematic of the fact that
they sustained a kingly office. There was blended in the representation
the idea that they were both "kings and priests." Thus, the idea is
expressed by Peter [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009), "a royal
priesthood" - βασίλειον ἱεράτευμα basileion hierateuma.

[Revelation 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 4:5</span></span>

And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices -
Expressive of the majesty and glory of Him that sat upon it. We are at
once reminded by this representation of the sublime scene that occurred
at Sinai [Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), where "there were
thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice
of the trumpet exceeding loud." Compare [Eze
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013), [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024). So Milton:

"Forth rushed with whirlwind sound.

The chariot of Paternal Deity,

Flahing thick flames."

"And from about him fierce effusion rolled.

Of smoke, and lightning flame, and sparkles dire."

Par. Lost, b. vi.

The word "voices" here connected with "thunders" perhaps means "voices
even thunders" - referring to the sound made by the thunder. The meaning
is, that these were echoing and re-echoing sounds, as it were a
multitude of voices that seemed to speak on every side.

And there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne - Seven
burning lamps that constantly shone there, illuminating the whole scene.
These steadily burning lamps would add much to the beauty of the vision.

Which are the seven Spirits of God - Which represent, or are emblematic
of, the seven Spirits of God. On the meaning of the phrase, "the seven
Spirits of God," see the notes on [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). If these lamps are designed to be
symbols of the Holy Spirit, according to the interpretation proposed in
[Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004), it may be perhaps in the
following respects:

\(1\) They may represent the manifold influences of that Spirit in the
world - as imparting light; giving consolation; creating the heart anew;
sanctifying the soul, etc.

\(2\) they may denote that all the operations of that Spirit are of the
nature of light, dissipating darkness, and vivifying and animating all
things.

\(3\) perhaps their being placed here before the throne, in the midst of
thunder and lightning, may be designed to represent the idea that -
amidst all the scenes of magnificence and grandeur; all the storms,
agitations, and tempests on the earth; all the political changes; all
the convulsions of empire under the providence of God; and all the
commotions in the soul of man, produced by the thunders of the law - the
Spirit of God beams calmly and serenely, shedding a steady influence
over all, like lamps burning in the very midst of lightnings, and
thunderings, and voices. In all the scenes of majesty and commotion that
occur on the earth, the Spirit of God is present, shedding a constant
light, and undisturbed in his influence by all the agitations that are
abroad.

[Revelation 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 4:6</span></span>

And before the throne there was a sea of glass - An expanse spread out
like a sea composed of glass: that is, that was pellucid and transparent
like glass. It is not uncommon to compare the sea with glass. See
numerous examples in Wetstein, in loco. The point of the comparison here
seems to be its transparent appearance. It was perfectly clear -
apparently stretching out in a wide expanse, as if it were a sea.

Like unto crystal - The word "crystal" means properly anything congealed
and pellucid, as ice; then anything resembling that, particularly a
certain species of stone distinguished for its clearness - as the
transparent crystals of quartz; limpid and colorless quartz; rock or
mountain quartz. The word "crystal" now, in mineralogy, means an
inorganic body which, by the operation of affinity, has assumed the form
of a regular solid, by a certain number of plane and smooth faces. It is
used here manifestly in its popular sense to denote anything that is
perfectly clear like ice. The comparison, in the representation of the
expanse spread around the throne, turns on these points:

\(1\) It appeared like a sea - stretching afar.

\(2\) it resembled, in its general appearance, glass; and this idea is
strengthened by the addition of another image of the same character -
that it was like an expanse of crystal, perfectly clear and pellucid.
This would seem to be designed to represent the floor or pavement on
which the throne stood. If this is intended to be emblematical, it may
denote:

\(a\) that the empire of God is vast - as if it were spread out like the
sea; or.

\(b\) it may be emblematic of the calmness, the placidity of the divine
administration - like an undisturbed and unruffled ocean of glass.
Perhaps, however, we should not press such circumstances too far to find
a symbolical meaning.

And in the midst of the throne - ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ θρόνου en mesō tou thronou.
Not occupying the throne, but so as to appear to be intermingled with
the throne, or "in the midst" of it, in the sense that it was beneath
the center of it. The meaning would seem to be, that the four living
creatures referred to occupied such a position collectively that they at
the same time appeared to be under the throne, so that it rested on
them, and around it, so that they could be seen from any quarter. This
would occur if their bodies were under the throne, and if they stood so
that they faced outward. To one approaching the throne they would seem
to be around it, though their bodies were under, or "in the midst" of it
as a support. The form of their bodies is not specified, but it is not
improbable that though their heads were different, their bodies, that
were under the throne, and that sustained it, were of the same form.

And round about the throne - In the sense above explained - that, as
they stood, they would be seen on every side of the throne.

Were four beasts - This is a very unhappy translation, as the word
"beasts" by no means conveys a correct idea of the original word. The
Greek word - ζοῶν zoōn - means properly "a living thing"; and it is thus
indeed applied to animals, or to the living creation, but the notion of
their being living things, or living creatures, should be retained in
the translation. Prof. Stuart renders it, "living creatures." Isaiah
[Isa 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001), in his vision of Yahweh,
saw two seraphim; Ezekiel, whom John more nearly resembles in his
description, saw four "living creatures" - חיות chayowt [Eze
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005) - that is, living, animated,
moving beings. The words "living beings" would better convey the idea
than any other which could be employed. They are evidently, like those
which Ezekiel saw, symbolical beings; but the nature and purpose of the
symbol is not perfectly apparent. The "four and twenty elders" are
evidently human beings, and are representatives, as above explained, of
the church.

In [Rev 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011), angels are themselves
introduced as taking an important part in the worship of heaven: and
these living beings, therefore, cannot be designed to represent either
angels or human beings. In Ezekiel they are either designed as poetic
representations of the majesty of God, or of his providential
government, showing what sustains his throne; symbols denoting
intelligence, vigilance, the rapidity and directness with which the
divine commands are executed, and the energy and firmness with which the
government of God is administered. The nature of the case, and the
similarity to the representation in Ezekiel, would lead us to suppose
that the same idea is to be found substantially in John; and there would
be no difficulty in such an interpretation were it not that these
"living creatures" are apparently represented in [Rev
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), as uniting with the redeemed
from the earth in such a manner as to imply that they were themselves
redeemed.

But perhaps the language in [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009),
"And they sung a new song," etc., though apparently connected with the
"four beasts" in [Rev 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008), is not
designed to be so connected. John may intend there merely to advert to
the fact that a new song was sung, without meaning to say that the "four
living beings" united in that song. For, if he designed merely to say
that the "four living beings" and the "four and twenty elders" fell down
to worship, and then that a song was heard, though in fact sung only by
the four and twenty eiders, he might have employed the language which he
actually has done. If this interpretation be admitted, then the most
natural explanation to be given of the "four living beings" is to
suppose that they are symbolical beings designed to furnish some
representation of the government of God - to illustrate, as it were,
that on which the divine government rests, or which constitutes its
support - to wit, power, intelligence, vigilance, energy. This is
apparent:

\(a\) because it was not unusual for the thrones of monarchs to be
supported by carved animals of various forms, which were designed
undoubtedly to be somehow emblematic of government - either of its
stability, vigilance, boldness, or firmness. Thus, Solomon had twelve
lions carved on each side of his throne - no improper emblems of
government - [Kg1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#010), [Kg1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#020).

\(b\) These living beings are described as the supports of the throne of
God, or as that on which it rests, and would be, therefore, no improper
symbols of the great principles or truths which give support or
stability to the divine administration.

\(c\) They are, in themselves, well adapted to be representatives of the
great principles of the divine government, or of the divine providential
dealings, as we shall see in the more particular explanation of the
symbol.

\(d\) Perhaps it might be added, that, so understood, there would be
completeness in the vision.

The "elders" appear there as representatives of the church redeemed; the
angels in their own proper persons render praise to God. To this it was
not improper to add, and the completeness of the representation seems to
make it necessary to add, that all the doings of the Almighty unite in
his praise; his various acts in the government of the universe harmonize
with redeemed and unfallen intelligences in proclaiming his glory. The
vision of the "living beings," therefore, is not, as I suppose, a
representation of the attributes of God as such, but an emblematic
representation of the divine government - of the throne of Deity resting
upon, or sustained by, those things of which these living beings are
emblems - intelligence, firmness, energy, etc. This supposition seems to
combine more probabilities than any other which has been proposed; for,
according to this supposition, all the acts, and ways, and creatures of
God unite in his praise.

It is proper to add, however, that expositors are by no means agreed as
to the design of this representation. Prof. Stuart supposes that the
attributes of God are referred to; Mr. Elliott (i. 93), that the
"twenty-four elders and the four living creatures symbolize the church,
or the collective body of the saints of God; and that as there are two
grand divisions of the church, the larger one that of the departed in
Paradise, and the other that militant on earth, the former is depicted
by the twenty-four elders, and the latter by the living creatures"; Mr.
Lord (pp. 53, 54), that the living creatures and the elders are both of
one race; the former perhaps denoting those like Enoch and Elijah, who
were translated, and those who were raised by the Saviour after his
resurrection, or those who have been raised to special eminence - the
latter the mass of the redeemed; Mr. Mede, that the living creatures are
symbols of the church worshipping on earth; Mr. Daubuz, that they are
symbols of the ministers of the church on earth; Vitringa, that they are
symbols of eminent ministers and teachers in every age; Dr. Hammond
regards him who sits on the throne as the metropolitan bishop of Judea,
the representative of God, the elders as diocesan bishops of Judea, and
the living creatures as four apostles, symbols of the saints who are to
attend the Almighty as assessors in judgment! See Lord on the
Apocalypse, pp. 58, 59.

Full of eyes - Denoting omniscience. The ancients fabled Argus as having
100 eyes, or as having the power of seeing in any direction. The emblem
here would denote an everwatchful and observing Providence; and, in
accordance with the explanation proposed above, it means that, in the
administration of the divine government, everything is distinctly
contemplated; nothing escapes observation; nothing can be concealed. It
is obvious that the divine government could not be administered unless
this were so; and it is the perfection of the government of God that all
things are seen just as they are. In the vision seen by Ezekiel [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018), the "rings" of the wheels on
which the living creatures moved are represented as "full of eyes round
about them," emblematic of the same thing. So Milton:

"As with stars their bodies all,

And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels.

Of beryl, and careening fires between."

Before - In front. As one looked on their faces, from whatever quarter
the throne was approached, he could see a multitude of eyes looking upon
him.

And behind - On the parts of their bodies which were under the throne.
The meaning is, that there is universal vigilance in the government of
God. Whatever is the form of the divine administration; whatever part is
contemplated; however it is manifested - whether as activity, energy,
power, or intelligence - it is based on the fact that all things are
seen from every direction. There is nothing that is the result of blind
fate or of chance.

[Revelation 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 4:7</span></span>

And the first beast was like a lion - A general description has been
given, applicable to all, denoting that in whatever form the divine
government is administered, these things will be found; a particular
description now follows, contemplating that government under particular
aspects, as symbolized by the living beings on which the throne rests.
The first is that of a lion. The lion is the monarch of the woods, the
king of beasts, and he becomes thus the emblem of dominion, of
authority, of government in general. Compare [Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009); [Amo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008); [Joe
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016); [Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004). As emblematic of the divine
administration, this would signify that He who sits on the throne is the
ruler over all, and that his dominion is absolute and entire. It has
been made a question whether the whole body had the form of a lion, or
whether it had the appearance of a lion only as to its face or front
part. It would seem probable that the latter only is intended, for it is
expressly said of the "third beast" that it had "the face of a man,"
implying that it did not resemble a man in other respects, and it is
probable that, as these living creatures were the supports of the
throne, they had the same form in all other particulars except the front
part. The writer has not informed us what was the appearance of these
living creatures in other respects, but it is most natural to suppose
that it was in the form of an ox, as being adapted to sustain a burden.
It is hardly necessary to say that the thing supposed to be symbolical
here in the government of God - his absolute rule - actually exists, or
that it is important that this should be fairly exhibited to people.

And the second beast like a calf - Or, more properly, a young bullock,
for so the word - μόσχος moschos - means. The term is given by Herodotus
(ii. 41; iii. 28) to the Egyptian god Apis, that is, a young bullock.
Such an emblem, standing under a throne as one of its supports, would
symbolize firmness, endurance, strength (compare [Pro
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#004)); and, as used to represent
qualities pertaining to him who sat on the throne, would denote
stability, firmness, perseverance: qualities that are found abundantly
in the divine administration. There was clearly, in the apprehension of
the ancients, some natural fitness or propriety in such an emblem. A
young bullock was worshipped in Egypt as a god. Jeroboam set up two
idols in the form of a calf, the one in Dan and the other in Bethel,
[Kg1 12:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028). A similar object of
worship was found in the Indian, Greek, and Scandinavian mythologies,
and the image appears to have been adopted early and extensively to
represent the divinity.

The above figure is a representation of a calfidol, copied from the
collection made by the artists of the French Institute at Cairo. It is
recumbent, with human eyes, the skin flesh-colored, and the whole
after-parts covered with a white and sky-blue drapery: the horns not on
the head, but above it, and containing within them the symbolical globe
surmounted by two feathers. The meaning of the emblems on the back is
not known. It is copied here merely to show that, for some cause, the
calf was regarded as an emblem of the Divinity. It may illustrate this,
also, to remark that among the sculptures found by Mr. Layard, in the
ruins of Nineveh, were not a few winged bulls, some of them of large
structure, and probably all of them emblematic. One of these was removed
with great difficulty, to be deposited in the British Museum. See Mr.
Layard's Nineveh and its Remains, vol. ii. pp. 64-75. Such emblems were
common in the East; and, being thus common, they would be readily
understood in the time of John.

And the third beast had a face as a man - There is no intimation as to
what was the form of the remaining portion of this living creature; but
as the beasts were "in the midst of the throne," that is, under it as a
support, it may be presumed that they had such a form as was adapted to
that purpose - as supposed above, perhaps the form of an ox. To this
living creature there was attached the head of a man, and that would be
what would be particuLarly visible to one looking on the throne. The
aspect of a man here would denote intelligence - for it is this which
distinguishes man from the creation beneath him; and if the explanation
of the symbol above given be correct, then the meaning of this emblem
is, that the operations of the government of God are conducted with
intelligence and wisdom. That is, the divine administration is not the
result of blind fate or chance; it is founded on a clear knowledge of
things, on what is best to be done, on what will most conduce to the
common good.

Of the truth of this there can be no doubt; and there was a propriety
that, in a vision designed to give to man a view of the government of
the Almighty, this should be appropriately symbolized. It may illustrate
this to observe, that in ancient sculptures it was common to unite the
head of a man with the figure of an animal, as cobining symbols. Among
the most remarkable figures discovered by Mr. Layard, in the ruins of
Nineveh, were winged, human-headed lions. These lions are thus described
by Mr. Layard: "They were about twelve feet in height, and the same
number in length. The body and limbs were admirably portrayed; the
muscles and bones, although strongly developed, to display the strength
of the animal, showed, at the same time, a correct knowledge of its
anatomy and form. Expanded wings sprung from the shoulder and spread
over the back; a knotted girdle, ending in tassels, encircled the loins.
These sculptures, forming an entrance, were partly in full, and partly
in relief. The head and forepart, facing the chambers, were in full; but
only one side of the rest of the slab was sculptured, the back being
placed against the wall of sun-dried bricks" ("Nineveh and its Remains,"
vol. i. p. 75).

The following engraving will give an idea of one of these human-headed
animals, and will serve to illustrate the passage before us alike in
reference to the head, indicating intelligence, and the wings, denoting
rapidity. On the use of these figures, found in the ruins of Nineveh,
Mr. Layard makes the following sensible remarks - remarks admirably
illustrating the view which I take of the symbols before us: "I used to
contemplate for hours these mysterious emblems, and muse over their
intent and history. What more noble forms could have ushered the people
into the temple of their gods? What more subblime images could have been
borrowed from nature by people who sought, unaided by the light of
revealed religion, to embody their conceptions of the wisdom, power, and
ubiquity of a Supreme Being? They could find no better type of intellect
and knowledge than the head of a man; of strength, than the body of the
lion; of rapidity of motion, than the wings of a bird. These winged,
human-headed lions were not idle creations, the offspring of mere fancy
their meaning was written upon them. They had awed and instructed races
which flourished 3000 years ago. Through the portals which they guarded,
kings, priests, and warriors had borne sacrifices to their altars, long
before the wisdom of the East had penetrated into Greece, and had
furnished its mythology with symbols long recognized by the Assyrian
votaries" ("Nineveh and its Remains," vol. i. p. 75, 76).

And the fourth beast was like a flying eagle - All birds, indeed, fly;
but the epithet flying is here employed to add intensity to the
description. The eagle is distinguished, among the feathered race, for
the rapidity, the power, and the elevation of its flight. No other bird
is supposed to fly so high; none ascends with so much power; none is so
majestic and grand in his ascent toward the sun. That which would be
properly symbolized by this would be the rapidity with which the
commands of God are executed; or this characteristic of the divine
government, that the purposes of God are carried into prompt execution.
There is, as it were, a vigorous, powerful, and rapid flight toward the
accomplishment of the designs of God - as the eagle ascends unmolested
toward the sun. Or, it may be that this symbolizes protecting care, or
is an emblem of that protection which God, by his providence, extends
over those who put their trust in him.

Thus, in [Exo 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004), "Ye have seen how
I bare you on eagles' wings." "Hide me under the shadow of thy wings,"
[Psa 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008). "In the shadow of thy
wing's will I rejoice," [Psa 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007). "As
an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth
abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings: so the Lord
alone did lead him," [Deu 32:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011),
etc. As in the case of the other living beings, so it is to be remarked
of the fourth living creature also, that the form of the body is
unknown. There is no impropriety in supposing that it is only its front
aspect that John here speaks of, for that was sufficient for the symbol.
The remaining portion "in the midst of the throne" may have corresponded
with that of the other living beings, as being adapted to a support. In
further illustration of this it may be remarked, that symbols of this
description were common in the Oriental world.

Figures in the human form, or in the form of animals, with the head of
an eagle or a vulture, are found in the ruins of Nineveh, and were
undoubtedly designed to be symbolic. "On the earliest Assyrian
monuments," says Mr. Layard ("Nineveh and its Remains," vol. ii., p.
348, 349), "one of the most prominent sacred types is the eagle-headed,
or the vulture-headed, human figure. Not only is it found in colossal
proportions on the walls, or guarding the portals of the chambers, but
it is also constantly represented in the groups on the embroidered
robes. When thus introduced, it is generally seen contending with other
mythic animals - such as the human-headed lion or bull; and in these
contests it is always the conqueror. it may hence be inferred that it
was a type of the Supreme Deity, or of one of his principal attributes.
A fragment of the Zoroastrian oracles, preserved by Eusebius, declares
that 'God is he that has the head of a hawk. He is the first,
indestructible, eternal, unbegotten, indivisible, dissimilar; the
dispenser of all good; incorruptible; the best of the good, the wisest
of the wise; he is the father of equity and justice, self-taught,
physical and perfect, and wise, and the only inventor of the sacred
philosophy.' Sometimes the head of this bird is added to the body of a
lion.

Under this form of the Egyptian hieracosphinx it is the conqueror in
combats with other symbolical figures, and is frequently represented as
striking down a gazelle or wild goat. It also clearly resembles the
gryphon of the Greek mythology, avowedly an Eastern symbol, and
connected with Apollo, or with the sun, of which the Assyrian form was
probably an emblem." The following figure found in Nimroud, or ancient
Nineveh; may furnish an illustration of one of the usual forms. If these
views of the meaning of these symbols are correct, then the idea which
would be conveyed to the mind of John, and the idea, therefore, which
should be conveyed to our minds, is, that the government of God is
energetic, firm, intelligent, and that in the execution of its purposes
it is rapid like the unobstructed flight of an eagle, or protective like
the care of the eagle for its young. When, in the subsequent parts of
the vision, these living creatures are represented as offering praise
and adoration to Him that sits on the throne [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008); [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), [Rev
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014), the meaning would be, in
accordance with this representation, that all the acts of divine
government do, as if they were personified, unite in the praise which
the redeemed and the angels ascribe to God. All living things, and all
acts of the Almighty, conspire to proclaim his glory. The church, by her
representatives, the "four and twenty elders," honors God; the angels,
without number, unite in the praise; all creatures in heaven, in earth,
under the earth, and in the sea [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013), join in the song; and all the
acts and ways of God declare also his majesty and glory: for around his
throne, and beneath his throne, are expressive symbols of the firmness,
energy, intelligence, and power with which his government is
administered.

[Revelation 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 4:8</span></span>

And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him - An emblem
common to them all, denoting that, in reference to each and all the
things here symbolized, there was one common characteristic - that in
heaven there is the utmost promptness in executing the divine commands.
Compare [Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002); [Psa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010); [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003); [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040). No mention is made of the
manner in which these wings were arranged, and conjecture in regard to
that is vain. The seraphim, as seen by Isaiah, had each one six wings,
with two of which the face was covered, to denote profound reverence;
with two the feet, or lower parts - emblematic of modesty; and with two
they flew - emblematic of their celerity in executing the commands of
God, [Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002). Perhaps without
impropriety we may suppose that, in regard to these living beings seen
by John, two of the wings of each were employed, as in Isaiah, to cover
the face - token of profound reverence; and that the remainder were
employed in flight denoting the rapidity with which the divine commands
are executed. Mercury, the messenger of Jupiter among the pagan, was
represented with wings, and nothing is more common in the paintings and
basreliefs of antiquity than such representations.

And they were full of eyes within - Prof. Stuart more correctly renders
this, "around and within are full of eyes"; connecting the word "around"
("about"), not with the wings, as in our version, but with the eyes. The
meaning is, that the portions of the beasts that were visible from the
outside of the throne, and the portions under or within the throne, were
covered with eyes. The obvious design of this is to mark the universal
vigilance of divine providence.

And they rest not - Margin, have no rest. That is, they are constantly
employed; there is no intermission. The meaning, as above explained, is,
that the works and ways of God are constantly bringing praise to him.

Day and night - Continually. They who are employed day and night fill up
the whole time - for this is all.

Saying, Holy, holy, holy - For the meaning of this, see the notes on
[Isa 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003).

Lord God Almighty - Isaiah [Isa 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)
expresses it, "Yahweh of hosts." The reference is to the true God, and
the epithet Almighty is one that is often given him. It is especially
appropriate here, as there were to be, as the sequel shows, remarkable
exhibitions of power in executing the purposes described in this book.

Which was, and is, and is to come - Who is eternal - existing in all
past time; existing now; and to continue to exist forever. See the notes
on [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004).

[Revelation 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 4:9</span></span>

And when those beasts give glory ... - As often as those living beings
ascribe glory to God. They did this continually [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008); and, if the above explanation be
correct, then the idea is that the ways and acts of God in his
providential government are continually of such a nature as to honor
him.

[Revelation 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 4:10</span></span>

The four and twenty elders fall down before him ... - The
representatives of the redeemed church in heaven (see the notes at [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004)) also unite in the praise. The
meaning, if the explanation of the symbol be correct, is, that the
church universal unites in praise to God for all that characterizes his
administration. In the connection in which this stands here, the sense
would be, that as often as there is any new manifestation of the
principles of the divine government, the church ascribes new praise to
God. Whatever may be thought of this explanation of the meaning of the
symbols, of the fact here stated there can be no doubt. The church of
God always rejoices when there is any new manifestation of the
principles of the divine administration. As all these acts, in reality,
bring glory and honor to God, the church, as often as there is any new
manifestation of the divine character and purposes, renders praise anew.
Nor can it be doubted that the view here taken is one that is every way
appropriate to the general character of this book. The great design was
to disclose what God was to do in future times, in the various
revolutions that were to take place on the earth, until his government
should be firmly established, and the principles of his administration
should everywhere prevail; and there was a propriety, therefore, in
describing the representatives of the church as taking part in this
universal praise, and as casting every crown at the feet of Him who sits
upon the throne.

And cast their crowns before the throne - They are described as
"crowned" [Rev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004), that is, as
triumphant, and as kings (compare [Rev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)), and they are here represented
as casting their crowns at his feet, in token that they owe their
triumph to Him. To his providential dealings, to his wise and merciful
government, they owe it that they are crowned at all; and there is,
therefore, a propriety that they should acknowledge this in a proper
manner by placing their crowns at his feet.

[Revelation 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 4:11</span></span>

Thou art worthy, O Lord - In thy character, perfections, and government,
there is what makes it proper that universal praise should be rendered.
The feeling of all true worshippers is, that (God is worthy of the
praise that is ascribed to him. No man worships him aright who does not
feel that there is that in his nature and his doings which makes it
proper that he should receive universal adoration.

To receive glory - To have praise or glory ascribed to thee.

And honour - To be honored; that is, to be approached and adored as
worthy of honor.

And power - To have power ascribed to thee, or to be regarded as having
infinite power. Man can confer no power on God, but he may acknowledge
what he has, and adore him for its exertion in his behalf and in the
government of the world.

For thou hast created all things - Thus, laying the foundation for
praise. No one can contemplate this vast and wonderful universe without
seeing that He who has made it is worthy to "receive glory, and honor,
and power." Compare the notes on [Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007).

And for thy pleasure they are - They exist by thy will - διὰ τὸ θέλημά
dia to thelēma. The meaning is, that they owe their existence to the
will of God, and therefore their creation lays the foundation for
praise. He "spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast." He
said, "Let there be light; and there was light." There is no other
reason why the universe exists at all than that such was the will of
God; there is nothing else that is to be adduced as explaining the fact
that anything has now a being. The putting forth of that will explains
all; and, consequently, whatever wisdom, power, goodness, is manifested
in the universe, is to be traced to God, and is the expression of what
was in him from eternity. It is proper, then, to "look up through nature
to nature's God," and wherever we see greatness or goodness in the works
of creation, to regard them as the faint expression of what exists
essentially in the Creator.

And were created - Bringing more distinctly into notice the fact that
they owe their existence to his will. They are not eternal; they are not
self-existent; they were formed from nothing. This concludes the
magnificent introduction to the principal visions in this book. It is
beautifully appropriate to the solemn disclosures which are to be made
in the following portions of the book, and, as in the case of Isaiah and
Ezekiel, was eminently adapted to impress the mind of the holy seer with
awe. Heaven is opened to his view; the throne of God is seen; there is a
vision of Him who sits upon that throne; thunders and voices are heard
around the throne; the lightnings play; and a rainbow, symbol of peace,
encircles all; the representatives of the redeemed church, occupying
subordinate thrones, and in robes of victory, and with crowns on their
heads, are there; a vast smooth expanse like the sea is spread out
before the throne; and the emblems of the wisdom, the power, the
vigilance, the energy, the strength of the divine administration are
there, represented as in the act of bringing honor to God, and
proclaiming his praise. The mind of John was doubtless prepared by these
august visions for the disclosures which follow; and the mind of the
reader should in like manner be deeply and solemnly impressed when he
contemplates them, as if he looked into heaven, and saw the impressive
grandeur of the worship there. Let us fancy ourselves, therefore, with
the holy seer looking into heaven, and listen with reverence to what the
great God discloses respecting the various changes that are to occur
until every foe of the church shall be subdued, and the earth shall
acknowledge his sway, and the whole scene shall close in the triumphs
and joys of heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 5](rev005)

</div>
