<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom000)  [Next](rom002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

[Romans 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 1:1</span></span>

Paul - The original name of the author of this Epistle was "Saul." [Act
7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058); [Act
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001); [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001), etc. This was changed to Paul
(see the note at [Act 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009)), and by
this name he is generally known in the New Testament. The reason why he
assumed this name is not certainly known. It was, however, in accordance
with the custom of the times; see the note at [Act
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009). The name Saul was Hebrew; the
name Paul was Roman. In addressing a letter to the Romans, he would
naturally make use of the name to which they were accustomed, and which
would excite no prejudice among them. The ancient custom was to begin an
epistle with the name of the writer, as Cicero to Varro, etc. We record
the name at the end. It may be remarked, however, that the placing the
name of the writer at the beginning of an epistle was always done, and
is still, when the letter was one of authority, or when it conferred any
special privileges. Thus, in the proclamation of Cyrus [Ezr
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002), "Thus saith Cyrus, king of
Persia," etc.; see also [Ezr 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011);
[Ezr 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012). "Artaxerxes, king of kings,
unto Ezra the priest," etc. [Dan 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001).
The commencement of a letter by an apostle to a Christian church in this
manner was especially proper as indicating authority.

A servant - This name was what the Lord Jesus himself directed His
disciples to use, as their general appellation; [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025); [Mat
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027); [Mar
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#044). And it was the customary name
which they assumed; [Gal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010); [Col
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012); [Pe2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001); [Jde
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001); [Act
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029); [Tit
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001); [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001). The proper meaning of this word
servant, δοῦλος doulos, is slave, one who is not free. It expresses the
condition of one who has a master, or who is at the control of another.
It is often, however, applied to courtiers, or the officers that serve
under a king: because in an eastern monarchy the relation of an absolute
king to his courtiers corresponded nearly to that of a master and a
slave. Thus, the word is expressive of dignity and honor; and the
servants of a king denote officers of a high rank and station. It is
applied to the prophets as those who were honored by God, or especially
entrusted by him with office; [Deu
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005); [Jos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002); [Jer
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#004). The name is also given to the
Messiah, [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), "Behold my servant
in whom my soul delighteth," etc.; [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011), "shall my righteous servant
justify many." The apostle uses it here evidently to denote his
acknowledging Jesus Christ as his master; as indicating his dignity, as
especially appointed by him to his great work; and as showing that in
this Epistle he intended to assume no authority of his own, but simply
to declare the will of his master, and theirs.

Called to be an apostle - This word called means here not merely to be
invited, but has the sense of appointed. It indicates that he had not
assumed the office himself, but that he was set apart to it by the
authority of Christ himself. It was important for Paul to state this,

\(1\) Because the other apostles had been called or chosen to this work
[Joh 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016), [Joh
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019); [Mat
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001); [Luk
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013); and,

\(2\) Because Paul was not one of those originally appointed.

It was of consequence for him therefore, to affirm that he had not taken
this high office to himself, but that he had been called to it by the
authority of Jesus Christ. His appointment to this office he not
infrequently takes occasion to vindicate; [Co1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001), etc.: [Gal
1:12-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012); [Co2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012); [Ti1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007); [Ti2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011); [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013).

An apostle - One sent to execute a commission. It is applied because the
apostles were sent out by Jesus Christ to preach his gospel, and to
establish his church; [Mat 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002) note;
[Luk 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013) note.

Separated - The word translated "separated unto," ἀφορίζω aphorizō,
means to designate, to mark out by fixed limits, to bound as a field,
etc. It denotes those who are "separated," or called out from the common
mass; [Act 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009); [Co2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017). The meaning here does not
materially differ from the expression, "called to be an apostle," except
that perhaps this includes the notion of the purpose or designation of
God to this work. Thus, Paul uses the same word respecting himself; [Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015), "God, who separated me from my
mother's womb, and called me by his grace," that is, God designated me;
marked me out; or designed that I should be an apostle from my infancy.
In the same way Jeremiah was designated to be a prophet; [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005).

Unto the gospel of God - Designated or designed by God that I should
make it "my business" to preach the gospel. Set apart to this, as the
special, great work of my life; as having no other object for which I
should live. For the meaning of the word "gospel," see the note at [Mat
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). It is called the gospel of God
because it is his appointment; it has been originated by him, and has
his authority. The function of an apostle was to preach the gospel Paul
regarded himself as separated to this work. It was not to live in
splendor, wealth, and ease, but to devote himself to this great business
of proclaiming good news, that God was reconciled to people in his Son.
This is the sole business of all ministers of "religion."

[Romans 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 1:2</span></span>

Which he had promised afore - Which gospel, or which doctrines, he had
before announced.

By the prophets - The word "prophets" here is used to include those who
wrote as well as those who spake. It included the teachers of the
ancient Jews generally.

In the holy scriptures - In the writings of the Old Testament. They were
called holy because they were inspired by the Holy Spirit, and were
regarded as separated from all other writings, and worthy of all
reverence. The apostle here declares that he was not about to advance
anything new. His doctrines were in accordance with the acknowledged
oracles of God. Though they might appear to be new, yet he regarded the
gospel as entirely consistent with all that had been declared in the
Jewish dispensation; and not only consistent, but as actually promised
there. He affirms, therefore:

\(1\) That all this was promised, and no small part of the Epistle is
employed to show this.

\(2\) that it was confirmed by the authority of holy and inspired men.

\(3\) that it depended on no vague and loose tradition, but was
recorded, so that people might examine for themselves.

The reason why the apostle was so anxious to show that his doctrine
coincided with the Old Testament was because the church at Rome was made
up in part of Jews. He wished to show them, and the remainder of his
countrymen, that the Christian religion was built on the foundation of
their prophets, and their acknowledged writings. So doing, he would
disarm their prejudice, and furnish a proof of the truth of religion. It
was a constant position with the apostle that he advanced nothing but
what was maintained by the best and holiest men of the nation. [Act
26:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#022), "saying none other things
than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come," etc. There
was a further reason here for his appealing so much to the Old
Testament. He had never been at Rome. He was therefore personally a
stranger, and it was proper for him then especially to show his regard
for the doctrines of the prophets. Hence, he appeals here so often to
the Old Testament; and defends every point by the authority of the
Bible. The particular passages of the Old Testament on which he relied
will come before us in the course of the Epistle. See particularly Rom.
3;4; 9; 10; 11. We may see here,

\(1\) The reverence which Paul showed for the Old Testament. He never
undervalued it. He never regarded it as obsolete, or useless. He
manifestly studied it; and never fell into the impious opinion that the
Old Testament is of little value.

\(2\) if these things were promised - predicted in the Old Testament,
then Christianity is true. Every passage which he adduces is therefore
proof that it is from God.

[Romans 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 1:3</span></span>

Concerning his Son - This is connected with the first verse, with the
word "gospel." The gospel of God concerning his Son. The design of the
gospel was to make a communication relative to his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the whole of it. There is no "good news" to man respecting
salvation except what comes by Jesus Christ.

Which was made - The word translated "was made" means usually "to be,"
or "to become." It is used, however, in the sense of being born. Thus,
[Gal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004), "God sent forth his Son made
of a woman," born of a woman. [Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058), "before Abraham was (born), I
am." In this sense it seems to be used here, who was born, or descended
from the seed of David.

Of the seed of David - Of the posterity or lineage of David. He was a
descendant of David. David was perhaps the most illustrious of the kings
of Israel. The promise to him was that there should not fail a man to
sit on this throne; [Kg1 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#004); [Kg1
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025); [Kg1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#005); [Ch2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#016). This ancient promise was
understood as referring to the Messiah, and hence, in the New Testament
he is called the descendant of David, and so much pains is taken to show
that he was of his line; [Luk 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027);
[Mat 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027); [Mat
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022); [Mat
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#023); [Mat
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009), [Mat
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015); [Mat
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042), [Mat
22:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045); [Joh
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042); [Ti2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008). As the Jews universally believed
that the Messiah would be descended from David [Joh
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042), it was of great importance for
the sacred writers to make it out clearly that Jesus of Nazareth was of
that line and family. Hence, it happened, that though our Saviour was
humble, and poor, and obscure, yet he had that on which no small part of
the world have been accustomed so much to pride themselves, an
illustrious ancestry. To a Jew there could be scarcely any honor so high
as to be descended from the best of their kings; and it shows how little
the Lord Jesus esteemed the honors of this world, that he could always
evince his deep humility in circumstances where people are usually
proud; and that when he spoke of the honors of this world, and told how
little they were worth, he was not denouncing what was not within his
reach.

According to the flesh - The word "flesh," σάρξ sarx, is used in the
Scriptures in a great variety of significations.

\(1\) it denotes, as with us, the flesh literally of any living being;
[Luk 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039), "A spirit hath not flesh
and bones," etc.

\(2\) the animal system, the body, including flesh and bones, the
visible part of man, in distinction from the invisible, or the soul;
[Act 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031), "Neither did his flesh (his
body) "see corruption." [Co1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005); [Co1
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039).

\(3\) the man, the whole animated system, body and soul; [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003), "In the likeness of sinful flesh.
[Co1 15:50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050); [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017); [Luk
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006).

\(4\) human nature. As a man. Thus, [Act
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030), "God hath sworn with an oath
that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, that is, in his
human nature, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne." [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005), "whose are the fathers, and of
whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
forever." The same is its meaning here. He was a descendant of David in
his human nature, or as a man. This implies, of course, that he had
another nature besides his human, or that while he was a man he was also
something else; that there was a nature in which he was not descended
from David.

That this is its meaning will still further appear by the following
observations.

\(1\) the apostle expressly makes a contrast between his condition
according to the flesh, and that according to the spirit of holiness.

\(2\) the expression "according to the flesh" is applied to no other one
in the New Testament but to Jesus Christ. Though the word "flesh" often
occurs, and is often used to denote man, yet the special expression,
"according to the flesh" occurs in no other connection.

In all the Scriptures it is never said of any prophet or apostle, any
lawgiver or king, or any man in any capacity, that he came in the flesh,
or that he was descended from certain ancestors according to the flesh.
Nor is such an expression ever used any where else. If it were applied
to a mere man, we should instantly ask in what other way could he come
than in the flesh? Has he a higher nature? Is he an angel, or a seraph?
The expression would be unmeaningful. And when, therefore, it is applied
to Jesus Christ, it implies, if language has any meaning, that there was
a sense in which Jesus was not descended from David. What that was,
appears in the next verse.

[Romans 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 1:4</span></span>

And declared - In the margin, "determined." Τοῦ ὁρισθέντος Tou
horisthentos. The ancient Syriac has, "And he was known to be the Son of
God by might and by the Holy Spirit, who rose from the house of the
dead." The Latin Vulgate, "Who was "predestinated" the Son of God," etc.
The Arabic, "The Son of God destined by power special to the Holy
Spirit," etc. The word translated "declared to be" means properly "to
bound, to fix limits to," as to a field, to determine its proper limits
or boundaries, to "define," etc. [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026), "and hath determined the bounds
of their habitation." Hence, it means to determine, constitute; ordain,
decree; i, e. to fix or designate the proper boundaries of a truth, or a
doctrine; to distinguish its lines and marks from error; or to show, or
declare a thing to be so by any action. [Luk
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#022), "the Son of man goeth as it was
determined, as it was fixed; purposed, defined, in the purpose of God,
and declared in the prophets. [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023), "him being delivered by the
determinate counsel, the definite. constituted will, or design, of God.
[Act 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029); [Heb
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#007), "he limiteth a certain day,"
fixes it, defines it. In this sense it is clearly used in this place.
The act of raising him from the dead designated him, or constituted him
the Son of God. It was such an act as in the circumstances of the case
showed that he was the Son of God in regard to a nature which was not
"according to the flesh." The ordinary resurrection of a man, like that
of Lazarus, would not show that he was the Son of God; but in the
circumstances of Jesus Christ it did; for he had claimed to be so; he
had taught it; and God now attested the truth of his teaching by raising
him from the dead.

The Son of God - The word "son" is used in a great variety of senses,
denoting literally a son, then a descendant, posterity near or remote, a
disciple or ward, an adopted son, or one that imitates or resembles
another; see the note at [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001). The
expression "sons of God," or "son of God," is used in an almost equal
latitude of signification. It is:

\(1\) Applied to Adam, as being immediately created by God without an
earthly father; [Luk 3:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#038).

\(2\) it is applied to saints or Christians, as being adopted into his
family, and sustaining to him the relation of children; [Joh
1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012); [Jo1
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001), etc. This name is given to them
because they resemble him in their moral character; [Mat
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045).

\(3\) it is given to strong men as resembling God in strength; [Gen
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002), "The sons of God saw the
daughters of men," etc. Here these men of violence and strength are
called sons of God, just as the high hills are called hills of God, the
lofty trees of Lebanon are called cedars of God, etc.

\(4\) kings are sometimes called his sons, as resembling him in dominion
and power, [Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006).

\(5\) the name is given to angels because they resemble God; because he
is their Creator and Father, etc., [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006); [Job
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001); [Dan
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025).

But the name the "Son of God" is in the New Testament given by way of
eminence to the Lord Jesus Christ. This was the common and favorite name
by which the apostles designated him. The expression "Son of God" is
applied to him no less than 27 times in the Gospels and the Acts of the
Apostles, and 15 times in the Epistles and the Revelation The expression
my Son, and his Son, thy Son, etc. is applied to him in his special
relation to God, times almost without number. The other most common
appellation which is given to him is "Son of man." By this name he
commonly designated himself. There can be no doubt that that was assumed
to denote that he was a man, that he sustained a special relation to
man, and that he chose to speak of himself as a man. The first, the most
obvious, impression on the use of the name "Son of man" is that he was
truly a man, and was used doubtless to guard against the impression that
one who manifested so many other qualities, and did so many things like
a celestial being, was not truly human being.

The phrase "Son of God" stands in contrast with the title "Son of man,"
and as the natural and obvious import of that is that he was a man, so
the natural and obvious import of the title "Son of God" is that he was
divine; or that he sustained relations to God designated by the name Son
of God, corresponding to the relations which he sustained to man
designated by the name Son of Man. The natural idea of the phrase, "Son
of God," therefore is, that he sustained a relation to God in his nature
which implied more than was human or angelic; which implied equality
with God. Accordingly, this idea was naturally suggested to the Jews by
his calling God his Father; [Joh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018),
"But said also that God was his Father, "making himself equal with God."
This idea Jesus immediately proceeded to confirm; see the note at [Joh
5:19-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019). The same idea is also
suggested in [Joh 10:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029), [Joh
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033), [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036), "Say ye of him whom the Father
hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest: "because I
said I am the Son of God?" There is in these places the fullest proof
that the title suggested naturally the idea of equality with God; or the
idea of his sustaining a relation to God corresponding to the relation
of equality to man suggested by the title Son of man.

This view is still further sustained in the first chapter of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, [Rom 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001), "God hath
spoken unto us by His Son." He is the brightness of his glory, and the
express image of his person, [Rom 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003).
He is higher than the angels, and they are required to worship him, [Rom
1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004). He is called "God," and his
throne is forever and ever, [Rom 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008).
He is "the Creator of the heavens and the earth," and is immutably the
same, [Rom 1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010). Thus, the rank or
title of the "Son of God" suggests the ideas and attributes of the
Divinity. This idea is sustained throughout the New Testament. See [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009), "He that hath seen me hath seen
the Father;" [Rom 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023), "That all men
shall honor the Son even as they honor the Father;" [Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019), "It hath pleased the Father that
in him should all fulness dwell;" [Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009), "For in him dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily:" [Phi
2:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002); [Rev
5:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013); [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023). It is not affirmed that this
title was given to the second person of the Trinity before he became
incarnate; or to suggest the idea of any derivation or extraction before
he was made flesh. There is no instance in which the appellation is not
conferred to express his relation after he assumed human flesh. Of any
derivation from God, or emanation from him in eternity, the Scriptures
are silent. The title is conferred on him, it is supposed, with
reference to his condition in this world, as the Messiah. And it is
conferred, it is believed, for the following reasons, or to denote the
following things, namely.

\(1\) to designate his unique relation to God, as equal with him, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018); [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027); [Luk
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022); [Luk
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022); [Pe2
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017), or as sustaining a most intimate
and close connection with him, such as neither man nor angels could do,
an acquaintance with his nature [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027), plans, and counsels, such as no
being but one who was equal with God could possess. In this sense, I
regard it as conferred on him in the passage under consideration.

\(2\) it designates him as the anointed king, or the Messiah. In this
sense it accords with the use of the word in [Psa
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006). See [Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016), "Thou art "the Christ, the Son
of the living God." [Mat 26:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063), "I
adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether "thou be the
Christ, the Son of God." [Mar 14:61](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#061);
[Luk 22:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#070); [Joh
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034); [Act
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020), "he preached Christ in the
synagogues, that he is the Son of God."

\(3\) it was conferred on him to denote his miraculous conception in the
womb of the Virgin Mary. [Luk 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035),
"the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, therefore διό dio also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the "Son of God."

(It is readily admitted, that on the subject of the "eternal Sonship"
very much has been said of an unintelligible kind. Terms applicable only
to the relation as it exists among people have been freely applied to
this mystery. But whatever may be thought of such language as "the
eternal generation," "the eternal procession," and "the subordination"
of the Son; the doctrine itself, which this mode of speaking was
invented to illustrate, and has perhaps served to obscure, is in no way
affected. The question is not, Have the friends of the doctrine at all
times employed judicious illustration? but, What is the "Scripture
evidence" on the point? If the eternal Sonship is to be discarded on
such grounds, we fear the doctrine of the Trinity must share a similar
fate. Yet, those who maintain the divinity of Christ, and
notwithstanding deny the eternal Sonship, seem generally to found their
objections on these incomprehensible illustrations, and from thence leap
to the conclusion that the doctrine itself is false.

That the title Son of God, when applied to Jesus, denotes a natural and
not merely an official Sonship, a real and not a figurative relation; in
other words, that it takes origin from the divine nature, is the view
which the Catholic Church has all along maintained on this subject: no
explanation which falls short of divinity will exhaust the meaning of
the title. Christ is indeed called the Son of God on account of his
miraculous conception; "That holy thing," said the angel to the Virgin,
"which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of the Highest."
But the creation of Adam, by the immediate power of God, without father
or mother, would constitute him the Son of God, in a sense equally or
even more exalted than that in which the title is applied to Jesus, if
the miraculous conception were allowed to exhaust its meaning. Nor will
an appeal to the resurrection of Christ serve the purpose of those who
deny the divine origin of the title, since that is assigned as the
evidence only, and not the ground of it.

The Redeemer was not constituted, but declared or evidenced to be, "the
Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead." In the search
for a solution short of divine Sonship, recourse is next had to the
office of Christ as Mediator. Yet though the appellation in question be
frequently given in connection with the official character of Jesus, a
careful examination of some of these passages will lead to the
conclusion, that "though the Son of God hold the office, yet the office
does not furnish the reason or ground of the title." The name is given
to distinguish Jesus from all others who have held office, and "in such
a way as to convince us that the office is rendered "honorable" by the
exalted personage discharging its duties, and not that the person merits
the designation in virtue of the office." "When the fulness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman," etc. "God so loved
the world that he gave his "only begotten Son," etc. Now the glory of
the mission in the first of these passages, and the greatness of the
gift in the second, is founded on the original dignity of the person
sent and given. But if the person derive his title from the office only,
there would seem to be comparatively little grandeur in the mission, and
small favor in the gift. The passages quoted would more readily prove
that God had bestowed favor on Jesus, by giving him an office from which
he derived so much "personal dignity!"

The following are some of the passages in which the appellation "Son of
God" is found connected with the office of Christ. "These are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, (an official term
signifying "anointed Saviour"), the Son of God;" "He answered and said,
I believe that Jesus Christ (the official designation) is the Son of
God;" "Whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God" Now it is reasonable to
suppose, that these declarations and confessions concerning the person
of Christ, contain not only an acknowledgment of his official character,
but also of his personal dignity. "Thou art Jesus the Christ," is the
acknowledgment of his office, and "thou art the Son of God," is an
acknowledgment of his natural dignity. The confession of the Ethiopian
eunuch, and of Peter, would be incomplete on any other supposition. It
should be borne in mind also, that the question of Christ to Peter was
not, What office do ye suppose I hold? but, "Whom say ye that I am?" See
Haldane on [Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004).

If, then, the miraculous conception, the resurrection, and the office of
Christ, do not all of them together exhaust the meaning of the
appellation, we must seek for its origin higher still - we must ascend
to the divine nature. We may indeed take one step more upward before we
reach the divine nature, and suppose, with Professor Stuart and others,
that the name denotes "the complex person of the Saviour," as God and
man, or in one word, "Mediator." Comment on Heb. Exe. 2. But this is
just the old resolution of it into official character, and is therefore
liable to all the objections stated above. For while it is admitted by
those who hold this view, that Christ is divine, it is distinctly
implied, that the title Son of God would not have been his but for his
office.

In the end therefore we must resolve the name into the divine nature.
That it implies equality with God is clearly proved in this commentary.
So the Jews understood it, and the Saviour tacitly admitted that their
construction was right. And as there is no equality with God without
divinity, the title clearly points to such a distinction in the Godhead
as is implied in the relative terms, Father and Son. Indeed it is not
easy to understand how the doctrine of the Trinity can be maintained
apart from that of the eternal Sonship. If there be in the Godhead a
distinction of persons, does not that distinction belong to the nature
of the Godhead, independent of any official relations. Or will it be
maintained, that the distinction of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, arises
entirely from the scheme of redemption, and did not exist from eternity?
We may find fault with Dr Owen, and others, who speak of a "hypostatical
subordination of persons in the Godhead." Prof. Stuart, Com. Heb. Exe.
1. Yet, the distinction itself, through we cannot explain it, "must" be
allowed to exist.

The remaining evidence of the eternal Sonship may be thus stated.

1\. Christ is called God's "own Son," his "beloved," and "well beloved,"
and "only begotten Son.' So strong and special adjuncts seem intended to
prevent any such idea as that of figurative Sonship. If these do not
express the natural relationship, it is beyond the power of language to
do it. Moreover, correct criticism binds us to adopt the natural and
ordinary signification of words, unless in such cases as plainly refuse
it,

2\. In a passage already quoted, God is said "to have sent forth His Son
to redeem us," etc. And there are many passages to the same effect, in
which is revealed, not only the pre-existence of Christ, but the
capacity in which he originally moved, and the rank which he held in
heaven. "God sent forth his Son," implies that he held that title prior
to his mission. This at least is the most obvious sense of the passage,
and the sense which an ordinary reader would doubtless affix to it. The
following objection, however, has been supposed fatal to this argument:
"The name Son of God is indeed used, when speaking of him previous to
his having assumed human nature, but so are the names of Jesus and the
Christ, which yet we know properly to belong to him, only as united to
humanity." It is readily allowed that the simple fact of the name being
given prior to the incarnation proves nothing of itself. But the case is
altered when this fact is viewed in connection with the difficulty or
impossibility of resolving the Sonship into an official relation. No
such difficulty exists in regard to the terms "Jesus" and "Christ," for
they are plainly official names, signifying "anointed Saviour."

3\. [Rom 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003). If in this passage we
understand the apostle to declare, that Christ was of the seed of David,
according to his human nature, the rule of antithesis demands, that we
understand him next to assert what he was according to his divine
nature, namely, the Son of God.

The views given in this Note are those adopted by the most eminent
orthodox divines. The language of the Westminster divines is well known;
"The only Redeemer of the covenant of grace is the Lord Jesus Christ,
who being the eternal Son of God, of one substance etc." "Larger
Catechism." Mr. Scott "is decidedly of opinion, that Christ is called
the only Son of God in respect of his divine nature." Commentary, [Heb
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)." The late Principal Hill, in
his Theological System, having exposed what he deemed erroneous views on
this subject, adds, "there is a more ancient and a more exalted title to
this name (Son of God), which is inseparable from the nature" of Christ.
"3rd edition, vol. i., page 363.)"

With power - ἐν δυνάμει en dunamei. By some this expression has been
supposed to mean in power or authority, after his resurrection from the
dead. It is said, that he was before a man of sorrows; now he was
clothed with power and authority. But I have seen no instance in which
the expression in power denotes office, or authority. It denotes
physical energy and might, and this was bestowed on Jesus before his
resurrection as well as after; [Act
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038), "God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the Holy Spirit, and with power; [Rom
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019); [Co1
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043). With such power Jesus will come
to judgment: [Mat 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030). If there is
any passage in which the word "power" means authority, office, etc., it
is [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018), "All power in heaven
and earth is given unto me." But this is not a power which was given
unto him after his resurrection, or which he did not possess before. The
same authority to commission his disciples he had exercised before this
on the same ground, [Mat 10:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007). I am
inclined to believe, therefore, that the expression means "powerfully,
efficiently;" he was with great power, or conclusiveness, shown to be
the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead. Thus, the phrase "in
power" is used to qualify a verb in [Col
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#029), "Which worketh in me mightily,"
"Greek," in power, that is, operating in me effectually, or powerfully.
The ancient versions seem to have understood it in the same way.
"Syriac," "He was known to be the Son of God by power, and by the Holy
Spirit." "AEthiopic," "Whom he declared to be the Son of God by his own
power, and by his Holy Spirit," etc. "Arabic," "Designated the Son of
God by power appropriate to the Holy Spirit."

According to the spirit of holiness - κατά πνεῦμα ἁγιωσύνης kata pneuma
hagiōsunēs. This expression has been variously understood. We may arrive
at its meaning by the following considerations.

\(1\) it is not the third person in the Trinity that is referred to
here. The designation of that person is always in a different form. It
is "the Holy Spirit," the Holy Ghost, πνεῦμα ἅγιον pneuma hagion, or τὸ
πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον to pneuma to hagion; never "the spirit of holiness."

\(2\) it stands in contrast with the flesh; [Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003), "According to the flesh, the seed
of David: according to the spirit of holiness, the Son of God." As the
former refers doubtless to his human nature, so this must refer to the
nature designated by the title Son of God, that is, to his superior or
divine nature.

\(3\) the expression is altogether unique to the Lord Jesus Christ. No
where in the Scriptures, or in any other writings, is there an
affirmation like this. What would be meant by it if affirmed of a mere
man?

\(4\) it cannot mean that the Holy Spirit, the third person in the
Trinity, showed that Jesus was the Son of God by raising him from the
dead because that act is no where attributed to him. It is uniformly
ascribed either to God, as God [Act
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024), [Act
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#032); [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015), [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026); [Act
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010); [Act
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030); [Act
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#040); [Act
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#030), [Act
13:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033); [Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031); [Rom
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009); [Eph
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020), or to the Father [Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004), or to Jesus himself [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018). In no instance is this act
ascribed to the Holy Spirit.

\(5\) it indicates a state far more elevate than any human dignity, or
honor In regard to his earthly descent, he was of a royal race; in
regard to the Spirit of holiness, much more than that, he was the Son of
God.

\(6\) the word "Spirit" is used often to designate God, the holy God, as
distinguished from all the material forms of idol worship, [Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024).

\(7\) the word "Spirit" is applied to the Messiah, in his more elevated
or divine nature. [Co1 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045), "the
last Adam was made a quickening Spirit." [Co2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017), "now the Lord (Jesus) is that
Spirit." [Heb 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014), Christ is said to
have offered himself through the eternal Spirit. [Pe1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018), he is said to have been "put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit." [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016), he is said to have been
"justified in the Spirit." In most of these passages there is the same
contrast noticed between his flesh, his human nature, and his other
state, which occurs in [Rom 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003). In
all these instances, the design is, doubtless, to speak of him as a man,
and as something more than a man: he was one thing as a man; he was
another thing in his other nature. In the one, he was of David; was put
to death, etc. In the other, he was of God, he was manifested to be
such, he was restored to the elevation which he had sustained before his
incarnation and death, [Joh 17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001);
[Phi 2:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002). The expression,
"according to the Spirit of holiness," does not indeed of itself imply
divinity. It denotes that holy and more exalted nature which he
possessed as distinguished from the human. What that is, is to be
learned from other declarations. "This expression implies simply that it
was such as to make proper the appellation, the Son of God." Other
places, as we have seen, show that that designation naturally implied
divinity. And that this was the true idea couched under the expression,
according to the Spirit of holiness, appears from those numerous texts
of scripture which explicitly assert his divinity; see [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), etc., and the note on that place.

By the resurrection from the dead - This has been also variously
understood. Some have maintained that the word "by," ἐξ ex, denotes
after. He was declared to be the Son of God in power after he rose from
the dead; that is, he was solemnly invested with the dignity that became
the Son of God after he had been so long in a state of voluntary
humiliation. But to this view there are some insuperable objections.

\(1\) it is not the natural and usual meaning of the word "by."

\(2\) it is not the object of the apostle to state the time when the
thing was done, or the order, but evidently to declare the fact, and the
evidence of the fact. If such had been his design, he would have said
that previous to his death he was shown to be of the seed of David, but
afterward that he was invested with power.

\(3\) though it must be admitted that the preposition "by, ἐξ ex,"
sometimes means after ([Mat 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#020);
[Luk 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#027); xxiii. 8, etc.), yet its
proper and usual meaning is to denote the efficient cause, or the agent,
or origin of a thing, [Mat 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003), [Mat
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018); [Mat
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#025); [Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005); [Rom
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016); [Rom
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036), "OF him are all things." [Co1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006), "one God, the Father, of whom are
all things," etc. In this sense, I suppose it is used here; and that the
apostle means to affirm that he was clearly or decisively shown to be
the Son of God by his resurrection from the dead.

But here will it be asked, how did his resurrection show this? Was not
Lazarus raised from the dead? And did not many saints rise also after
Jesus? And were not the dead raised by the apostles; by Elijah, by the
bones of Elisha, and by Christ himself? And did their being raised prove
that they were the sons of God? I answer that the mere fact of the
resurrection of the body proves nothing in itself about the character
and rank of the being that is raised. But in the circumstances in which
Jesus was placed it might show it conclusively. When Lazarus was raised,
it was not in attestation of anything which he had taught or done. It
was a mere display of the power and benevolence of Christ. But in regard
to the resurrection of Jesus, let the following circumstances be taken
into the account.

\(1\) he came as the Messiah.

\(2\) he uniformly taught that he was the Son of God.

\(3\) he maintained that God was his Father in such a sense as to imply
equality with him, [Joh 5:17-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017); [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036).

\(4\) he claimed authority to abolish the laws of the Jews, to change
their customs, and to be himself absolved from the observance of those
laws, even as his Father was, John 5:1-17; [Mar
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#028).

\(5\) when God raised him up therefore, it was not an ordinary event. It
was "a public attestation, in the face of the universe, of the truth of
his claims to be the Son of God." God would not sanction the doings and
doctrines of an impostor. And when, therefore he raised up Jesus, he, by
this act, showed the truth of his claims, that he was the Son of God.

Further, in the view of the apostles, the resurrection was intimately
connected with the ascension and exaltation of Jesus. The one made the
other certain. And it is not improbable that when they spoke of his
resurrection, they meant to include, not merely that single act, but the
entire series of doings of which that was the first, and which was the
pledge of the elevation and majesty of the Son of God. Hence, when they
had proved his resurrection, they assumed that all the others would
follow. That involved and supposed all. And the series, of which that
was the first, proved that he was the Son of God; see [Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031), "He will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained, whereof he hath given
assurance to all people, "in that he hath raised him from the dead." The
one involves the other; see [Act 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006).
Thus, Peter [Act 2:22-32](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022) having proved
that Jesus was raised up, adds, [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033), "therefore, being by the right
hand exalted, he hath shed forth this," etc.; and [Act
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036), "therefore, let all the house of
Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same Jesus whom ye have
crucified, both Lord and Christ."

This verse is a remarkable instance of the "apostle" Paul's manner of
writing. Having mentioned a subject, his mind seems to catch fire; he
presents it in new forms, and amplifies it, until he seems to forget for
a time the subject on which he was writing. It is from this cause that
his writings abound so with parentheses, and that there is so much
difficulty in following and understanding him.

[Romans 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 1:5</span></span>

By whom - The apostle here returns to the subject of the salutation of
the Romans, and states to them his authority to address them. That
authority he had derived from the Lord Jesus, and not from man. On this
fact, that he had received his apostolic commission, not from man, but
by the direct authority of Jesus Christ, Paul not infrequently insisted.
[Gal 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#012), "for I neither received it
of man, neither was I taught it, but by revelation of Jesus Christ;"
[Co1 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#001); [Eph
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001).

We - The plural here is probably put for the singular; see [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003); compare [Eph
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019). It was usual for those who
were clothed with authority to express themselves in this manner.
Perhaps here, however, he refers to the general nature of the apostolic
office, as being derived from Jesus Christ, and designs to assure the
Romans that "he" had received the apostolic commission as the others
had. 'We," the apostles, have received the appointment from Jesus
Christ. '

Grace and apostleship - Many suppose that this is a figure of speech,
"hendiadys," by which one thing is expressed by two words, meaning the
grace or favor of the apostolic office. Such a figure of speech is often
used. But it may mean, as it does probably here, the two things, grace,
or the favor of God to his own soul, as a personal matter; and the
apostolic office as a distinct thing. He often, however, speaks of the
office of the apostleship as a matter of special favor, [Rom
15:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015); [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009); [Eph
3:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007).

For obedience to the faith - In order to produce, or promote obedience
to the faith; that is, to induce them to render that obedience to God
which faith produces. There are two things therefore implied.

\(1\) that the design of the gospel and of the apostleship is to induce
men to obey God.

\(2\) that the tendency of faith is to produce obedience. There is no
true faith which does not produce that. This is constantly affirmed in
the New Testament, [Rom 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018); [Rom
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019); [Co2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015); James 2.

Among all nations - This was the original commission which Jesus gave to
his apostles, [Mar 16:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015); [Mat
28:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018). This was the special
commission which Paul received when he was converted, [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015). It was important to show that
the commission extended thus far, as he was now addressing a distant
church which he had not seen.

For his name - This means probably "on his account," that is, on account
of Christ, [Joh 14:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013); [Joh
16:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023). The design of the
apostleship was to produce obedience to the gospel among all nations,
that thus the name of Jesus might be honored. Their work was not one in
which they were seeking to honor themselves, but it was solely for the
honor and glory of Jesus Christ. For him they toiled, they encountered
perils, they laid down their lives, because by so doing they might bring
people to obey the gospel, and thus Jesus Christ might wear a brighter
crown and be attended by a longer and more splendid train of worshippers
in the kingdom of his glory.

[Romans 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 1:6</span></span>

Among whom - That is, among the Gentiles who had become obedient to the
Christian faith in accordance with the design of the gospel, [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008). This proves that the church at
Rome was made up partly at least, if not mainly, of Gentiles or pagans.
This is fully proved in the xvith. chapter by the names of the persons
whom Paul salutes.

The called of Jesus Christ - Those whom Jesus Christ has called to be
his followers. The word "called" (see [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)) denotes not merely an external
invitation to privilege, but it also denotes the "internal" or
"effectual" call which secures conformity to the will of him who calls,
and is thus synonymous with the name Christians, or believers. That true
Christians are contemplated by this address, is clear from the whole
scope of the Epistle; see particularly Rom. 8; compare [Phi
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014); [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001).

[Romans 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 1:7</span></span>

To all that be in Rome - That is, to all who bear the Christian name.
Perhaps he here included not only the church at Rome, but all who might
have been there from abroad. Rome was a place of vast concourse for
foreigners; and Paul probably addressed all who happened to be there.

Beloved of God - Whom God loves. This is the privilege of all
Christians. And this proves that the persons whom Paul addressed were
"not" those merely who had been invited to the external privileges of
the gospel. The importance of this observation will appear in the
progress of these notes.

Called to be saints - So called, or influenced by God who had called
them, as to become saints. The word "saints," ἅγιοι hagioi, means those
who are holy, or those who are devoted or consecrated to God. The
radical idea of the word is what is separated from a common to a sacred
use, and answers to the Hebrew word, קדושׁ qadowsh. It is applied to any
thing that is set apart to the service of God, to the temple, to the
sacrifices, to the utensils about the temple, to the garments, etc. of
the priests, and to the priests themselves. It was applied to the Jews
as a people separated from other nations, and devoted or consecrated to
God, while other nations were devoted to the service of idols. It is
also applied to Christians, as being a people devoted or set apart to
the service of God. The radical idea then, as applied to Christians, is,
that "they are separated from other men, and other objects and pursuits,
and consecrated to the service of God." This is the special
characteristic of the saints. And this characteristic the Roman
Christians had shown. For the use of the word, as stated above, see the
following passages of scripture; [Luk
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#023); [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002), [Rom
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016); [Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006); [Pe1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#016); [Act
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013); [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005); [Act
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021), [Eph
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005); [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009); [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015); [Jo1
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001).

Grace - This word properly means "favor." It is very often used in the
New Testament, and is employed in the sense of benignity or benevolence;
felicity, or a prosperous state of affairs; the Christian religion, as
the highest expression of the benevolence or favor of God; the happiness
which Christianity confers on its friends in this and the future life;
the apostolic office; charity, or alms; thanksgiving; joy, or pleasure;
and the benefits produced on the Christian's heart and life by religion
- the grace of meekness, patience, charity, etc., "Schleusner." In this
place, and in similar places in the beginning of the apostolic epistles,
it seems to be a word including all those blessings that are applicable
to Christians in common; denoting an ardent wish that all the mercies
and favors of God for time and eternity, blended under the general name
grace, may be conferred on them. It is to be understood as connected
with a word implying invocation. I pray, or I desire, that grace, etc.
may be conferred on you. It is the customary form of salutation in
nearly all the apostolic epistles; [Co1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003); [Co2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#002); [Gal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#003); [Eph
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#002); [Phi
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#002); [Col
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#002); [Th1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001); [Th2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#002); [Plm
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#003).

And peace - Peace is the state of freedom from war. As war conveys the
idea of discord and numberless calamities and dangers, so peace is the
opposite, and conveys the idea of concord, safety, and prosperity. Thus,
to wish one peace was the same as to wish him all safety and prosperity.
This form of salutation was common among the Hebrews. [Gen
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023), "peace to you! fear not;" [Jdg
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#023); [Jdg
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020); [Luk
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036). But the word "peace" is also
used in contrast with that state of agitation and conflict which a
sinner has with his conscience. and with God. The sinner is like the
troubled sea, which cannot rest, [Isa
57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020). The Christian is at peace with
God through the Lord Jesus Christ, [Rom
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001). By this word, denoting
reconciliation with God, the blessings of the Christian religion are
often described in the scriptures, [Rom
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006); [Rom
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017); [Rom
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013); [Gal
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022); [Phi
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007). A prayer for peace, therefore, in
the epistles, is not a mere formal salutation, but has a special
reference to those "spiritual" blessings which result from
reconciliation with God through the Lord Jesus Christ.

From God our Father - The Father of all Christians. He is the Father of
all his creatures, as they are his offspring, [Act
17:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028). He is especially the Father
of all Christians, as they have been "begotten by him to a lively hope,"
have been adopted into his family, and are like him; [Mat
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045); [Pe1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003); [Jo1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001); [Jo1
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001). The expression here is
equivalent to a prayer that God the Father would bestow grace and peace
on the Romans. It implies that these blessings proceed from God, and are
to be expected from him.

And the Lord Jesus Christ - From him. The Lord Jesus Christ is
especially regarded in the New Testament as the Source of peace, and the
Procurer of it; see [Luk 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014); [Luk
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#038), [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042); [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027); [Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033); [Act
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036); [Rom
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001); [Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017). Each of these places will show
with what propriety peace was invoked from the Lord Jesus. From thus
connecting the Lord Jesus with the Father in this place, we may see,

\(1\) That the apostle regarded him as the source of grace and peace as
really as he did the Father.

\(2\) he introduced them in the same connection, and with reference to
the bestowment of the same blessings.

\(3\) if the mention of the Father in this connection implies a prayer
to him, or an act of worship, the mention of the Lord Jesus implies the
same thing, and was an act of homage to him.

\(4\) all this shows that his mind was familiarized to the idea that he
was divine.

No man would introduce his name in such connections if he did not
believe that he was equal with God; compare [Phi
2:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002). It is from this incidental and
unstudied manner of expression, that we have one of the most striking
proofs of the manner in which the sacred writers regarded the Lord Jesus
Christ.

These seven verses are one sentence. They are a striking instance of the
manner of Paul. The subject is simply a salutation to the Roman church.
But at the mention of some single words, the mind of Paul seems to catch
fire, and go burn and blaze with signal intensity. He leaves the
immediate subject before him, and advances some vast thought that awes
us, and fixes us in contemplation, and involves us in difficulty about
his meaning, and then returns to his subject. This is the characteristic
of his great mind; and it is this, among other things, that makes it so
difficult to interpret his writings.

[Romans 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 1:8</span></span>

First - In the first place, not in point of importance, but before
speaking of other things, or before proceeding to the main design of the
Epistle.

I thank my God - The God, whom I worship and serve. The expression of
thanks to God for his mercy to them was suited to conciliate their
feelings, and to prepare them for the truths which he was about to
communicate to them. It showed the deep interest which he had in their
welfare; and the happiness it would give him to do them good. It is
proper to give thanks to God for his mercies to others as well as to
ourselves. We are members of one great family, and we should make it a
subject of thanksgiving that he confers any blessings, and especially
the blessing of salvation, on any mortals.

Through Jesus Christ - The duty of presenting our thanks to God
"through" Christ is often enjoined in the New Testament, [Eph
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020); [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015); compare [Joh
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014). Christ is the mediator between
God and human beings, or the medium by which we are to present our
prayers and also our thanksgivings. We are not to approach God directly,
but through a mediator at all times, depending on him to present our
cause before the mercy-seat; to plead for us there; and to offer the
desires of our souls to God. It is no less proper to present thanks in
his name, or through him, than it is prayer. He has made the way to God
accessible to us, whether it be by prayer or praise; and it is owing to
"his" mercy and grace that "any" of our services are acceptable to God.

For you all - On account of you all, that is, of the entire Roman
church. This is one evidence that that church then was remarkably pure.
How few churches have there been of whom a similar commendation could be
expressed.

That your faith - "Faith" is put here for the whole of religion, and
means the same as your piety. Faith is one of the principal things of
religion; one of its first requirements; and hence, it signifies
religion itself. The readiness with which the Romans had embraced the
gospel, the firmness with which they adhered to it, was so remarkable,
that it was known and celebrated everywhere. The same thing is affirmed
of them in [Rom 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019), "For your
obedience is come abroad unto all men."

Is spoken of - Is celebrated, or known. They were in the capital of the
Roman Empire; in a city remarkable for its wickedness; and in a city
whose influence extended everywhere. It was natural, therefore, that
their remarkable conversion to God should be celebrated everywhere. The
religious or irreligious influence of a great city will be felt far and
wide, and this is one reason why the apostles preached the gospel so
much in such places.

Throughout the whole world - As we say, everywhere; or throughout the
Roman Empire. The term "world" is often thus limited in the scriptures;
and here it denotes those parts of the Roman Empire where the Christian
church was established. All the churches would hear of the work of God
in the capital, and would rejoice in it; compare [Col
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006), [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023); [Joh
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019). It is not improper to commend
Christians, and to remind them of their influence; and especially to
call to their mind the great power which they may have on other churches
and people. Nor is it improper that great displays of divine mercy
should be celebrated everywhere, and excite in the churches praise to
God.

[Romans 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 1:9</span></span>

For God is my witness - The reason of this strong appeal to God is, to
show to the Romans the deep interest which he felt in their welfare This
interest was manifested in his prayers, and in his earnest desires to
see them. A deep interest shown in this way was well suited to prepare
them to receive what he had to say to them.

Whom I serve - See [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001); compare
[Act 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023). The expression denotes
that he was devoted to God in this manner; that he obeyed him; and had
given himself to do his will in making known his gospel.

With my spirit - Greek, ἐν en, in my spirit, that is, with my "heart."
It is not an external service merely; it is internal, real, sincere. He
was really and sincerely devoted to the service of God.

In the gospel of his Son - In making known the gospel, or as a minister
of the gospel.

That without ceasing - ἀδιαλείπτως adialeiptōs. This word means
constantly, always, without intermission. It was not only once, but
repeatedly. It had been the burden of his prayers. The same thing he
also mentions in regard to other churches, [Th1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003); [Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013).

I make mention - I call you to remembrance, and present your case before
God. This evinced his remarkable interest in a church which he had never
seen, and it shows that Paul was a man of prayer; praying not for his
friends and kindred only, but for those whom he had never seen. If with
the same intensity of prayer all Christians, and Christian ministers,
would remember the churches, what a different aspect would the Christian
church soon assume!

Always - This word should be connected with the following verse, "Always
making request," etc.

[Romans 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 1:10</span></span>

Making request - It was his earnest desire to see them, and he presented
the subject before God.

If by any means - This shows the earnest desire which he had to see
them, and implies that be had designed it, and had been hindered; see
[Rom 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013).

Now at length - He had purposed it a long time, but had been hindered.
He doubtless cherished this purpose for years. The expressions in the
Greek imply an earnest wish that this long-cherished purpose might be
accomplished before long.

A prosperous journey - A safe, pleasant journey. It is right to regard
all success in traveling as depending on God, and to pray for success
and safety from danger. Yet all such prayers are not answered according
to the letter of the petition. The prayer of Paul that be might see the
Romans was granted, but in a remarkable way. He was persecuted by the
Jews, and arraigned before King Agrippa. He appealed to the Roman
emperor, and was taken there in chains as a prisoner. Yet the journey
might in this way have a more deep effect on the Romans, than if he had
gone in any other way. In so mysterious a manner does God often hear the
prayers of his people; and though their prayers are answered, yet it is
in his own time and way; see the last chapters of the Acts .

By the will of God - If God shall grant it; if God will by his mercy
grant me the great favor of my coming to you. This is a proper model of
a prayer; and is in accordance with the direction of the Bible; see [Jam
4:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014).

[Romans 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 1:11</span></span>

For I long to see you - I earnestly desire to see you; compare [Rom
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023), [Rom
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#032).

That I may impart - That I may "give," or communicate to you.

Some spiritual gift - Some have understood this as referring to
"miraculous gifts," which it was supposed the apostles had the power of
conferring on others. But this interpretation is forced and unnatural.
There is no instance where this expression denotes the power of working
miracles. Besides, the apostle in the next verse explains his meaning,
"That I may be comforted together by the mutual faith," etc. From this
it appears that he desired to be among them to exercise the office of
the ministry, to establish them in the gospel and to confirm their
hopes. He expected that the preaching of the gospel would be the means
of confirming them in the faith; and he desired to be the means of doing
it. It was a wish of benevolence, and accords with what he says
respecting his intended visit in [Rom
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029), "And I am sure that when I
come, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of
Christ." To make known to them more fully the blessings of the gospel,
and thus to impart spiritual gifts, was the design he had in view.

To the end ... - With the design, or purpose.

Ye may be established - That is, that they might be "confirmed" in the
truths of the gospel. This was one design of the ministry, that
Christians may be established, or strengthened, [Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013). It is not to have dominion ever
their faith, but to be "helpers of their joy," [Co2
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024). Paul did not doubt that this
part of his office might be fulfilled among the Romans, and he was
desirous there also of making full proof of his ministry. His wish was
to preach not simply where he must, but where he might. This is the
nature of this work.

[Romans 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 1:12</span></span>

That I may be comforted ... - It was not merely to confirm them that
Paul wished to come. He sought the communion of saints; he expected to
be himself edified and strengthened; and to be comforted by seeing their
strength of faith, and their rapid growth in grace. We may remark here,

\(1\) That one effect of religion is to produce the desire of the
communion of saints. It is the nature of Christianity to seek the
society of those who are the friends of Christ.

\(2\) nothing is better suited to produce growth in grace than such
communion. Every Christian should have one or more Christian friends to
whom he may unbosom himself. No small part of the difficulties which
young Christians experience would vanish, if they should communicate
their feelings and views to others. Feelings which they suppose no
Christians ever had, which greatly distress them, they will find are
common among those who are experienced in the Christian life.

\(3\) there is nothing better suited to excite the feelings, and confirm
the hopes of Christian ministers, than the firm faith of young converts,
of those just commencing the Christian life, [Jo3
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004).

\(4\) the apostle did not disdain to be taught by the humblest
Christians. He expected to be strengthened himself by the faith of those
just beginning the Christian life. "There is none so poor in the church
of Christ, that he cannot make some addition of importance to our
stores," Calvin.

[Romans 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 1:13</span></span>

That oftentimes I purposed - See [Rom
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010). How often he had purposed this
we have no means of ascertaining. The fact, however, that he had done
it, showed his strong desire to see them, and to witness the displays of
the grace of God in the capital of the Roman world; compare [Rom
15:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023). One instance of his having
purposed to go to Rome is recorded in [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021), "After these things were ended
(namely, at Ephesus), Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had passed
through Macedonia and Achaia to go to Jerusalem; saying, After I have
been there, I must also see Rome." This purpose expressed in this manner
in the Epistle, and the Acts of the Apostles, has been shown by Dr.
Paley (Horae Paulinae on [Rom 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)) to
be one of those undesigned coincidences which strongly show that both
books are genuine; compare [Rom
15:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023), with [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021). A forger of these books would
not have thought of such a contrivance as to feign such a purpose to go
to Rome at that time, and to have mentioned it in that manner. Such
coincidences are among the best proofs that can be demanded, that the
writers did not intend to impose on the world; see Paley.

But was let hitherto - The word "let" means to "hinder," or to
"obstruct." In what way this was done we do not know, but it is probable
that he refers to the various openings for the preaching of the gospel
where he had been, and to the obstructions of various kinds from the
enemies of the gospel to the fulfillment of his purposes.

That I might have some fruit among you - That I might be the means of
the conversion of sinners and of the edification of the church in the
capital of the Roman Empire. It was not curiosity to see the splendid
capital of the world that prompted this desire; it was not the love of
travel, and of roaming from clime to clime; it was the specific purpose
of doing good to the souls of human beings. To "have fruit" means to
obtain success in bringing men to the knowledge of Christ. Thus, the
Saviour said [Joh 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)," I have
chosen you, and ordained you that you should bring forth fruit, and that
your fruit should remain."

[Romans 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 1:14</span></span>

I am debtor - This does not mean that they had conferred any favor on
him, which bound him to make this return, but that he was under
obligation to preach the gospel to all to whom it was possible. This
obligation arose from the favor that God had shown him in appointing him
to this work. He was specially chosen as a vessel to bear the gospel to
the Gentiles [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015); [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013), and he did not feel that he had
discharged the obligation until he had made the gospel known as far as
possible among all the nations of the earth.

To the Greeks - This term properly denotes "those who dwelt in Greece."
But as the Greeks were the most polished people of antiquity, the term
came to be synonymous with the polished, the refined, the wise, as
opposed to barbarians. In this place it doubtless means the same as "the
wise," and includes the Romans also, as it cannot be supposed that Paul
would designate the Romans as barbarians. Besides, the Romans claimed an
origin from Greece, and Dionysius Halicarnassus (book i.) shows that the
Italian and Roman people were of Greek descent.

Barbarians - All who were not included under the general name of Greeks.
Thus, Ammonius says that "all who were not Greeks were barbarians." This
term "barbarian," Βάρβαρος Barbaros, properly denotes one who speaks a
foreign language, a foreigner, and the Greeks applied it to all who did
not use their tongue; compare [Co1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011), "I shall be unto him that
speaketh, a barbarian, etc. that is, I shall speak a language which he
cannot understand. The word did not, therefore, of necessity denote any
rusticity of manners, or any lack of refinement.

To the wise - To those who esteemed themselves to be wise, or who
boasted of their wisdom. The term is synonymous with "the Greeks," who
prided themselves much in their wisdom. [Co1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022), "the Greeks seek after wisdom;"
compare [Co1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019); [Co1
3:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018); [Co1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010); [Co2
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#019).

Unwise - Those who were regarded as the ignorant and unpolished part of
mankind. The expression is equivalent to ours, 'to the learned and the
unlearned.' It was an evidence of the proper spirit to be willing to
preach the gospel to either. The gospel claims to have power to instruct
all mankind, and they who are called to preach it, should be able to
instruct those who esteem themselves to be wise, and who are endowed
with science, learning, and talent; and they should be willing to labor
to enlighten the most obscure, ignorant, and degraded portions of the
race. This is the true spirit of the Christian ministry.

So, as much as in me is - As far as opportunity may be offered, and
according to my ability.

I am ready ... - I am prepared to preach among you, and to show the
power of the gospel, even in the splendid metropolis of the world. He
was not deterred by any fear; nor was he indifferent to their welfare;
but he was under the direction of God. and as far as he gave him
opportunity, he was ready to make known to them the gospel, as he had
done at Antioch, Ephesus, Athens, and Corinth.

This closes the introduction or preface to the Epistle. Having shown his
deep interest in their welfare, he proceeds in the next verse to state
to them the great doctrines of that gospel which he was desirous of
proclaiming to them.

[Romans 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 1:16</span></span>

For I am not ashamed ... - The Jews had cast him off, and regarded him
as an apostate; and by the wise among the Gentiles he had been
persecuted, and despised, and driven from place to place, and regarded
as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things [Co1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013), but still he was not ashamed of
the gospel. He had so firm a conviction of its value and its truth; he
had experienced so much of its consolations; and had seen so much of its
efficacy; that he was so far from being ashamed of it that he gloried in
it as the power of God unto salvation. People should be ashamed of crime
and folly. They are ashamed of their own offences, and of the follies of
their conduct, when they come to reflect on it. But they are not ashamed
of what they feel to be right, and of what they know will contribute to
their welfare, and to the benefit of their fellow-men. Such were the
views of Paul about the gospel; and it is one of his favorite doctrines
that they who believe on Christ shall not be ashamed, [Rom
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011); [Rom
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005); [Co2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#014); [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012); [Phi
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020); [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033); [Ti2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008); compare [Mar
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038); [Pe1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#016); [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028).

Of the gospel - This word means the "good news," or the glad
intelligence; see the note at [Mar
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001). It is so called because it
contains the glad annunciation that sin may be pardoned, and the soul
saved.

Of Christ - The good news respecting the Messiah; or which the Messiah
has brought. The expression probably refers to the former, the good news
which relates to the Messiah, to his character, advent, preaching,
death, resurrection, and ascension. Though this was "to the Jews a
stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness," yet he regarded it as
the only hope of salvation, and was ready to preach it even in the rich
and splendid capital of the world.

The power of God - This expression means that it is the way in which God
exerts his power in the salvation of people. It is the efficacious or
mighty plan, by which power goes forth to save, and by which all the
obstacles of man's redemption are taken away. This expression implies,

\(1\) That it is God's plan, or his appointment. It is not the device of
man.

\(2\) it is adapted to the end. It is suited to overcome the obstacles
in the way. It is not merely the instrument by which God exerts his
power, but it has an inherent adaptedness to the end, it is suited to
accomplish salvation to man so that it may be denominated power.

\(3\) it is mighty, hence, it is called power, and the power of God. If
is not a feeble and ineffectual instrumentality, but it is "mighty to
the pulling down of strongholds," [Co2
10:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004). It has shown its power as
applicable to every degree of sin, to every combination of wickedness.
It has gone against the sins of the world, and evinced its power to save
sinners of all grades, and to overcome and subdue every mighty form of
iniquity, compare [Jer 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029), "Is not
my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh
the rock in pieces?" [Co1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018), "the
preaching of the cross is to them that perish, foolishness, but unto us
which are saved, it is the power of God."

Unto salvation - This word means complete deliverance from sin and
death, and all the foes and dangers that beset man. It cannot imply
anything less than eternal life. If a man should believe and then fall
away, he could in no correct sense be said to be saved. And hence, when
the apostle declares that it is the power of God unto salvation "to
everyone that believeth," it implies that all who become believers
"shall be kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation" (see
[Pe1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005)), and that none shall ever
fall away and be lost. The apostle thus commences his discussion with
one of the important doctrines of the Christian religion, the final
preservation of the saints. He is not defending the gospel for any
temporary object, or with any temporary hope. He looks through the
system, and sees in it a plan for the complete and eternal recovery of
all those who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. When he says it is the
power of God unto salvation, he means that it is the power of God for
the attainment of salvation. This is the end, or the design of this
exertion of power.

To everyone that believeth - Compare [Mar
16:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016). This expresses the
condition, or the terms, on which salvation is conferred through the
gospel. It is not indiscriminately to all people, whatever may be their
character. It is only to those who confide or trust in it; and it is
conferred on all who receive it in this manner. If this qualification is
possessed, it bestows its blessings freely and fully. All people know
what "faith" is. It is exercised when we confide in a parent, a friend,
a benefactor. It is such a reception of a promise, a truth, or a
threatening, as to suffer it to make its appropriate impression on the
mind, and such as to lead us to act under its influence, or to act as we
should on the supposition that it is true. Thus, a sinner credits the
threatenings of God, and fears. This is faith. He credits his promises,
and hopes. This is faith. He feels that he is lost, and relies on Jesus
Christ for mercy. This is faith. And, in general, faith is such an
impression on the mind made by truth as to lead us to feel and act as if
it were true; to have the appropriate feelings, and views, and conduct
under the commands, and promises, and threatenings of God; see the note
at [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016).

To the Jew first - First in order of time, Not that the gospel was any
more adapted to Jews than to others; but to them had been committed the
oracles of God; the Messiah had come through them; they had had the Law,
the temple, and the service of God, and it was natural that the gospel
should be proclaimed to them before it was to the Gentiles. This was the
order in which the gospel was actually preached to the world, first to
the Jews, and then to the Gentiles. Compare Acts 2 and Acts 10; [Mat
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006); [Luk
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049); [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046), "It was necessary that the Word
of God should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from
you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to
the Gentiles." Compare [Mat 21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043).

And also to the Greek - To all who were nor Jews, that is, to all the
world. It was nor confined in its intention or efficacy to any class or
nation of people. It was adapted to all, and was designed to be extended
to all.

[Romans 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 1:17</span></span>

For - This word implies that he is now about to give a "reason" for what
he had just said, a reason why he was not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ. That reason is stated in this verse. It embodies the substance
of all that is contained in the Epistle. It is the doctrine which he
seeks to establish; and there is not perhaps a more important passage in
the Bible than this verse; or one more difficult to be understood.

Therein - In it, ἐν οὕτῳ en houtō, that is, in the gospel.

Is the righteousness of God - δικαιοσύνη Θεοῦ dikaiosunē Theou. There is
not a more important expression to be found in the Epistle than this. It
is capable of only the following interpretations.

\(1\) some have said that it means that the attribute of God which is
denominated righteousness or justice, is here displayed. It has been
supposed that this was the design of the gospel to make this known; or
to evince his justice in his way of saving people. There is an important
sense in which this is true [Rom 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026).
But this does not seem to be the meaning in the passage before us. For,

\(a\) The leading design of the gospel is not to evince the justice of
God, or the attribute of justice, but the love of God; see [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016); [Eph
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004); [Th2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016); [Jo1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008).

\(b\) The attribute of justice is not what is principally evinced in the
gospel. It is rather mercy, "or mercy in a manner consistent with
justice," or that does not interfere with justice.

\(c\) The passage, therefore, is not designed to teach simply that the
righteousness of God, as an attribute, is brought forth in the gospel,
or that the main idea is to reveal his justice.

\(2\) a second interpretation which has been affixed to it is, to make
it the same as goodness, the benevolence of God is revealed, etc. But to
this there are still stronger objections. For.

\(a\) It does not comport with the design of the apostle's argument.

\(b\) It is a departure from the established meaning of the word
"justice," and the phrase "the righteousness of God."

\(c\) If this had been the design, it is remarkable that the usual words
expressive of goodness or mercy had not been used. Another meaning,
therefore, is to be sought as expressing the sense of the phrase.

\(3\) the phrase "righteousness of God" is equivalent to God's "plan of
justifying people; his scheme of declaring them just in the sight of the
Law; or of acquitting them from punishment, and admitting them to
favor." In this sense it stands opposed to man's plan of justification,
that is, by his own works: God's plan is by faith. The way in which that
is done is revealed in the gospel. The object contemplated to be done is
to treat people as if they were righteous. Man attempted to accomplish
this by obedience to the Law. The plan of God was to arrive at it by
faith. Here the two schemes differ; and the great design of this Epistle
is to show that man cannot be justified on his own plan, to wit, by
works; and that the plan of God is the only way, and a wise and glorious
way of making man just in the eye of the Law. No small part of the
perplexity usually attending this subject will be avoided if it is
remembered that the discussion in this Epistle pertains to the question,
"how can mortal man be just with God?" The apostle shows that it cannot
be by works; and that it "can be" by faith. This latter is what he calls
the "righteousness of God" which is revealed in the gospel.

To see that this is the meaning, it is needful only to look at the
connection; and at the usual meaning of the words. The word to
"justify," δικαιόω dikaioō, means properly "to be just, to be innocent,
to be righteous." It then means to "declare," or treat as righteous; as
when a man is charged with an offence. and is acquitted. If the crime
alleged is not proved against him, he is declared by the Law to be
innocent. It then means to "treat as if innocent, to regard as
innocent;" that is, to pardon, to forgive, and consequently to treat as
if the offence had not occurred. It does not mean that the man did not
commit the offence; or that the Law might not have held him answerable
for it; but that the offence is forgiven; and it is consistent to
receive the offender into favor, and treat him as if he had not
committed it. In what way this may be done rests with him who has the
pardoning power. And in regard to the salvation of man, it rests solely
with God. and must be done in that way only which he appoints and
approves. The design of Paul in this Epistle is to show how this is
done, or to show that it is done by faith. It may be remarked here that
the expression before us does not imply any particular manner in which
it is done; it does not touch the question whether it is by imputed
righteousness or not; it does not say that it is on legal principles; it
simply affirms "that the gospel contains God's plan of justifying people
by faith."

The primary meaning of the word is, therefore, "to be innocent, pure,
etc." and hence, the name means "righteousness" in general. For this use
of the word, see [Mat 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015); [Mat
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006), [Mat
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010), [Mat
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020); [Mat
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#032); [Luk
1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075); [Act
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035); [Act
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010); [Rom
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026); [Rom
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004), etc.

In the sense of pardoning sin, or of treating people as if they were
innocent, on the condition of faith, it is used often, and especially in
this Epistle; see [Rom 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024), [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026), [Rom
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028), [Rom
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030); [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005); [Rom
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001); [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030); [Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016); [Gal
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008), [Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024); [Rom
3:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021), [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025); [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003), [Rom
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006),[Rom
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013); [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030), etc.

It is called "God's" righteousness, because it is God's plan, in
distinction from all the plans set up by people. It was originated by
him; it differs from all others; and it claims him as its author, and
tends to his glory. It is called his righteousness, as it is the way by
which he receives and treats people as righteous. The same plan was
foretold in various places where the word "righteousness" is nearly
synonymous with "salvation;" [Isa 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005)
"My righteousness is near, my salvation is gone forth;" [Isa
56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006), "My salvation shall be forever,
and my righteousness shall not be abolished;" [Isa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001), "My salvation is near to come,
and my righteousness to be revealed;" [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024), "To make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness."

(There is yet another sense lying on the very surface of the passage,
and adopted by nearly all the evangelical expositors, according to which
"the righteousness of God" is that righteousness, which Christ worked
out in his active and passive obedience. This is a righteousness which
God hath devised, procured, and accepted. It is therefore eminently His.
It is imputed to believers, and on account of it they are held righteous
in the sight of God. It is of the highest importance that the true
meaning of this leading expression be preserved; for if it be explained
away, the doctrine of imputed righteousness is materially affected, as
will appear in a subsequent note.

That the phrase is to be understood of the righteousness which Christ
has procured by his obedience and death, appears from the general sense
of the original term δικαιοσύνη dikaiosunē. Mr. Haldane in a long and
elaborate comment on [Rom 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021), has
satisfactorily shown that it signifies "righteousness in the abstract,
and also conformity to law," and that "Wherever it refers to the subject
of man's salvation, and is not merely a personal attribute of Deity, it
signifies that righteousness which, in conformity with his justice, God
has appointed and provided."

Besides, if the expression be understood of "God's plan of justifying
men," we shall have great difficulty in explaining the parallel
passages. They will not bend to any such principle of interpretation, In
[Rom 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017), this righteousness is
spoken of as a "gift" which we "receive," and in the [Rom
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018) and [Rom
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019) verses, the "righteousness of
one" and "the obedience of one," are used as convertible terms. Now it
is easy to understand how the righteousness which Christ has procured by
his obedience, becomes "a gift," but "a plan of justification" is
appropriately said to be declared, or promulgated. It cannot be spoken
of in the light of a gift received. The same observation applies with
still greater force to the passage in [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021), "For he hath made him to be sin
for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him." How would this passage appear, if "plan of justification" were
substituted for righteousness of God?

In [Phi 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009), Paul desires to be found
in Christ, "not having his own righteousness, which is of the land, but
what is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God
by faith." Is not his own righteousness what he could attain to by his
works or obedience, and is not the righteousness of Christ what Jesus
had procured by his obedience?

Lastly, in [Rom 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003), the
righteousness of God is thus opposed to the righteousness of man, "they
being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God." Now what is that righteousness which natural
people seek to establish, and which is especially called "their own?"
Doubtless it is a righteousness founded on their own works, and
therefore what is here properly opposed to it is a righteousness founded
on the "work of God. See Haldane, Hodge, Scott, Guyse, etc." This
meaning of the term furnishes a key to unlock "all" the passages in
which it is used in connection with the sinner's justification, whereas
any other sense, however it may suit a few places, will be found
generally inapplicable.)

In regard to this plan it may be observed;

\(1\) That it is not to declare that people are innocent and pure. That
would not be true. The truth is just the reverse; and God does not
esteem men to be different from what they are.

\(2\) it is not to take part with the sinner, and to mitigate his
offences. It admits them to their full extent; and makes him feel them
also.

\(3\) it is not that we become partakers of the essential righteousness
of God. That is impossible.

\(4\) it is not that his righteousness becomes ours. This is not true;
and there is no intelligible sense in which that can be understood.

(It is true indeed that the righteousness of Christ cannot be called
ours in the sense of our having actually accomplished it in our own
persons. This is a view of imputation easily held up to ridicule, yet
there is a sense in which the righteousness of Christ may be ours.
Though we have not achieved it, yet it may be so placed to our account
that we shall be held righteous, and treated as such. I have said,
first, we shall be held righteous, and then treated as such; for God
treats none as righteous who in some sense or other are not really so.
See the note at [Rom 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003).)

But it is God's plan for pardoning sin, and for treating us as if we had
not committed it; that is, adopting us as his children, and admitting us
to heaven on the ground of what the Lord Jesus has done in our stead.
This is God's plan. People seek to save themselves by their own works.
God's plan is to save them by the merits of Jesus Christ.

Revealed - Made known, and communicated. The gospel states the fact that
God has such a plan of justification; and shows the way or manner in
which it might be done. The fact seems to have been understood by
Abraham, and the patriarchs Heb. 11, but the full mode or manner in
which it was to be accomplished, was not revealed until it was done in
the gospel of Christ. And because this great and glorious truth was thus
made known, Paul was not ashamed of the gospel. Nor should we be.

From faith - ἐκ πίστεως ek pisteōs. This phrase I take to be connected
with the expression, "the righteousness of God." Thus, the righteousness
of God, or God's plan of justifying people by faith, is revealed in the
gospel. Here the great truth of the gospel is brought out, that people
are justified by faith, and not by the deeds of the Law. The common
interpretation of the passage has been, that the righteousness of God in
this is revealed from one degree of faith to another. But to this
interpretation there are many objections.

\(1\) it is not true. The gospel was not designed for this. It did not
"suppose" that people had a certain degree of faith by nature which
needed only to be strengthened in order that they might be saved.

\(2\) it does not make good sense. To say that the righteousness of God,
meaning, as is commonly understood, his essential justice, is revealed
from one degree of faith to another, is to use words without any
meaning.

\(3\) the connection of the passage does not admit of this
interpretation. The design of the passage is evidently to set forth the
doctrine of justification as the grand theme of remark, and it does not
comport with that design to introduce here the advance from one degree
of faith to another, as the main topic.

\(4\) the Epistle is intended clearly to establish the fact that people
are justified by faith. This is the grand idea which is kept up; and to
show how this may be done is the main purpose before the apostle; see
[Rom 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022), [Rom
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030); [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030); [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032); [Rom
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006), etc.

\(5\) the passage which he immediately quotes shows that he did not
speak of different degrees of faith, but of the doctrine that people are
to be justified by faith.

To faith - Unto those who believe (compare [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)); or to everyone that believeth,
[Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). The abstract is here put
for the concrete. It is designed to express the idea, "that God's plan
of justifying people is revealed in the gospel, which plan is by faith,
and the benefits of which plan shall be extended to all that have faith,
or that believe."

As it is written - See [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004).

The just shall live by faith - The Septuagint translate the passage in
Habakkuk, 'If any man shall draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him, but the just by my faith," or by faith in me, "shall live." The
very words are used by them which are employed by the apostle, except
they add the word "my," μοῦ mou, my faith. The Syriac renders it in a
similar manner, "The just by faith shall live." The meaning of the
Hebrew in Habakkuk is the same. It does not refer originally to the
doctrine of justification by faith; but its meaning is this, "The just
man, or the righteous man, shall live by his confidence in God." The
prophet is speaking of the woes attending the Babylonish captivity. The
Chaldeans were to come upon the land and destroy it, and remove the
nation, [Rom 1:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006). But this was not
to be perpetual. It should have an end [Rom
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#003), and they who had confidence in
God should live [Rom 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004); that is,
should be restored to their country, should be blessed and made happy.
Their confidence in God should sustain them, and preserve them. This did
not refer primarily to the doctrine of justification by faith, nor did
the apostle so quote it, but it expressed a general principle that those
who had confidence in God should be happy, and be preserved and blessed.
This would express the doctrine which Paul was defending. It was not by
relying on his own merit that the Israelite would be delivered, but it
was by confidence in God, by his strength and mercy. On the same
principle would men be saved under the gospel. It was not by reliance on
their own works or merit; it was by confidence in God, by faith, that
they were to live.

Shall live - In Habakkuk this means to be made happy, or blessed; shall
find comfort, and support, and deliverance. So in the gospel the
blessings of salvation are represented as life, eternal life. Sin is
represented as death, and man by nature is represented as dead in
trespasses and sins, [Eph 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001). The
gospel restores to life and salvation, [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036); [Joh
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029), [Joh
5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040); [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051), [Joh
6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053); [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031); [Act
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#028); [Rom
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018); [Rom
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#006). This expression, therefore, does
not mean, as it is sometimes supposed, the "justified by faith" shall
live; but it is expressive of a general principle in relation to people,
that they shall be defended, preserved, made happy, not by their own
merits, or strength, but by confidence in God. This principle is exactly
applicable to the gospel plan of salvation. Those who rely on God the
Saviour shall be justified, and saved.

[Romans 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 1:18</span></span>

For - This word denotes that the apostle is about to give a reason for
what he had just said. This verse commences the argument of the Epistle.
an argument designed to establish the proposition advanced in [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017). The proposition is, that God's
plan of justification is revealed in the gospel. To show this, it was
necessary to show that all other plans had failed; and that there was
need of some new plan or scheme to save people. To this he devotes this
and the two following chapters. The design of this argument is, to show
that people were sinners. And in order to make this out, it was
necessary to show that they were under law. This was clear in regard to
the Jews. They had the Scriptures; and the apostle in this chapter shows
that it was equally clear in regard to the Gentiles, and then proceeds
to show that both had failed of obeying the Law. To see this clearly it
is necessary to add only, that there can be but two ways of
justification conceived of; one by obedience to law, and the other by
grace. The former was the one by which Jews and Gentiles had sought to
be justified; and if it could be shown that in this they had failed, the
way was clear to show that there was need of some other plan.

The wrath of God - ὀργὴ Θεοῦ orgē Theou. The word rendered "wrath"
properly denotes that earnest appetite or desire by which we seek
anything, or an intense effort to obtain it. And it is particularly
applied to the desire which a man has to take vengeance who is injured,
and who is enraged. It is thus synonymous with revenge. [Eph
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031), "let all bitterness, and wrath,
etc.; [Col 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008), "anger, wrath,
malice," etc.; [Ti1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008); [Jam
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019). But it is also often applied to
God; and it is clear that when we think of the word as applicable to
him, it must be divested of everything like human passion, and
especially of the passion of revenge. As he cannot be injured by the
sins of people [Job 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#006), he has no
motive for vengeance properly so called, and it is one of the most
obvious rules of interpretation that we are not to apply to God passions
and feelings which, among us, have their origin in evil.

In making a revelation, it was indispensable to use words which people
used; but it does not follow that when applied to God they mean
precisely what they do when applied to man. When the Saviour is said
[Mar 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005) to have looked on his
disciples with anger (Greek, "wrath," the same word is here), it is not
to be supposed that he had the feelings of an implacable man seeking
vengeance. The nature of the feeling is to be judged of by the character
of the person. So, in this place, the word denotes the "divine
displeasure" or "indignation" against sin; the divine purpose to
"inflict punishment. It is the opposition of the divine character
against sin;" and the determination of the divine mind to express that
opposition in a proper way, by excluding the offender from the favors
which he bestows on the righteous. It is not an unamiable, or arbitrary
principle of conduct. We all admire the character of a father who is
opposed to disorder, and vice, and disobedience in his family, and who
expresses his opposition in a proper way.

We admire the character of a ruler who is opposed to all crime in the
community, and who expresses those feelings in the laws. And the more he
is opposed to vice and crime, the more we admire his character and his
laws; and why shall we be not equally pleased with God, who is opposed
to all crime in all parts of the universe, and who determines to express
it in the proper way for the sake of preserving order and promoting
peace? The phrase "divine displeasure" or "indignation," therefore,
expresses the meaning of this phrase; see [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007); [Luk
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007); [Luk
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#023); [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036); [Rom
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005), [Rom
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008); [Rom
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005); [Rom
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015); [Rom
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009); [Rom
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022); [Rom
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019); [Rom
13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004); [Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003); [Eph
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006); [Th1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010); [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016), etc. The word occurs 35 times in
the New Testament.

Is revealed - That is, revealed to the Jews by their Law; and to the
Gentiles in their reason, and conscience, as the apostle proceeds to
show.

From heaven - This expression I take to mean simply that the divine
displeasure against sin is made known by a divine appointment; by an
arrangement of events, communications, and arguments, which evince that
they have had their origin in heaven; or are divine. How this is, Paul
proceeds to state, in the works of creation, and in the Law which the
Hebrews had. A variety of meanings have been given to this expression,
but this seems the most satisfactory. It does not mean that the wrath
will be sent from heaven; or that the heavens declare his wrath; or that
the heavenly bodies are proofs of his wrath against sin; or that Christ,
the executioner of wrath, will be manifest from heaven (Origen, Cyril,
Beza, etc.); or that it is from God who is in heaven; but that it is by
an arrangement which shows that it had its origin in heaven. or has
proofs that it is divine.

Against all ungodliness - This word properly means "impiety" toward God,
or neglect of the worship and honor due to him. ἀσέβειαν asebeian. It
refers to the fact that people had failed to honor the true God, and had
paid to idols the homage which was due to him. Multitudes also in every
age refuse to honor him, and neglect his worship, though they are not
idolaters. Many people suppose that if they do not neglect their duty to
their fellow-men, if they are honest and upright in their dealings, they
are not guilty, even though they are not righteous, or do not do their
duty to God; as though it were a less crime to dishonor God than man;
and as though it were innocence to neglect and disobey our Maker and
Redeemer. The apostle here shows that the wrath of God is as really
revealed against the neglect of God as it is against positive iniquity;
and that this is an offence of so much consequence as to be placed
"first," and as deserving the divine indignation more than the neglect
of our duties toward people; compare [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026); [Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016); [Tit
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012); [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015), [Jde
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018). The word does not occur
elsewhere in the New Testament.

Unrighteousness of men - Unrighteousness, or iniquity toward people. All
offences against our neighbor, our parents. our country, etc. The word
"ungodliness" includes all crimes against God; this, all crimes against
our fellow-men. The two words express what comprehends the violation of
all the commands of God; "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, etc. and thy
neighbor as thyself," [Mat 22:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037).
The wrath of God is thus revealed against all human wickedness.

Who hold the truth - Who "keep back," or "restrain" the truth. The word
translated "hold" here, sometimes means to "maintain," to "keep," to
"observe" [Co1 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030); [Co2
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012); but it also means to "hold back,
to detain, to hinder." [Luk 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042), "the
people sought him (Jesus), and came to him, and stayed him." (Greek, the
same as here.) [Plm 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013), "whom I
would have "retained" with me," etc.; [Th2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#006), "and now ye know what
"withholdeth," etc. In this place it means also that they held back, or
restrained the truth, by their wickedness.

The truth - The truth of God, in whatever way made known, and
particularly, as the apostle goes on to say, what is made known by the
light of nature. The truth pertaining to his perfections, his Law, etc.
They hold it back. or restrain its influence.

In unrighteousness - Or rather, by their iniquity. Their wickedness is
the cause why the truth had had so little progress among them, and had
exerted so little influence. This was done by their yielding to corrupt
passions and propensities, and by their being therefore unwilling to
retain the knowledge of a pure and holy God, who is opposed to such
deeds, and who will punish them. As they were determined to practice
iniquity, they chose to exclude the knowledge of a pure God, and to
worship impure idols, by which they might give a sanction to their
lusts. Their vice and tendency to iniquity was, therefore, the reason
why they had so little knowledge of a holy God; and by the love of this,
they held back the truth from making progress, and becoming diffused
among them.

The same thing is substantially true now. People hold back or resist the
truth of the gospel by their sins in the following ways.

\(1\) people of influence and wealth employ both, in directly opposing
the gospel.

\(2\) people directly resist the doctrines of religion. since they know
they could not hold to those doctrines without abandoning their sins.

\(3\) people who resolve to live in sin, of course, resist the gospel,
and endeavor to prevent its influence.

\(4\) pride, and vanity, and the love of the world also resist the
gospel, and oppose its advances.

\(5\) Unlawful business - business that begins in evil, and progresses,
and ends in evil - has this tendency to hold back the gospel. Such is
the effect of the traffic in ardent spirits, in the slave-trade, etc.
They begin in the love of money, the root of all evil [Ti1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010); they progress in the tears and
sorrows of the widow, the orphan, the wife, the sister, or the child;
and they end in the deep damnation of multitudes in the world to come.
Perhaps there has been nothing that has so much held back the influence
of truth, and of the gospel, as indulgence in the vice of intemperance,
and traffic in liquid fire.

\(6\) Indulgence in vice, or wickedness of any kind, holds back the
truth of God. People who are resolved to indulge their passions will not
yield themselves to this truth. And hence, all the wicked, the proud,
and vain, and worldly are responsible, not only for their own sins
directly, but for hindering, by their example and their crimes, the
effect of religion on others. They are answerable for standing in the
way of God and his truth; and for opposing him in the benevolent design
of doing good to all people. There is nothing that prevents the
universal spread and influence of truth but sin. And people of
wickedness are answerable for all the ignorance and wo which are spread
over the community, and which have extended themselves over the world.

[Romans 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 1:19</span></span>

Because - The apostle proceeds to show how it was that the pagan
hindered the truth by their iniquity. This he does by showing that the
truth might be known by the works of creation; and that nothing but
their iniquity prevented it.

That which may be known of God - That which is "knowable" concerning
God. The expression implies that there may be many things concerning God
which cannot be known. But there are also many things which may be
ascertained. Such are his existence, and many of his attributes, his
power, and wisdom, and justice, etc. The object of the apostle was not
to say that every thing pertaining to God could be known by them, or
that they could have as clear a view of him as if they had possessed a
revelation. We must interpret the expression according to the object
which he had in view. That was to show that so much might be known of
God as to prove that they had no excuse for their crimes; or that God
would be just in punishing them for their deeds. For this, it was
needful only that his existence and his justice, or his determination to
punish sin, should be known; and this, the apostle affirms, was known
among them, and had been from the creation of the world. This
expression. therefore, is not to be pressed as implying that they knew
all that could be known about God, or that they knew as much as they who
had a revelation; but that they knew enough to prove that they had no
excuse for their sins.

Is manifest - Is known; is understood.

In them - "Among" them. So the preposition "in" is often used. It means
that they had this knowledge; or it had been communicated to them. The
great mass of the pagan world was indeed ignorant of the true God; but
their leaders, or their philosophers, had this knowledge; see the note
at [Rom 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021). But this was not true of
the mass, or body of the people. Still it was true that this knowledge
was in the possession of man, or was "among" the pagan world. and would
have spread, had it not been for the love of sin.

God hath showed it to them - Compare [Joh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009). He had endowed them with reason
and conscience [Rom 2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014); he had
made them capable of seeing and investigating his works; he had spread
before them the proofs of his wisdom, and goodness, and power, and had
thus given them the means of learning his perfections and will.

[Romans 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 1:20</span></span>

For the invisible things of him - The expression "his invisible things"
refers to those things which cannot be perceived by the senses. It does
not imply that there are any things pertaining to the divine character
which may be seen by the eye; but that there are things which may be
known of him, though not discoverable by the eye. We judge of the
objects around us by the senses, the sight, the touch, the ear, etc.
Paul affirms, that though we cannot judge thus of God, yet there is a
way by which we may come to the knowledge of him. What he means by the
invisible things of God he specifies at the close of the verse, "his
eternal power and Godhead." The affirmation extends only to that; and
the argument implies that that was enough to leave them without any
excuse for their sins.

From the creation of the world - The word "creation" may either mean the
"act" of creating, or more commonly it means "the thing created," the
world, the universe. In this sense it is commonly used in the New
Testament; compare [Mar 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#006); [Mar
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#019); [Mar
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005); [Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025); [Co2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017); [Gal
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015); [Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015), [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023); [Heb
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013); [Heb
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011); [Pe1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013); [Pe2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004); [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014). The word "from" may mean
"since," or it may denote "by means of." And the expression here may
denote that, as an historical fact, God "has been" "known" since the act
of creation; or it may denote that he is known "by means of" the
material universe which he has formed. The latter is doubtless the true
meaning. For,

\(1\) This is the common meaning of the word "creation;" and,

\(2\) This accords with the design of the argument.

It is not to state an historical fact, but to show that they had the
means of knowing their duty within their reach, and were without excuse.
Those means were in the wisdom, power, and glory of the universe, by
which they were surrounded.

Are clearly seen - Are made manifest; or may be perceived. The word used
here does not occur elsewhere in the New Testament.

Being understood - His perfections may be investigated, and comprehended
by means of his works. They are the evidences submitted to our
intellects, by which we may arrive at the true knowledge of God.

Things that are made - By his works; compare [Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003). This means, not by the original
"act" of creation, but by the continual operations of God in his
Providence, by his doings, ποιήμασιν poiēmasin, by what he is
continually producing and accomplishing in the displays of his power and
goodness in the heavens and the earth. What they were capable of
understanding, he immediately adds, and shows that he did not intend to
affirm that everything could be known of God by his works; but so much
as to free them from excuse for their sins.

His eternal power - Here are two things implied.

\(1\) that the universe contains an exhibition of his power, or a
display of that attribute which we call "omnipotence;" and,

\(2\) That this power has existed from eternity, and of course implies
an eternal existence in God.

It does not mean that this power has been exerted or put forth from
eternity, for the very idea of creation supposes that it had not, but
that there is proof, in the works of creation, of power which must have
existed from eternity, or have belonged to an eternal being. The proof
of this was clear, even to the pagan, with their imperfect views of
creation and of astronomy; compare [Psa
19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001). The majesty and grandeur of
the heavens would strike their eye, and be full demonstration that they
were the work of an infinitely great and glorious God. But to us, under
the full blaze of modern science, with our knowledge of the magnitude,
and distances, and revolutions of the heavenly bodies, the proof of this
power is much more grand and impressive. We may apply the remark of the
apostle to the present state of the science, and his language will cover
all the ground, and the proof to human view is continually rising of the
amazing power of God, by every new discovery in science, and especially
in astronomy. Those who wish to see this object presented in a most
impressive view, may find it done in Chalmer's Astronomical Discourses,
and in Dick's Christian Philosopher. Equally clear is the proof that
this power must have been eternal. If it had not always existed, it
could in no way have been produced. But it is not to be supposed that it
was always exerted, any more than it is that God now puts forth all the
power that he can, or than that we constantly put forth all the power
which we possess. God's power was called forth at the creation. He
showed his omnipotence; and gave, by that one great act, eternal
demonstration that he was almighty; and we may survey the proof of that,
as clearly as if we had seen the operation of his hand there. The proof
is not weakened because we do not see the process of creation constantly
going on. It is rather augmented by the fact that he sustains all
things, and controls continually the vast masses of matter in the
material worlds.

Godhead - His deity; divinity; divine nature, or essence. The word is
not used elsewhere in the New Testament. Its meaning cannot therefore be
fixed by any parallel passages. It proves the truth that the supremacy,
or supreme divinity of God, was exhibited in the works of creation, or
that he was exalted above all creatures and things. It would not be
proper, however, to press this word as implying that all that we know of
God by revelation was known to the pagan; but that so much was known as
to show his supremacy; his right to their homage; and of course the
folly and wickedness of idolatry. This is all that the argument of the
apostle demands, and, of course, on this principle the expression is to
be interpreted.

So that they are without excuse - God has given them so clear evidence
of his existence and claims, that they have no excuse for their
idolatry, and for hindering the truth by their iniquity. It is implied
here that in order that people should be responsible, they should have
the means of knowledge; and that he does not judge them when their
ignorance is involuntary, and the means of knowing the truth have not
been communicated. But where people have these means within their reach,
and will not avail themselves of them, all excuse is taken away. This
was the case with the Gentile world. They had the means of knowing so
much of God, as to show the folly of worshipping dumb idols; compare
[Isa 44:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008). They had also traditions
respecting his perfections; and they could not plead for their crimes
and folly that they had no means of knowing him. If this was true of the
pagan world then, how much more is it true of the world now?

And especially how true and fearful is this, respecting that great
multitude in Christian lands who have the Bible, and who never read it;
who are within the reach of the sanctuary, and never enter it; who are
admonished by friends, and by the providences of God, and who regard it
not; and who look upon the heavens, and even yet see no proof of the
eternal power and Godhead of him who made them all! Nay, there are those
who are apprized of the discoveries of modern astronomy, and who yet do
not seem to reflect that all these glories are proof of the existence of
an eternal God; and who live in ignorance of religion as really as the
pagan, and in crimes as decided and malignant as disgraced the darkest
ages of the world. For such there is no excuse, or shadow of excuse, to
be offered in the day of doom. And there is no fact more melancholy in
our history, and no one thing that more proves the stupidity of people,
than this sad forgetfulness of Him that made the heavens, even amid all
the wonders and glories that have come fresh from the hand of God, and
that everywhere speak his praise.

[Romans 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 1:21</span></span>

Because that - The apostle here is showing that it was right to condemn
people for their sins. To do this it was needful to show them that they
had the knowledge of God, and the means of knowing what was right; and
that the true source of their sins and idolatries was a corrupt and evil
heart.

When they knew God - Greek, "knowing God." That is, they had an
acquaintance with the existence and many of the perfections of one God.
That many of the philosophers of Greece and Rome had a knowledge of one
God, there can be no doubt. This was undoubtedly the case with
Pythagoras, who had traveled extensively in Egypt, and even in
Palestine; and also with Plato and his disciples. This point is clearly
shown by Cudworth in his Intellectual System, and by Dr. Warburton in
the Divine Legation of Moses. Yet the knowledge of this great truth was
not communicated to the people. It was confined to the philosophers; and
not improbably one design of the mysteries celebrated throughout Greece
was to keep up the knowledge of the one true God. Gibbon has remarked
that "the philosophers regarded all the popular superstitions as equally
false: the common people as equally true; and the politicians as equally
useful." This was probably a correct account of the prevalent feelings
among the ancients. A single extract from "Cicero" (de Natura Deorum,
lib. ii. c. 6) will show that they had the knowledge of one God. "There
is something in the nature of things, which the mind of man, which
reason, which human power cannot effect; and certainly what produces
this must be better than man. What can this be called but "God?" Again
(c. 2), "What can be so plain and manifest, when we look at heaven, and
contemplate heavenly things, as that there is some divinity of most
excellent mind, by which these things are governed?"

They glorified him not as God - They did not "honor" him as God. This
was the true source of their abominations. To glorify him "as God" is to
regard with proper reverence all his perfections and laws; to venerate
his name, his power, his holiness, and presence, etc. As they were not
inclined to do this, so they were given over to their own vain and
wicked desires. Sinners are not willing to give honor to God, as God.
They are not pleased with his perfections; and therefore the mind
becomes fixed on other objects, and the heart gives free indulgence to
its own sinful desires. A willingness to honor God as God - to
reverence, love, and obey him, would effectually restrain people from
sin.

Neither were thankful - The obligation to be "thankful" to God for his
mercies, for the goodness which we experience, is plain and obvious.
Thus, we judge of favors received of our fellow-men. the apostle here
clearly regards this unwillingness to render gratitude to God for his
mercies as one of the causes of their subsequent corruption and
idolatry. The reasons of this are the following.

\(1\) the effect of ingratitude is to render the heart hard and
insensible.

\(2\) people seek to forget the Being to whom they are unwilling to
exercise gratitude.

\(3\) to do this, they fix their affections on other things; and hence,
the pagan expressed their gratitude not to God, but to the sun, and
moon, and stars, etc., the mediums by which God bestows his favors upon
people. And we may here learn that an unwillingness to thank God for his
mercies is one of the most certain causes of alienation and hardness of
heart.

But became vain - To "become vain," with us, means to be elated, or to
be self-conceited, or to seek praise from others. The meaning here seems
to be, they became foolish, frivolous in their thoughts and reasonings.
They acted foolishly; they employed themselves in useless and frivolous
questions, the effect of which was to lead the mind further and further
from the truth respecting God.

Imaginations - This word means properly "thoughts," then "reasonings,"
and also "disputations." Perhaps our word, "speculations," would convey
its meaning here. It implies that they were unwilling to honor God, and
being unwilling to honor him, they commenced those speculations which
resulted in all their vain and foolish opinions about idols, and the
various rites of idolatrous worship. Many of the speculations and
inquiries of the ancients were among the most vain and senseless which
the mind can conceive.

And their foolish heart - The word "heart" is not infrequently used to
denote the mind, or the understanding. We apply it to denote the
affections. But such was not its common use, among the Hebrews. We speak
of the head when we refer to the understanding, but this was not the
case with the Hebrews. They spoke of the heart in this manner, and in
this sense it is clearly used in this place; see [Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018); [Rom
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015); [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006); [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019). The word "foolish" means
literally what is without "understanding;" [Mat
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016).

Was darkened - Was rendered obscure, so that they did not perceive and
comprehend the truth. The process which is stated in this verse is,

\(1\) That people had the knowledge of God.

\(2\) that they refused to honor him when they knew him, and were
opposed to his character and government.

\(3\) that they were ungrateful.

\(4\) that they then began to doubt, to reason, to speculate, and
wandered far into darkness.

This is substantially the process by which people wander away from God
now. They have the knowledge of God, but they do not love him; and being
dissatisfied with his character and government, they begin to speculate,
fall into error, and then "find no end in wandering mazes lost," and
sink into the depths of heresy and of sin.

[Romans 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 1:22</span></span>

Professing themselves to be wise - This was the common boast of the
philosophers of antiquity. The very word by which they chose to be
called, "philosophers," means literally "lovers of wisdom." That it was
their boast that they were wise, is well known; compare [Rom
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014); [Co1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019), [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020), [Co1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022); [Co1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019); [Co2
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#019).

They became fools - Compare [Jer
8:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008). They became really foolish in
their opinions and conduct. There is something particularly pungent and
cutting in this remark, and as true as it is pungent. In what way they
evinced their folly, Paul proceeds immediately to state. Sinners of all
kinds are frequently spoken of as fools in the Scriptures. In the sense
in which it is thus used, the word is applied to them as void of
understanding or moral sense; as idolaters, and as wicked; [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001); [Pro
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#004); [Pro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017), [Pro
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022); [Pro
14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#008). The senses in which this word
here is applied to the pagan are,

\(1\) That their speculations and doctrines were senseless; and,

\(2\) That their conduct was corrupt.

[Romans 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 1:23</span></span>

And changed - This does not mean that they literally "transmuted" God
himself; but that in their views they exchanged him; or they changed him
"as an object of worship" for idols. They produced, of course, no real
change in the glory of the infinite God, but the change was in
themselves. They forsook him of whom they had knowledge [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021), and offered the homage which was
due to him, to idols.

The glory - The majesty, the honor, etc. This word stands opposed here
to the "degrading" nature of their worship. Instead of adoring a Being
clothed with majesty and honor, they bowed down to reptiles, etc. They
exchanged a glorious object of worship for what was degrading and
humiliating. The glory of God, in such places as this, means his
essential honor, his majesty, the concentration and expression of his
perfections, as the glory of the sun, [Co1
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041) means his shining, or his
splendor; compare [Jer 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011); [Psa
106:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020).

The uncorruptible God - The word "uncorruptible" is here applied to God
in opposition to "man." God is unchanging, indestructible, immortal. The
word conveys also the idea that God is eternal. As he is incorruptible,
he is the proper object of worship. In all the changes of life, man may
come to him, assured that he is the same. When man decays by age or
infirmities, he may come to God, assured that he undergoes no such
change, but is the same yesterday, today, and forever; compare [Ti1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017).

Into an image - An image is a representation or likeness of anything,
whether made by painting, or from wood, stone, etc. Thus, the word is
applied to "idols," as being "images" or "representations" of heavenly
objects; [Ch2 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#007); [Dan
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001); [Rev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004), etc. See instances of this among
the Jews described in [Isa 40:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018),
and [Eze 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010).

To corruptible man - This stands opposed to the "incorruptible" God.
Many of the images or idols of the ancients were in the forms of men and
women. Many of their gods were heroes and benefactors, who were deified,
and to whom temples, altars, and statues were erected. Such were
Jupiter, and Hercules, and Romulus, etc. The worship of these heroes
thus constituted no small part of their idolatry, and their images would
be of course representations of them in human form. It was proof of
great degradation, that they thus adored human beings with like passions
as themselves; and attempted to displace the true God from the throne,
and to substitute in his place an idol in the likeness of men.

And to birds - The "ibis" was adored with special reverence among the
Egyptians, on account of the great benefits resulting from its
destroying the serpents which, but for this, would have overrun the
country. The hawk was also adored in Egypt, and the eagle at Rome. As
one great principle of pagan idolatry was to adore all objects from
which important benefits were derived, it is probable that all birds
would come in for a share of pagan worship, that rendered service in the
destruction of noxious animals.

And fourfooted beasts - Thus, the ox, under the name "apis," was adored
in Egypt; and even the dog and the monkey. In imitation of the Egyptian
ox, the children of Israel made their golden calf, [Exo
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004). At this day, two of the most
sacred objects of worship in Hindostan are the cow and the "monkey."

And creeping things - Reptiles. "Animals that have no feet, or such
short ones that they seem to creep or crawl on the ground." "(Calmet.)"
Lizards, serpents, etc. come under this description. The "crocodile" in
Egypt was an object of adoration, and even the serpent so late as the
second century of the Christian era, there was a sect in Egypt, called
"Ophites" from their worshipping a serpent, and who ever claimed to be
Christians, (Murdock's Mosheim, vol. i. p. 180, 181). There was scarcely
an object, animal or vegetable, which the Egyptians did not adore. Thus,
the leek, the onion, etc. were objects of worship, and people bowed down
and paid adoration to the sun and moon, to animals, to vegetables, and
to reptiles. Egypt was the source of the views of religion that pervaded
other nations, and hence, their worship partook of the same wretched and
degrading character. (See "Leland's" "Advantage and Necessity of
Revelation.")

[Romans 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 1:24</span></span>

Wherefore - That is, because they were unwilling to retain him in their
knowledge, and chose to worship idols. Here is traced the practical
tendency of paganism; not as an innocent and harmless system, but as
resulting in the most gross and shameless acts of depravity.

God gave them up - He abandoned them, or he ceased to restrain them, and
suffered them to act out their sentiments, and to manifest them in their
life. This does not imply, that he exerted any positive influence in
inducing them to sin, any more than it would if we should seek, by
argument and entreaty, to restrain a headstrong youth, and when neither
would prevail, should leave him to act out his propensities. and to go
as he chose to ruin. It is implied in this,

\(1\) That the tendency of man was to these sins;

\(2\) That the tendency of idolatry was to promote them; and,

\(3\) That all that was needful, in order that people should commit
them, was for God to leave him to follow the devices and desires of his
own heart; compare [Psa 81:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#012); [Th2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010), [Th2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012).

To uncleanness - To impurity, or moral defilement; particularly to those
impurities which he proceeds to specify, [Rom
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026), etc.

Through the lusts of their own hearts - Or, in consequence of their own
evil and depraved passions and desires. He left them to act out, or
manifest, their depraved affections and inclinations.

To dishonour - To disgrace; [Rom
1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026).

Between themselves - Among themselves; or mutually. They did it by
unlawful and impure connections with one another.

[Romans 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 1:25</span></span>

Who changed the truth of God - This is a repetition of the declaration
in [Rom 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023), in another form. The
phrase, "the truth of God" is a Hebrew phrase, meaning "the true God."
In such a case, where two nouns come together, one is employed as an
adjective to qualify the other. Most commonly the latter of two nouns is
used as the adjective, but sometimes it is the former, as in this case.
God is called "the true God" in opposition to idols, which are called
false gods. There is but one real or true God, and all others are false.

Into a lie - Into idols, or false gods. Idols are not infrequently
called falsehood and lies, because they are not true representations of
God; [Jer 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025); [Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015); [Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014); [Psa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004).

The creature - Created things, as the sun, moon, animals, etc.

Who is blessed forever - It was not uncommon to add a doxology, or
ascription of praise to God, when his name was mentioned; see [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005); [Co2
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#031); [Gal
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#005). The Jews also usually did it. In
this way they preserved veneration for the name of God, and accustomed
themselves to speak of him with reverence. "The Muslims also borrowed
this custom from the Jews, and practice it to a great extent. Tholuck
mentions an Arabic manuscript in the library at Berlin which contains an
account of heresies in respect to Islamism, and as often as the writer
has occasion to mention the name of a new heretical sect, he adds, 'God
be exalted above all which they say'" (Stuart).

Amen - This is a Hebrew word denoting strong affirmation. So let it be.
It implies here the solemn assent of the writer to what was just said;
or his strong wish that what he had said might be - that the name of God
might be esteemed and be blessed forever. The mention of the degrading
idolatry of the pagans was strongly calculated to impress on his mind
the superior excellency and glory of the one living God. It is mentioned
respecting the honorable Robert Boyle, that he never mentioned the name
of God without a solemn pause, denoting his profound reverence. Such a
practice would tend eminently to prevent an unholy familiarity and
irreverence in regard to the sacred name of the Most High; compare [Exo
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007).

[Romans 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 1:26</span></span>

For this cause - On account of what had just been specified; to wit,
that they did not glorify him as God, that they were unthankful, that
they became polytheists and idolaters. In the previous verses he had
stated their speculative belief. He now proceeds to show its practical
influences on their conduct.

Vile affections - Disgraceful passions or desires. That is, to those
which are immediately specified. The great object of the apostle here,
it will be remembered, is to shew the state of the pagan world, and to
prove that they had need of some other way of justification than the law
of nature. For this purpose, it was necessary for him to enter into a
detail of their sins. The sins which he proceeds to specify are the most
indelicate, vile, and degrading which can be charged on man. But this is
not the fault of the apostle. If they existed, it was necessary for him
to charge them on the pagan world. His argument would not be complete
without it. The shame is not in specifying them, but in their existence;
not in the apostle, but in those who practiced them, and imposed on him
the necessity of accusing them of these enormous offences. It may be
further remarked, that the mere fact of his charging them with these
sins is strong presumptive proof of their being practiced. If they did
not exist, it would be easy for them to deny it, and put him to the
proof of it. No man would venture charges like these without evidence;
and the presumption is, that these things were known and practiced
without shame. But this is not all. There is still abundant proof on
record in the writings of the pagan themselves, that these crimes were
known and extensively practiced.

For even their women ... - Evidence of the shameful and disgraceful fact
here charged on the women is abundant in the Greek and Roman writers.
Proof may be seen, which it would not be proper to specify, in the
lexicons, under the words τριζὰς ὄλισβον trizas olisbon, and ἑταιρίστης
hetairistēs. See also Seneca, epis. 95; Martial, epis. i. 90. Tholuck on
the State of the pagan World, in the Biblical Repository, vol. ii.;
Lucian, Dial. Meretric. v.; and Tertullian de Pallio.

[Romans 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 1:27</span></span>

And likewise the men ... - The sin which is here specified is what was
the shameful sin of Sodom, and which from that has been called sodomy.
It would scarcely be credible that man had been guilty of a crime so
base and so degrading, unless there was ample and full testimony to it.
Perhaps there is no sin which so deeply shows the depravity of man as
this; none which would so much induce one "to hang his head, and blush
to think himself a man." And yet the evidence that the apostle did not
bring a railing accusation against the pagan world; that he did not
advance a charge which was unfounded, is too painfully clear. It has
been indeed a matter of controversy whether paederastry, or the love of
boys, among the ancients was not a pure and harmless love, but the
evidence is against it. (See this discussed in Dr. Leland's Advantage
and Necessity of Revelation, vol. i. 49-56.) The crime with which the
apostle charges the Gentiles here was by no means confined to the lower
classes of the people.

It doubtless pervaded all classes, and we have distinct specifications
of its existence in a great number of cases. Even Virgil speaks of the
attachment of Corydon to Alexis, without seeming to feel the necessity
of a blush for it. Maximus Tyrius (Diss. 10) says that in the time of
Socrates, this vice was common among the Greeks; and is at pains to
vindicate Socrates from it as almost a solitary exception. Cicero
(Tuscul. Ques. iv. 34) says, that "Dicearchus had accused Plato of it,
and probably not unjustly." He also says (Tuscul. Q. iv. 33), that the
practice was common among the Greeks, and that their poets and great
men, and even their learned men and philosophers, not only practiced,
but gloried in it. And he adds, that it was the custom, not of
particular cities only, but of Greece in general. (Tuscul. Ques. v. 20.)
Xenophon says, that "the unnatural love of boys is so common, that in
many places it is established by the public laws."

He particularly alludes to Sparta. (See Leland's Advantage, etc. i. 56.)
Plato says that the Cretans practiced this crime, and justified
themselves by the example of Jupiter and Ganymede. (Book of Laws, i.)
And Aristotle says, that among the Cretans there was a law encouraging
that sort of unnatural love. (Aristotle, Politic. b. ii. chapter 10.)
Plutarch says, that this was practiced at Thebes, and at Elis. He
further says, that Solon, the great lawgiver of Athens, "was not proof
against beautiful boys, and had not courage to resist the force of
love." (Life of Solon.) Diogenes Laertius says that this vice was
practiced by the Stoic Zeno. Among the Romans, to whom Paul was writing,
this vice was no less common. Cicero introduces, without any mark of
disapprobation, Cotta, a man of the first rank and genius, freely and
familiarly owning to other Romans of the same quality, that this worse
than beastly vice was practiced by himself, and quoting the authority of
ancient philosophers in vindication of it. (De Natura Deorum, b. i.
chapter 28.) It appears from what Seneca says (epis. 95) that in his
time it was practiced openly at Rome, and without shame.

He speaks of flocks and troops of boys, distinguished by their colors
and nations; and says that great care was taken to train them up for
this detestable employment. Those who may wish to see a further account
of the morality in the pagan world may find it detailed in Tholuck's
"Nature and moral Influence of Heathenism," in the Biblical Repository,
vol. ii., and in Leland's Advantage and Necessity of the Christian
Revelation. There is not the least evidence that this abominable vice
was confined to Greece and Rome. If so common there, if it had the
sanction even of their philosophers, it may be presumed that it was
practiced elsewhere, and that the sin against nature was a common crime
throughout the pagan world. Navaratte, in his account of the empire of
China (book ii. chapter 6), says that it is extremely common among the
Chinese. And there is every reason to believe, that both in the old
world and the new, this abominable crime is still practiced. If such was
the state of the pagan world, then surely the argument of the apostle is
well sustained, that there was need of some other plan of salvation than
was taught by the light of nature.

That which is unseemly - That which is shameful, or disgraceful.

And receiving in themselves ... - The meaning of this doubtless is, that
the effect of such base and unnatural passions was, to enfeeble the
body, to produce premature old age, disease, decay, and an early death.
That this is the effect of the indulgence of licentious passions, is
amply proved by the history of man. The despots who practice polygamy,
and keep harems in the East, are commonly superannuated at forty years
of age; and it is well known, even in Christian countries, that the
effect of licentious indulgence is to break down and destroy the
constitution. How much more might this be expected to follow the
practice of the vice specified in the verse under examination! God has
marked the indulgence of licentious passions with his frown. Since the
time of the Romans and the Greeks, as if there had not been sufficient
restraints before, he has originated a new disease, which is one of the
most loathsome and distressing which has ever afflicted man, and which
has swept off millions of victims. But the effect on the body was not
all. It tended to debase the mind; to sink man below the level of the
brute; to destroy the sensibility; and to "sear the conscience as with a
hot iron." The last remnant of reason and conscience, it would seem,
must be extinguished it those who would indulge in this unnatural and
degrading vice. See Suetonius' Life of Nere, 28.

[Romans 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 1:28</span></span>

And even as they did not like ... - This was the true source of their
crimes. They did not choose to acknowledge God. It was not because they
could not, but because they were displeased with God, and chose to
forsake him, and follow their own passions and lusts.

To retain God ... - To think of him, or to serve and adore him. This was
the first step in their sin. It was not that God compelled them; or that
he did not give them knowledge; nor even is it said that he arbitrarily
abandoned them as the first step; but they forsook him, and as a
consequence he gave them up to a reprobate mind.

To a reprobate mind - A mind destitute of judgment. In the Greek the
same word is used here, which, in another form, occurs in the previous
part of the verse, and which is translated "like." The apostle meant
doubtless to retain a reference to that in this place. "As they did not
approve, ἐδοκιμασαν edokimasan, or choose to retain God, etc. he gave
them up to a mind disapproved, rejected, reprobate," ἀδοκιμον adokimon,
and he means that the state of their minds was such that God could not
approve it. It does not mean that they were reprobate by any arbitrary
decree; but that as a consequence of their headstrong passions, their
determination to forget him, he left them to a state of mind which was
evil, and which he could not approve.

Which are not convenient - Which are not fit or proper; which are
disgraceful and shameful; to wit, those things which he proceeds to
state in the remainder of the chapter.

[Romans 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 1:29</span></span>

Being filled - That is, the things which he specifies were common or
abounded among them. This is a strong phrase, denoting that these things
were so often practiced as that it might be said they were full of them.
We have a phrase like this still, when we say of one that he is full of
mischief, etc.

Unrighteousness - ἀδικία adikia. This is a word denoting injustice, or
iniquity in general. The particular specifications of the iniquity
follow.

Fornication - This was a common and almost universal sin among the
ancients, as it is among the moderns. The word denotes all illicit
sexual intercourse. That this was a common crime among the ancient
pagan, it would be easy to show, were it proper, even in relation to
their wisest and most learned men. They who wish to see ample evidence
of this charge may find it in Tholuck's "Nature and Moral Influence of
Heathenism," in the Biblical Repository, vol. ii. p. 441-464.

Wickedness - The word used here denotes a desire of injuring others; or,
as we should express it, malice. It is that depravity and obliquity of
mind which strives to produce injury on others. (Calvin.)

Covetousness - Avarice, or the desire of obtaining what belongs to
others. This vice is common in the world; but it would be particularly
so where the other vices enumerated here abounded, and people were
desirous of luxury, and the gratification of their senses. Rome was
particularly desirous of the wealth of other nations, and hence, its
extended wars, and the various evils of rapine and conquest.

Licentiousness - κακία kakia. This word denotes evil in general; rather
the act of doing wrong than the desire which was expressed before by the
word "wickedness."

Full of envy - "Pain, uneasiness, mortification, or discontent, excited
by another's prosperity, accompanied with some degree of hatred or
malignity, and often with a desire or an effort to depreciate the
person, and with pleasure in seeing him depressed" (Webster). This
passion is so common still, that it is not necessary to attempt to prove
that it was common among the ancients. It seems to be natural to the
human heart. It is one of the most common manifestations of wickedness,
and shows clearly the deep depravity of man. Benevolence rejoices at the
happiness of others, and seeks to promote it. But envy exists almost
everywhere, and in almost every human bosom:

"All human virtue, to its latest breath,

Finds envy never conquered but by death."

Pope.

Murder - "The taking of human life with premeditated malice by a person
of a sane mind." This is necessary to constitute murder now, but the
word used here denotes all manslaughter, or taking human life, except
what occurs as the punishment of crime. It is scarcely necessary to show
that this was common among the Gentiles. It has prevailed in all
communities, but it was particularly prevalent in Rome. It is necessary
only to refer the reader to the common events in the Roman history of
assassinations, deaths by poison, and the destruction of slaves. But in
a special manner the charge was properly alleged against them, on
account of the inhuman contests of the gladiators in the amphitheaters.
These were common at Rome, and constituted a favorite amusement with the
people. Originally captives, slaves, and criminals were trained up for
combat; but it afterward became common for even Roman citizens to engage
in these bloody combats, and Nero at one show exhibited no less than
four hundred senators and six hundred knights as gladiators.

The fondness for this bloody spectacle continued until the reign of
Constantine the Great, the first Christian emperor, by whom they were
abolished about six hundred years after the original institution.
"Several hundred, perhaps several thousand, victims were annually
slaughtered in the great cities of the empire." Gibbon's Decline and
Fall, chapter xxx. 404 a.d. As an instance of what might occur in this
inhuman spectacle, we may refer to what took place on such an occasion
in the reign of Probus (281 a.d.). During his triumph, near 700
gladiators were reserved to shed each other's blood for the amusement of
the Roman people. But "disdaining to shed their blood for the amusement
of the populace, they killed their keepers, broke from their place of
confinement, and filled the streets of Rome with blood and confusion."
Gibbon's Decline and Fall, chapter 12. With such views and with such
spectacles before them, it is not wonderful that murder was regarded as
a matter of little consequence, and hence, this crime prevailed
throughout the world.

Debate - Our word debate does not commonly imply evil. It denotes
commonly discussion for elucidating truth; or for maintaining a
proposition, as the debates in Parliament, etc. But the word in the
original meant also contention, strife, altercation, connected with
anger and heated zeal; [Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013);
[Co1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011); [Co1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003); [Co2
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020); [Gal
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020); [Phi
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015); [Ti1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#004); [Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009). This contention and strife would,
of course, follow from malice and covetousness, etc.

Deceit - This denotes fraud, falsehood, etc. That this was common is
also plain. The Cretans are testified by one of the Greek poets to have
been always liars. [Tit 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012). Juvenal
charges the same thing on the Romans. (Sat. iii. 41.) "What," says he,
"should I do at Rome? I cannot lie." Intimating that if he were there,
it would follow, of course, that he would be expected to be false. The
same thing is still true. Writers on India tell us that the word of a
Hindu even under oath is not to be regarded; and the same thing occurs
in most pagan countries.

Malignity - This word signifies here, not malignity in general, but that
particular species of it which consists in misinterpreting the words or
actions of others, or putting the worst construction on their conduct.

Whisperers - Those who secretly, and in a sly manner, by hints and
inuendoes, detract from others, or excite suspicion of them. It does not
mean those who openly calumniate, but that more dangerous class who give
hints of evil in others, who affect great knowledge, and communicate the
evil report under an injunction of secrecy, knowing that it will be
divulged. This class of people abounds everywhere, and there is scarcely
any one more dangerous to the peace or happiness of society.

[Romans 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 1:30</span></span>

Backbiters - Those Who calumniate, slander, or speak ill of those who
are absent. Whisperers declare secretly, and with great reserve, the
supposed faults of others. Backbiters proclaim them publicly and
avowedly.

Haters of God - There is no charge which can be brought against people
more severe than this. It is the highest possible crime; yet it is a
charge which the conduct of people will abundantly justify, and the
truth of which all those experience who are brought to see their true
character. To an awakened sinner there is often nothing more plain and
painful than that he is a hater of God. His heart rises up against Him,
and his Law, and his plan of saving people; and he deeply feels that
nothing can subdue this but the mighty power of the Holy One. This is a
charge which is not unfrequently brought against people in the Bible;
see [Joh 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007); [Joh
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018), [Joh
15:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024); [Joh
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019). Surely, if this be the native
character of man, then it is "far gone from original righteousness." No
more striking proof of depravity could be given; and in no creed or
confession of faith is there a more painful and humiliating
representation given of human wickedness, than in this declaration of an
inspired apostle, that people are by nature haters of God.

Despiteful - This word denotes those who abuse, or treat with unkindness
or disdain, those who are present. Whisperers and backbiters are those
who calumniate those who are absent.

Proud - Pride is well understood. It is an inordinate self-esteem; an
unreasonable conceit of one's superiority in talents, beauty, wealth,
accomplishments, etc. (Webster). Of the existence of this everywhere,
there is abundant proof. And it was particularly striking among the
ancients. The sect of the Stoics was distinguished for it, and this was
the general character of their philosophers. People will be proud where
they suppose none are superior; and it is only the religion that reveals
a great and infinite God, and that teaches that all blessings are his
gift, and that he has given us the station which we occupy, that will
produce true humility. We may add, that the system of paganism did not
disclose the wickedness of the heart, and that rids was a main reason
why they were elevated in self-esteem.

Boasters - Those who arrogate to themselves what they do not possess,
and glory on it. This is closely connected with pride. A man who has an
inordinate self-conceit, will not be slow to proclaim his own merits to
those around him.

Inventors of evil things - This doubtless refers to their seeking to
find out new arts or plans to practice evil; new devices to gratify
their lusts and passions; new forms of luxury, and vice, etc. So intent
were they on practicing evil, so resolved to gratify their passions,
that the mind was excited to discover new modes of gratification. In
cities of luxury and vice, this has always been done. Vices change their
form, people become satiated, and they are obliged to resort to some new
form. The passions cease to be gratified with old forms of indulgence,
and consequently people are obliged to resort to new devices to pamper
their appetites, and to rekindle their dying passions to a flame. This
was eminently true of ancient Rome; a place where all the arts of
luxury, all the devices of passion, all the designs of splendid
gratification, were called forth to excite and pamper the evil passions
of people. Their splendid entertainments, their games, their theaters,
their sports - cruel and bloody - were little else than new and
ever-varying inventions of evil things to gratify the desires of lust
and of pride.

Disobedient to parents - This expresses the idea that they did not show
to parents that honor, respect, and attention which was due. This has
been a crime of paganism in every age; and though among the Romans the
duty of honoring parents was enjoined by the laws, yet it is not
improbable that the duty was often violated, and that parents were
treated with great neglect and even contempt. "Disobedience to parents
was punished by the Jewish Law with death, and with the Hindus it is
attended with the loss of the child's inheritance. The ancient Greeks
considered the neglect of it to be extremely impious, and attended with
the most certain effects of divine vengeance. Solon ordered all persons
who refused to make due provision for their parents to be punished with
infamy, and the same penalty was incurred for personal violence toward
them." Kent's Commentaries on American Law, vol. ii. p. 207; compare
Virg. AEniad, ix. 283. The feelings of pride and haughtiness would lead
to disregard of parents. It might also be felt that to provide for them
when aged and infirm was a burden; and hence, there would arise
disregard for their wants, and probably open opposition to their wishes,
as being the demands of petulance and age. It has been one
characteristic of paganism every where, that it leaves children to treat
their parents with neglect. Among the Sandwich islanders it was
customary, when a parent was old, infirm, and sick beyond the hope of
recovery, for his own children to bury him alive; and it has been the
common custom in India for children to leave their aged parents to
perish on the banks of the Ganges.

[Romans 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 1:31</span></span>

Without understanding - Inconsiderate, or foolish; see [Rom
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021).

Covenant breakers - Perfidious; false to their contracts.

Without natural affections - This expression denotes the lack of
affectionate regard toward their children. The attachment of parents to
children is one of the strongest in nature, and nothing can overcome it
but the most confirmed and established wickedness. And yet the apostle
charges on the pagan generally the lack of this affection. He doubtless
refers here to the practice so common among pagans of exposing their
children, or putting them to death. This crime, so abhorrent to all the
feelings of humanity, was common among the pagan, and is still. The
Canaanites, we are told [Psa
106:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#037), "sacrificed their sons and
their daughters unto devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of
their sons and their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of
Canaan." Manasseh among the Jews imitated their example, and introduced
the horrid custom of sacrificing children to Moloch, and set the example
by offering his own; [Ch2 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006).

Among the ancient Persians it was a common custom to bury children
alive. In most of the Grecian states, infanticide was not merely
permitted, but actually enforced by law. The Spartan lawgiver expressly
ordained that every child that was born should be examined by the
ancient men of the tribe, and that if found weak or deformed, should be
thrown into a deep cavern at the foot of Mount Taygetus. Aristotle, in
his work on government, enjoins the exposure of children that are
naturally feeble and deformed, in order to prevent an excess of
population. But among all the nations of antiquity, the Romans were the
most unrelenting in their treatment of infants. Romulus obliged the
citizens to bring up all their male children, and the oldest of the
females, proof that the others were to be destroyed. The Roman father
had an absolute right over the life of his child, and we have abundant
proof that that right was often exercised.

Romulus expressly authorized the destruction of all children that were
deformed, only requiring the parents to exhibit them to their five
nearest neighbors, and to obtain their consent to their death. The law
of the Twelve Tables enacted in the 301st year of Rome, sanctioned the
same barbarous practice. Minucius Felix thus describes the barbarity of
the Romans in this respect: "I see you exposing your infants to wild
beasts and birds, or strangling them after the most miserable manner."
(chapter xxx.) Pliny the older defends the right of parents to destroy
their children, upon the ground of its being necessary in order to
preserve the population within proper bounds. Tertullian, in his
apology, expresses himself boldly on this subject. "How many of you
(addressing himself to the Roman people, and to the governors of cities
and provinces) might I deservedly charge with infant murder; and not
only so, but among the different kinds of death, for choosing some of
the cruelest for their own children, such as drowning, or starving with
cold or hunger, or exposing to the mercy of dogs; dying by the sword
being too sweet a death for children."

Nor was this practice arrested in the Roman government until the time of
Constantine, the first Christian prince. The Phoenicians and
Carthaginians were in the habit of sacrificing infants to the gods. It
may be added that the crime is no less common among modern pagan
nations. No less than 9000 children are exposed in Pekin in China
annually. Persons are employed by the police to go through the city with
carts every morning to pick up all the children that may have been
thrown out during the night. The bodies are carried to a common pit
without the walls of the city, into which all, whether dead or living,
are promiscuously thrown. (Barrow's Travels in China, p. 113, Amos ed.)
Among the Hindus the practice is perhaps still more common. In the
provinces of Cutch and Guzerat alone the number of infantile murders
amounted, according to the lowest calculation in 1807, to 3,000
annually; according to another calculation, to 30,000.

Females are almost the only victims. (Buchanan's Researches in Asia,
Eng. ed. p. 49. Ward's View of the Hindus.) In Otaheite, previously to
the conversion of the people to Christianity. it was estimated that at
least two-thirds of the children were destroyed. (Turnbull's Voyage
round the World in 1800, 2, 3, and 4.) The natives of New South Wales
were in the habit of burying the child with its mother, if she should
happen to die. (Collins' Account of the Colony of New South Wales, p.
124, 125.) Among the Hottentots, infanticide is a common crime. "The
altars of the Mexicans were continually drenched in the blood of
infants." In Peru, no less than two hundred infants were sacrificed on
occasion of the coronation of the Inca. The authority for these
melancholy statements may be seen in Beck's Medical Jurisprudence, vol.
i. 18-197, ed. 1823; see also Robertson's History of America, p. 221,
ed. 1821. This is a specimen of the views and feelings of the pagan
world; and the painful narrative might be continued to almost any
length. After this statement, it cannot surely be deemed a groundless
charge when the apostle accused them of being destitute of natural
affection.

Implacable - This word properly denotes those who will not be reconciled
where there is a quarrel; or who pursue the offender with unyielding
revenge. It denotes an unforgiving temper; and was doubtless common
among the ancients, as it is among all pagan people. The aborigines of
America have given the most striking manifestation of this that the
world has known. It is well known that among them, neither time nor
distance will obliterate the memory of an offence; and that the avenger
will pursue the offender over hills and streams, and through heat or
snow, happy if he may at last, though at the expiration of years, bury
the tomahawk in the head of his victim, though it may be at the expense
of his own life. See Robertson's America, book iv. Section lxxiii. -
lxxxi.

Unmerciful - Destitute of compassion. As a proof of this, we may remark
that no provisions for the poor or the infirm were made among the pagan.
The sick and the infirm were cast out, and doomed to depend on the
stinted charity of individuals. Pure religion, only, opens the heart to
the appeals of want; and nothing but Christianity has yet expanded the
hearts of people to make public provisions for the poor, the ignorant,
and the afflicted.

[Romans 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 1:32</span></span>

Who knowing - That the Gentiles had a moral sense, or were capable of
knowing the will of God in this case, is clear from [Rom
2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014). The means which they had of
arriving at the knowledge of God were, their own reason, their
conscience, and an observation of the effects of depravity.

The judgment of God - The word "judgment" here denotes the declared
sentiment of God that such things deserved death. It does not mean his
inflictions, or his statutes or precepts; but it means that God thought
or judged that they which did such things ought to die. As they were
aware of this, it showed their guilt in still persevering in the face of
his judgments, and his solemn purpose to inflict punishment.

Were worthy of death - The word "death" in the Scriptures is often used
to denote punishment. But it does not mean here that these deserved
capital punishment from the civil magistrate, but that they knew they
were evil, and offensive to God, and deserving of punishment from his
hand; see [Joh 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051); [Rom
5:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012).

Have pleasure ... - They delight in those who commit sin; and hence,
encourage them in it, and excite them to it. This was a grievous
aggravation of the offence. It greatly heightens guilt when we excite
others to do it, and seduce them from the ways of innocence. That this
was the case with the pagan there can be no doubt. People do not commit
sin often alone. They need the countenance of others. They "join hand in
hand," and become confederate in iniquity. All social sins are of this
class; and most of those which the apostle mentioned were sins of this
character.

If this revolting and melancholy picture of the pagan world was a true
representation, then it was clear that there was need of some other plan
of religion. And that it was true has already in part been seen. In the
conclusion of this chapter we may make a few additional observations.

1\. The charges which the apostle makes here were evidently those which
were well known. He does not even appeal to their writings, as he does
on some other occasions, for proof; compare [Tit
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012). So well known were they, that
there was no need of proof. A writer would not advance charges in this
manner unless he was confident that they were well-founded, and could
not be denied.

2\. They are abundantly sustained by the pagan writers themselves. This
we have in part seen In addition we may adduce the testimony of two
Roman writers respecting the state of things at Rome in the time of the
apostle. Livy says of the age of Augustus, in some respects the
brightest period of the Roman history, "Rome has increased by her
virtues until now, when we can neither bear our vices nor their remedy."
Preface to his History. Seneca, one of the purest moralists of Rome, who
died in 65 a.d., says of his own time, "All is full of criminality and
vice; indeed much more of these is committed than can be remedied by
force. A monstrous contest of abandoned wickedness is carried on. The
lust of sin increases daily; and shame is daily more and more
extinguished. Discarding respect for all that is good and sacred, lust
rushes on wherever it will. Vice no longer hides itself. It stalks forth
before all eyes. So public has abandoned wickedness become, and so
openly does it flame up in the minds of all, that innocence is no longer
seldom, but has wholly ceased to exist." Seneca de Ira, ii. 8. Further
authorities of this kind could be easily given, but these will show that
the apostle Paul did not speak at random when he charged them with these
enormous crimes.

3\. If this was the state of things, then it was clear that there was
need of another plan of saving people. It will be remembered that, in
these charges, the apostle speaks of the most enlightened and refined
nations of antiquity; and especially that he speaks of the Romans at the
very height of their power, intelligence, and splendor. The experiment
whether man could save himself by his own works, had been fairly made.
After all that their greatest philosophers could do, this was the
result, and it is clear that there was need of some better plan than
this. More profound and laborious philosophers than had arisen, the
pagan world could not hope to see; more refinement and civilization than
then existed, the world could not expect to behold under paganism. At
this time, when the experiment had been made for four thousand years,
and when the inefficacy of all human means, even under the most
favorable circumstances, to reform mankind, had been tried, the gospel
was preached to people. It disclosed another plan; and its effects were
seen at once throughout the most abandoned states and cities of the
ancient world.

4\. If this was the state of things in the ancient pagan world, the same
may be expected to be the state of paganism still. And it is so. The
account given here of ancient pagans would apply substantially still to
the pagan world. The same things have been again and again witnessed in
China, and Hindostan, and Africa, the Sandwich islands, and in
aboriginal America. It would be easy to multiply proofs almost without
end of this: and to this day the pagan world is exhibiting substantially
the same characteristics that it was in the time of Paul.

5\. There was need of some better religion than the pagan. After all
that infidels and deists have said of the sufficiency of natural
religion, yet here is the sad result. This shows what man can do, and
these facts will demonstrate forever that there was need of some other
religion than that furnished by the light of nature.

6\. The account in this chapter shows the propriety of missionary
exertions. So Paul judged; and so we should judge still. If this be the
state of the world, and if Christianity, as all Christians believe,
contains the remedy for all these evils, then it is wisdom and
benevolence to send it to them. And it is not wisdom or benevolence to
withhold it from them. Believing as they do, Christians are bound to
send the gospel to the pagan world. It is on this principle that modern
missions to the pagan are established; and if the toils of the apostles
were demanded to spread the gospel, then are the labors of Christians
now. If it was right, and wise, and proper for them to go to other lands
to proclaim "the unsearchable riches of Christ," then it is equally
proper and wise to do it now. If there was danger that the pagan world
then would perish without the gospel, there is equal danger that the
pagan world will perish now.

7\. If it should be said that many of these things are practiced now in
nations which are called Christian, and that, therefore, the charge of
the apostle that this was the effect of paganism could not be
well-founded, we may reply,

\(1\) That this is true, too true. But this very fact shows the deep and
dreadful depravity of human nature. If such things exist in lands that
have a revelation, what mush have been the state of those countries that
had none of its restraints and influences? But,

\(2\) These things do not exist where religion exerts its influence.
They are not in the bosom of the Christian church. They are not
practiced by Christians. And the effect of the Christian religion, so
far as it has influence, is to call off people from such vices, and to
make them holy and pure in their life. Let religion exert its full
influence on any nominally Christian nation, and these things would
cease. Let it send its influence into other lands, and the world, the
now polluted world, would become pure before God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 2](rom002)

</div>
