<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](jdg021)  [Next](rut001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Ruth

The Book of Ruth is historically important as giving the lineage of
David through the whole period of the rule of the Judges [Rut
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001), i. e. from Salmon who fought
under Joshua, to "Jesse the Bethlehemite" [Sa1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001); and as illustrating the ancestry
of "Jesus Christ, the son of David," who "was born in Bethlehem of
Judea" [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001); [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001). The care with which this
narrative was preserved through so many centuries before the birth of
Christ is a striking evidence of the providence of God, that "known unto
God are all His works from the beginning of the world." The genealogy
with which the Book closes [Rut 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018),
is also an important contribution to the chronology of Scripture
history. We learn from it, with great distinctness, that Salmon, one of
the conquering host of Joshua, was the grandfather of Obed, who was the
grandfather of king David; in other words, that four generations, or
about 200 years, span the "days when the Judges ruled."

But the Book of Ruth has another interest, from the charming view it
gives us of the domestic life of pious Israelites even during the most
troubled times. If we only had drawn our impressions from the records of
violence and crime contained in the Book of Judges, we would have been
ready to conclude that all the gentler virtues had fled from the land,
while the children of Israel were alternately struggling for their lives
and liberties with the tribes of Canaan, or yielding themselves to the
seductions of Canaanite idolatry. But the Book of Ruth, lifting up the
curtain which veiled the privacy of domestic life, discloses to us most
beautiful views of piety, integrity, self-sacrificing affection,
chastity, gentleness and charity, growing up amidst the rude scenes of
war, discord, and strife.

Ruth, from its contents, as anciently by its place in the canon, belongs
to the Book of Judges, and is a kind of appendix to it. In the present
Hebrew Bible it is placed among the Kethubim (Hagiographa), in the group
containing the Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and
Esther; but in the Greek Septuagint and the Latin Vulgate it occupies
the same place as in our English Bibles, which was its ancient place in
the Hebrew Bible.

The language of the Book of Ruth is generally pure Hebrew. But there are
words of Aramaic form and origin , and other expressions unique to the
later Hebrew. The inference would be that, the Book of Ruth was composed
not before the later times of the Jewish monarchy; and this inference is
somewhat strengthened by the way in which the writer speaks of the
custom which prevailed in former times in Israel [Rut
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007). Other expressions, which the book
has in common with the Books of Samuel and Kings, and a certain
similarity of narrative, tend to place it upon about the same level of
antiquity with those Books.

The Books of the Old Testament, to the contents of which reference seems
to be made in the Book of Ruth, are Judges, Leviticus, Deuteronomy,
Genesis, 1 and 2 Samuel, and perhaps Job. Ruth is not quoted or referred
to in the New Testament, except that the generations from Hezron to
David in our Lord's genealogy seem to be taken from it.

No mystical or allegorical sense can be assigned to the history; but
Ruth, the Moabitess, was undoubtedly one of the first-fruits of the
ingathering of Gentiles into the Church of Christ, and so an evidence of
God's gracious purpose in Christ, "also to the Gentiles to grant
repentance unto life;" and the important evangelical lesson is as
plainly taught in her case, as in that of Cornelius, "that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every nation he that feareth God, and
worketh righteousness, is accepted of Him." The great doctrine of divine
grace is also forcibly taught by the admission of Ruth, the Moabitess,
among the ancestry of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 1](rut001)

</div>
