<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1002)  [Next](ti1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 3:0</span></span>

Analysis Of The Chapter

The object of this chapter 1 Tim. 3 is to give directions respecting the
qualifications and duties of the officers of the Christian church. As it
is evident that Timothy was to be partly employed in the appointment of
suitable officers for the church at Ephesus, and as the kinds of
officers here referred to were to be permanent in the church, it was
important that a full statement should be put on record, under the
influence of inspiration, respecting their qualifications and duties.
The chapter embraces the following subjects:

I. The qualifications of a bishop; [Ti1
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001). The enumeration of his
qualifications is preceded by a general statement that the office was an
honorable one, and that he who aspired to it sought an employment that
was, in itself, to be regarded as desirable; [Ti1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001). The qualifications specified for
this office, are the following:

\(1\) He must be a man of good private character; possessing and
illustrating the Christian virtues, or, as we would say now, an upright
man, and a Christian gentleman; [Ti1
3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

\(2\) he must be a man who ruled his own house well, and who thus showed
that he was qualified to preside as the first officer in the church of
God; [Ti1 3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004).

\(3\) he must be a man of suitable age and experience - one who would
not be likely to fall into the temptations that are laid for the young;
[Ti1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006).

\(4\) he must have a fair reputation among those who were not Christians
- as it is intended that the influence of his ministry shall reach them,
and as it is impossible to do them good unless he is believed to be a
man of integrity; [Ti1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007).

II\. The qualifications of deacons; [Ti1
3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008), [Ti1
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012). They must be:

\(1\) Men of fair character - serious, temperate, candid; [Ti1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008).

\(2\) men who hold to the doctrines of the gospel with a pure
conscience; [Ti1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009).

\(3\) men who have been proved, and who have shown that they are
qualified to serve the church: [Ti1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010).

\(4\) men whose wives are of such a character that their example will
contribute to the promotion of the common cause; [Ti1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011).

\(5\) men not living in polygamy, and who exercise exemplary family
government; [Ti1 3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012).

III\. The reason why Paul gave these instructions to Timothy; [Ti1
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014). It was, that he might know
how he ought to demean himself in the important station which he was
called to occupy. Paul hoped to be able to come to him before long, and
to complete the work which he had commenced at Ephesus, but, in the
meantime, he gave him these written councils, that he might understand
particularly the duty which was required of him.

IV\. The chapter closes with a statemerit which seems to have been
intended to impress the mind of Timothy with the importance of the
duties in which he was engaged; [Ti1
3:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015). The statement is, that the
church is the great defender of the truth in the world [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015), and that the truth which the
church is to maintain is of the greatest importance. It relates to the
incarnation of the Son of God, and to the work which he accomplished on
earth a work which excited the deepest interest in heaven, and the true
doctrine respecting which it was of the utmost importance to keep up
among people; [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016). This reason
is further urged in the following chapter, by showing that the time
would come when, under the influence of Satan, these great doctrines
would be denied, and the truth be corrupted and perverted.

[1 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 3:1</span></span>

This is a trite saying - Greek, "Faithful is the word" - the very phrase
which is used in [Ti1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015); see the
notes on that verse. The idea here is, that it was worthy of credence;
it was not to be doubted.

If a man desire - Implying that there would be those who would wish to
be put into the ministry. The Lord, undoubtedly, by his Spirit, often
excites an earnest and irrepressible desire to preach the gospel - a
desire so strong, that he in whom it exists can be satisfied in no other
calling. In such a case, it should be regarded as one evidence of a call
to this work. The apostle, however, by the statements which follow,
intimates that wherever this desire exists, it is of the utmost
importance to have just views of the nature of the office, and that
there should be other qualifications for the ministry than a mere desire
to preach the gospel. He proceeds, therefore, to state those
qualifications, and no one who "desires" the office of the ministry
should conclude that he is called to it, unless these qualifications
substantially are found in him. The word rendered "desire" here (ὀρέγω
oregō), denotes properly, "to reach" or "stretch out" - and hence to
reach after anything, to long after, to try to obtain; [Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016).

The office of a bishop - The Greek here is a single word - ἐπισκοπῆς
episkopēs. The word ἐπισκοπή episkopē - "Episcope" - whence the word
"Episcopal" is derived - occurs but four times in the New Testament. It
is translated "visitation" in [Luk
19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044), and in [Pe1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012); "bishoprick," Acts . [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020); and in this place "office of a
bishop." The verb from which it is derived (ἐπισκοπέω episkopeō), occurs
but twice, In [Heb 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015), it is
rendered "looking diligently," and in [Pe1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002), "taking the oversight." The noun
rendered bishop occurs in [Act 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028);
[Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001); [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002); [Tit
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007); [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025). The verb means, properly, to
look upon, behold; to inspect, to look after, see to, take care of; and
the noun denotes the office of overseeing, inspecting, or looking to. It
is used to denote the care of the sick, Xeno. Oec. 15, 9; compare
"Passow;" and is of so general a character that it may denote any office
of overseeing, or attending to. There is nothing in the word itself
which would limit it to any class or grade of the ministry, and it is,
in fact, applied to nearly all the officers of the church in the New
Testament, and, indeed, to Christians who did not sustain "any" office.
Thus it is applied:

\(a\) to believers in general, directing them to "look diligently, lest
anyone should fail of the grace of God," [Heb
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015);

\(b\) to the elders of the church at Ephesus, "over the which the Holy
Ghost hath made you overseers," [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028);

\(c\) to the elders or presbyters of the church in [Pe1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002), "Feed the flock of God, taking
the oversight thereof;

\(d\) to the officers of the church in Philippi, mentioned in connection
with deacons as the only officers of the church there, "to the saints at
Philippi, with the bishops and deacons," [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001);

\(e\) to Judas, the apostate. [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020); and,

\(f\) to the great Head of the church, the Lord Jesus Christ, [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025), "the Shepherd and Bishop of your
souls."

From this use of the term it follows:

\(1\) That the word is never used to designate the "uniqueness" of the
apostolic office, or so as to have any special applicability to the
apostles. Indeed, the term "bishop" is "never" applied to any of them in
the New Testament; nor is the word in any of its forms ever used with
reference to them, except in the single case of "Judas," [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020).

\(2\) it is never employed in the New Testament to designate an order of
men superior to presbyters, regarded as having any other functions than
presbyters, or being in any sense "successors" to the apostles. It is so
used now by the advocates of prelacy; but this is a use wholly unknown
to the New Testament. It is so undeniable that the name is never given
in the New Testament to those who are now called "bishops," that even
Episcopalians concede it. Thus, Dr. Onderdonk (Tract on Episcopacy, p.
12) says, "All that we read in the New Testament concerning 'bishops' is
to be regarded as pertaining to the 'middle grade;' that is, to those
who are now regarded as 'priests.'" This is not strictly correct, as is
clear from the remarks above respecting what is called the "middle
grade;" but it is strictly correct, so far as it affirms that it is
"never" applied to prelates.

\(3\) it is used in the New Testament to denote ministers of the gospel
who had the care or oversight of the churches, without any regard to
grade or rank.

\(4\) it has now, as used by Episcopalians, a sense which is wholly
unauthorized by the New Testament, and which, indeed, is entirely at
variance with the usage there. To apply the term to a pretended superior
order of clergy, as designating their special office, is wholly to
depart from the use of the word as it occurs in the Bible.

\(5\) as it is never used in the Scriptures with reference to
"prelates," it "should" be used with reference to the pastors, or other
officers of the church; and to be a "pastor," or "overseer" of the flock
of Christ, should be regarded as being a scriptural bishop.

He desireth a good work - An honorable office; an office which it is
right for a man to desire. There are some stations in life which ought
never to be desired; it is proper for anyone to desire the office of a
bishop who has the proper qualifications; compare notes on [Rom
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013).

[1 Timothy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 3:2</span></span>

A bishop - A minister of religion, according to the foregoing remarks,
who has the charge or oversight of any Christian church. The reference
here is doubtless to one who had the government of the church entrusted
to him [Ti1 3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004), and who was also a
preacher of the gospel.

Must be blameless - This is a different word (ἀνεπίλημπτον anepilēmpton)
from that rendered "blameless" in [Luk
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006); [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015); [Phi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006) (ἄμεμπτος amemptos); compare
however, [Luk 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006) note; [Phi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006) note. The word here used does not
mean that, as a necessary qualification for office, a bishop should be
"perfect;" but that he should be a man against whom no charge of
immorality, or of holding false doctrine, is alleged. His conduct should
be irreprehensible or irreproachable. Undoubtedly it means that if "any"
charge could be brought against him implying moral obliquity, he is not
fit for the office. He should be a man of irreproachable character for
truth, honesty, chastity, and general uprightness.

The husband of one wife - This need not be understood as requiring that
a bishop "should be" a married man, as Vigilantius, a presbyter in the
church at Barcelona in the fourth century, supposed, however desirable
in general it may be that a minister of the gospel should be married.
But, while this interpretation is manifestly to be excluded as false,
there has been much difference of opinion on the question whether the
passage means that a minister should not have more than one wife at the
same time, or whether it prohibits the marriage of a second wife after
the death of the first. On this question, the notes of Bloomfield,
Doddridge, and Macknight, may be consulted. That the former is the
correct opinion, seems to me to be evident from the following
considerations:

\(1\) It is the most obvious meaning of the language, and it would
doubtless be thus understood by those to whom it was addressed. At a
time when polygamy was not uncommon, to say that a man should "have but
one wife" would be naturally understood as prohibiting polygamy.

\(2\) the marriage of a second wife, after the death of the first, is
nowhere spoken of in the Scriptures as wrong. The marriage of a widow to
a second husband is expressely declared to be proper [Co1
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039); and it is not unfair to infer
from that permission that it is equally lawful and proper for man to
marry the second time. But if it is lawful for any man it is right for a
minister of the gospel. No reason can he assigned against such marriages
in his case, which would not be equally valid in any other. Marriage is
as honorable for a minister of the gospel as for any other man (compare
notes on [Heb 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)); and, as Doddridge
has well remarked, "Circumstances may be so adjusted that there may be
as much reason for a second marriage as for the first, and as little
inconvenience of any kind may attend it."

\(3\) there was a special propriety in the prohibition, if understood as
prohibiting polygamy. It is known that it was extensively practiced, and
was not regarded as unlawful. Yet one design of the gospel was to
restore the marriage relation to its primitive condition; and though it
might not have seemed absolutely necessary to require of every man who
came into the church to divorce his wives, if he had more than one, yet,
in order to fix a brand on this irregular practice, it might have been
deemed desirable to require of the ministers of the gospel that they
should have but one wife. Thus the practice of polygamy would gradually
come to be regarded as dishonorable and improper, and the example and
influence of the ministry would tend to introduce correct views in
regard to the nature of this relation. One thing is clear from this
passage, that the views of the Papists in regard to the celibacy of the
clergy are directly at variance with the Bible. The declaration of Paul
in [Heb 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004), is, that "marriage is
honorable in all;" and here it is implied that it was proper that a
minister should be married. If it were not, why did not Paul prohibit it
altogether? Instead of saying that it was improper that a bishop should
have more than one wife, why did he not say that it was improper that he
should be married at all? Would not a Romanist say so now?

Vigilant - This word (νηφάλεος nēphaleos) occurs only here and in [Ti1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011); [Tit
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#002). It means, properly, "sober,
temperate, abstinent," especially in respect to wine; then
"sober-minded, watchful, circumspect. Robinson." A minister should have
a watchful care over his own conduct. He should be on his gaurd against
sin in any form.

Sober - σώφρονα sōphrona Properly, a man of "a sound mind;" one who
follows sound reason, and who is not under the control of passion. The
idea is, that he should have his desires and passions well regulated.
Perhaps the word "prudent" would come nearer to the meaning of the
apostle than any single word which we have.

Of good behaviour - Margin, "modest." Coverdale renders it, "mannerly."
The most correct rendering, according to the modern use of language,
would be, that he should be "a gentleman." He should not be slovenly in
his appearance, or rough and boorish in his manners. He should not do
violence to the usages of refined conversation, nor be unfit to appear
respectable in the most refined circles of society. Inattention to
personal neatness, and to the rules which regulate refined contact, is
indicative neither of talent, learning, nor religion; and though they
are occasionally - not often - connected with talent, learning, and
religion, yet they are never the fruit of either, and are always a
disgrace to those who exhibit such incivility and boorishness, for such
men "ought" to know better. A minister of the gospel should be a
finished gentleman in his manners, and there is no excuse for him if he
is not. His religion, if he has any, is adapted to make him such. He has
usually received such an education as ought to make him such, and in all
cases "ought" to have had such a training. He is admitted into the best
society, and has an opportunity of becoming familiar with the laws of
refined conversation. He should be an example and a pattern in all that
goes to promote the welfare of mankind, and there are few things so
easily acquired that are suited to do this, as refinement and gentility
of manners. No man can do good, on the whole, or in the "long run," by
disregarding the rules of refined contact; and, other things being
equal, the refined, courteous, polite gentleman in the ministry, will
always do more good than he who neglects the rules of goodbreeding.

Given to hospitality - This is often enjoined on all Christians as a
duty of religion. For the reasons of this, and the nature of the duty,
see the [Rom 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013) note; [Heb
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002) note. It was a special duty of
the ministers of religion, as they were to be examples of every
Christian virtue.

Apt to teach - Greek, "Didactic;" that is, capable of instructing, or
qualified for the office of a teacher of religion. As the principal
business of a preacher of the gospel is to "teach," or to communicate to
his fellow-men the knowledge of the truth, the necessity of this
qualification is obvious. No one should be allowed to enter the ministry
who is not qualified to impart "instruction" to others on the doctrines
and duties of religion; and no one should feel that he ought to continue
in the ministry, who has not industry, and self-denial, and the love of
study enough to lead him constantly to endeavor to "increase" in
knowledge, that he may be qualified to teach others. A man who would
"teach" a people, must himself keep in advance of them on the subjects
on which he would instruct them.

[1 Timothy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 3:3</span></span>

Not given to wine - Margin, "Not ready to quarrel and offer wrong, as
one in wine." The Greek word (πάροινος paroinos) occurs in the New
Testament only here and in [Tit 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007).
It means, properly, "by wine;" i. e., spoken of what takes place "by" or
"over" wine, as revelry, drinking songs, etc. Then it denotes, as it
does here, one who sits "by" wine; that is, who is in the habit of
drinking it. It cannot be inferred, from the use of the word here, that
wine was absolutely and entirely prohibited; for the word does not
properly express that idea. It means that one who is in the habit of
drinking wine, or who is accustomed to sit with those who indulge in it,
should not be admitted to the ministry. The way in which the apostle
mentions the subject here would lead us fairly to suppose that he did
not mean to commend its use in any sense; that he regarded its use as
dangerous, and that he would wish the ministers of religion to avoid it
altogether. In regard to its use at all, except at the communion or as a
medicine, it may be remarked, that a minister will do no injury to
himself or others by letting it entirely alone; he may do injury by
indulging in it. No man is under any "obligation" of courtesy or
Christian duty to use it; thousands of ministers of the gospel have
brought ruin on themselves, and disgrace on the ministry, by its use;
compare [Mat 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009) note, and [Ti1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023) note.

No striker - He must be a peaceable, not a quarrelsome man. This is
connected with the caution about the use of wine, probably, because that
is commonly found to produce a spirit of contention and strife.

Not greedy of filthy lucre - Not contentious or avaricious. Greek, Not
desirous of base gain. The desire of this is condemned everywhere in the
New Testament; but it is especially the duty of a minister of the gospel
to be free from it. He has a right to a support (see the notes on 1 Cor.
9); but there is nothing that more certainly paralyzes the usefulness of
a minister of the gospel than the love of money. There is an instinctive
feeling in the human bosom that such a man ought to be actuated by a
nobler and a purer principle. As avarice, moreover, is the great sin of
the world - the sin that sways more hearts, and does more to hinder the
progress of the gospel, than all others combined - it is important in
the highest degree that the minister of religion should be an example of
what men "should" be, and that he, by his whole life, should set his
face against that which is the main obstruction to the progress of that
gospel which he is appointed to preach.

But patient - Modest, mild, gentle. See the word (Greek) in [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005); [Tit
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#002); [Jam
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#017), and [Pe1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018), where it is rendered "gentle."
The word means that the minister of the gospel should be a man of mild
and kind demeanor, such as his Master was.

Not a brawler - compare [Ti2 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024).
That is, he should not be a man given to contention, or apt to take up a
quarrel. The Greek is, literally, "Not disposed to fight."

Not covetous - Greek, "Not a lover of silver;" that is, of money. A man
should not be put into the ministry who is characteristically a lover of
money. Such a one, no matter what his talents may be, has no proper
qualification for the office, and will do more harm than good.

[1 Timothy 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 3:4</span></span>

One that ruleth well his own house - This implies that a minister of the
gospel would be, and ought to be, a married man. It is everywhere in the
New Testament supposed that he would be a man who could be an example in
all the relations of life. The position which he occupies in the church
has a strong resemblance to the relation which a father sustains to his
household; and a qualification to govern a family well, would be an
evidence of a qualification to preside properly in the church. It is
probable that, in the early Christian church, ministers were not
unfrequently taken from those of mature life, and who were, at the time,
at the head of families; and, of course, such would be men who had had
an opportunity of showing that they had this qualification for the
office. Though, however, this cannot be insisted on now as a "previous"
qualification for the office, yet it is still true that, if he has a
family, it is a necessary qualification, and that a man in the ministry
"should be" one who governs his own house well. A want of this will
always be a hindrance to extensive usefulness.

Having his children in subjection with all gravity - This does not mean
that his "children" should evince gravity, whatever may be true on that
point; but it refers "to the father." He should be a grave or serious
man in his family; a man free from levity of character, and from
frivolity and fickleness, in his conversation with his children. It does
not mean that he should be severe, stern, morose - which are traits that
are often mistaken for gravity, and which are as inconsistent with the
proper spirit of a father as frivolity of manner - but that he should be
a serious and sober-minded man. He should maintain proper "dignity"
(σεμνότης semnotēs); he should maintain self-respect, and his deportment
should be such as to inspire others with respect for him.

[1 Timothy 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 3:5</span></span>

For if a man know not how to rule - This is a beautiful and striking
argument. A church resembles a family. It is, indeed, larger, and there
is a greater variety of dispositions in it than there is in a family.
The authority of a minister of the gospel in a church is also less
absolute than that of a father. But still there is a striking
resemblance. The church is made up of an assemblage of brothers and
sisters. They are banded together for the same purposes, and have a
common object to aim at. They have common feelings and common needs.
They have sympathy, like a family, with each other in their distresses
and afflictions. The government of the church also is designed to be
"paternal." It should be felt that he who presides over it has the
feelings of a father; that he loves all the members of the great family;
that he has no prejudices, no partialities, no selfish aims to gratify.

Now, if a man cannot govern his own family well; if he is severe,
partial, neglectful, or tyrannical at home, how can he be expected to
take charge of the more numerous "household of faith" with proper views
and feelings? If, with all the natural and strong ties of affection
which bind a father to his own children; if, when they are few
comparatively in number, and where his eye is constantly upon them, he
is unable to govern them aright, how can he be expected to preside in a
proper manner over the larger household where he will be bound with
comparatively feebler ties, and where he will be exposed more to the
influence of passion, and where he will have a much less constant
opportunity of supervision? Confucius, as quoted by Doddridge, has a
sentiment strikingly resembling that before us: "It is impossible that
he who knows not how to govern and reform his own family, should rightly
govern and reform a people." We may remark, also, in this verse, a
delicate and beautiful use of words by the apostle to prevent the
possibility of misapprehension. While he institutes a comparison between
the government of a family and that of the church, he guards against the
possibility of its being supposed that he would countenance "arbitrary"
authority in the church, even such authority as a father must of
necessity employ in his own family. Hence, he uses different words. He
speaks of the father as "ruling" over his own family, or "presiding over
it" - προστῆναι prostēnai; he describes the minister of religion as
"having a tender care for the church" - ἐπιμελὴσεται epimelēsetai.

[1 Timothy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 3:6</span></span>

Not a novice - Margin, "one newly come to the faith." The Greek word,
which occurs nowhere else in the New Testament, means, properly, that
which is "newly planted." Thus it would mean a plant that was not
strong, or not fitted to bear the severity of storms; that had not as
yet struck its roots deep, and could not resist the fierceness of a cold
blast. Then the word comes to mean a new convert; one who has had little
opportunity to test his own faith, or to give evidence to others that he
would be faithful to the trust committed to him. The word does not refer
so much to one who is young "in years," as one who is young "in faith."
Still, all the reasons which apply against introducing a very recent
convert into the ministry, will apply commonly with equal force against
introducing one young in years.

Lest being lifted up with pride - We are not to suppose that this is the
only reason against introducing a recent convert into the ministry, but
it is a sufficient reason. He would be likely to be elated by being
entrusted at once with the highest office in the church, and by the
commendations and flattery which he might receive. No condition is
wholly proof against this; but he is much less likely to be injured who
has had much experience of the depravity of his own heart, and whose
mind has been deeply imbued with the spirit of the gospel.

He fall into the condemnation of the devil - That is, the same kind of
condemnation which the devil fell into; to wit, condemnation on account
of pride. It is here intimated that the cause of the apostasy of Satan
was pride - a cause which is as likely to have been the true one as any
other. Who can tell but it may have been produced by some new honor
which was conferred on him in heaven, and that his virtue was not found
sufficient for the untried circumstances in which he was placed? Much of
the apostasy from eminent virtue in this world, arises from this cause;
and possibly the case of Satan may have been the most signal instance of
this kind which has occurred in the universe. The idea of Paul is, that
a young convert should not suddenly be raised to an exalted station in
the church. Who can doubt the wisdom of this direction? The word
rendered "lifted up" (τυφωθὲις tuphōtheis), is from a verb which means
to smoke, to fume, to surround with smoke; then to "inflate" - as a
bladder is with air; and then to be conceited or proud; that is, to be
"like" a bladder filled, not with a solid substance, but with air.

[1 Timothy 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 3:7</span></span>

Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without - Who are
without the church; that is, of those who are not Christians. This
includes, of course, "all" classes of those who are not Christians -
pagans, infidels, Jews, moral people, and scoffers. The idea is, that he
must have a fair reputation with them for integrity of character. His
life must be in their view upright. He must not be addicted to anything
which they regard as inconsistent with good morals. His deportment must
be such that they shall regard it as not inconsistent with his
profession. He must be true and just and honest in his dealings with his
fellow-men, and so live that they cannot say that he has wronged them.
He must not give occasion for scandal or reproach in his contact with
the other sex, but must be regarded as a man of a pure life and of a
holy walk. The "reason" for this injunction is obvious.

It is his business to endeavor to do such people good, and to persuade
them to become Christians. "But no minister of the gospel can possibly
do such people good, unless they regard him as an upright and honest
man." No matter how he preaches or prays; no matter how orthodox,
learned, or apparently devout he may be, all his efforts will be in vain
unless they regard him as a man of incorruptible integrity. If they hate
religion themselves, they insist justly that since he has professed it
he shall be governed by its principles; or if they feel its importance,
they will not be influenced to embrace it by a man that they regard as
hypocritical and impure. Go to a man whom you have defrauded, or who
regards you as having done or attempted wrong to any other one, and talk
to him about the necessity of religion, and he will instinctively say
that he does not "want" a religion which will not make its professor
true, honest, and pure. It is impossible, therefore, for a minister to
over-estimate the importance of having a fair character in the view of
the world, and no man should be introduced into the ministry, or
sustained in it, who has not a fair reputation; compare [Col
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#005) note; [Th1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012) note.

Lest he fall into reproach - That is, in such a way as to bring dishonor
on the ministerial character. His life will be such as to give people
occasion to reproach the cause of religion.

And the snare of the devil - The snare which the devil lays to entrap
and ruin the ministers of the gospel and all good people. The snare to
which reference is here made, is that of "blasting the character and
influence of the minister of the gospel." The idea is, that Satan lays
this snare so to entangle him as to secure this object, and the means
which he uses is the vigilance and suspicion of those who are out of the
church. If there is anything of this kind in the life of a minister
which they can make use of, they will be ready to do it. Hence, the
necessity on his part of an upright and blameless life. Satan is
constantly aiming at this thing; the world is watching for it, and if
the minister has any "propensity" which is not in entire accordance with
honesty, Satan will take advantage of it and lead him into the snare.

[1 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 3:8</span></span>

Likewise must the deacons - On the meaning of the word "deacons," see
the notes on [Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001). On their
appointment, see the notes, [Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001).
The word here evidently denotes those who had charge of the temporal
affairs of the church, the poor, etc. No qualifications are mentioned,
implying that they were to be preachers of the gospel. In most respects,
except in regard to preaching, their qualifications were to be the same
as those of the "bishops."

Be grave - Serious, sober-minded men. In [Act
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003), it is said that they should be
men "of honest report." On the meaning of the word "grave," see the
notes on [Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004). They should be men
who by their serious deportment will inspire respect.

Not double-tongued - The word here used δίλογος dilogos - does not occur
elsewhere in the New Testament. It means, properly, uttering the same
thing twice (from δίς dis and λέγω legō), and then deceitful, or
speaking one thing and meaning another. They should be men who can be
relied on for the exact truth of what they say, and for the exact
fulfillment of their promises.

Not given to much wine - see [Ti1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003).
The word "much" is added here to what is said [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002) of the qualification of a bishop.
It is not affirmed that it would be proper for the deacon, anymore than
the bishop, to indulge in the use of wine in small quantities, but it
"is" affirmed that a man who is much given to the use of wine ought not,
on any consideration, to be a deacon. It may be remarked here, that this
qualification was everywhere regarded as necessary for a minister of
religion. Even the pagan priests, on entering a temple, did not drink
wine. "Bloomfield." The use of wine, and of strong drinks of all kinds,
was absolutely prohibited to the Jewish ministers of every rank when
they were about to engage in the service of God; [Lev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009). Why should it then be anymore
proper for a Christian minister to drink wine than for a Jewish or a
pagan priest? Shall a minister of the gospel be less holy than they?
Shall he have a feebler sense of the purity of his vocation? Shall he be
less careful lest he expose himself to the possibility of conducting the
services of religion in an irreverent and silly manner? Shall he venture
to approach the altar of God under the influence of intoxicating drinks,
when a sense of propriety restrained the pagan priest, and a solemn
statue of Yahweh restrained the Jewish priest from doing it?

Not greedy of filthy lucre - notes, [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003). The special reason why this
qualification was important in the deacon was, that he would be
entrusted with the funds of the church, and might be tempted to
appropriate them to his own use instead of the charitable purposes for
which they were designed; see this illustrated in the case of Judas,
[Joh 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006).

[1 Timothy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 3:9</span></span>

Holding the mystery of the faith - On the word "mystery," see notes on
[Co1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007). It means that which had been
concealed, or hidden, but which was now revealed. The word "faith" here,
is synonymous with "the gospel;" and the sense is, that he should hold
firmly the great doctrines of the Christian religion which had been so
long concealed from people, but which were now revealed. The reason is
obvious. Though not a preacher, yet his influence and example would be
great, and a man who held material error ought not to be in office.

In a pure conscience - A mere orthodox faith was not all that was
necessary, for it was possible that a man might be professedly firm in
the belief of the truths of revelation, and yet be corrupt at heart.

[1 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 3:10</span></span>

And let these also first be proved - That is, tried or tested in regard
to the things which were the proper qualifications for the office. This
does not mean that they were to be employed as "preachers," but that
they were to undergo a proper trial in regard to their fitness for the
office which they were to fill. They were not to be put into it without
any opportunity of knowing what they were. It should be ascertained that
they were grave, serious, temperate, trustworthy men; men who were sound
in the faith, and who would not dishonor the office. It is not said here
that there should be a "formal" trial, as if they were candidates for
this office; but the meaning is, that they should have had an
opportunity of making their character known, and should have gained such
respect for their piety, and their other qualifications, that there
would be reason to believe that they would perform the functions of the
office well. Thus, in [Act 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003), when
deacons were first appointed, the church was directed to "look out seven
men of honest report," who might be appointed to the office.

Then let them use the office of a deacon - Let them be appointed to this
office, and fulfil its duties.

Being found blameless - If nothing can be alleged against their
character see the notes on [Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

[1 Timothy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 3:11</span></span>

Even so must their wives be grave - Chrysostom, Theophylact, Grotius,
Bloomfield, and many others, suppose that by the word "wives," here,
(γυνᾶικας gunaikas), the apostle means "deaconesses." Clarke supposes
that it refers to women in general. The reason assigned for supposing
that it does not refer to the wives of deacons, as such, is, that
nothing is said of the qualifications of the wives of bishops - a matter
of as much importance as that of the character of the wife of a deacon;
and that it cannot be supposed that the apostle would specify the one
without some allusion to the other. But that the common interpretation,
which makes it refer to the wives of deacons, as such, is to be adhered
to, seems to me to be clear. Because:

\(1\) it is the obvious and natural interpretation.

\(2\) the word here used - "wives" - is never used of itself to denote
deaconesses.

\(3\) if the apostle had meant deaconesses, it would have been easy to
express it without ambiguity; compare notes, [Rom
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001).

\(4\) what is here mentioned is important, whether the same thing is
mentioned of bishops or not.

\(5\) in the qualifications of bishops, the apostle had made a statement
respecting his family, which made any specification about the particular
members of the family unnecessary. He was to be one who presided in a
proper manner over his own house, or who had a well-regulated family;
[Ti1 3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004). By a comparison of this
passage, also, with [Tit 2:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003), which
bears a strong resemblance to this, it would seem that it was supposed
that the deacons would be taken from those who were advanced in life,
and that their wives would have some superintendence over the younger
females of the church. It was, therefore, especially important that they
should be persons whose influence would be known to be decidedly
favorable to piety. No one can doubt that the character of a woman may
be such, that it is not desirable that her husband should be an officer
in the church. A bad woman ought not to be entrusted with any additional
power or influence.

Grave - notes, [Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004).

Not slanderers - compare [Tit 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003),
"Not false accusers." The Greek word is διαβόλους diabolous - "devils."
It is used here in its original and proper sense, to denote a
"calumniator," "slanderer," or "accuser." It occurs in the same sense in
[Ti2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003), and [Tit
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003). Elsewhere in the New Testament,
it is uniformly rendered "devil" (compare notes, [Mat
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)), and is given to Satan, the
prince of the fallen angels [Mat 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#034),
by way of eminence, as "the accuser;" compare [Job
1:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006) notes, and [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010) note. Here it means that they
should not be women who were in the habit of calumniating others, or
aspersing their character. Mingling as they would with the church, and
having an opportunity to claim acquaintance with many, it would be in
their power, if they chose, to do great injury to the character of
others.

Sober - notes, [Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

Faithful in all things - To their husbands, to their families, to the
church, to the Saviour.

[1 Timothy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 3:12</span></span>

Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife - notes, [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

Ruling their children and their own houses well - notes, [Ti1
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004).

[1 Timothy 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 3:13</span></span>

For they that have used the office of a deacon well - Margin,
"ministered." The Greek word is the same as deacon, meaning ministering,
or serving in this office. The sense would be well expressed by the
phrase, "deaconizing well." The "word" implies nothing as to the exact
nature of the office.

Purchase to themselves - Procure for themselves; see this word explained
in the notes on [Act 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028).

A good degree - The word here used (βαθμός bathmos) occurs nowhere else
in the New Testament. It means, properly, "a step," as of a stair; and
the fair meaning is that of going up higher, or taking an additional
step of dignity, honor, or standing. So far as the "word" is concerned,
it may mean either an advance in office, in dignity, in respectability,
or in influence. It cannot certainly be inferred that the apostle
referred to a higher grade of "office;" for all that the word
essentially conveys is, that, by exercising this office well, a deacon
would secure additional respectability and influence in the church.
Still, it is possible that those who had performed the duties of this
office well were appointed to be preachers. They may have shown so much
piety, prudence, good sense, and ability to preside over the church,
that it was judged proper that they should be advanced to the office of
bishops or pastors of the churches. Such a course would not be
unnatural. This is, however, far from teaching that the office of a
deacon is a subordinate office, "with a view" to an ascent to a higher
grade.

And great boldness in the faith - The word here rendered "boldness"
properly refers to boldness "in speaking;" see it explained in the [Act
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013) note; [Co2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012) note; [Phi
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020) note. But the word is commonly
used to denote boldness of any kind - openness, frankness, confidence,
assurance; [Joh 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013), [Joh
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026); [Mar
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#032); [Co2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#004). As it is here connected with
"faith" - "boldness in the faith" - it means, evidently, not so much
public speaking, as a manly and independent exercise of faith in Christ.
The sense is, that by the faithful performance of the duties of the
office of a deacon, and by the kind of experience which a man would have
in that office, he would establish a character of firmness in the faith,
which would show that he was a decided Christian. This passage,
therefore, cannot be fairly used to prove that the deacon was "a
preacher," or that he belonged to a grade of ministerial office from
which he was regularly to rise to that of a presbyter.

[1 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 3:14</span></span>

These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly - That
is, he hoped to come there to give instructions personally, or to
finish, himself, the work which he had commenced in Ephesus, and which
had been interrupted by his being driven so unexpectedly away. This
verse proves that the apostle Paul did not regard Timothy as the
permanent diocesan bishop of Ephesus. Would any Episcopal bishop write
this to another bishop? If Timothy were the permanent prelate of
Ephesus, would Paul have intimated that he expected soon to come and
take the work of completing the arrangements there into his own hands?
In regard to his expectation of going soon to Ephesus, see the notes on
[Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003); compare the Introduction to
the Epistle.

[1 Timothy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 3:15</span></span>

But if I tarry long - Paul appears to have been uncertain how long
circumstances would require him to be absent. He expected to return, but
it was possible that his hope of returning soon would be disappointed.

That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself - That is,
that he might have just views about settling the affairs of the church.

In the house of God - This does not mean in a place of public worship,
nor does it refer to propriety of deportment there. It refers rather to
the church as a body of believers, and to converse with them. The church
is called the "house of God," because it is that in which he dwells.
Formerly, his unique residence was in the temple at Jerusalem; now that
the temple is destroyed, it is the church of Christ, among his people.

Which is the church of the living God - This seems to have been added to
impress the mind of Timothy with the solemn nature of the duty which he
was to perform. What he did pertained to the honor and welfare of the
church of the living God, and hence he should feet the importance of a
correct deportment, and of a right administration of its affairs.

The pillar and ground of the truth - There has been no little diversity
of opinion among critics whether this phrase is to be taken in
connection with the preceding, meaning that "the church" is the pillar
and ground of the truth; or whether it is to be taken in connection with
what follows, meaning that the principal support of the truth was the
doctrine there referred to - that God was manifest in the flesh.
Bloomfield remarks on this: "It is surprising that any who have any
knowledge or experience in Greek literature could tolerate so harsh a
construction as that which arises from the latter method." The more
natural interpretation certainly is, to refer it to the former; and this
is supported by the consideration that it would then fall in with the
object of the apostle. His design here seems to be, to impress Timothy
with a deep sense of the importance of correct conduct in relation to
the church; of the responsibility of those who presided over it; and of
the necessity of care and caution in the selection of proper officers.

To do this, he reminded him that the truth of God - that revealed truth
which he had given to save the world - was entrusted to the church; that
it was designed to preserve it pure, to defend it, and to transmit it to
future times; and that, therefore, every one to whom the administration
of the affairs of the church was entrusted, should engage in this duty
with a deep conviction of his responsibility. On the construction of the
passage, Bloomfield Rosenmuller, and Clarke, may be consulted. The word
"pillar" means a column, such as that by which a building is supported,
and then any firm prop or support; [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009); [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012). If it refers to the church here,
it means that that is the support of the truth, as a pillar is of a
building. It sustains it amidst the war of elements, the natural
tendency to fall, and the assaults which may be made on it, and
preserves it when it would otherwise tumble into ruin.

Thus it is with the church. It is entrusted with the business of
maintaining the truth, of defending it from the assaults of error, and
of transmitting it to future times. The truth is, in fact, upheld in the
world by the church. The people of the world feel no interest in
defending it, and it is to the church of Christ that it is owing that it
is preserved and transmitted from age to age. The word rendered "ground"
- ἑδραίωμα hedraiōma - means, properly, a basis, or foundation. The
figure here is evidently taken from architecture, as the use of the word
pillar is. The proper meaning of the one expression would be, that truth
is supported by the church. as an edifice is by a pillar; of the other,
that the truth rests "on" the church, as a house does on its foundation.
It is that which makes it fixed, stable, permanent; that on which it
securely stands amidst storms and tempests; that which renders it firm
when systems of error are swept away as a house that is built on the
sand; compare notes on [Mat 7:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024).

The meaning then is, that the stability of the truth on earth is
dependent on the church. It is owing to the fact that the church is
itself founded on a rock, that the gates of hell cannot prevail against
it, that no storms of persecution can overthrow it, that the truth is
preserved from age to age. Other systems of religion are swept away;
other opinions change; other forms of doctrine vanish; but the knowledge
of the great system of redemption is preserved on earth unshaken,
because the church is preserved, and because its foundations cannot be
moved. This does not refer, I suppose, to creeds and confessions, or to
the decisions of synods and councils; but to the living spirit of truth
and piety "in" the church itself. As certainly as the church continues
to live, so certain it will be that the truth of God will be perpetuated
among people.

[1 Timothy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 3:16</span></span>

And, without controversy - Undeniably, certainly. The object of the
apostle is to say that the truth which he was about to state admitted of
no dispute.

Great is the mystery - On the meaning of the word "mystery," see the
notes on [Co1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007). The word means that
which had been hidden or concealed. The meaning here is not that the
proposition which he affirms was mysterious in the sense that it was
unintelligible, or impossible to be understood; but that the doctrine
respecting the incarnation and the work of the Messiah, which had been
so long "kept hidden" from the world, was a subject of the deepest
importance. This passage, therefore, should not be used to prove that
there is anything unintelligible, or anything that surpasses human
comprehension, in that doctrine, whatever may be the truth on that
point; but that the doctrine which he now proceeds to state, and which
had been so long concealed from mankind, was of the utmost consequence.

Of godliness - The word "godliness" means, properly, piety, reverence,
or religiousness. It is used here, however, for the gospel scheme, to
wit, that which the apostle proceeds to state. This "mystery," which had
"been hidden from ages and from generations, and which was now manifest"
[Col 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026), was the great doctrine on
which depended "religion" everywhere, or was that which constituted the
Christian scheme.

God - Probably there is no passage in the New Testament which has
excited so much discussion among critics as this, and none in reference
to which it is so difficult to determine the true reading. It is the
only one, it is believed, in which the microscope has been employed to
determine the lines of the letters used in a manuscript; and, after all
that has been done to ascertain the exact truth in regard to it, still
the question remains undecided. It is not the object of these notes to
enter into the examination of questions of this nature. A full
investigation may be found in Wetstein. The question which has excited
so much controversy is, whether the original Greek word was Θεὸς Theos,
"God," or whether it was ὅς hos, "who," or ὁ ho, "which." The
controversy has turned, to a considerable degree, on the reading in the
"Codex Alexandrinus;" and a remark or two on the method in which the
manuscripts in the New Testament were written, will show the true nature
of the controversy.

Greek manuscripts were formerly written entirely in capital letters, and
without breaks or intervals between the words, and without accents; see
a full description of the methods of writing the New Testament, in an
article by Prof. Stuart in Dr. Robinson's Biblotheca Sacra, No. 2, pp.
254ff The small, cursive Greek letters which are now used, were not
commonly employed in transcribing the New Testament, if at all, until
the ninth or tenth centuries. It was a common thing to abridge or
contract words in the manuscript. Thus, πρ would be used for πατερ
pater, "father;" κς for κυριος kurios, "Lord;" Θς for Θεος Theos, "God,"
etc. The words thus contracted were designated by a faint line or dash
over them. In this place, therefore, if the original uncials (capitals)
were ΘC, standing for Θεὸς Theos, "God," and the line in the Θ, and the
faint line over it, were obliterated from any cause, it would easily be
mistaken for OC - ὅς hos - "who."

To ascertain which of these is the true reading, has been the great
question; and it is with reference to this that the microscope has been
resorted to in the examination of the Alexandrian manuscript. It is now
generally admitted that the faint line "over" the word has been added by
some later hand, though not improbably by one who found that the line
was nearly obliterated, and who meant merely to restore it. Whether the
letter O was originally written with a line within it, making the
reading "God," it is now said to be impossible to determine, in
consequence of the manuscript at this place having become so much worn
by frequent examination. The Vulgate and the Syriac read it: "who," or
"which." The Vulgate is, "Great is the sacrament of piety which was
manifested in the flesh." The Syriac, "Great is the mystery of
godliness, that he was manifested in the flesh." The "probability" in
regard to the correct reading here, as it seems to me, is, that the
word, as originally written, was Θεός Theos - "God." At the same time,
however, the evidence is not so clear that it can be properly used in an
argument. But the passage is not "necessary" to prove the doctrine which
is affirmed, on the supposition that that is the correct reading. The
same truth is abundantly taught elsewhere; compare [Mat
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023); [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).

Was manifest - Margin, "Manifested." The meaning is, "appeared" in the
flesh.

In the flesh - In human nature; see this explained in the notes on [Rom
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003). The expression here looks as
though the true reading of the much-disputed word was "God." It could
not have been, it would seem evident, ὁ ho, "which," referring to
"mystery;" for how could a mystery "be manifested in the flesh?" Nor
could it it be ὅς hos, "who," unless that should refer to one who was
more than a man; for how absurd would it be to say that "a man was
manifested, or appeared in the flesh!" How else could a man appear? The
phrase here means that God appeared in human form, or with human nature;
and this is declared to be the "great" truth so long concealed from
human view, but now revealed as constituting the fundamental doctrine of
the gospel. The expressions which follow in this verse refer to God "as"
thus manifested in the flesh; to the Saviour as he appeared on earth,
regarded as a divine and human being. It was the fact that he thus
appeared and sustained this character, which made the things which are
immediately specified so remarkable, and so worthy of attention.

Justified in the Spirit - That is, the incarnate person above referred
to; the Redeemer, regarded as God and man. The word "Spirit," here, it
is evident, refers to the Holy Spirit, because:

\(1\) it is not possible to attach any intelligible idea to the phrase,
"he was justified by his own spirit, or soul;"

\(2\) as the Holy Spirit performed so important a part in the work of
Christ, it is natural to suppose there would be some allusion here to
him; and,

\(3\) as the "angels" are mentioned here as having been with him, and as
the Holy Spirit is often mentioned in connection with him, it is natural
to suppose that there would be some allusion to Him here. The word
"justified," here, is not used in the sense in which it is when applied
to Christians, but in its more common signification. It means to
"vindicate," and the sense is, that he was shown to be the Son of God by
the agency of the Holy Spirit; he was thus vindicated from the charges
alleged against him. The Holy Spirit furnished the evidence that he was
the Son of God, or "justified" his claims. Thus he descended on him at
his baptism, [Mat 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016); he was sent to
convince the world of sin because it did not believe on him, [Joh
16:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008); the Saviour cast out devils by
him, [Mat 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028); the Spirit was given
to him without measure, [Joh 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034), and
the Spirit was sent down in accordance with his promise, to convert the
hearts of people; [Act 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033). All the
manifestations of God to him; all the power of working miracles by his
agency; all the influences imparted to the man Christ Jesus, endowing
him with such wisdom as man never had before, may be regarded as an
attestation of the Holy Spirit to the divine mission of the Lord Jesus,
and of course as a vindication from all the charges against him. In like
manner, the descent of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, and his
agency in the conversion of every sinner, prove the same thing, and
furnish the grand argument in vindication of the Redeemer that he was
sent from God. To this the apostle refers as a part of the glorious
truth of the Christian scheme now revealed - the "mystery of religion;"
as a portion of the amazing records, the memory of which the church was
to preserve as connected with the redemption of the world.

Seen of angels - They were attendants on his ministry, and came to him
in times of distress, peril, and want; compare [Luk
2:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009); [Luk
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#043); [Luk
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#004); [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006); [Mat
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011). They felt an interest in him and
his work, and they gladly came to him in his sorrows and troubles. The
design of the apostle is to give an impressive view of the grandeur and
glory of that work which attracted the attention of the heavenly hosts,
and which drew them from the skies that they might proclaim his advent,
sustain him in his temptations, witness his crucifixion, and watch over
him in the tomb. The work of Christ, though despised by people, excited
the deepest interest in heaven; compare notes on [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012).

Preached unto the Gentiles - This is placed by the apostle among the
"great" things which constituted the "mystery" of religion. The meaning
is, that it was a glorious truth that salvation might be, and should be,
proclaimed to all mankind, and that this was a part of the important
truths made known in the gospel. Elsewhere this is called, by way of
eminence, "the mystery of the gospel;" that is, the grand truth which
had not been known until the coming of the Saviour; see the [Eph
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019) note; [Col
1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026); [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003) notes. Before his coming, a wall
of partition had divided the Jewish and Gentile world. The Jews regarded
the rest of mankind as excluded from the covenant mercies of God, and it
was one of the principal stumblingblocks in their way, in regard to the
gospel, that it proclaimed that all the race was on a level, that that
middle wall of partition was broken down, and that salvation might now
be published to all people; compare [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021); [Eph
2:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014); [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022); [Rom
10:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011).

The Jew had no special advantage for salvation by being a Jew; the
Gentile was not excluded from the hope of salvation. The plan of
redemption was adapted "to man" as such - without regard to his
complexion, country, customs, or laws. The blood of Christ was shed for
all, and wherever a human being could be found, salvation might be
freely offered him. This "is" a glorious truth; and taken in all its
bearings, and in reference to the views which then prevailed, and which
have always more or less prevailed about the distinctions made among
people by caste and rank, there is scarcely anymore glorious truth
connected with the Christian revelation, or one which will exert a wider
influence in promoting the welfare of man. It is a great privilege to be
permitted to proclaim that all people, in one respect - and that the
most important - are on a level; that they are all equally the objects
of the divine compassion; that Christ died for one as really as for
another; that birth, wealth, elevated rank, or beauty of complexion,
contribute nothing to the salvation of one man; and that poverty, a
darker skin, slavery, or a meaner rank, do nothing to exclude another
from the favor of his Maker.

Believed on in the world - This also is mentioned among the "great"
things which constitute the mystery of revealed religion. But why is
this regarded as so remarkable as to be mentioned thus? In point of
importance, how can it be mentioned in connection with the fact that God
was manifest in the flesh; that he was vindicated by the Holy Spirit;
that he was an object of intense interest to angelic hosts, and that his
coming had broken down the walls which had separated the world, and
placed them now on a level? I answer, perhaps the following
circumstances may have induced the apostle to place this among the
remarkable things evincing the greatness of this truth:

\(1\) The strong "improbability" arising from the greatness of the
"mystery," that the doctrines respecting the incarnate Deity would be
believed. Such is the incomprehensible nature of many of the truths
connected with the incarnation; so strange does it seem that God would
become incarnate; so amazing that he should appear in human flesh and
blood, and that the incarnate Son of God should die, that it might be
regarded as a wonderful thing that such a doctrine had in fact obtained
credence in the world. But it was a glorious truth that all the natural
improbabilities in the case had been overcome, and that people had
accredited the announcement.

\(2\) the strong improbability that his message would be believed,
arising from the "wickedness of the human heart." Man, in all his
history, had shown a strong reluctance to believe any message from God,
or any truth whatever revealed by him. The Jews had rejected his
prophets and put them to death Matt. 23; Acts 7; and had at last put his
own Son - their Messiah - to death. Man everywhere had shown his strong
inclination to unbelief. There is in the human soul no elementary
principle or germ of faith in God. Every man is an unbeliever by nature
- an infidel first; a Christian afterward; an infidel as he comes into
the world; a believer only as he is made so by grace. The apostle,
therefore, regarded it as a glorious fact that the message respecting
the Saviour "had been" believed in the world. It overcame such a strong
and universal reluctance to confide in God, that it showed that there
was more than human power in operation to overcome this reluctance.

\(3\) the extent to which this had been done may have been a reason why
he thought it worthy of the place which he gives it here. It had been
embraced, not by a few, but by thousands in all lands where the gospel
had been published; and it was proof of the truth of the doctrine, and
of the great power of God, that such high mysteries as those relating to
redemption, and so much opposed to the natural feelings of the human
heart, should have been embraced by so many. The same thing occurs now.
The gospel makes its way against the native incredulity of the world,
and every new convert is an additional demonstration that it is from
God, and a new illustration of the greatness of this mystery.

Received up into glory - To heaven; compare [Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005); see the notes on [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009). This is mentioned as among the
"great" or remarkable things pertaining to "godliness," or the Christian
revelation, because it was an event which had not elsewhere occurred,
and was the crowning grandeur of the work of Christ. It was an event
that was fitted to excite the deepest interest in heaven itself. No
event of more importance has ever occurred in the universe, of which we
have any knowledge, than the re-ascension of the triumphant Son of God
to glory after having accomplished the redemption of a world.

In view of the instructions of this chapter, we may make the following
remarks.

1\. The word "bishop" in the New Testament never means what is now
commonly understood by it - "a Prelate." It does not denote here, or
anywhere else in the Now Testament, one who has charge over a "diocese"
composed of a certain district of country, embracing a number of
churches with their clergy.

2\. There are not "three orders" of clergy in the New Testament. The
apostle Paul in this chapter expressly designates the characteristics of
those who should have charge of the church, but mentions only two,
"bishops" and "deacons." The former are ministers of the word, having
charge of the spiritual interests of the church; the other are deacons,
of whom there is no evidence that they were appointed to preach. There
is no "third" order. There is no allusion to anyone who was to be
"superior" to the "bishops" and "deacons." As the apostle Paul was
expressly giving instructions in regard to the organization of the
church, such an omission is unaccountable if he supposed there was to be
an order of "prelates" in the church. Why is there no allusion to them?
Why is there no mention of their qualifications? If Timothy was himself
a prelate, was he to have nothing to do in transmitting the office to
others? Were there no special qualifications required in such an order
of people which it would be proper to mention? Would it not be
"respectful," at least, in Paul to have made some allusion to such an
office, if Timothy himself held it?

3\. There is only one order of preachers in the church. The
qualifications of that order are specified with great minuteness and
particularity, as well as beauty; [Ti1
3:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002). No man really needs to know
more of the qualifications for this office than could be learned from a
prayerful study of this passage.

4\. A man who enters the ministry "ought" to have high qualifications;
[Ti1 3:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002). No man "ought," under any
pretence, to be put into the ministry who has not the qualifications
here specified. Nothing is gained in any department of human labor, by
appointing incompetent persons to fill it. A farmer gains nothing by
employing a man on his farm who has no proper qualifications for his
business; a carpenter, a shoemaker, or a blacksmith, gains nothing by
employing a man who knows nothing about his trade; and a neighborhood
gains nothing by employing a man as a teacher of a school who has no
qualifications to teach, or who has a bad character. Such a man would do
more mischief on a farm, or in a workshop, or in a school, than all the
good which he could do would compensate. And so it is in the ministry.
The true object is not to increase the "number" of ministers, it is to
increase the number of those who are "qualified" for their work, and if
a man has not the qualifications laid down by the inspired apostle, he
had better seek some other calling.

5\. The church is the guardian of the truth; [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015). It is appointed to preserve it
pure, and to transmit it to future ages. The world is dependent on it
for any just views of truth. The church has the power, and is entrusted
with the duty, of preserving on earth a just knowledge of God and of
eternal things; of the way of salvation; of the requirements of pure
morality: to keep up the knowledge of that truth which tends to elevate
society and to save man. It is entrusted with the Bible, to preserve
uncorrupted, and to transmit to distant ages and lands. It is bound to
maintain and assert the truth in its creeds and confessions of faith.
And it is to preserve the truth by the holy lives of its members, and to
show in their walk what is the appropriate influence of truth on the
soul. Whatever religious truth there is now on the earth, has been thus
preserved and transmitted, and it still devolves on the church to bear
the truth of God on to future times, and to diffuse it abroad to distant
lands.

6\. The closing verse of this chapter [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) gives us a most elevated view of
the plan of salvation. and of its grandeur and glory. It would be
difficult, if not impossible, to condense more interesting and sublime
thought into so narrow a compass as this. The great mystery of the
incarnation; the interest of angelic beings in the events of redemption;
the effect of the gospel on the pagan world; the tendency of the
Christian religion to break down every barrier among people, and to
place all the race on a level; its power in overcoming the unbelief of
mankind; and the re-ascension of the Son of God to heaven, present a
series of most wonderful facts to our contemplation. These things are
found in no other system of religion, and these are worthy of the
profound attention of every human being. The manifestation of God in the
flesh! What a thought! It was worthy of the deepest interest among the
angels, and it "claims" the attention of people, for it was for human
beings and not for angels that he thus appeared in human form; compare
notes on [Pe1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012).

7\. How strange it is that "man" feels no more interest in these things!
God was manifest in the flesh for his salvation, but he does not regard
it Angels looked upon it with wonder: but man, for whom he came, feels
little interest in his advent or his work! The Christian religion has
broken down the barrier among nations, and has proclaimed that all
people may be saved; yet the mass of people look on this with entire
unconcern. The Redeemer ascended to heaven, having finished his great
work; but how little interest do the mass of mankind feel in this! He
will come again to judge the world; but the race moves on, regardless of
this truth; unalarmed at the prospect of meeting him; feeling no
interest in the assurance that he "has" come and died for sinners, and
no apprehension in view of the fact that he will come again, and that
they must stand at his bar. All heaven was moved with his first advent,
and will be with his second; but the earth regards it with unconcern.
Angelic beings look upon this with the deepest anxiety, though they have
no personal interest in it; man, though all his great interests are
concentrated on it, regards it as a fable, disbelieves it all, and
treats it with contempt and scorn. Such is the difference between heaven
and earth - angels and human beings!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 4](ti1004)

</div>
