<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](th2003)  [Next](ti1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to 1 Timothy

Section 1. Notices of the Life of Timothy

Nearly all that can now be known of Timothy is to be learned from the
New Testament. He was a native of either Derbe or Lystra, but it is not
certainly known which [Act 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001). Paul
found him there on his visit to those places, and does not appear to
have been acquainted with him before. His mother, whose name was Eunice,
was a Jewess, and was pious, as was also his grandmother, Lois [Ti2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003). His father was a Greek, but was
evidently not unfriendly to the Jewish religion, because Timothy had
been carefully trained in the Scriptures [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015). Paul came to Derbe and Lystra.
and became acquainted with Timothy, about 51 or 52 a.d., but there is no
method now of ascertaining the exact age of Timothy at that time, though
there is reason to think that he was then a youth [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012). It would seem, also, that he was
a youth of uncommon hope and promise, and that there had been some
special indications that he would rise to distinction as a religious
man, and would exert an extended influence in favor of religion [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018). At the time when Paul first met
with Timothy, he was a "disciple," or a Christian convert; but the means
which had been used for his conversion are unknown. Timothy's mother had
been before converted to the Christian faith [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001), and Timothy was well known to
the Christians in the neighboring towns of Lystra and Iconium. The
gospel had been preached by Paul and Barnabas, in Iconium, Derbe, and
Lystra, some six or seven years before it is said that Paul met with
Timothy [Act 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001), and it is not
improbable that this youth had been converted in the interval.

Several things appear to have combined to induce the apostle to
introduce him into the ministry, and to make him a traveling companion.
His youth; his acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures; the "prophecies
which went before on him;" his talents; his general reputation in the
church, and, it would seem also, his amiableness of manners, adapting
himself to be an agreeable companion. attracted the attention of the
apostle, and led Paul to desire that he might be a fellow-laborer with
him. To satisfy the prejudices of the Jews, and to prevent any possible
objection which might be made against his qualifications for the
ministerial office, Paul circumcised him [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003), and Timothy was ordained to the
office of the ministry by "the laying on of the hands of the presbytery"
[Ti1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014). When this ordination
occurred is not known, but it is most probable that it was before
Timothy went on his travels with Paul, since it is known that Paul was
present on the occasion, and took a leading part in the transaction [Ti2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006).

Having joined Paul and Silas, Timothy accompanied them on a visit to the
congregations of Phrygia and Galatia, in which they delivered them the
decrees to keep which had been ordained at Jerusalem; [Act
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004) following. Having done this, they
endeavored to go together into Bythinia, a province of Asia Minor, on
the northwest, but were prevented; and they then went into Mysia, and to
the towns of Troas; [Act 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008). Here
Luke appears to have joined them, and from this place, in obedience to a
vision which appeared to Paul, they went into Macedonia, and preached
the gospel first at Philippi, where they established a church. In this
city Paul and Silas were imprisoned; but it is remarkable that nothing
is said of Timothy and Luke, and it is not known whether they shared in
the sufferings of the persecution there or not. Everything, however,
renders it probable that Timothy was with them at Philippi, as he is
mentioned as having started with them to go on the journey [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003); and, since we find Timothy at
Berea, after the apostle had been released from prison, and had preached
at Thessalonica and Berea [Act 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014).
From this place Paul was conducted to Athens, but left an injunction for
Silas and Timothy to join him there as soon as possible. This was done;
- but when Timothy had come to Athens, Paul felt it to be important that
the church at Thessalonica should be visited and comforted in its
afflictions, and being prevented from doing it himself, he sent Timothy,
at great personal inconvenience, back to that church. Having discharged
the duty there, he rejoined the apostle at Corinth [Act
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005), from which place the First
Epistle to the Thessalonians was written; see the introduction to 1
Thessalonians and the notes on [Th1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001), and [Th1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002). These transactions occurred about
52 ad.

Paul remained at Corinth for a year and a half [Act
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011), and it is probable that Timothy
and Silas continued with him; see [Th2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001). From Corinth he sailed for Syria,
accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila, whom he appears to have left on his
way at Ephesus; [Act 18:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018), [Act
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026). Whether Timothy and Silas
accompanied him is not mentioned, but we find Timothy again with him at
Ephesus, after he had been to Caesarea and Antioch, and had returned to
Ephesus; [Act 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022); [Act
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001), [Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022). From Ephesus, he sent Timothy
and Erastus to Macedonia [Act 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022),
but for what purpose, or how long they remained, is unknown. From [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017), it appears that Paul expected
that on this journey Timothy would stop at Corinth, and would give the
church there instructions adapted to its situation. Paul continued in
Ephesus until he was compelled to depart by the tumult caused by
Demetrius, when he left and went to Macedonia; Acts 20.

Whether Timothy, during the interval, had returned to Ephesus from
Macedonia, is not expressly mentioned in the history; but such a
supposition is not improbable. Paul, during the early part of his
residence in Ephesus, appears to have labored quietly [Act
19:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009); and Timothy was sent away
before the disturbances caused by Demetrius; [Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022). Paul designed to follow him
soon, and then to go to Jerusalem, and then to Rome; [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021). Paul [Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031) was in Ephesus in all for about
three years; and it is not unreasonable to suppose that he remained
there after Timothy was sent to Macedonia long enough for him to go and
to return to him again. If so, it is possible that when Paul himself
went away, he left Timothy there in his place; compare [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003). It has been the general opinion
that the First Epistle to Timothy was written at this time, either when
the apostle was on his way to Macedonia, or while in Macedonia. But this
opinion has not been unquestioned.

The departure of Paul for Macedonia occurred about 58 or 59 a.d. In [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004), Timothy is again mentioned as
accompanying Paul, after he had remained in Greece three months, on the
route to Syria through Macedonia. He went with him, in company with many
others, into "Asia." Going before Paul, they waited for him at Troas
[Act 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005), and thence doubtless
accompanied him on his way to Jerusalem. It was on this occasion that
Paul delivered his farewell charge to the elders of the church of
Ephesus at Miletus [Act 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017). When in
Macedonia, Paul wrote the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, and Timothy
was then with him, for Paul unites in the salutations; [Co2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001). Timothy was also with the apostle
on this journey at Corinth, when from that city he wrote his Epistle to
the Romans; [Rom 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021).

The subsequent events of the life of Timothy are less known. It does not
appear from the Acts of the Apostles, that Timothy was with Paul during
his two years' imprisonment at Caesarea, nor during his voyage to Rome.
It is certain, however, that he was at Rome with the apostle when he
wrote the epistles to the Philippians, to the Colossians, and to
Philemon; [Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001); [Col
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001); [Plm
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001); From [Heb
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023) it appears also, that Timothy
had been with the apostle there, but that when the Epistle was written
he was absent on some important embassy, and that Paul was expecting his
speedy return; see notes on that verse. Between the first and second
imprisonment of Paul at Rome, no mention is made of Timothy, nor is it
known where he was, or whether he accompanied him in his travels or not.
When he was imprisoned there the second time, he wrote the Second
Epistle to Timothy, in which he desires him to come to Rome, and bring
with him several things which he had left at Troas; [Ti2
4:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009), [Ti2
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021). If Timothy went to Rome,
agreeably to the request of the apostle, it is probable that he was a
witness there of his martyrdom.

In regard to the latter part of the life of Timothy, there is nothing
which can be depended upon. It has been the current opinion, derived
from tradition, that he was "Bishop" of Ephesus; that he died and was
buried there; and that his bones were subsequently removed to
Constantinople. The belief that he was "Bishop" of Ephesus rests mainly
on the "subscription" to the Second Epistle to Timothy - which is no
authority whatever (see notes on that subscription). On the question
whether he was an episcopal prelate at Ephesus, the reader may consult
my "Enquiry into the Organization and Government of the Apostolic
Church," pp. 88-107. The supposition that he died at Ephesus, and was
subsequently removed to Constantinople, rests on no certain historical
basis.

Timothy was long the companion and the friend of the apostle Paul, and
is often mentioned by him with affectionate interest. Indeed there seems
to have been not one of his fellow-laborers to whom he was so warmly
attached; see [Ti1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002), [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018); [Ti2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#002); [Ti2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001); [Co1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#017), where he calls him "his own
son," and "his beloved son" [Ti2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#004),
where he expresses his earnest desire to see him, and makes a reference
to the tears which Timothy shed at parting from him; - [Co1
16:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010), where he bespeaks for him a
kind reception among the Corinthians; - [Co1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#010); [Rom
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021); [Th1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002), where he speaks of his fidelity,
of his usefulness to him in his labors, and of the interest which he
took in the churches which the apostle had established.

Section 2. When and Where the Epistle Was Written

The subscription at the close of the epistle states that it was written
from Laodicea. But these subscriptions are of no authority, and many of
them are false; see notes at the end of 1 Corinthians. There has been
much diversity of opinion in regard to the time when this epistle was
written, and of course in regard to the place where it was composed. All
that is certain from the epistle itself is, that it was addressed to
Timothy at Ephesus, and that it was soon after Paul had left that city
to go to Macedonia; [Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003). Paul is
mentioned in the Acts as having been at Ephesus twice: [Act
18:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019); 19:1-41. After his first
visit there, he went directly to Jerusalem, and of course it could not
have been written at that time. The only question then is, whether it
was written when Paul left the city, having been driven away by the
excitement caused by Demetrius [Act
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001), or whether he visited Ephesus
again on some occasion after his first imprisonment at Rome, and of
course after the narrative of Luke in the Acts of the Apostles closes.
If on the former occasion, it was written about the year 58 or 59; if
the latter, about the year 64 or 65 a.d. Critics have been divided in
reference to this point, and the question is still unsettled, and it may
be impossible to determine it with entire certainty.

Those who have maintained the former opinion, among others, are
Theodoret, Benson, Zachariae, Michaelis, Schmidt. Koppe, Planck, Grotius
Lightfoot, Witsius, Lardner, Hug, and Prof. Stuart. The latter opinion,
that it was written subsequently to the period of Paul's first
imprisonment at Rome, is maintained by Paley, Pearson, L'Enfant,
LeClerc, Cave, Mill, Whitby, Macknight, and others.

An examination of the reasons in favor of each of these opinions in
regard to the date of the epistle, may be found in Paley's Horae Paul.;
Macknight; Hug's Intro., and Koppe, Prolegomena.

The theory of Eichhorn, which is unique, and which is supported by some
ingenious and plausible, but not conclusive reasoning, may be seen in
his Einleitung in das neue Test. 3 B. 314-352.

In the diversity of opinion which prevails about the time when the
epistle was written, it is impossible to determine the question in such
a manner as to leave no room for doubt. After the most careful
examination which I have been able to give to the subject, however, it
seems to me that the former opinion is correct, that it was written soon
after Paul was driven from Ephesus by the tumult caused by Demetrius, as
recorded in Acts 19; [Act 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001). The
reasons for this opinion are briefly these:

1\. This is the only record that occurs in the New Testament of the
apostle's having gone from Ephesus to Macedonia; see above. It is
natural, therefore, to suppose that this is referred to in [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003), unless there is some insuperable
difficulty in the way.

2\. There is no certain evidence that Paul visited the church at Ephesus
after his first imprisonment at Rome. It is certainly possible that he
did, but there is no record of any such visit in the New Testament, nor
any historical record of it elsewhere. If there had been such a visit
after his release, and if this epistle was written then, it is
remarkable that the apostle does not make any allusion to his
imprisonment in this epistle, and that he does not refer at all to his
own escape from this danger of death at Rome; compare [Ti2
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016).

3\. The supposition that the epistle was written at the time supposed,
agrees better with the character of the epistle, and with the design for
which Timothy was left at Ephesus, than the others. It is manifest from
the epistle that the church was in some respects in an unsettled
condition, and it would seem also that one part of the duty of Timothy
there was to see that it was placed under a proper organization. This
Paul had evidently proposed to accomplish himself, but it is clear from
[Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003), that he left his work
unfinished, and that he gave what he had proposed to do into the hands
of Timothy to be perfected. After the first imprisonment of Paul at
Rome, however, there is every reason to suppose that the church was
completely organized. Even when Paul went from Macedonia to Jerusalem
Acts 20, there were "elders" placed over the church at Ephesus, whom
Paul assembled at Miletus, and to whom he gave his parting charge, and
his final instructions in regard to the church.

4\. At the time when Paul wrote this epistle, Timothy was a young man -
a youth; [Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012). It is true, that
if he was somewhere about twenty years of age when he was introduced
into the ministry, as has been commonly supposed, this language would
not he entirely inappropriate, even after the imprisonment of Paul, but
still the language would more properly denote one somewhat younger than
Timothy would be at that time.

5\. To this may be added the declaration of Paul in [Ti1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014), that he "hoped to come to him
shortly." This is an expression which agrees well with the supposition
that he had himself been driven away before he had intended to leave;
that he had left something unfinished there which he desired to
complete, and that he hoped that affairs would soon be in such a state
that he would be permitted to return. It may he also suggested, as a
circumstance of some importance, though not conclusive, that when Paul
met the elders of the church of Ephesus at Miletus, he said that he had
no expectation of ever seeing them again. "And now, behold, I know that
ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see
my face no more;" [Act 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025). I do not
think that this is to be understood as an inspired prediction, affirming
with absolute certainty that he never would see them again, but that he
rather expressed his apprehensions that it would be so from the
circumstances which then existed; [Act
20:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022). Still, this passage shows
that when he uttered it he did not expect to visit Ephesus again, as he
manifestly did when he wrote the epistle to Timothy.

These considerations seem so clear that they would leave no doubt on the
mind, were it not for certain things which it seems to many impossible
to reconcile with this supposition. The difficulties are the following:

1\. That before Paul went to Macedonia, he had sent Timothy with Erastus
before him [Act 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022), purposing to
follow them at no distant period, and to pass through Macedonia and
Achaia, and then to go to Jerusalem, and afterward to visit Rome; [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021). As he had sent Timothy before
him but so short a time before he left Ephesus, it is asked how Timothy
could be left at Ephesus when Paul went himself to Macedonia? To this
objection we may reply, that it is not improbable by any means that
Timothy may have accomplished the object of his journey to Macedonia,
and may have returned to the apostle at Ephesus before he was driven
away. It does not appear, from the narrative, that Timothy was entrusted
with any commission which would require a long time to fulfil it, nor
that Paul expected that he would remain in Macedonia until he himself
came. The purpose for which he sent Timothy and Erastus is not indeed
mentioned, but it seems probable that it was with reference to the
collection which he proposed to take up for the poor saints at
Jerusalem; see notes on [Act 19:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021);
compare [Co1 16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001). If it was the
purpose to prepare the churches for such a collection, it could not have
required any considerable time, nor was it necessary that Timothy should
remain long in a place; and it was natural also that he should return to
the apostle at Ephesus and apprize him of what he had done, and what was
the prospect in regard to the collection. It has been clearly shown by
Hug (Introduction to the New Testament, sections 104, 109), that such a
journey could easily have been made during the time which the apostle
remained at Ephesus after he had sent Timothy and Erastus to Macedonia.

2\. The next objection - and one which is regarded by Paley as decisive
against the supposition that the epistle was written on this occasion -
is, that from the Second Epistle to the Corinthians [Co2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001), it is evident that at the time in
which this epistle is supposed to have been written, Timothy was with
the apostle in Macedonia. The second epistle to the Corinthians was
undoubtedly written during this visit of Paul to Macedonia, and at that
time Timothy was with him; see the Introduction to 2 Corinthians,
section 3. How then can it be supposed that he was at Ephesus? Or how
can this fact be reconciled with the supposition that Timothy was left
there, and especially with the declaration of Paul to him [Ti1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014), that he "hoped to come to him
shortly?" That Paul expected that Timothy would remain at Ephesus, at
least for some time, is evident from [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015), "But if I tarry long, that thou
mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God;"
and from [Ti1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013), "Till I come, give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine." The only solution
of this difficulty is, that Timothy had left Ephesus, and had followed
the apostle into Macedonia; and the only question here is, whether,
since the apostle designed that he should remain at Ephesus, and
expected himself to return and meet him there, Timothy would be likely
to leave that place and go to Macedonia. It is certain that the history
in the Acts does not make this record, but that is no material objection
- since it cannot be supposed that every occurrence in the travels of
the apostles was recorded. But there are two or three circumstances
which may render the supposition that Timothy, either by the
concurrence, or by the direction of Paul, privately communicated to him,
may have left Ephesus sooner than was at first contemplated, and may
have rejoined him in Macedonia.

\(1\) one is, that the main business which Timothy was appointed to
perform at Ephesus - to give a solemn charge to certain persons there to
teach no other doctrine but that which Paul taught [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003) - might have been speedily
accomplished. Paul was driven away in haste, and as he had not the
opportunity of doing this himself as he wished, he left Timothy in
charge of it. But this did not require, of necessity, any considerable
time.

\(2\) another is, that the business of appointing suitable officers over
the church there, might also have been soon accomplished. In fact, the
church there is known to have been supplied with proper officers not
long after this, for Paul sent from Miletus for the elders to meet him
there on his way to Jerusalem. This remark is made in accordance with
the opinion that a part of the work which Timothy was expected to
perform there was to constitute proper officers over the church. But
there is no proof that that was a part of his business. It is not
specified in what Paul mentions, in [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003), as the design for which he was
left there, and it is hardly probable that the apostle would have spent
so long a time as he did in Ephesus nearly three years [Act
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031) - without having organized the
church with proper officers. Besides, the address of Paul to the elders
at Miletus implies that they had received their appointment before he
left them; see Acts 20:18-35, particularly [Act
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035). The instructions to Timothy in
this Epistle about the proper qualifications of the officers of the
church, do not prove that he was then to appoint officers at Ephesus,
for they are general instructions, having no particular reference to the
church there, and designed to guide him in his work through life. There
is, therefore, nothing in the duties which Timothy was to perform at
Ephesus which would forbid the supposition that he may have soon
followed the apostle into Macedonia.

\(3\) It appears that though Paul may have intended, if possible, to
visit Ephesus on his way to Jerusalem, in accordance with [Ti1
3:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014); [Ti1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013), yet, if that had been his
intention, he subsequently changed his mind, and found it necessary to
make other arrangements. Thus it is said [Act
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#016), that "Paul had determined to
sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia:" that is,
he had resolved to sail past Ephesus without visiting it. It would seem
probable also, that this resolution had been formed before he left
Macedonia, for it is said that he "had determined" it (ἔκρινεν ekrinen),
and if so, there is no improbability in supposing that he had in some
way caused it to be intimated to Timothy that he wished him to leave
Ephesus and join him before he left Macedonia.

\(4\) in fact, and in accordance with this supposition, we find Timothy
with Paul when he went on that occasion into "Asia;" [Act
20:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004). These considerations render it
probable that the epistle was written to Timothy soon after Paul left
Ephesus to go into Macedonia after the tumult excited by Demetrius. As
Paul was driven away unexpectedly, and when he had not completed what he
designed to do there, nothing is more natural than the supposition that
he would embrace the earliest opportunity to give suitable instructions
to Timothy, that he might know how to complete the work.

Section 3. The Occasion and Design of the Epistle

This is specified in [Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003). Paul
had gone into Macedonia, having been suddenly driven away from Ephesus,
before he had entirely done what he had designed to do there. He left
Timothy there to "charge some that they teach no other doctrine;" that
is, no other doctrine than that which he had himself taught when there.
It is clear, from this, that there were certain errors prevailing there
which Paul thought it of the highest importance to have corrected. In
regard to those errors, see the introduction to the Epistle to the
Ephesians, and the Epistle to the Colossians. Some of the circumstances
which gave occasion to this epistle can be gathered from the history in
the Acts of the Apostles; others can be derived from the epistle itself.
From these sources of information we learn the following things in
reference to the state of the church in Ephesus, which made it proper
that Timothy should be left there, and that these instructions should be
given him to regulate his conduct.

\(1\) there was much opposition to the apostle Paul from the Jews who
resided there; [Act 19:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008).

\(2\) there were in the church teachers who endeavored to enforce the
maxims of the Jewish law, and to represent that law as binding on
Christians; [Ti1 1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#006).

\(3\) some of the Jews residing there were addicted to exorcism, and
endeavored to make use of Christianity and the name of Jesus to promote
their selfish ends; [Act 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#014);
compare [Ti1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004).

\(4\) the Jewish teachers laid great stress on genealogies and
traditions. and were much given to debates about various questions
connected with the law; [Ti1 1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004),

\(5\) There were erroneous views prevailing respecting the rights of
women, and the place which they ought to occupy in the church: [Ti1
2:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008).

\(6\) the organization of the officers of the church had not been
effected as Paul wished it to be. It is probable that some of the
officers had been appointed, and that some instructions had been given
to them in regard to their duties, but the whole arrangement had not
been completed; [Ti1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004);

\(7\) There were certain questions in regard to the proper treatment of
widows which had not yet been determined; 1 Tim. 5.

\(8\) the apostle in his preaching had inculcated benevolent principles,
and had asserted the natural equality of all men, and it would seem that
certain persons had taken occasion from this to excite a spirit of
discontent and insubordination among those who were servants.

The doctrine seems to have been advanced, that, as all men were equal,
and all had been redeemed by the same blood, therefore those who had
been held in bondage were free from all obligation to serve their
masters. There were those evidently who sought to excite them to
insurrection; to break down the distinctions in society, and to produce
a state of insubordination and disorder; 1 Tim. 6; compare [Eph
6:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005); [Col
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#022); [Col
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002).

Such appears to have been the state of things when the apostle was
compelled suddenly to leave Ephesus. He had hitherto directed the
affairs of the church there mainly himself, and had endeavored to
correct the errors then prevailing, and to establish the church on a
right foundation. Matters appear to have been tending to the desired
result; religion was acquiring a strong hold on the members of the
church [Act 19:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#018); error was giving
way; the community was becoming more and more impressed with the value
of Christianity; the influence of idolatry was becoming less and less
[Act 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023), and the arrangements for
the complete organization of the church were in progress. Such was the
promising state of things in these respects that the apostle hoped to be
able to leave Ephesus at no very distant period, and had actually made
arrangements to do it; [Act 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021). But
his arrangements were not quite finished, and before they were
completed, he was compelled to leave by the tumult excited by Demetrius.
He left Timothy, therefore, to complete the arrangements, and, in this
first epistle, gave him all the instructions which were necessary to
guide him in that work.

This view of the state of things in Ephesus at the time when the apostle
was constrained to leave it, will enable us to understand the drift of
the epistle, and the reasons why the various topics found in it were
introduced. At the same time, the instructions are of so general a
character that they would be an invaluable guide to Timothy not only at
Ephesus, but through his life; and not only to him, but to all the
ministers of the gospel in every age and land. A more detailed view of
these topics will be furnished in the analysis prefixed to the several
chapters of the epistle.

The Epistles to Timothy and Titus occupy a very important place in the
New Testament, and without them there would be a manifest and most
material defect in the volume of inspiration. Their canonical authority
has never been questioned by the great body of the church, and there is
no doubt that they are the productions of the apostle Paul. If the
various epistles which he wrote, and the various other books of the New
Testament; be attentively examined, it will be found that each one is
designed to accomplish an important object, and that if anyone were
removed a material chasm would be made. Though the removal of anyone of
them would not so impair the volume of the New Testament as to obscure
any essential doctrine, or prevent our obtaining the knowledge of the
way of salvation from the remainder, yet it would mar the beauty and
symmetry of the truth, and would render the system of instruction
defective and incomplete.

This is true in regard to the epistles to Timothy and Titus, as it is of
the other epistles. They fill a department which nothing else in the New
Testament would enable us to supply, and without which instructions to
man respecting redemption would be incomplete. They relate mainly "to
the office of the ministry;" and though there are important
instructions, of the Saviour himself respecting the office (Matt. 10;
Mark 16, add elsewhere), and though in the address of Paul to the elders
of Ephesus Acts 20, and in the Epistles to the Corinthians, there are
invaluable suggestions respecting it, yet such is its importance in the
organization of the church, that more full and complete instructions
seem to be imperiously demanded. Those instructions are furnished in
these epistles. They are as full and complete as we could desire in
regard to the nature of the office, the qualifications for it, and the
duties which grow out of it.

They are fitted not only to direct Timothy and Titus in the work to
which they were specifically appointed, but to counsel the ministry in
every age and in every land. It is obvious that the character and
welfare of the church depend greatly, if not entirely, on the character
of the ministry. The office of the ministry is God's great appointment
for the preservation of pure religion, and for spreading it abroad
through the world. The church adheres to the truth; is built up in
faith; is distinguished for love, and purity, and zeal, in proportion as
the ministry is honored, and shows itself qualified for its work. In
every age corruption in the church has commenced in the ministry; and
where the gospel has been spread abroad with zeal, and the church has
arisen in her strength and beauty, it has been pre-eminently where God
has sent down his Spirit in copious measures on those who have filled
the sacred office. So important, then, is this office to the welfare of
the church and the world, that it was desirable that full instructions
should be furnished in the volume of revelation in regard to its nature
and design. Such instructions we have in these epistles, and there is
scarcely any portion of the New Testament which the church could not
better afford to part with than the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Had
the ministry always been such as these epistles contemplate; had they
who have filled the sacred office always had the character and
qualifications here described, we may believe that the church would have
been saved from the strifes that have torn it, and that the pure gospel
would long before this have been spread through the world.

But it is not to the ministry only that these Epistles are of so much
value. They are of scarcely less importance to the church at large. Its
vitality; its purity; its freedom from strife; its zeal and love and
triumph in spreading the gospel, depend on the character of the
ministry. If the church will prosper from age to age, the pulpit must be
filled with a pious, learned, laborious, and devoted ministry, and one
of the first cares of the church should be that such a ministry should
be secured. This great object cannot better be attained than by keeping
the instructions in these Epistles steadily before the minds of the
members of the church; and though a large part of them is particularly
adapted to the ministers of the gospel, yet the church itself can in no
better way promote its own purity and prosperity than by a prayerful and
attentive study of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 1](ti1001)

</div>
