<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2000)  [Next](ti2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

The principal design of 2 Tim. 1 is to exhort Timothy to steadfastness
and fidelity as a Christian and a minister; and to entreat him to adhere
to the truth, and live as became a Christian, in the midst of all the
temptations by which he was surrounded, and while so many were turning
away from the Christian faith. Timothy was young; he was exposed, like
others, to trials; he could not be unaware that not a few had
apostatized; he knew that his father in Christ was in bonds, and he was
liable to become disheartened, or to be led astray. In these
circumstances, the apostle seems to have resolved to place before him
strong reasons to induce him to devote himself steadfastly to the cause
of religion, and not to allow those things which might tend to alienate
him from Christianity to have any effect on his mind. After the usual
salutations, therefore [Ti2 1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001), he
proceeds to present these considerations to the mind of Timothy:

\(1\) He commences the chapter with "delicate praise" of his young
friend - one of the most happy methods of inducing him to persevere in
the course of life on which he had entered; [Ti2
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003). We naturally desire to perfect
that in which we already excel; we feel encouraged for future efforts in
a cause in which we have already been successful. The apostle,
therefore, reminds Timothy of the manner in which he had been trained;
of the piety of his mother and grandmother, and assures him of his
belief that their efforts to train him up in the ways of religion had
not been in vain.

\(2\) he urges various considerations to induce him not to turn away
from that holy purpose to which he had devoted himself. The
considerations which he urges, are these:

\(a\) he had been solemnly consecrated to the work of preaching the
gospel, [Ti2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006);

\(b\) God had imparted to him, as to others, a spirit of love and power,
and a sound mind, [Ti2 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007);

\(c\) the grace of God had called him to his great work, and he
possessed that gospel by which life and immortality are brought to
light, [Ti2 1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008);

\(d\) Paul urges his own example, and says that, amidst all his own
trials, he had never seen occasion to be ashamed of the gospel, [Ti2
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012); and,

\(e\) he reminds Timothy that all his other friends in Asia had turned
away from him, specifying two of them, and urges him, therefore, to
maintain a steadfast attachment to the principles which he had
professed, [Ti2 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015).

\(3\) the chapter closes with the expression of an earnest prayer that
the Lord would bless the family of Onesiphorus, and with a grateful
mention of his kindness to him, [Ti2
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016).

[2 Timothy 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 1:1</span></span>

Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, - See the notes at [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001).

By the will of God - Called to be an apostle in accordance with the
divine will and purpose; see the notes at [Gal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001).

According to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus - In
accordance with the great promise of eternal life through the Saviour;
that is, he was called to be an apostle to carry out the great purpose
of human salvation; compare [Eph 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006).
God has made a promise of life to mankind through faith in the Lord
Jesus, and it was with reference to this that he was called to the
apostleship.

[2 Timothy 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti2 1:2</span></span>

To Timothy, my dearly beloved son; - See the notes at [Ti1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002).

Grace, mercy, and peace - see the notes at [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

[2 Timothy 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti2 1:3</span></span>

I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers - Paul reckoned among his
forefathers the patriarchs and the holy men of former times, as being of
the same nation with himself, though it may be that he also included his
more immediate ancestors, who, for anything known to the contrary, may
have been distinguished examples of piety. His own parents, it is
certain, took care that he should be trained up in the ways of religion;
compare the [Phi 3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004) notes; [Act
26:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004). The phrase "from my
forefathers," probably means, after the example of my ancestors. He
worshipped the same God; he held substantially the same truths; he had
the same hope of the resurrection and of immortality; he trusted to the
same Saviour having come, on whom they relied as about to come. His was
not, therefore, a different religion from theirs; it was the same
religion carried out and perfected. The religion of the Old Testament
and the New is essentially the same; see the notes at [Act
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006).

With pure conscience - see the notes at [Act
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001).

That without ceasing - compare the [Rom
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012) note; [Th1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017) note.

I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day - see the notes
at [Phi 1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003).

[2 Timothy 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti2 1:4</span></span>

Greatly desiring to see thee; - see [Ti2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009), [Ti2
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021). It was probably on, account of
this earnest desire that this Epistle was written. He wished to see him,
not only on account of the warm friendship which he had for him, but
because he would be useful to him in his present circumstances; see the
introduction, Section 3.

Being mindful of thy tears - Alluding probably to the tears which he
shed at parting from him. The occasion to which he refers is not
mentioned; but nothing is more probable than that Timothy would weep
when separated from such a father and friend. It is not wrong thus to
weep, for religion is not intended to make us stoics or savages.

That I may be filled with joy - By seeing you again. It is easy to
imagine what joy it would give Paul, then a prisoner, and forsaken by
nearly all his friends, and about to die, to see a friend whom he loved
as he did this young man. Learn hence, that there may be very pure and
warm friendship between an old and young man, and that the warmth of
true friendship is not diminished by the near prospect of death.

[2 Timothy 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti2 1:5</span></span>

When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee; - notes,
[Ti1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005). On the faith of Timothy, see
the notes at [Ti1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006).

Which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois - That is, the same faith
dwelt in her; or, she was a sincere believer in Christ. It would seem
probable, from this, that she was the first of the family who had been
converted. In the Acts of the Apostles [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001), we have an account of the family
of Timothy: - "Then came he to Derbe and Lystra; and behold a certain
disciple was there, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman which
was a Jewess, and believed; but his father was a Greek." In this account
no mention is made of the grandmother Lois, but there is no
improbability in supposing that Paul was better acquainted with the
family than Luke. There is, at any rate, no contradiction between the
two accounts; but the one confirms the other, and the "undesigned
coincidence" furnishes an argument for the authenticity of both. See
Paley's Horae Paulinae, in loc. As the mother of Timothy was a Hebrew,
it is clear that his grandmother was also. Nothing more is known of her
than is mentioned here.

And in thy mother Eunice - In [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001), it is said that the mother of
Timothy was "a Jewess, and believed;" but her name is not mentioned.
This shows that Paul was acquainted with the family, and that the
statement in the Epistle to Timothy was not forged from the account in
the Acts . Here is another "undesigned coincidence." In the history in
the Acts , nothing is said of the father, except that he was "a Greek,"
but it is implied that he was not a believer. In the Epistle before us,
nothing whatever is said of him. But the piety of his mother alone is
commended, and it is fairly implied that his father was not a believer.
This is one of those coincidences on which Paley has constructed his
beautiful argument in the Horae Paulinae in favor of the genuineness of
the New Testament.

[2 Timothy 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 1:6</span></span>

That thou stir up the gift of God - Greek, That thou "kindle up" as a
fire. The original word used here denotes the kindling of a fire, as by
bellows, etc. It is not uncommon to compare piety to a flame or a fire,
and the image is one that is obvious when we speak of causing that to
burn more brightly. The idea is, that Timothy was to use all proper
means to keep the flame of pure religion in the soul burning, and more
particularly his zeal in the great cause to which he had been set apart.
The agency of man himself is needful to keep the religion of the heart
warm and glowing. However rich the gifts which God has bestowed upon us,
they do not grow of their own accord, but need to be cultivated by our
own personal care.

Which is in thee by the putting on of my hands - In connection with the
presbytery; see the notes at [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014). This proves that Paul took part
in the ordination of Timothy; but it does not prove either that he
performed the duty alone, or that the "ordaining virtue," whatever that
was, was imparted by him only; because:

\(1\) it is expressly said [Ti1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014),
that he was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the presbytery, of
which Paul was doubtless one; and,

\(2\) the language here used, "by the putting on of my hands," is just
such as Paul, or any other one of the presbytery, would use in referring
to the ordination of Timothy, though they were all regarded as on a
level. It is such an expression as an aged Presbyterian, or
Congregational, or Baptist minister would address to a son whom he had
assisted to ordain. Nothing would be more natural than to remind him
that his own hands had been laid on him when he was set apart to the
work of the ministry. It would be in the nature of a tender, pathetic,
and solemn appeal, bringing all that there was in his own character,
age, and relation to the other, to bear on him, in order to induce him
to be faithful to his trust. On other occasions, he would naturally
remind him that others had united with him in the act, and that he had
derived his authority through the presbytery, just as Paul appeals to
Timothy, [Ti1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014). But no one would
now think of inferring from this, that he meant to be understood as
saying that he alone had ordained him, or that all the authority for
preaching the gospel had been imparted through his hands, and that those
who were associated with him only expressed "concurrence;" that is, that
their presence there was only an unmeaning ceremony. What was the "gift
of God" which had been conferred in this way, Paul specifies in the next
verse [Ti2 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007). It is "the spirit of
power, and of love, and of a sound mind." The meaning is, that these had
been conferred by God, and that the gift had been recognized by his
ordination. It does not imply that any mysterious influence had gone
from the hands of the ordainers, imparting any holiness to Timothy which
he had not before.

[2 Timothy 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti2 1:7</span></span>

For God hath not given us the spirit of fear - A timorous and servile
spirit. This is said in order to encourage Timothy, who was not
improbably modest and diffident.

But of power - Power to encounter foes and dangers; power to bear up
under trials; power to triumph in persecutions. That is, it is the
nature of the gospel to inspire the mind with holy courage; compare,
however, [Luk 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049).

And of love - Love to God and to the souls of men. The tendency of This,
also, is to "cast out fear" [Jo1 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018),
and to make the mind bold and constant. Nothing will do more to inspire
courage, to make a man fearless of danger, or ready to endure privation
and persecution, than "love." The love of country, and wife, and
children, and home, makes the most timid bold when they are assailed;
and the love of Christ and of a dying world nerves the soul to great
enterprises, and sustains it in the deepest sorrows.

And of a sound mind - The Greek word denotes one of sober mind; a man of
prudence and discretion. The state referred to here is that in which the
mind is well balanced, and under right influences; in which it sees
things in their just proportions and relations; in which it is not
feverish and excited, but when everything is in its proper place. It was
this state of mind which Timothy was exhorted to cultivate; this which
Paul regarded as so necessary to the performance of the duties of his
office. It is as needful now for the minister of religion as it was
then.

[2 Timothy 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 1:8</span></span>

Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord - Do not be
ashamed to bear your testimony to the doctrines taught by the Lord
Jesus; [Joh 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011), [Joh
3:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032); [Joh
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007); compare [Act
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022); [Act
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024); [Co1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006); [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016). Paul seems to have apprehended
that Timothy was in some danger of being ashamed of this gospel, or of
shrinking back from its open avowal in the trials and persecutions to
which he now saw it exposed him.

Nor of me his prisoner - Of the testimony which I have borne to the
truth of the gospel. This passage proves that, when Paul wrote this
Epistle, he was in confinement; compare [Eph
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001); [Eph
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020); [Phi
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013), [Phi
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016); [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003), [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018); [Plm
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009). Timothy knew that he had been
thrown into prison on account of his love for the gospel. To avoid that
himself, there might be some danger that a timid young man might shrink
from an open avowal of his belief in the same system of truth.

But be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel - The sufferings
to which the profession of the gospel may expose you; compare the notes
at [Col 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024).

According to the power of God - That is, according to the power which
God gives to those who are afflicted on account of the gospel. The
apostle evidently supposes that they who were subjected to trials on
account of the gospel, might look for divine strength to uphold them,
and asks him to endure those trials, relying on that strength, and not
on his own.

[2 Timothy 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 1:9</span></span>

Who hath saved us; - See the notes at [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021). He has brought us into a state
in which salvation is so certain, that Paul could speak of it as if it
were already done.

And called us - see the notes at [Rom
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028), [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030).

With an holy calling - A calling which is in its own nature holy, and
which leads to holiness; compare the [Eph
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001) note; [Phi
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014) note; [Heb
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001) note.

Not according to our works - [Tit 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005);
notes, [Eph 2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008). The idea is, that
our own works have nothing to do in inducing God to call us. As, when we
become Christians, he does not choose us because of our works, so the
eternal purpose in regard to our salvation could not have been formed
because he foresaw that we would perform such works as would be a reason
why he should choose us. The whole arrangement was irrespective of our
deserts.

But according to his own purpose and grace - see the [Rom
9:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011) notes, 16; [Eph
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004) notes.

Which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began - That is,
which he intended to give us, for it was not then actually given. The
thing was so certain in the divine purposes, that it might be said to be
already done; compare the notes at [Rom
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017).

[2 Timothy 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 1:10</span></span>

But is now made manifest - The purpose to save us was long concealed in
the divine mind, but the Saviour came that he might make it known.

Who hath abolished death - That is, he has made it so certain that death
will be abolished, that it may be spoken of as already done. It is
remarkable how often, in this chapter, Paul speaks of what God intends
to do as so certain, that it may be spoken of as a thing that is already
done. In the meaning of the expression here, see the notes at [Co1
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054); compare the notes at [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014). The meaning is, that, through
the gospel, death will cease to reign, and over those who are saved
there will be no such thing as we now understand by dying.

And hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel - This
is one of the great and glorious achievements of the gospel, and one of
the things by which it is distinguished from every other system. The
word rendered "hath brought to light" - φωτίζω phōtizō - means to give
light, to shine; then to give light to, to shine upon; and then to bring
to light, to make known. Robinson, Lexicon. The sense is, that these
things were before obscure or unknown, and that they have been disclosed
to us by the gospel. It is, of course, not meant that there were no
intimations of these truths before, or that nothing was known of them -
for the Old Testament shed some light on them; but that they are fully
disclosed to man in the gospel. It is there that all ambiguity and doubt
are removed, and that the evidence is so clearly stated as to leave no
doubt on the subject. The intimations of a future state, among the
wisest of the pagan, were certainly very obscure, and their hopes very
faint.

The hope of a future state is styled by Cicero, Futurorum quoddam
augurium saeculorum - "a conjecture or surmise of future ages. Tusc. Q.
1. Seneca says it is "that which our wise men do promise, but they do
not prove." Epis. 102. Socrates, even at his death, said, "I hope to go
hence to good men, but of that I am not very confident; nor doth it
become any wise man to be positive that so it will be. I must now die,
and you shall live; but which of us is in the better state, the living
or the dead, only God knows." Pliny says, "Neither soul nor body has any
more sense after death, than before it was born." Cicero begins his
discourse on the subject with a profession that he intended to deliver
nothing as fixed and certain, but only as probable, and as having some
likelihood of truth. And, having mentioned the different sentiments of
philosophers, he concludes, - "Which of these opinions is true, some god
must tell us; which is most like to truth, is a great question."

See Whitby, "in loc." Such doubts existed in regard to the immortality
of the soul; but of the resurrection and future life of the body, they
had no conception whatever; compare the notes at [Act
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032). With what propriety, then, may
it be said that these doctrines were brought to light through the
gospel! Man would never have known them if it had not been for
revelation. The word "life," here, refers undoubtedly to life in the
future world. The question was, whether man would live at all; and that
question has been determined by the gospel. The word "immortality"
means, properly, "incorruption, incapacity of decay;" and may be applied
either to the body or the soul. See it explained in the notes at [Co1
15:42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042). It is used in reference to the
body, in [Co1 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042), [Co1
15:53-54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053); in [Rom
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007), it is applied to the future state
of rewards, without special reference to the body or soul. Here it seems
to refer to the future state as that in which there will be no
corruption or decay.

Many suppose that the phrase "life and immortality," here, is used by
hendiadys (two things for one), as meaning immortal or incorruptible
life. The gospel thus has truths not found in any other system, and
contains what man never would have discovered of himself. As fair a
trial had been made among the philosophers of Greece and Rome as could
be made, to determine whether the unaided powers of the human mind could
arrive at these great truths; and their most distinguished philosophers
confessed that they could arrive at no certainty on the subject. In this
state of things, the gospel comes and reveals truths worthy of all
acceptation; sheds light where man had desired it; solves the great
problems which had for ages perplexed the human mind, and discloses to
man all that he could wish - that not only the soul will live for ever,
but that the body will be raised from the grave, and that the entire man
will become immortal. How strange it is that men will not embrace the
gospel! Socrates and Cicero would have hailed its light, and welcomed
its truths, as those which their whole nature panted to know.

[2 Timothy 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti2 1:11</span></span>

Whereunto I am appointed a preacher - That is, I am appointed to make
these truths known; see the notes at [Eph
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007).

[2 Timothy 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti2 1:12</span></span>

For the which cause I also suffer these things - That is, I suffer on
account of my purpose to carry the gospel to the Gentiles; see the notes
at [Col 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024).

Nevertheless I am not ashamed - compare the notes at [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016).

For I know whom I have believed - Margin, "trusted." The idea is, that
he understood the character of that Redeemer to whom he had committed
his eternal interests, and knew that he had no reason to be ashamed of
confiding in him. He was able to keep all that he had intrusted to his
care, and would not suffer him to be lost; see [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016).

And am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed
unto him - That is, the soul, with all its immortal interests. A man has
nothing of higher value to intrust to another than the interests of his
soul, and there is no other act of confidence like that in which he
intrusts the keeping of that soul to the Son of God. Hence, learn:

\(1\) that religion consists in committing the soul to the care of the
Lord Jesus; because:

\(a\) We feel that we cannot secure the soul's salvation ourselves.

\(b\) The soul is by nature in danger.

\(c\) If not saved by him, the soul will not be saved at all.

\(2\) that the soul is a great and invaluable treasure which is
committed to him.

\(a\) No higher treasure can be committed to another;

\(b\) In connection with that the whole question of our happiness on
earth and in heaven is entrusted to him, and all depends on his
fidelity.

\(3\) it is done by the true Christian with the most entire confidence,
so that the mind is at rest. The grounds of this confidence are:

\(a\) what is said of the mighty power of the Saviour;

\(b\) his promises that he will keep all who confide in him (compare the
notes at [Joh 10:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027);

\(c\) experience - the fact that those who have trusted in him have
found that he is able to keep them.

\(4\) this act of committing the soul, with all its interests, to the
Saviour, is the true source of peace in the trials of life. This is so
because:

\(a\) having done this, we feel that our great interests are secure. If
the soul is safe, why need we be disturbed by the loss of health, or
property, or other temporal comforts? Those are secondary things. A man
who is shipwrecked, and who sees his son or daughter safe with him on
the shore, will be little concerned that a casket of jewels fell
overboard - however valuable it might be:

\(b\) All those trials will soon pass away, and he will be safe in
heaven.

\(c\) These very things may further the great object - the salvation of
the soul. A man's great interests may be more safe when in a prison than
when in a palace; on a pallet of straw than on a bed of down; when
constrained to say, "Give us this day our daily bread," than when
encompassed with the wealth of Croesus.

Against that day - The day of judgment - called "that day," without
anything further to designate it, because it is the great day; "the day
for which all others days were made." It seems to have been so much the
object of thought and conversation among the early Christians, that the
apostle supposed that he would be understood by merely referring to it
as "that day;" that is, the day which they were always preaching about,
and talking about, and thinking about.

[2 Timothy 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti2 1:13</span></span>

Hold fast the form of sound words; - see the notes at [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003). On the Greek word here rendered
"form," see the notes at [Ti1 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016),
where it is rendered pattern. The word means a form, sketch, or
imperfect delineation - an outline. Grotius says that it here means "an
exemplar, but an exemplar fixed in the mind - an idea." Calvin says that
the command is that he should adhere to the doctrine which he had
learned, not only in its substance, but in its form. Dr. Tillotson
explains this as meaning the profession of faith which was made by
Christians at baptism. There seems to be an allusion to some summary or
outline of truth which Paul had given to Timothy, though there is no
evidence that it was written. Indeed, there is every presumption that,
if it refers to such a summary, it was not committed to writing. If it
had been, it would have been regarded as inspired, and would have taken
its place in the canon of Scripture. It may be presumed that almost none
of the sacred writings would have been more sacredly preserved than such
a condensed summary of Christian truth. But there is no improbability in
supposing that Paul, either at his ordination, or on some other
occasion, may have stated the outlines of the Christian religion to
Timothy, that he might have a clear and connected view of the subject.
The passage, therefore, may be used as an argument for the propriety of
some brief summary of doctrine as a matter of convenience, though not as
having binding authority on the consciences of others. "Of sound words;"
compare the notes at [Ti1 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#003). The
Greek is the same in both places.

Which thou hast heard of me - This proves that he does not refer to a
written creed, since what he refers to was something which he had heard.

In faith and love which is in Christ Jesus - Hold these truths with
sincere faith in the Lord Jesus, and with that love which is the best
evidence of attachment to him.

[2 Timothy 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 1:14</span></span>

That good thing which was committed unto thee; - see the notes at [Ti1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020). The reference here in the
phrase, "that good thing committed to thee," is to the sound Christian
doctrine with which he had been intrusted, and which he was required to
transmit to others.

Keep by the Holy Ghost - By the aid of the Holy Spirit. One of the best
methods of preserving the knowledge and the love of truth is to cherish
the influences of the Holy Spirit.

[2 Timothy 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti2 1:15</span></span>

This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from
me - That is, in that part of Asia Minor of which Ephesus was the
capital. The name Asia was often given particularly to that part of Asia
Minor; see the notes at [Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009); [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006). This passage proves that Timothy
was somewhere in that region when this Epistle was written to him, for
otherwise he could not be supposed to Know what is here said. When Paul
says that "all" were turned away from him, he must use the word in a
general sense, for he immediately specifies one who had been faithful
and kind to him.

Of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes - We know nothing of these
individuals but what is here mentioned. It would seem that they were
prominent persons, and those from whom the apostle had a right to expect
other treatment. "The ecclesiastical traditions allege that they were of
the seventy disciples, and in the end became followers of Simon Magus.
We imagine that this is little more than conjecture." It is a sad thing
when the only record made of a man - the only evidence which we have
that he ever lived at all - is, that he turned away from a friend, or
forsook the paths of true religion. And yet there are many men of whom
the only thing to be remembered of them is, that they lived to do wrong.

[2 Timothy 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 1:16</span></span>

The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus - The family of
Onesiphorus - for so the word house is often used. He was himself still
living [Ti2 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018), but not improbably
then absent from his home; compare the notes at [Ti2
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019). He was evidently of Asia, and is
the only one who is mentioned from that region who had showed the
apostle kindness in his trials. He is mentioned only in this Epistle,
and nothing more is known of him. The record is entirely honorable to
him, and for his family the apostle felt a warm interest on account of
the kindness which he had showed to him in prison. The ecclesiastical
traditions also state that he was one of the seventy disciples, and was
ultimately Bishop of Corone. But there is no evidence of this. There is
much force in the remark of the Editor of the Pictorial Bible, that "the
pretended lists of the 70 disciples seem to have been made out on the
principle of including all the names incidentally mentioned in the
sacred books, and not otherwise appropriated."

For he oft refreshed me - That is, showed me kindness, and ministered to
my needs.

And was not ashamed of my chain - Was not ashamed to be known as a
friend of one who was a prisoner on account of religion. Paul was bound
with a chain when a prisoner at Rome; [Phi
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013), [Phi
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016); [Col
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003), [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018); [Plm
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010); see the notes at [Act
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020).

[2 Timothy 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti2 1:17</span></span>

But when he was in Rome - What was the employment of Onesiphorus is not
known. It may have been that he was a merchant, and had occasion to
visit Rome on business. At all events, he was at pains to search out the
apostle, and his attention was the more valuable because it cost him
trouble to find him. It is not everyone, even among professors of
religion, who in a great and splendid city would be at the trouble to
search out a Christian brother, or even a minister, who was a prisoner,
and endeavor to relieve his sorrows. This man, so kind to the great
apostle, will be among those to whom the Saviour will say, at the final
judgment, "I was in prison, and ye came unto me;" [Mat
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036).

[2 Timothy 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti2 1:18</span></span>

The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day -
The day of judgment; notes at [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012). This proves that Onesiphorus was
then alive, as Paul would not offer prayer for him if he was dead. The
Papists, indeed, argue from this in favor of praying for the dead -
assuminG from [Ti2 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019), that
Onesiphorus was then dead. But there is no evidence of that. The passage
in [Ti2 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019), would prove only that he
was then absent from his family.

And in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus - This was the
home of Onesiphorus, and his family was still there; [Ti2
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019). When Paul was at Ephesus, it
would seem that Onesiphorus had showed him great kindness. His affection
for him did not change when he became a prisoner. True friendship, and
especially that which is based on religion, will live in all the
vicissitudes of fortune, whether we are in prosperity or adversity;
whether in a home of plenty, or in a prison.

This chapter is full of interest, and may suggest many interesting
reflections. We see:

\(1\) A holy man imprisoned and about to die. He had nearly finished his
course, and had the prospect of soon departing.

\(2\) he was forsaken by his friends, and left to bear his sorrows
alone. They on whom he might have relied, had left him; and to all his
outward sufferings, there was added this, one of the keenest which his
Master endured before him, that his friends forsook him, and left him to
bear his sorrows alone.

\(3\) yet his mind is calm, and his faith in the gospel is unshaken. He
expresses no regret that he had embraced the gospel; no sorrow that he
had been so zealous in it as to bring these calamities upon himself.
That gospel he still loves, and his great solicitude is, that his young
friend may never shrink from avowing it, though it may call him also to
pass through scenes of persecution and sorrow.

\(4\) in the general apostasy, the turning away of those on whom he
might have relied, it is refreshing and interesting, to find mention
made of one unshaken friend; [Ti2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016). He never swerved in his
affections. He had been kind to him in former years of comparative
honor, and he did not leave him now in the dark day of adversity. It is
always interesting to find true friendship in this world - friendship
that survives all reverses, and that is willing to manifest itself when
the great mass turn coldly away. There is such a thing as friendship,
and there is such a thing as religion, and when they meet and mingle in
the same heart, the one strengthens the other; and then neither
persecution, nor poverty, nor chains, will prevent our doing good to him
who is in prison and is about to die; see the notes at [Ti2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 2](ti2002)

</div>
