<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](tit002)  [Next](plm000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 3:0</span></span>

This chapter comprises the following subjects:

\(1\) Titus was to instruct his hearers to be subject to lawful
authority, and in general to manifest meekness and gentleness towards
all classes of men; [Tit 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001).

\(2\) a reason is assigned why they should do this; [Tit
3:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003). They who were Christians were
once, indeed, like others, disobedient and unholy; they were regardless
of law, and gave free indulgence to their evil propensities, but they
had been redeemed for a better purpose, and it was the design of God in
redeeming them, that they should manifest every kind of virtue.

\(3\) Titus was to avoid foolish questions, and contentions, and strifes
about the law; [Tit 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009).

\(4\) he who was a heretic was to be rejected after suitable
admonitions; [Tit 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010).

\(5\) Paul directs Titus to come to him at Nicopolis, and to bring Zenas
and Apollos with him; [Tit 3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012).

\(6\) he closes with the customary salutations; [Tit
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#015).

[Titus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 3:1</span></span>

Put them in mind to be subject ... - See the duty here enjoined,
explained in the notes at [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001),
following.

Principalities and powers - See these words explained in the notes at
[Rom 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038). The word here rendered
"powers" (ἐξουσίαις exousiais), is not, indeed, the same as that which
is found there (δυνάμεις dunameis), but the same idea is conveyed;
compare the notes at [Eph 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021).

To obey magistrates - That is, to obey them in all that was not contrary
to the word of God; [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001) note,
following; [Act 4:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019) notes.

To be ready to every good work - "To be prepared for" (ἑτοίμους
hetoimous); prompt to perform all that is good; Notes, [Phi
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008). A Christian should be always
ready to do good as far as he is able. He should not need to be urged,
or coaxed, or persuaded, but should be so ready always to do good that
he will count it a privilege to have the opportunity to do it.

[Titus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">tit 3:2</span></span>

To speak evil of no man - Greek, "to blaspheme (βλασφημεῖν blasphēmein,
compare the notes at [Mat 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003)) no
one." Doddridge renders it, "calumniate no one." The idea is, that we
are not to slander, revile, or defame anyone. We are not to say anything
to anyone, or of anyone, which will do him injury. We are never to utter
anything which we know to be false about him or to give such a coloring
to his words or conduct as to do him wrong in any way. We should always
so speak to him and of him in such a way that he will have no reason to
complain that he is an injured man. It may be necessary, when we are
called to state what we know of his character, to say things which are
not at all in his favor, or things which he has said or done that were
wrong; but,

\(1\) we should never do this for the purpose of doing him injury, or so
as to find a pleasure in it; and,

\(2\) where it is necessary to make the statement, it should be so as to
do him no injustice.

We should give no improper coloring. We should exaggerate no
circumstances. We should never attempt to express ourselves about his
motives, or charge on him bad motives - for we know not what his motives
were. We should state every palliating circumstance of which we have
knowledge, and do entire justice to it. We should not make the bad
traits of his character prominent, and pass over all that is good. In a
word, we should show that we would rather find him to be a good man than
a bad man - even if the result should be that we had been mistaken in
our opinions. It is better that we should have been mistaken, than that
he should be a bad man.

To be no brawlers - See the notes at [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003). The same Greek word occurs in
both places. It is not elsewhere found in the New Testament.

But gentle - The word here used is rendered "moderation" in [Phi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005), "patient" in [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003), and elsewhere "gentle;" see the
notes at [Ti1 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003).

Showing all meekness unto all men - In the reception of injuries; see
the [Mat 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005) note; [Eph
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002) note.

[Titus 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">tit 3:3</span></span>

For we ourselves - We who are Christians. There is no reason for
supposing, as Benson does, that this is to be understood as confined to
Paul himself. There are some things mentioned here which were not
probably true of him before his conversion, and the connection does not
require us to suppose that he referred particularly to himself. He is
stating a reason why those to whom Titus was appointed to preach should
be urged to lead holy lives, and especially to manifest a spirit of
order, peace, kindness, and due subordination to law. In enforcing this,
he says, that those who were now Christians had formerly been wicked,
disorderly, and sensual, but that under the influence of the gospel,
they had been induced to lead better lives. The same gospel which had
been effectual in their case, might, be in others. To others it would be
an encouragement to show that there were cases in which the gospel had
been thus efficacious, and they who were appointed to preach it might
refer to their own example as a reason why others should be persuaded to
lead holy lives. In preaching to others, also, they were not to be proud
or arrogant. They were to remember that they were formerly in the same
condition with those whom they addressed, and whom they exhorted to
reformation. They were not to forget that what they had that was
superior to others they owed to the grace of God, and not to any native
goodness. He will exhort the wicked to repentance most effectually who
remembers that his own former life was wicked; he will evince most of
the proper spirit in doing it who has the deepest sense of the errors
and folly of his own past ways.

Foolish - See this word explained in the notes at [Luk
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025), where it is rendered "fools;"
compare [Rom 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014), where it is
rendered "unwise," and [Gal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001), [Gal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003); [Ti1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#009), where it is rendered "foolish."

Disobedient - To law, to parents, to civil authority, to God. This is
the natural character of the human heart; see [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017); [Rom
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030); [Ti2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002); [Tit
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016), where the same word occurs.

Deceived - By the great enemy, by false teachers, by our own hearts, and
by the flattery of others. It is a characteristic of man by nature that
he sees nothing in its true light, but walks along amidst constant,
though changing and very beautiful illusions; compare [Mat
24:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004), [Mat
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011); [Ti2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013); [Pe1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025); [Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009); [Rev
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023), where the same word occurs; see
also [Rev 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003), [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008),[Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010), where the same word is applied
to that great deceiver who has led the world astray. Every one who is
converted feels, and is ready to confess, that before conversion he was
deceived as to the comparative value of things, as to the enjoyment
which he expected to find in scenes of pleasure and riot, and often in
what seemed to him well-formed plans.

Serving divers lusts and pleasures - Indulging in the various corrupt
passions and propensities of the soul. We were so under their influence
that it might be said we were their servants, or were slaves to them
(δουλεύοντες douleuontes); that is, we implicitly obeyed them; see the
notes at [Rom 6:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016).

Living in malice - Greek, "in evil" - ἐν κακίᾳ en kakia; that is, in all
kinds of evil; see the notes at [Rom
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029), where the word is rendered
maliciousness.

And envy - Displeasure at the happiness and prosperity of others; Notes,
[Rom 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029).

Hateful - στυγητοὶ stugētoi. This word does not elsewhere occur in the
New Testament. It means that our conduct was such as to be worthy of the
hatred of others. Of whom, before his conversion, is not this true?

And hating one another - There was no brotherly love; no true affection
for others. There was ill-will felt in the heart, and it was evinced in
the life. This is an apt description of the state of the heathen world
before the gospel shines on it, and it may be regarded as the
characteristic of all men before conversion. They have no true love for
one another, such as they ought to cherish, and they are liable
constantly to give indulgence to feelings which evince hatred. In
contentions, and strifes, and litigations, and wars, this feeling is
constantly breaking out. All this is suggested here as a reason why
Christians should now be gentle and mild toward those who are evil. Let
us remember what we were, and we shall not be disposed to treat others
harshly. When a Christian is tempted to unkind thoughts or words towards
others, nothing is more appropriate for him than to reflect on his own
past life.

[Titus 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">tit 3:4</span></span>

But after that - Greek, when - ὅτε hote The meaning is, that "when the
love of God was manifested in the plan of salvation, he saved us from
this state God appeared" after we had sinned in this way, but that when
his mercy was thus displayed we were converted from our sins, and made
pure in his sight.

The kindness - χρηστότης chrēstotēs - "the goodness, or the benignity."
The word is rendered "goodness" and "good" in [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004); [Rom
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012); [Rom
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022), thrice; "kindness," [Co2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006); [Eph
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007); [Col
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#012); [Tit
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004); and "gentleness," [Gal
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022). The act of redeeming us was one
of great kindness, or goodness.

And love of God - Margin, "pity." The Greek word is φιλανθρωπία
philanthrōpia - "philanthropy - the love of man." The plan of salvation
was founded on love to man, and was the highest expression of that love;
the notes at [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016). The Greek of
this verse is, "When the kindness and love of God our Saviour to man was
manifested, he saved us" [Tit 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005), to
wit, from those sins of which we had before been guilty.

[Titus 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">tit 3:5</span></span>

Not by works of righteousness which we have done - The plan was not
based on our own good works, nor are our own good works now the cause of
our salvation. If people could have been saved by their own good works,
there would have been no need of salvation by the Redeemer; if our own
deeds were now the basis of our title to eternal life, the work of
Christ would be equally unnecessary. It is a great and fundamental
principle of the gospel that the good works of men come in for no share
in the justification of the soul. They are in no sense a consideration
on account of which God pardons a man, and receives him to favor. The
only basis of justification is the merit of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
in the matter of justification before God, all the race is on a level;
see the notes at [Eph 2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008).

But according to his mercy -

\(1\) It had its origin in mercy;

\(2\) It is by mere mercy or compassion, and not by justice;

\(3\) It is an expression of great mercy, and,

\(4\) It is now in fact conferred only by mercy.

Whatever we have done or can do, when we come to receive salvation from
the hand of God, there is no other element which enters into it but
mercy. It is not because our deeds deserve it; it is not because we have
by repentance and faith wrought ourselves into such a state of mind that
we can claim it; but, after all our tears, and sighs, and prayers, and
good deeds, it is a mere favor. Even then God might justly withhold it
if he chose, and no blame would be attached to him if he should suffer
us to sink down to ruin.

He saved us - That is, he began that salvation in us which is to be
completed in heaven. A man who is already renewed and pardoned may be
spoken of as saved - for:

\(1\) the work of salvation is begun, and,

\(2\) when begun it will certainly be completed; see the notes at [Phi
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006).

By the washing of regeneration - In order to a correct understanding of
this important passage, it is necessary to ascertain whether the phrase
here used refers to baptism, and whether anything different is intended
by it from what is meant by the succeeding phrase - "renewing of the
Holy Ghost." - The word rendered "washing" (λουτρόυ loutrou) occurs in
the New Testament only in this place and in [Eph
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026), where also it is rendered
"washing" - "That he might sanctify and cleanse it (the church) with the
washing of water by the word." The word properly means "a bath;" then
water for bathing; then the act of bathing, washing, ablution. Passow
and Robinson. It is used by Homer to denote a warm or cold bath; then a
washing away, and is thus applied to the drink-offerings in sacrifice,
which were supposed to purify or wash away sin. Passow. The word here
does not mean "laver," or the vessel for washing in, which would be
expressed by λουτὴρ loutēr and this word cannot be properly applied to
the baptismal font.

The word in itself would naturally be understood as referring to baptism
(compare notes at [Act 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016)), which
was regarded as the emblem of washing away sins, or of cleansing from
them. I say it was the emblem, not the means of purify ing the soul from
sin. If this be the allusion, and it seems probable, then the phrase
"washing of regeneration" would mean "that outward washing or baptism
which is the emblem of regeneration," and which is appointed as one of
the ordinances connected with salvation; see the notes at [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016), "He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved." It is not affirmed in this phrase that baptism
is the means of regeneration; or that grace is necessarily conveyed by
it; and still less that baptism is regeneration, for no one of these is
a necessary interpretation of the passage, and should not be assumed to
be the true one. The full force of the language will be met by the
supposition that it means that baptism is the emblem or symbol of
regeneration, and, if this is the case, no one has a right to assume
that the other is certainly the meaning.

And that this is the meaning is further clear, because it is nowhere
taught in the New Testament that baptism is regeneration, or that it is
the means of regeneration. The word rendered "regeneration"
(παλιγγενεσία palingenesia) - occurs in the New Testament only here and
in [Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), - "in the regeneration
when the Son of man," etc. It means, properly, a new birth,
reproduction, or renewal. It would properly be applied to one who should
be begotten again in this sense, that a new life was commenced in him in
some way corresponding to his being made to live at first. To the proper
idea of the word, it is essential that there should be connected the
notion of the commencement of life in the man, so that he may be said to
live anew; and as religion is in the Scriptures represented as life, it
is properly applied to the beginning of that kind of life by which man
may be said to live anew. This word, occurring only here and in [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), and there indubitably not
referring to baptism, should not be here understood as referring to
that, or be applied to that, because:

\(1\) that is not the proper meaning of the word;

\(2\) there is no Scripture usage to sanction it;

\(3\) the connection here does not demand it;

\(4\) the correlatives of the word (see [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003), [Joh
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005), [Joh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008); [Pe1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003),) are applied only to that great
moral change which is produced by the Holy Spirit, and,

\(5\) it is a dangerous use of the word.

Its use in this sense leaves the impression that the only change needful
for man is that which is produced by being regularly baptized. On almost
no point has so much injury been done in the church as by the
application of the word "regeneration" to baptism. It affects the
beginning of religion in the soul, and if a mistake is made there, it is
one which must pervade all the views of piety.

And renewing of the Holy Ghost - This is an important clause, added by
Paul apparently to save from the possibility of falling into error. If
the former expression, "the washing of regeneration," had been left to
stand by itself, it might have been supposed possibly that all the
regeneration which would be needed would be that which would accompany
baptism. But he avoids the possibility of this error, by saying that the
"renewing of the Holy Ghost" is an indispensable part of that by which
we are saved. It is necessary that this should exist in addition to that
which is the mere emblem of it - the washing of regeneration - for
without this the former would be unmeaning and unavailing. It is
important to observe that the apostle by no means says that this always
follows from the former, nor does he affirm that it ever follows from it
- whatever may be the truth on that point - but he asserts that this is
that on which our salvation depends. - The word rendered "renewing"
(ἀνακαίνωσις anakainōsis) occurs only here and in [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002), where it is also rendered
"renewing;" compare Note on that place. The verb (ἀνακαινόω anakainoō)
occurs in [Co2 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#015), and [Col
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#019), in both which places it is
rendered "renewed," and the corresponding word, ἀνακαινίζω anakainizō,
in [Heb 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#006).

The noun properly means making new again: a renewing; a renovation;
compare H. Planck in Bib. Repos. i. 677. It is a word which is found
only in the writings of Paul, and in ecclesiastical Greek writers. It
would be properly applied to such a change as the Holy Spirit produces
in the soul, making one a new man; that is, a man new, so far as
religion is concerned - new in his views, feelings, desires, hopes,
plans, and purposes. He is so far different from what he was before,
that it may be said he enters on a new life; see the notes at [Eph
4:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023). The "renewing of the Holy
Ghost" of course means that which the Holy Spirit produces, recognizing
the fact, everywhere taught in the Scriptures, that the Holy Spirit is
the Author of the new creation. It cannot mean, as Koppe supposes, the
renewing of the mind itself, or producing a holy spirit in the soul.

[Titus 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">tit 3:6</span></span>

Which he shed on us - Greek, "Which he poured out on us" - ἐξέχην
exechēn; see the notes at [Act 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017).
The same Greek word is used there as here. It occurs also in the same
sense in [Act 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#018), [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033).

Abundantly - Margin, as in Greek, "richly." The meaning is, that the
Holy Spirit had been imparted in copious measure in order to convert
them from their former wickedness. There is no particular allusion here
to the day of Pentecost, but the sense is, that the Holy Spirit had been
imparted richly to all who were converted, at any time or place, from
the error of their ways. What the apostle says here is true of all who
become Christians, and can be applied to all who become believers in any
age or land,

Through Jesus Christ our Saviour - See Notes, [Act
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033).

[Titus 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">tit 3:7</span></span>

That being justified by his grace - Not by our own works, but by his
favor or mercy; see the notes at [Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024).

We should be made heirs - See the notes at [Rom
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015), [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017).

According to the hope of eternal life - In reference to the hope of
eternal life; that is, we have that hope in virtue of our being adopted
with the family of God, and being made heirs. He has received us as his
children, and permits us to hope that we shall live with him forever.

[Titus 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">tit 3:8</span></span>

This is a faithful saying - See the notes at [Ti1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015). The reference here is to what he
had been just saying, meaning that the doctrine which he had stated
about the method of salvation was in the highest degree important, and
entirely worthy of belief.

And these things I will that thou affirm constantly - Make them the
constant subject of your preaching. "That they which have believed in
God might be careful to maintain good works." This shows that Paul
supposed that the doctrines of the gospel were fitted to lead people to
holy living; compare [Tit 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001), and the
notes at [Phi 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008). The "good works"
here refer not merely to acts of benevolence and charity, but to all
that is upright and good - to an honest and holy life.

These things are good and profitable unto men - That is, these doctrines
which he had stated were not mere matters of speculation, but they were
fitted to promote human happiness, and they should be constantly taught.

[Titus 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">tit 3:9</span></span>

But avoid foolish questions and genealogies - See the [Ti1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004) note; [Ti2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016), [Ti2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023) notes.

And contentions, and strivings about the law - Such as the Jews started
about various matters connected with the law - about meats and drinks,
etc.; the notes at [Ti1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004); compare
the notes at [Act 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#015).

For they are unprofitable and vain - - They disturb and embitter the
feelings; they lead to the indulgence of a bad spirit; they are often
difficult to be settled, and are of no practical importance if they
could be determined. The same thing might be said of multitudes of
things about which men dispute so earnestly now.

[Titus 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">tit 3:10</span></span>

A man that is an heretic - The word "heretic" is now commonly applied to
one who holds some fundamental error of doctrine, "a person who holds
and teaches opinions repugnant to the established faith, or that which
is made the standard of orthodoxy." Webster. The Greek word here used
αἱρετικὸς hairetikos occurs nowhere else in the New Testament. The
corresponding noun (αἵρεσις hairesis) occurs in the following places:
[Act 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017); [Act
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005); [Act
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005); [Act
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005); [Act
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022), where it is rendered "sect;"
and [Act 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014); [Co1
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019); [Gal
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020); [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001), where it is rendered "heresy,"
and "heresies;" see the notes at [Act
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014). The true notion of the word is
that of one who is a promoter of a sect or party. The man who makes
divisions in a church, instead of aiming to promote unity, is the one
who is intended. Such a man may form sects and parties on some points of
doctrine on which be differs from others, or on some custom, religious
rite, or special practice; he may make some unimportant matter a ground
of distinction from his brethren, and may refuse to have fellowship with
them, and endeavor to get up a new organization. Such a man, according
to the Scripture usage, is a heretic, and not merely one who holds a
different doctrine from that which is regarded as orthodoxy. The spirit
of the doctrine here is the same as in [Rom
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017), and the same class of persons
is referred to. "Mark them which cause divisions and offences contrary
to the doctrine which ye have received; and avoid them." See the notes
at that passage. The word here used is defined by Robinson (Lexicon),
"one who creates dissensions, introduces errors, a factious person." It
is not found in classic Greek, but often in ecclesiastical writers; see
Suicer's Thesaurus.

After the first and second admonition - Compare [Mat
18:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015). That is, do not do it
hastily and rashly. Give him an opportunity to explain himself, and to
repent and abandon his course. No man is to be cut off without giving
him a proper opportunity to vindicate his conduct, and to repent if he
has done wrong. If after the first and second admonition a man who is
undoubtedly doing wrong, will not repent, then he is to be cut off. The
apostle does not say in what way this admonition is to be given, or
whether it should be public or private. The language which he uses would
justify either, and the method which is to be adopted is doubtless to be
determined by circumstances. The thing which is to be reached is, that
his fault is to be fairly set before his mind.

Reject - παραιτοῦ paraitou. This word is rendered "excuse" in [Luk
14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#018); "refuse," [Act
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011); [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007); [Ti1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011); [Heb
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#025); "avoid," [Ti2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023), and "entreated," [Heb
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#019). Its prevailing meaning, as used
in connections like the one before us, is to reject in relation to an
office; that is, to decline appointing one to an office. It probably had
a primary reference to that here, and meant that a man who was given to
making dissensions, or who was a factious person, should not be admitted
to an office in the church. The general direction would also include
this, - that he should not be admitted to the church. He is neither to
be owned as a member, nor admitted to office; compare [Mat
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017). "Let him be unto thee as a
heathen man and a publican." In regard to this passage, then, we may
observe:

\(1\) That the utmost limit which this allows is mere exclusion. It does
not allow us to follow the offender with injury.

\(2\) it does not authorize us to oppose one on account of his mere
private opinions. The essential idea is that of a factious,
division-making man; a man who aims to form sects and parties, whether
on account of opinions, or from any other cause.

\(3\) it does not make it right to deliver such a man over to the
"secular arm," or to harm him in body, soul, property, or reputation. It
gives no power to torture him on the rack, or with thumb-screws, or to
bind him to the stake. It authorizes us not to recognize him as a
Christian brother, or to admit him to an office in the church - but
beyond this it gives us no right to go. He has a right to his own
opinion still, as far as we are concerned, and we are not to molest him
in the enjoyment of that right.

\(4\) it demands that, when a man is undoubtedly a heretic in the sense
here explained, there should be the utmost kindness towards him, in
order if possible to reclaim him. We should not begin by attacking and
denouncing his opinions; or by formally arraigning him; or by blazoning
his name as a heretic; but he is to be dealt with in all Christian
kindness and brotherly fidelity. He is to be admonished more than once
by those who have the right to admonish him; and then, and then only, if
he does not repent, he is to be simply avoided. That is to be an end of
the matter so far as we are concerned. The power of the church there
ceases. It has no power to deliver him over to anyone else for
persecution or punishment, or in any way to meddle with him. He may live
where he pleases; pursue his own plans; entertain his own opinions or
company, provided he does not interfere with us; and though we have a
right to examine the opinions which he may entertain, yet our work with
him is done. If these plain principles had been observed, what scenes of
bloody and cruel persecution in the church would have been avoided!

[Titus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">tit 3:11</span></span>

Knowing that he that is such is subverted - Literally, "is turned out;"
or, "is changed," i. e., for the worse. He has gone from the right way,
and therefore he should be rejected.

And sinneth, being condemned of himself - His own conscience condemns
him. He will approve the sentence, for he knows that he is wrong; and
his self-condemnation will be punishment sufficient. His own course, in
attempting a division or schism in the church, shows him that it is
right that he should be separated from the communion of Christians. He
that attempts to rend the church, without a good reason, should himself
be separated from it.

[Titus 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">tit 3:12</span></span>

When I shall send Artemas unto thee - This person is not elsewhere
mentioned in the New Testament, and nothing more is known of him.

Or Tychicus - Notes, [Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004).

Be diligent - Notes, [Ti2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009). "To
come unto me to Nicopolis." It was at this place, probably, that this
epistle was written. In regard to its situation, see Introduction,
Section 4.

For I have determined there to winter - Why Paul designed to spend the
winter there, or what he purposed to do there, are questions on which no
light can now be thrown. There is no evidence that he organized a church
there, though it may be presumed that he preached the gospel, and that
he did not do it without success. His requesting Titus to leave his
important post and to come to him, looks as if his aid were needed in
the work of the ministry there, and as if Paul supposed there was a
promising field of labor there.

[Titus 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">tit 3:13</span></span>

Bring Zenas the lawyer - - This person is not elsewhere mentioned in the
New Testament, and nothing more is known of him. He belonged doubtless
to that class of persons so often mentioned in the New Testament as
lawyers; that is, who were regarded as qualified to expound the Jewish
laws; see the notes at [Mat 22:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#035). It
does not mean that he practiced law, in the modern sense of that phrase.
He had doubtless been converted to the Christian faith, and it is not
improbable that there were Jews at Nicopolis, and that Paul supposed he
might be particularly useful among them.

And Apollos - Notes, [Act 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024). He
was also well-skilled in the laws of Moses, being "mighty in the
Scriptures" [Act 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024), and he and
Zenas appear to have been traveling together. It would seem that they
had been already on a journey, probably in preaching the gospel, and
Paul supposed that they would be in Crete, and that Titus could aid
them.

Diligently - [Ti2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009); Greek Speedily;
i. e., facilitate their journey as much as possible.

That nothing be wanting unto them - Nothing necessary for their journey.
Paul desired that they might meet with hospitable treatment from
Christians in Crete, and might not be embarrassed for the want of that
which was needful for their journey. It would seem most probable that
they had been sent by Paul on a visit to the churches.

[Titus 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">tit 3:14</span></span>

And let ours - Our friends; that is, those who were Christians Paul had
just directed Titus to aid Zenas and Apollos himself, and he here adds
that he wished that others who were Christians would be char acterized
by good works of all kinds.

To maintain good works - Margin, profess honest trades. The Greek will
admit of the interpretation in the margin, or will include that, but
there is no reason why the direction should be supposed to have any
special reference to an honest mode of livelihood, or why it should be
confined to that. It rather means, that they should be distinguished for
good works, including benevolent deeds, acts of charity, honest toil,
and whatever would enter into the conception of an upright life; see the
notes at [Tit 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008).

For necessary uses - Such as are required by their duty to their
families, and by the demands of charity; see [Tit
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008).

That they be not unfruitful - - That it may be seen that their religion
is not barren and worthless, but that it produces a happy effect on
themselves and on society; compare the [Joh
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016) note; [Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028) note.

[Titus 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">tit 3:15</span></span>

All that are with me salute thee - Notes, [Rom
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003). Paul, at the close of his
epistles, usually mentions the names of those who sent affectionate
salutations. Here it would seem to be implied that Titus knew who were
with Paul, and also that he himself had been traveling with him. He
evidently refers not to those who were residing in the place where he
was, but to those who had gone with him from Crete as his companions.

Greet them that love us in the faith - In the faith of the gospel, or as
Christians. No names are here mentioned; compare [Th1
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#026); [Col
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#015).

Grace be with you all - Notes, [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007); [Rom
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020).

The subscription, "It was written to Titus," etc., is, like the other
subscriptions at the close of the epistles, of no authority whatever;
see the close of the notes at 1 Cor. In this subscription there are
probably two errors:

\(1\) In the statement that Titus was "ordained the first bishop of the
church of the Cretians;" because:

\(a\) there is no evidence that there was a church there called "the
church of the Cretians," as there were doubtless many churches on the
island;

\(b\) there is no evidence that Titus was the first Bishop of the church
there, or that he was the first one there to whom might be properly
applied the term "bishop" in the Scriptural sense. Indeed, there is
positive evidence that he was not the first, for Paul was there with
him, and Titus was "left" there to complete what he had begun.

\(c\) There is no evidence that Titus was "bishop" there at all in the
prelatical sense of the term, or even that he was a settled pastor; see
the notes at [Tit 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001), [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005).

\(2\) that the epistle was written "from Nicopolis of Macedonia;" for

\(a\) there is no certain evidence that it was written at Nicopolis at
all, though this is probable;

\(b\) there is no reason to believe that the Nicopolis referred to was
in Macedonia; see Introduction 4.

These subscriptions are so utterly destitute of authority, and are so
full of mistakes, that it is high time they were omitted in the editions
of the Bible. They are no part of the inspired writings, but are of the
nature of "notes and comments," and are constantly doing something,
perhaps much, to perpetuate-error. "The opinion that Timothy and Titus
were prelatical bishops, the one of Ephesus and the other of Crete,
depends far more on these worthless subscriptions than on anything in
the epistles themselves." Indeed, there is no evidence of it in the
epistles; and, if these subscriptions were removed, no man from the New
Testament would ever suppose that they sustained this office at all.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Introduction](plm000)

</div>
