<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep002)  [Next](hag000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Notes on the Bible*, by Albert Barnes, \[1834\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)

[Zephaniah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 3:1</span></span>

The "woe," having gone round the pagan nations, again circles round
where it began, the "Jerusalem that killed the prophets and stoned those
that were sent unto her" [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037).
Woe upon her, and joy to the holy Jerusalem, the "new Jerusalem [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012); [Rev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010), the Jerusalem which is from
above, the mother of us all," close this prophecy; both in figure;
destruction of her and the whole earth, in time, the emblem of the
eternal death; and the love of God, the foretaste of endless joy in Him.

Woe - "Rebellious and polluted;" "thou oppressive city!" . The address
is the more abrupt, and bursts more upon her, since the prophet does not
name her. He uses as her proper name, not her own name, city of peace,"
but "rebellious," "polluted;" then he sums up in one, thou "oppressive
city."

Jerusalem's sin is threefold, actively rebelling against God; then,
inwardly defiled by sin; then cruel to man. So then, toward God, in
herself, toward man, she is wholly turned to evil, not in passing acts,
but in her abiding state:

\(1\) rebellious

\(2\) defiled

\(3\) oppressive

She is known only by what she has become, and what has been done for her
in vain. She is rebellious, and so had had the law; defiled, and so had
been cleansed; and therefore her state is the more hopeless.

[Zephaniah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zep 3:2</span></span>

She obeyed not the Voice - Of God, by the law or the prophets, teaching
her His ways; and when, disobeying, He chastened her, "she received not
correction," and when He increased His chastisements, she, in the
declining age of the state and deepening evil, turned not unto Him, as
in the time of the judges, nor ceased to do evil.

In the Lord she trusted not - But in Assyria or Egypt or her idols. Our
practical relation to God is summed up in the four words, "Mis-trust
self; trust God." Man reverses this, and when "self-trust" has of course
failed him, then he "mistrusts God" . "Such rarely ask of God, what they
hope they may obtain from man. They strain every nerve of their soul to
obtain what they want; canvass, flatter, fawn, bribe, court favor; and
betake themselves to God when all human help fails. They would be
indebted, not to God, but to their own diligence. For the more they
receive of God, the less, they see, can they exalt their own diligence,
the more they are bound to thank God, and obey Him the more strictly."

To her God she drew not nigh - Even in trouble, when all draw near unto
Him, who are not wholly alien from Him; she drew not near by repentance,
by faith hope or love, or by works meet for repentance, but in heart
remained far from Him. And yet He was "her" own "God," as He had shown
Himself in times past, who changes not, while we change; is faithful to
us, while we fail Him; is still our God, while we forget Him; "waits, to
have mercy upon us;" shines on us while we interpose our earth-born
clouds between us and Him. Dionysius: "Not in body nor in place, but
spiritually and inwardly do we approach to the uncircumscribed God,"
owning Him as our Father, to whom we daily say "Our Father."

[Zephaniah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zep 3:3</span></span>

The prophet having declared the wickedness of the whole city, rehearses
how each in Church and state, the ministers of God in either, who should
have corrected the evil, themselves aggravated it. Not enemies, without,
destroy her, but

Her princes within her - In the very midst of the flock, whom they
should in God's stead "feed with a true heart," destroy her as they
will, having no protection against them. "Her judges are evening wolves"
(see [Hab 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008)); these who should in
the Name of God redress all grievances and wrongs, are themselves like
wild beasts, when most driven by famine. "They gnaw not the bones until
the morrow or on the morrow" (literally, in the morning). They reserve
nothing until the morning light, but do in darkness the works of
darkness, shrinking from the light, and, in extreme rapacity, devouring
at once the whole substance of the poor. As Isaiah says, "Thy princes
are rebellious and companions of thieves" [Isa
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023), and "The Lord will enter into
judgment with the ancients of His people and the princes thereof: for ye
have eaten up the vineyard: the spoil of the poor is in your houses"
[Isa 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014). And Ezekiel, "Her princes
in the midst thereof are like wolves, ravening the prey to shed blood,
to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain" [Eze
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#027).

[Zephaniah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 3:4</span></span>

Her prophets are light - , boiling and bubbling, up, like water boiling
over , empty boasters claiming the gift of prophecy, which they have
not; "boldly and rashly pouring out what they willed as they willed;"
promising good things which shall not be. So they are "her" prophets, to
whom they "prophesy smooth things" (see [Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)), "the prophets of this people"
not the prophets of God; "treacherous persons" (literally, men of
treacheries) wholly given to manifold treacheries against God in whose
Name they spake and to the people whom they deceived. Jerome: "They
spake as if from the mouth of the Lord and uttered everything against
the Lord." "The leaders of the people," those who profess to lead it
aright, Isaiah says, "are its misleaders" ([Isa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015) ([Isa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016) in English)). "Thy prophets,"
Jeremiah says, "have seen vain and foolish things for thee; they have
seen for thee false visions and causes of banishment" [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014).

Her priests have polluted her sanctuary - Literally, "holiness," and so
holy rites, persons [Ezr 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#028), things,
places (as the sanctuary), sacrifices. All these they polluted, being
themselves polluted; they polluted first themselves, then the holy
things which they handled, handling them as they ought not; carelessly
and irreverently, not as ordained by God; turning them to their own use
and self-indulgence, instead of the glory of God; then they polluted
them in the eyes of the people, "making them to abhor the offering of
the Lord" [Sa1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#017), since, living
scandalously, they themselves regarded the Ministry entrusted to them by
God so lightly. Their office was to "put difference between holy and
unholy and between clean and unclean, and to teach the children all the
statutes which the Lord hath spoken unto them by Moses" [Lev
10:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#010); that they "should sanctify
themselves and be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy" ([Lev
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044); [Lev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002), etc.). But they on the contrary,
God says by Ezekiel, "have done violence to My law and have profaned My
holy things; they have made no difference between holy and profane, and
have taught none between clean and unclean" [Eze
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#026). "Holy" and "unholy" being the
contradictory of each other, these changed what God had hallowed into
its exact contrary. It was not a mere short-coming, but an annihilation
(so to speak), of God's purposes.

Cyril: "The priests of the Church then must keep strict watch, not to
profane holy things. There is not one mode only of profaning them, but
many and divers. For priests ought to be purified both in soul and body,
and to cast aside every form of abominable pleasure. Rather should they
be resplendent with zeal in well-doing, remembering what Paul saith,
'walk in the Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh' [Gal
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#016)."

They have oppressed, done violence, to the law - Openly violating it ;
or straining it, or secretly wresting and using its forms to wrong and
violence, as in the case of Naboth and of Him, of whom Naboth thus far
bore the Image. "'We have a law, and by our law He ought to die' [Joh
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#007). Law exists to restrain human
violence; these reversed God's ordinances; violence and law changed
places: first, they did violence to the majesty of the law, which was
the very voice of God, and then, through profaning it, did violence to
man. Forerunners herein of those, who, when Christ came, "transgressed
the commandment of God, and made it of none effect by their traditions"
[Mat 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#006); omitting also the weightier
matters of the law, judgment and mercy and faith; full of extortion and
excess!" [Mat 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023), [Mat
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025).

[Zephaniah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zep 3:5</span></span>

But, beside these "evening wolves in the midst of her," there standeth
Another "in the midst of her," whom they knew not, and so, very near to
them although they would not draw near to Him. But He was near, to
behold all the iniquities which they did in the very city and place
called by His Name and in His very presence; He was in her to protect,
foster her with a father's love, but she, presuming on His mercy, had
cast it off. And so He was near to punish, not to deliver; as a Judge,
not as a Saviour. Dionysius: "God is everywhere, Who says by Jeremiah,
'I fill heaven and earth' [Jer 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#024).
But since, as Solomon attesteth, 'The Lord is far from the wicked' [Pro
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#029), how is He said here to be in
the midst of these most wicked men? Because the Lord is far from the
wicked, as regards the presence of love and grace; still in His Essence
He is everywhere, and in this way He is equally present to all."

The Lord is in the midst thereof; He will not do iniquity - Dionysius:
"Since He is the primal rule and measure of all righteousness; therefore
from the very fact that He doeth anything, it is just, for He cannot do
amiss, being essentially holy. Therefore He will give to every man what
he deserves. Therefore we chant, 'The Lord is upright, and there is no
unrighteousness in Him' [Psa 92:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#015)."
justice and injustice, purity and impurity, cannot be together. God's
presence then must destroy the sinners, if not the sin. He was "in the
midst of them," to sanctify them, giving them His judgments as a pattern
of theirs; "He will not do iniquity:" but if they heeded it not, the
judgment would fall upon themselves. It were for God to become "such an
one as themselves" [Psa 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021), and to
connive at wickedness, were He to spare at last the impenitent.

Every morning - (Literally, in the morning, in the morning) one after
the other, quickly, openly, daily, continually, bringing all secret
things, all works of darkness, to light, as He said to David, "Thou
didst it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the sun" [Sa2 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#012). Doth He
bring His judgments to light," so that no sin should be hidden in the
brightness of His Light, as He said by Hosea, "Thy judgments are a light
which goeth forth." Cyril: "Morning by morning, He shall execute His
judgments, that is, in bright day and visibly, not restraining His
anger, but bringing it forth in the midst, and making it conspicuous,
and, as it were, setting in open vision what He had foreannounced." Day
by day God gives some warning of His judgments. By chastisements which
are felt to be His on this side or on that or all around, He gives
ensamples which speak to the sinner's heart. "He faileth not." As God
said by Habakkuk, that His promises, although they seem to "linger,"
were not "behind" [Hab 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003) the real
time, which lay in the Divine Mind, so, contrariwise, neither are His
judgments. His hand is never missing at the appointed time. "But the
unjust," he, whose very being and character, "iniquity," is the exact
contrary to what he had said of the perfection of God, "Who doth not
iniquity," or, as Moses had taught them in his song, "all His ways are
judgment, a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is He"
[Deu 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004). "Knoweth no shame," as God
saith by Jeremiah, "Thou refusedst to be ashamed" [Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003). They were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush" [Jer 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015);
[Jer 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012). Even thus they would not be
ashamed of their sins, "that they might be converted and God might heal
them" [Isa 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010).

[Zephaniah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zep 3:6</span></span>

I have cut off the nations - God appeals to His judgments on pagan
nations, not on any particular nation, as far as we know; but to past
history, whether of those, of whose destruction Israel itself had been
the instrument, or others. The judgments upon the nations before them
were set forth to them, when they were about to enter on their
inheritance, as a warning to themselves. "Defile not ye yourselves in
any of these things, for in all these have the nations defiled
themselves, which I cast out before you: and the land is defiled;
therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land vomiteth
out her inhabitants. And ye, ye shall keep My statutes and My judgements
and shall not commit any of these abominations - And the land shall not
spue you out when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations which were
before you" ([Lev 18:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024), [Lev
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028), add [Lev
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#023)). The very possession then of
the land was a warning to them; the ruins, which crowned so many of its
hilltops , were silent preachers to them; they lived among the memories
of God's visitations; if neglected, they were an earnest of future
judgments on themselves.

Yet God's judgments are not at one time only. Sennacherib appealed to
their own knowledge, "Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria
have done to all lands by destroying them utterly. Have the gods of the
nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed?" [Isa
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#011), [Isa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#013). Hezekiah owned it as a fact
which he knew: "Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have laid waste
all the nations and their land" [Isa
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#018). And God owns him as His
instrument: "Now I have brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to
lay waste defensed cities into ruinous heaps" [Isa
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026) : and, "I will send him against
an ungodly nation, and against the people of My wrath will I give him a
charge, to take the spoil and to take the prey, and to tread them down
as the mire of the streets," and says of him, "It is in his heart to
destroy and to cut off nations not a few" . The king of Babylon too he
describes as "the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake
kingdoms. that made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities
thereof" [Isa 14:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#016). Habakkuk
recently described the wide wasting by the Babylonians, and the
helplessness of nations before him [Hab
1:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014).

Their towers, corner towers - o, the most carefully fortified parts of
their fortified cities, "are desolate; I made their streets waste." The
desolation is complete, within as well as without; ruin itself is hardly
so desolate as the empty habitations and forsaken streets, once full of
life, where

"The echoes and the empty tread

Would sound like voices from the dead."

[Zephaniah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 3:7</span></span>

I said, surely thou wilt fear Me - God speaks of things here, as they
are in their own nature. "It could not but be," that in the very
presence of the Hand of God, destroying others but as yet sparing them,
they must learn to fear Him; they must stand in awe of Him for His
judgments on others; they must be in filial fear of Him for His loving
longsuffering toward themselves. "Thou 'wilt' receive instruction,"
corrected and taught through God's correction of others and the lighter
judgments on themselves, as Solomon says, "I looked, I set my heart: I
saw, I received instruction" [Pro
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#032). He saith, "receive," making it
man's free act. God brings it near, commends it to him, exhorts,
entreats, but leaves him the awful power to "receive" or to refuse. God
speaks with a wonderful tenderness. "Surely thou 'wilt' stand in awe of
Me; thou 'wilt' receive instruction; thou wilt now do what hitherto thou
hast refused to do." There was (so to speak) nothing else left for them,
in sight of those judgments. He pleads their own interests. The
lightning was ready to fall. The prophet had, in vision, seen the enemy
within the city. Yet even now God lingers, as it were, "If thou hadst
known in this thy day, the things which are for thy peace" [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042).

So their - (her) dwelling should not be cut off His own holy land which
He had given them. A Jew paraphrases , "And He will not cut off their
dwellings from the land of the house of My Shechinah" (God's visible
presence in glory). Judah, who was before addressed "thou," is now
spoken of in the third person, "her;" and this also had wonderful
tenderness. It is as though God were musing over her and the blessed
fruits of her return to Him; "it shall not be needed to correct her
further." "Howsoever I punished them:" literally, "all" (that is, 'all'
the offences) "which I visited upon her," as God saith of Himself,
"'visiting' the 'sins' of the fathers 'upon' the children" [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); [Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007); [Num
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018), and this is mostly the meaning
of the words "visit upon." Amid and not withstanding all the offences
which God had already chastised, He, in His love and compassion, still
longeth, not utterly to remove them from His presence, if they would but
receive instruction "now;" but they would not. "How often," our Lord
says, "would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not" [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037). "But indeed," "probably, Of a
truth" (it is a word strongly affirming what follows) "they rose early,
they corrupted all their doings;" God gave them His warnings, awaited
the result; they lost no time, they began with morning light; they
hasted to rise, burdened themselves, made sure of having the whole day
before them, to - seek God as He had sent His prophets, "rising early
and sending them?" [Jer 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013), [Jer
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025); [Jer
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007); [Jer
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#005); [Jer
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#019).

No, nor even simply to do ill, but of set purpose. to do, not this or
that corruptly, but "to corrupt all their doings." Jerome: "They with
diligence and eagerness rose early, that, with the same haste wherewith
they ought to have returned to Me, they might shew forth in deed what
they had conceived amiss in their mind." There are as many aggravations
of their sin as there are words. The four Hebrew words bespeak
eagerness, willfulness, completeness enormity, in sin. They "rose
early," themselves deliberately "corrupted," of their own mind made
offensive, "all" their "doings," not slight acts, but "deeds," great
works done with a high hand .

[Zephaniah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 3:8</span></span>

Therefore wait ye upon - (for) Me God so willeth not to punish, but that
all should lay hold of His mercy, that He doth not here even name
punishment. Judah had slighted His mercies; He was ready to forgive all
they had sinned, if they would "now" receive instruction; they in return
set themselves to corrupt "all" their doings. They had wholly forsaken
Him. "Therefore" - we should have expected, as elsewhere, "Therefore I
will visit all your iniquities upon you." But not so. The chastisement
is all veiled; the prophet points only to the mercy beyond. "Therefore
wait ye for Me." All the interval of chastisement is summed up in these
words; that is, since neither My mercies toward you, nor My chastisement
of others, lead you to obey Me, "therefore" the time shall be, when My
Providence shall not seem to be over you, nor My presence among you (see
[Hos 3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#003)); but then, "wait ye for
Me" earnestly, intensely, perseveringly, "until the day, that I rise up
to the prey." "The day" is probably in the first instance, the
deliverance from Babylon. But the words seem to be purposely enlarged,
that they may embrace other judgments of God also.

For the words to "gather the nations, assemble the kingdoms," describe
some array of nations against God and His people; gathering themselves
for their own end at that time, but, in His purpose, gathering
themselves for their own destruction, rather than the mere tranquil
reunion of those of different nations in the city of Babylon, when the
Medes and Persians came against them. Nor again are they altogether
fulfilled in the destruction of Jerusalem, or any other event until now.
For although then a vast number of the dispersed Jews were collected
together, and were at that time "broken off" [Rom
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020) and out of covenant with God,
they could hardly be called "nations," (which are here and before Zeph.
5:6 spoken of in contrast with Judah), much less "kingdoms." In its
fullest sense the prophecy seems to belong to the same events in the
last struggle of Anti-Christ, as at the close of Joel [Joe
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002), [Joe
3:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009) and Zechariah Zech. 14.

With this agrees the largeness of the destruction; "to pour out upon
them," in full measure, emptying out so as to overwhelm them, "Mine
indignation, even all My fierce anger, for all the earth shall be
devoured with the fire of My jealousy" (see [Psa
69:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#024); [Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006); [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011); [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025); [Jer
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#016); [Eze
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#031); [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001)). The outpouring of all God's
wrath, the devouring of the whole earth, in the fullest sense of the
words, belongs to the end of the world, when He shall say to the wicked,
"Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." In lesser degrees,
and less fully, the substance of the prophecy has again and again been
fulfilled to the Jewish Church before Christ, at Babylon and under the
Maccabees; and to the Christian, as when the Muslims hemmed in
Christendom on all sides, and the waves of their conquests on the east
and west threatened to meet, overwhelming Christendom. The Church,
having sinned, had to "wait" for a while "for God" who by His Providence
withdrew Himself, yet at last delivered it.

And since the whole history of the Church lies wrapt up in the Person of
the Redeemer, "the day that I rise up to the prey," is especially the
Day in which the foundation of His Church was laid, or that in which it
shall be completed; the Day whereon He rose again, as the first-fruits,
or that Day in which He shall "stand again on the earth" , to judge it;
"so coming even as He went up into heaven" [Act
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011). Then, "the prey" must be, what
God vouch-safes to account as His gain, "the prey" which is "taken from
the mighty" [Isa 49:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#024), and "the
lawful captivity, the prey of the terrible one," which shall be
delivered; even that spoil which the Father bestowed on Him "Who made
His soul an offering for sin" [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010), [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012), the goods of the strong man
[Mat 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029) whom He bound, and spoiled
us, His lawful goods and captives, since we had "sold" ([Rom
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014), coll; [Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001); [Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003)) ourselves "under sin" to him.
Cyril: "Christ lived again having spoiled hell, because "it was not
possible" (as it is written) "that He," being by nature Life, "should be
holden of death" [Act 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024).

Here, where spoken of with relation to the Church, "the jealousy" of
Almighty God is that love for His people (see the note at [Nah
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002)), which will not endure their
ill-treatment by those who (as all anti-Christian power does) make
themselves His rivals in the government of the world.

[Zephaniah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zep 3:9</span></span>

For then - In the order of God's mercies. The deliverance from Babylon
was the forerunner of that of the Gospel, which was its object. The
spread of the Gospel then is spoken of in the connection of God's
Providence and plan, and time is overlooked. Its blessings are spoken
of, as "then" given when the earnest was given, and the people, from
whom according to the flesh Christ was to be born, were placed anew in
the land where He was to be born. Lap.: "The prophet springs, as is his
wont, to Christ and the time of the new law." And in Christ, the End of
the Law, the prophet ends.

I will turn - Contrary to what they had before, "to the people,"
literally, "peoples," the nations of the earth, "a pure language,"
literally, "a purified lip." It is a real conversion, as was said of
Saul at the beginning [Sa1 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009); "God"
(literally) "turned to him another heart." Before the dispersion of
Babel the world was "of one lip," but that, impure, for it was in
rebellion against God. Now it shall be again of "one lip;" and that,
"purified." The purity is of faith and of life, "that they way call upon
the Name of the Lord," not as heretofore on idols, but that every tongue
should confess the one true God, Father Son and Holy Spirit, in Whose
Name they are baptized. This is purity of faith. To "call upon the Name
of the Lord Jesus" [Act 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016); [Rom
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013) is the very title of Christian
worship; "all that called upon the Name" of Jesus, the very title of
Christians [Act 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014), [Act
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#021); [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002). "To serve Him with one consent,"
literally, "with one shoulder," evenly, steadfastly, "not unequally
yoked," but all with united strength, bearing Christ's "easy yoke" and
"one another's burdens, fulfilling the law of Christ." This is purity of
life. The fruit of the lips is the "sacrifice of praise" [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015).

God gave back one pure language, when, on the Day of Pentecost, the Holy
Spirit, the Author of purity, came down in fiery tongues upon the
Apostles, teaching them and guiding them "into the whole truth" [Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013), and to "speak to every one in
his own tongue, wherein he was born, the wonderful works of God" [Act
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#008), [Act
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#011). Thenceforth there was to be a
higher unity than that of outward language. For speech is not the outer
sound, but the thoughts which it conveys and embodies. The inward
thought is the soul of the words. The outward confusion of Babel was to
hinder oneness in evil and a worse confusion. At Pentecost, the unity
restored was oneness of soul and heart, wrought by One Spirit, whose
gift is the one Faith and the one Hope of our calling, in the One Lord,
in whom we are one, grafted into the one body, by our baptism [Eph
4:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003). The Church, then created, is
the One Holy Universal Church diffused throughout all the world,
everywhere with one rule of Faith, "the Faith once for all delivered
unto the saints," confessing one God, the Trinity in Unity, and serving
Him in the one law of the Gospel with one consent.

Christians, as Christians, speak the same language of Faith, and from
all quarters of the world, one language of praise goes up to the One God
and Father of all. : "God divided the tongues at Babel, lest,
understanding one another, they should form a destructive unity. Through
proud men tongues were divided; through humble Apostles tongues were
gathered in one. The spirit of pride dispersed tongues; the Holy Spirit
gathered tongues in one. For when the Holy Spirit came upon the
disciples, they spake with the tongues of all, were understood by all;
the dispersed tongues were gathered into one. So then, if they are yet
angry and Gentiles, it is better for them to have their tongues divided.
If they wish for one tongue, let them come to the Church, for in
diversity of the tongues of the flesh, there is one tongue in the Faith
of the heart." In whatever degree the oneness is impaired within the
Church, while there is yet one faith of the creeds, He alone can restore
it and 'turn to her a purified language,' who first gave it to those who
waited for Him. Both praise and service are perfected above, where the
Blessed, with one loud voice, 'shall cry, Salvation to our God which
sitteth upon the Throne and unto the Lamb; blessing and glory and wisdom
and thanksgiving and honor and power and might be unto our God forever
and ever' [Rev 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#010), [Rev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012). And they who 'have come out of
great tribulation and have washed their robes and made them white in the
Blood of the Lamb," shall be 'before the Throne of God and serve Him day
and night in His Temple' [Rev
7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)."

[Zephaniah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zep 3:10</span></span>

From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia - (See [Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001).) The farthest southern people,
with whom the Jews had contact, stand as the type of the whole world
beyond. The utmost bound of the known inhabited land should not be the
bound of the Gospel. The conversion of Abyssinia is one, but the
narrowest fulfillment of the prophecy. The whole new world, though not
in the mind of the prophet, was in the mind of Him who spake by the
prophet.

My suppliants - He names them as what they shall be when they shall come
to Him. They shall come, as needy, to the Fountain of all good, asking
for mercy of the unfailing Source of all mercy. He describes the very
character of all who come to God through Christ. "The daughter of My
dispersed." God is, in the way of Providence, the Father of all,
although, by sin, alienated from Him; from where Paul says, "we are the
offspring of God" [Act 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028). They
were "dispersed," severed from the oneness in Him and from His house and
family; yet still, looking on them as already belonging to Him, He calls
them, "My dispersed," as by Caiaphas, being high priest, He prophesied
that "Jesus should die for that nation; and not for that nation only,
but that also He should gather together in one the children of God that
were scattered abroad" [Joh 11:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051).

Shall bring Mine offering - o The offering is the same as that which
Malachi prophesies shall continue under the New Testament, which
offering was to be offered to the Name of God, not in Jerusalem, but
[Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011) "in every place from the
rising of the sun unto the going down of the same." The dark skin of the
Ethiopian is the image of ingrained sin, which man could not efface or
change [Jer 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023) : their conversion
then declares how those steeped in sin shall be cleansed from all their
darkness of mind, and washed white from their sins in Baptism and
beautified by the grace of God. Cyril: "The word of prophecy endeth in
truth. For not only through the Roman empire is the Gospel preached, but
it circles round the barbarous nations. And there are Churches
everywhere, shepherds and teachers, guides and instructors in mysteries,
and sacred altars, and the Lamb is invisibly sacrificed by holy priests
among Indians too and Ethiopians. And this was said plainly by another
prophet also, 'For I am a great King, saith the Lord, and My Name is
great among the pagan, and in every place incense is offered to My Name
and a pure sacrifice' [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)."

[Zephaniah 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zep 3:11</span></span>

In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings - Because God,
forgiving them, will blot them out and no more remember them. This was
first fulfilled in the Gospel. Cyril: "No one can doubt that when Christ
came in the flesh, there was an amnesty and remission to all who
believed. 'For we are justified not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to His great mercy.' But we have been released
from shame. For 'He' hath restored us to freedom of access to God, Who
for our sakes arose from the dead, and for us ascended to heaven in the
presence of the Father. 'For Christ, our Forerunner, hath ascended for
us now to appear in the presence of God.' So then He took away the guilt
of all and freed believers from failures and shame." Peter, even in
heaven, must remember his denial of our Lord, yet not so as to be
ashamed or pained anymore, since the exceeding love of God will remove
all shame or pain.

Rup.: "Mighty promise, mighty consolation. Now, before that Day comes,
the Day of My Resurrection, thou wilt be ashamed and not without reason,
since thou ownest by a true confession, 'all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags' [Isa 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006). But at that
Day it will not be so, especially when that shall be which I promise
thee in the prophets and the Psalms, 'There shall be a Fountain opened
for sin and for uncleanness' [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001); whence David also, exulting in
good hope of the Holy Spirit, saith, 'Thou shalt wash me and I shall be
whiter than snow' [Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007). For
though he elsewhere saith, 'they looked unto Him and were lightened, and
their faces were not ashamed' [Psa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005), yet in this mortal life, when
the Day of My Resurrection doth not fully shine upon thee, thou art
after some sort ashamed; as it is written, 'What fruit had ye then in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed?' [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021), but that shame will bring glory,
and, when that glory cometh in its place, will wholly pass away. But
when the fullness of that day shall come, the fullness of My
Resurrection, when the members shall rise, as the Head hath risen, will
the memory of past foulness bring any confusion? Yea the very memory of
the miseries will be the richest subject of singing, according to that,
'My song shall be alway of the loving-kindness of the Lord' [Psa
89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)." For how shall the redeemed
forget the mercies of their redemption, or yet how feel a painful shame
even of the very miseries, out of which they were redeemed by the
fullness of the overstreaming Love of God?

For then will I take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in
thy pride - (Those of thee who exult in pride.) All confusion shall
(cease, because all pride shall cease, the parent of sin and confusion.
The very gift of God becomes to the carnal a source of pride. Pride was
to the Jew also the great hindrance to the reception of the Gospel. He
made his "boast of the law," yea, in God Himself, that he "knew His
will," and was a "guide of others" [Rom
2:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017), [Rom
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023), and so was the more indignant,
that the pagan was made equal to him, and that he too was called to
repentance and faith in Christ. So, "going about to establish his own
righteousness, he did not submit himself to the righteousness of God,"
but shut himself out from the faith and grace and salvation of Christ,
and rejected Himself. So (Rup.), "thy pride" may be the pride in being
the people of God, and having Abraham for their father. "And thou shalt
no more be haughty in My holy mountain," "but thou shalt stand in the
great and everlasting abiding-place of humility, knowing perfectly, that
thou now 'knowest in part' only, and confessest truly that no one ever
could or can by his own works be justified in the sight of God. 'For all
have sinned and come short of the glory of God' [Rom
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)." Pride which is ever offensive
to God, is yet more hideous in a holy place or a holy office, "in" Mount
Sion where the temple was or in the Christian priesthood.

[Zephaniah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 3:12</span></span>

I will also leave - (Over, as a remnant, it is still the same heavy
prophecy, that a remnant only 'shall be saved') "an afflicted and poor
people." priests, (except that 'great company who were obedient to the
faith') [Act 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007), scribes, lawyers,
Pharisees, Sadducees were taken away; and there remained "the people of
the land" , the "unlearned and ignorant" [Act
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013), "the weak things of the world
and the things despised" [Co1 1:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)
who bore the very title of their Master, "the poor and needy; poor in
Spirit" [Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001); poor also in
outward things, since "they who had lands, sold them and they had all
things common" [Act 2:44-45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044); [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032), [Act
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035). They were afflicted above
measure outwardly in the ([Act 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001);
[Act 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002), [Act
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013); [Act
12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001); [Act
13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050); [Act
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005), [Act
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022); 22; etc. [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017), [Rom
8:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035); [Rom
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014); [Co1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019); [Co2
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008); [Co2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010); [Th2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004); [Ti2
3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#011); [Heb
10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032); [Jam
2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006); [Pe1
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006); [Pe1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013); [Rev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009); [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009) etc.) persecutions, "reproaches,
spoiling of" their "goods," stripes, deaths, which they endured for
Christ's sake.

They knew too their own poverty, Rup: "knowing themselves to be sinners,
and that they were justified only by faith in Jesus Christ." When the
rest were cast out "of the midst of her," these should be left "in the
midst of her" (the words stand in contrast with one another) in the
bosom of the Church. "And they shall trust in the name of the Lord." "As
they looked to be justified only in the Name of Christ," and (Dionysius)
"trusted in the grace and power of God alone, not in any power or wisdom
or eloquence or riches of this world, they converted the world to a
faith above nature." Cyril: "Conformed in this too to Christ. Who for
our sakes became poor and almost neglected both His divine glory and the
supereminence of His nature, to subject Himself to the condition of a
servant. So then those instructed in His laws after His example, think
humbly of themselves, They became most exceedingly loved of God, and
chiefly the divine disciples, who were set as lights of the world."

[Zephaniah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zep 3:13</span></span>

The remnant of Israel - The same poor people, the "true Israel" of whom
God said, "I leave over" (the word is the same) "a poor people," few,
compared with the rest who were blinded; of whom the Lord said, "I know
whom I have chosen" [Joh 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018). These
"shall not do iniquity nor speak lies." Cyril: "This is a spiritual
adorning, a most beautiful coronet of glorious virtues. For where
meekness and humility are and the desire of righteousness, and the
tongue unlearns vain words and sinful speech, and is the instrument of
strict truth, there dawns a bright and most perfect virtue. And this
beseems those who are in Christ. For the beauty of piety is not seen in
the Law, but gleams forth in the power of Evangelic teachings."

Our Lord said of Nathanael, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile" [Joh 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047), and to the Apostles,
"I send you forth as sheep among wolves; be ye therefore wise as
serpents and harmless as doves" [Mat
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016); and of the first Christians it
is said, "they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and
breaking bread from house to house did eat their merit with gladness and
singleness of heart, praising God and having favor with all the people"
[Act 2:46-47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046). This is the character of
Christians, as such, and it was at first fulfilled; "whosoever is born
of God, doth not commit sin" [Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009);
"whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God
keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not" [Jo1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018). An Apologist, at the close of
the second century, could appeal to the Roman Emperor , that no
Christian was found among their criminals, "unless it be only as a
Christian, or, if he be anything else, he is immediately no longer a
Christian. We alone then are innocent! What wonder if this be so, of
necessity? And truly of necessity it is so. Taught innocence by God, we
both know it perfectly, as being revealed by a perfect Master; and we
keep it faithfully, as being committed to us by an Observer, Who may not
be despised." : "Being so vast a multitude of men, almost the greater
portion of every state, we live silently and modestly, known perhaps
more as individuals than as a body, and to be known by no other sign
than the reformation of our former sins."

Now in the Church, which "our earth dimm'd eyes behold," we can but say,
as in regard to the cessation of war under the Gospel, that God's
promises are sure on His part, that still "they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts," that the Gospel is
"a power of God unto salvation" [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), that "the preaching of the Cross
is, unto us which are saved, the power of God" [Co1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018); "unto them that are called,
Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God" [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024); that those who will, "are kept
by God through faith unto salvation" [Pe1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005); but that now too "they are not
all Israel, which are of Israel" [Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006), and that "the faithlessness of
man does not make the faith of God of none effect" [Rom
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003). : "The Church of God is
universally holy in respect of all, by institutions and administrations
of sanctity; the same Church is really holy in this world, in relation
to all godly persons contained in it, by a real infused sanctity; the
same is farther yet at the same time perfectly holy in reference to the
saints departed and admitted to the presence of God; and the same Church
shall hereafter be most completely holy in the world to come, when all
the members, actually belonging to it, shall be at once perfected in
holiness and completed in happiness."

Most fully shall this be fulfilled in the Resurrection. Rup.: "O blessed
day of the Resurrection, in whose fullness no one will sin in word or
deed! O great and blessed reward to every soul, which, although it hath
now "done iniquity" and "spoken falsehood," yet willeth not to do it
further! Great and blessed reward, that he shall now receive such.
immovableness, as no longer to be able to do iniquity or speak
falsehood, since the blessed soul, through the Spirit of everlasting
love inseparably united with God its Creator, shall now no more be
capable of an evil will!"

For they shall feed - On the hidden manna, Dionysius: "nourished most
delicately by the Holy Spirit with inward delights, and spiritual food,
the bread of life." In the things of the body too was "distribution made
unto every man according as he had need" [Act
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035). "And they shall lie down" in the
green pastures where He foldeth them; "and none shall make them afraid"
[Pe1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005), "for they were ready to
suffer and to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus" [Act
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013). "They departed from the
presence of the council rejoicing that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame for His Name" [Act 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041).
Before the Resurrection and the sending of the Holy Spirit, how great
was the fearfulness, unsteadfastness, weakness of the disciples; how
great, after the infusion of the Holy Spirit, was their constancy and
imperturbableness, it is delightsome to estimate in their Acts," when
they "bare His Name before the Gentiles and kings, and the children of
Israel" [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015), and he who had been
afraid of a little maid, said to the high priest, "We ought to obey God
rather than men" [Act 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029). Cyril:
"When Christ the Good Shepherd Who laid down His life for His sheep,
shone upon us, we are fed in gardens and pastured among lilies, and lie
down in folds; for we are folded in Churches and holy shrines, no one
scaring or spoiling us, no wolf assailing nor lion trampling on us, no
robber breaking through, no one invading us, to steal and kill and
destroy; but we abide in safety and participation of every good, being
in charge of Christ the Saviour of all."

[Zephaniah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 3:14</span></span>

Sing, O daughter of Sion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all
the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem - Very remarkable throughout all
these verses is the use of the sacred number three, secretly conveying
to the thoughtful soul the thought of Him, Father Son and Holy Spirit,
the Holy and Undivided Trinity by whose operation these things shall be.
Threefold is the description of their being freed from sins:

\(1\) they shall "not do iniquity,"

\(2\) "nor speak lies,"

\(3\) "neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth."

Threefold their blessedness; They shall:

\(1\) "feed,"

\(2\) "lie down,"

\(3\) "none make them afraid."

Threefold the exhortation to joy here. (Rup.): "Sing to God the Father;
'shout' to God the Son; 'be glad and rejoice' in God the Holy Spirit,
which Holy Trinity is One God, from whom thou hast received it that thou
art:

\(1\) 'the daughter of Zion'

\(2\) 'Israel'

\(3\) 'the daughter of Jerusalem'

'The daughter of Zion' by faith, 'Israel' by hope, 'Jerusalem' by
charity." And this hidden teaching of that holy mystery is continued;
"The Lord," God the Father, "hath taken away thy judgments; He God" the
Son, "hath cast out (cleared quite away) thine enemy; the king of
Israel, the Lord," the Holy Spirit, "is in the midst of thee!" [Zep
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015). The promise is threefold:

\(1\) "thou shalt not see evil anymore"

\(2\) "fear thou not"

\(3\) "let not thine hands be slack"

The love of God is threefold:

\(1\) "He will rejoice over thee with joy"

\(2\) "He will rest in His love"

\(3\) "He will joy over thee with singing"

Again the words in these four verses are so framed as to be "ful"-
filled in the end. All in this life are but shadows of that fullness.
First, whether the Church or the faithful soul, she is summoned by all
her names, "daughter of Zion" ("the thirsty" athirst for God) "Israel"
("Prince with God") "Jerusalem" ("City of Peace"). By all she is called
to the fullest joy in God with every expression and every feeling.
"Sing;" it is the inarticulate, thrilling, trembling burst of joy;
"shout;" again the inarticulate yet louder swell of joy, a
trumpet-blast; and then too, deep within, "be glad," the calm even joy
of the inward soul; "exult," the triumph of the soul which cannot
contain itself for joy; and this, "with the whole heart," no corner of
it not pervaded with joy. The ground of this is the complete removal of
every evil, and the full presence of God.

[Zephaniah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zep 3:15</span></span>

The Lord hath taken away thy judgments - Her own, because brought upon
her by her sins. But when God takes away the chastisements in mercy, He
removes and forgives the sin too. Else, to remove "the judgments" only,
would be to abandon the sinner. "He hath cast out," literally, "cleared
quite away" , as a man clears away all hindrances, all which stands in
the way, so that there should be none whatever left - "thine enemy;" the
one enemy, from whom every hindrance to our salvation comes, as He
saith, "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out. The King of
Israel, even the Lord" [Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031),
Christ the Lord, "is in the midst of thee," of whom it is said, "He that
sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them" [Rev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015), and who Himself saith, "Lo I am
with you always unto the end of the world" [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). "Where two or three are
gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of you" [Mat
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020).

He who had removed "from the midst of her" the proud, Who had left "in
the midst of her" those with whom He dwelleth, shall Himself dwell "in
the midst of her" in mercy, as He had before in judgment [Mat
18:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011), [Mat
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015), [Mat
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#005). He cleanseth the soul for His
indwelling, and so dwelleth in the mansion which He had prepared for
Himself. "Thou shalt not see evil anymore." For even the remains of
evil, while we are yet in the flesh, are overruled, and "work together
to good to those who love God" [Rom
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028). They cannot separate between the
soul and Christ. Rather, He is nearer to her in them. We are bidden to
"count it all joy when we fall into divers temptations" [Jam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002), for all sorrows are but medicine
from a father's hand. : "And truly our way to eternal joy is to suffer
here with Christ, and our door to enter into eternal life is gladly to
die with Christ, that we may rise again from death and dwell with Him in
everlasting life."

So in the Revelation, it is first said that God should dwell with His
people, and then that all pain shall cease. "Behold the tabernacle of
God is with men, and He will dwell with them and be their God. And God
shall wipe all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be anymore pain, for the
former things are passed away" [Rev
21:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003). Cyril: "In the inmost meaning
of the words, he could not but bid her rejoice and be exceeding glad and
rejoice with her whole heart, her sins being done away through Christ.
For the holy and spiritual Zion, the Church, the multitude of believers,
is justified in Christ alone, and we are saved by Him and from Him,
escaping the harms of our invisible enemies, and having in the midst of
us the King and God of all, Who appeared in our likeness, the Word from
God the Father, through whom we see not evil, that is, are freed from
all who could do us evil. For He is the worker of our acceptableness,
our peace, our wall, the bestower of incorruption, the dispenser of
crowns, Who lighteneth the assaults of devils, Who giveth us to 'tread
on serpents and scorpions and all the power of the enemy' [Luk
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019) - through whom we are in good
hope of immortality and life, adoption and glory, through whom we shall
not see evil anymore."

[Zephaniah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zep 3:16</span></span>

In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not - For "perfect
love casteth out fear" [Joh 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#018); from
where he saith, "Fear not, little flock; it is your Father's good
pleasure to give you the kingdom" [Luk
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032). Who then and what should the
Church or the faithful soul fear, since "mightier is He that is in her,
than he that is in the world? And to Zion, Let not thine hands be
slack," through faint-heartedness (see [Heb
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012)), but work with all thy might;
be ready to do or bear anything; since Christ worketh with, in, by thee,
and "in due time we shall reap, if we faint not" [Gal
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009).

[Zephaniah 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zep 3:17</span></span>

The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; He will save - What can
He then not do for thee, since He is Almighty? What will He not do for
thee, since "He will save?" whom then should we fear? "If God be for us,
who can be against us?" [Rom 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031). But
then was He especially "in the midst of" us, when God "the Word became
flesh and dwelt among us; and we beheld His Glory, the Glory as of the
Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and Truth" [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). Thenceforth He ever is in the
midst of His own. He with the Father and the Holy Spirit "come unto them
and make Their abode with them" [Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023), so that they are "the temple of
God. He will save," as He saith, "My Father is greater than all, and no
man is able to pluck them out of My Father's hand. I and My Father are
One" [Joh 10:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029). Of the same time
of the Christ, Isaiah saith almost in the same words; "Strengthen ye the
weak hands and confirm the feeble knees, Say to them that are of a
feeble heart, Be strong, fear not, behold your God will come, He will
come and save you" [Isa 35:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003); and of
the Holy Trinity, "He will save us" [Isa
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022).

He will rejoice, over thee with joy - Love, joy, peace in man are
shadows of that which is in God, by whom they are created in man. Only
in God they exist undivided, uncreated. Hence, God speaks after the
manner of men, of that which truly is in God. God joyeth "with an
uncreated joy" over the works of His Hands or the objects of His Love,
as man joyeth over the object of "his" love. So Isaiah saith, "As the
bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee"
[Isa 62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005). As with uncreated love the
Father resteth in good pleasure in His well-beloved Son, so "God is
well-pleased with the sacrifices of loving deeds" [Heb
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016). and, "the Lord delighteth in
thee" [Isa 62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004); and, "I will rejoice
in Jerusalem and joy in My people" [Isa
65:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#019); and, "the Lord will again
rejoice over thee for good" [Deu 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009).
And so in a two-fold way God meeteth the longing of the heart of man.

The soul, until it hath found God, is evermore seeking some love to fill
it, and can find none, since the love of God Alone can content it. Then
too it longeth to be loved, even as it loveth. God tells it, that every
feeling and expression of human love may be found in Him, whom if any
love, he only "loveth Him, because He first loved us" [Jo1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019). Every inward and outward
expression or token of love are heaped together, to express the love of
Him who broodeth and as it were yearneth "over" (it is twice repeated)
His own whom He loveth. Then too He loveth thee as He biddeth thee to
love Him; and since the love of man cannot be like the love of the
Infinite God, He here pictures His own love in the words of man's love,
to convey to his soul the oneness wherewith love unites her unto God. He
here echoes in a manner the joy of the Church, to which He had called
her [Jo1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014), in words the self-same
or meaning the same.

We have "joy" here for "joy" there; "singing" or the unuttered
unutterable jubilee of the heart, which cannot utter in words its joy
and love, and joys and loves the more in its inmost depths because it
cannot utter it. A shadow of the unutterable, because Infinite Love of
God, and this repeated thrice; as being the eternal love of the
Everblessed Trinity. This love and joy the prophet speaks of, as an
exuberant joy, one which boundeth within the inmost self, and again is
wholly "silent in His love," as the deepest, tenderest, most yearning
love broods over the object of its love, yet is held still in silence by
the very depth of its love; and then, again, breaks forth in outward
motion, and leaps for joy, and uttereth what it cannot form in words,
for truly the love of God in its unspeakable love and joy is past
belief, past utterance, past thought. Rup.: "Truly that joy wherewith
'He will be silent in His love,' that exultation wherewith 'He will joy
over thee with singing, 'Eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither hath
it entered into the heart of man' [Co1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)."

The Hebrew word also contains the meaning, "He in His love shall make no
mention of past sins, He shall not bring them up against thee, shall not
upbraid thee, yea, shall not remember them" [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034); [Jer
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#008); [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018). It also may express the still,
unvarying love of the Unchangeable God. And again trow the very silence
of God, when He seemeth not to hear, as He did not seem to hear Paul, is
a very fruit of His love. Yet that entire forgiveness of sins, and that
seeming absence are but ways of showing His love. Hence, God speaks of
His very love itself, "He will be silent in His love," as, before and
after, "He will rejoice, He will joy over thee."

In the next few verses [Zep 3:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018)
still continuing the number "three," the prophecy closes with the final
reversal of all which, in this imperfect state of things, seems turned
upside down, when those who now mourn shall be comforted, they who now
bear reproach and shame shall have glory, and those who now afflict the
people of God shall be undone.

[Zephaniah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zep 3:18</span></span>

I will gather them that are sorrowful - for the solemn assembly, in
which they were to "rejoice" [Lev
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#040); [Deu
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#012), [Deu
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018); [Deu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011); [Deu
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#007) before God and which in their
captivity God made to cease. "They were of thee" [Lam
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004); [Lam
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#006), the true Israel who were "grieved
for the affliction of Joseph; to whom the reproach of it was a burden"
[Amo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006) (rather , 'on whom reproach
was laid'): for this "reproach of Christ is greater riches than the
treasures of Egypt," and such shall inherit the blessing, "Blessed are
ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their
company, and shall reproach you and east out your name as evil, for the
Son of Man's sake; rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for, behold
your reward is great in heaven" [Luk
6:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022).

[Zephaniah 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">zep 3:19</span></span>

Behold, at that time I will undo - (Literally, I deal with . While God
punisheth not, He seemeth to sit still [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004), be silent [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013), asleep [Psa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023). Then He shall act, He shall
"deal" according to their deserts with "all," evil men or devils, "that
afflict thee," His Church. The prophecy looked for a larger fulfillment
than the destruction of Jerusalem, since the Romans who, in God's Hands,
avenged the blood of His saints, themselves were among those who
"afflicted her." "And will save her," the flock or sheep "that halteth"
(see [Mic 4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006)), Dionysius:
"imperfect in virtue and with trembling faith," "and gather," like a
good and tender shepherd, "her that was driven out" (see [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)); scattered and dispersed
through persecutions. All infirmities within shall be healed; all
troubles without, removed.

And I will get them praise and fame - (Literally, I will make them a
praise and a name) "in every land where they have been put to shame." .
Throughout the whole world have they been "the offscourings of all
things" [Co1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013); throughout the
whole world should their praise be, as it is said, "Thou shalt make them
princes in all lands" [Psa 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016). One
of themselves saith, "Ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called.
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty; and base things of this world, and things which
are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring
to nought things that are" [Co1
1:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026). Rup.: "These He maketh a
praise and a name there, where they were without name and dispraised,
confounding by them and bringing to nought those wise and strong and
mighty, in whose sight they were contemptible."

[Zephaniah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">zep 3:20</span></span>

At that time will I bring you in - that is, into the one fold, the one
Church, the one "Household of God, even in the time that I gather you."
"That time" is the whole time of the Gospel; the one "day of salvation,"
in which all who shall ever be gathered, shall be brought into the new
Jerusalem. These words were fulfilled, when, at our Lord's first Coming,
the remnant, the true Israel, those "ordained to eternal life" were
brought in. It shall be fulfilled again, when "the fullness of the
Gentiles shall be "come in," and so all Israel shall be saved" [Rom
11:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025). It shall most perfectly be
fulfilled at the end, when there shall be no going out of those once
"brought" in, and those who have gathered others into the Church, shall
be "a name and a praise among all people of the earth," those whom God
hath "redeemed out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation" [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009), shining like stars forever and
ever.

When I turn back your captivity - Rup.: "That conversion, then begun,
now perfected, when the dead shall rise and they shall be placed on the
right hand, soon to receive the kingdom prepared for them from the
foundation of the world. O mighty spectacle of the reversed captivity of
those once captives; mighty wonder at their present blessedness, as they
review the misery of their past captivity!" "Before your eyes," so that
we shall see what we now believe and hope for, the end of all our
sufferings, chastisements, losses, achings of the heart, the fullness of
our Redemption. That which our eyes have looked for, "our eyes shall
behold and not another," the everliving God as He is, face to Face;
"saith the Lord," Who is the Truth Itself, all Whose words will be
fulfilled. "heaven and earth shall pass away, but My Words shall not
pass away" [Mar 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#031), saith He who is
"God blessed forever." And so the prophet closes in the thought of Him,
Whose Name is I am, the Unchangeable, the everlasting Rest and Center of
those who, having been once captives and halting and scattered among the
vanities of the world, turn to Him, to whom be glory and thanksgiving
forever and ever. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Introduction](hag000)

</div>
