[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09008)  [Next](cc09010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>PSALM 44

<span id="x-p2"></span>This psalm is divided into three principal parts.
In the beginning of it the faithful record the infinite mercy of God
towards his people, and the many tokens by which he had testified his
fatherly love towards them. Then they complain that they do not now find
that God is favorable towards them, as he had formerly been towards
their fathers. In the third place, they refer to the covenant which God
had made with Abraham, and declare that they have kept it with all
faithfulness, notwithstanding the sore afflictions to which they had
been subjected. At the same time, they complain that they are cruelly
persecuted for no other cause but for having continued steadfastly in
the pure worship of God. In the end, a prayer is added, that God would
not forget the wrongful oppression of his servants, which especially
tends to bring dishonor and reproach upon religion.

<span id="x-p3"></span>To the chief musician of the sons of Korah,
giving instruction.

<span id="x-p4"></span>It is uncertain who was the author of this psalm;
but it is clearly manifest that it was composed rather by any other
person than by David. The complaints and lamentations which it contains
may be appropriately referred to that miserable and calamitous period in
which the outrageous tyranny of Antiochus destroyed and wasted every
thing.  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) Some, indeed, may be
disposed to apply it more generally; for after the return of the Jews
from the captivity of Babylon, they were scarcely ever free from severe
afflictions. Such a view, doubtless, would not be applicable to the time
of David, under whose reign the Church enjoyed prosperity, It may be,
too, that during the time of their captivity in Babylon, some one of the
prophets composed this complaint in name of all the people. It is,
however, at the same time to be observed, that the state of the Church,
such as it was to be after the appearance of Christ, is here described.
Paul, in <span id="x-p5.2"></span>[Ro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)<span id="x-p5.2"></span>, as we
shall afterwards see in its proper place, did not understand this psalm
as a description of the state of the Church in one age only, but he
warns us, that Christians are appointed to the same afflictions, and
should not expect that their condition on earth, even to the end of the
world, will be different from what God has made known to us, as it were
by way of example, in the case of the Jews after their return from
captivity. Christ, it is true, afterwards appeared as the Redeemer of
the Church. He did not however appear, that the flesh should luxuriate
in ease upon the earth, but rather that we should wage war under the
banner of the cross, until we are received into the rest of the heavenly
kingdom. As to the meaning of the word <span id="x-p5.3"></span>משכיל,
*maskil,* it has been already elsewhere explained. It is sometimes found
in the inscription of psalms whose subject is cheerful; but it is more
commonly used when the subject treated of is distressing; for it is a
singular means of leading us to profit by the instruction of the Lord,
when, by subduing the obduracy of our hearts, he brings us under his
yoke.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
44:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1**. O God! we have heard with our ears, our
fathers have declared to us, the work which thou hast done in their
days, even in the days of old. **2**. Thou hast expelled the heathen
\[or nations  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) \] with thy hand,
and planted them  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) thou hast
wasted the peoples  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) and
multiplied them, \[or made them  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)
to spread.\] **3**. For they got not possession of the land by their own
sword, and their own arm did not save them, but thy right hand, and thy
arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favor for
them.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p8"></span><span id="x.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**1.** *O God! we have heard with our ears.*
The people of God here recount the goodness which he had formerly
manifested towards their fathers, that, by showing the great
dissimilarity of their own condition, they may induce God to alleviate
their miseries. They begin by declaring that they speak not of things
unknown or doubtful, but that they related events, the truth of which
was authenticated by unexceptionable witnesses. The expression, *We have
heard with our ears,* is not to be considered as a redundant form of
speech, but one of great weight. It is designed to point out that the
grace of God towards their fathers was so renowned, that no doubt could
be entertained respecting it. They add, that their knowledge of these
things was handed down from age to age by those who witnessed them. It
is not meant that their fathers, who had been brought up out of Egypt,
had, a thousand and five hundred years after, declared to their
posterity the benefits God had conferred upon them. The import of the
language is, that not only the first deliverance, but that also the
various other works which God had wrought from time to time in behalf of
his people, had come down, as it were, from hand to hand, in an
uninterrupted series, even to the latest age. As, therefore, those who,
after the lapse of many ages, became witnesses and heralds of the grace
which God had exercised towards this people, spake upon the report of
the first generation, the faithful are warranted in saying, as they here
do, that their fathers have declared to them that which they certainly
knew, because the knowledge of it had not been lost by reason of its
antiquity, but was continually preserved by the remembrance of it from
the fathers to the children. The sum of the whole is, that God had
manifested his goodness towards the children of Abraham, not only for
ten or twenty years, but that ever since he had received them into his
favor, he had never ceased to bestow upon them continued tokens of his
grace.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span><span id="x.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**2.** *Thou hast expelled the heathen with
thy hand.* This is an illustration of the preceding verse: for the
inspired writer had not yet expressly referred to that work of God, the
fame of which had been preserved by their fathers. He therefore now
adds, that God *with his own hand expelled the heathen,* in order *to
plant* in their room the children of Abraham: and that *he wasted and
destroyed them, that he might increase and multiply* the seed of
Abraham. He compares the ancient inhabitants of the land of Canaan to
trees; for, from long continued possession of the country, they had, as
it were, taken root in it. The sudden change, therefore, which had
happened to them, was as if a man plucked up trees by the roots to plant
others in their stead. But as it would not have been enough for God’s
ancient people to have been planted at first in the country, another
metaphor is here added, by which the faithful testify that the blessing
of God had caused this chosen people to increase and multiply, even as a
tree, extending it roots and its branches far and wide, gains still
greater strength in the place where it has been planted. Besides, it is
necessary to observe for what purpose it is that the faithful here
magnify this manifestation of the grace of God. It often happens that
our own hearts suggest to us grounds of despair, when we begin to
conclude that God has rejected us, because he does not continue to
bestow upon us the same benefits which in his goodness he vouchsafed to
our fathers. But it were altogether inconsistent, that the faithful here
disposing their hearts for prayer, should allow such an obstacle to
prevent them from exercising the confidence which is proper in prayer. I
freely admit, that the more we think of the benefits which God has
bestowed upon others, the greater is the grief which we experience when
he does not relieve us in our adversities. But faith directs us to
another conclusion, namely, that we should assuredly believe that we
shall also in due time experience some relief, since God continues
unchangeably the same. There can be no reason to doubt, that the
faithful now call to remembrance the things which God had formerly done
for the welfare of his Church, with the view of inspiring their minds
with stronger hope, as we have seen them acting in a similar manner in
the beginning of the twenty-second psalm. They do not simply state the
comparison, which would tend to draw a line of separation between those
who have in former times been preserved by the power of God, and those
who now labored and groaned under afflictions; but they rather set forth
the covenant of God as the bond of holy alliance between them and their
fathers, that they might conclude from this, that whatever amount of
goodness the Church had at any time experienced in God pertained also to
them. At first, indeed, they use the language of complaint, asking why
it is that the course of God’s fatherly favor towards his people is, as
it were, interrupted; but straightway they correct their mistake, and
take courage from a new consideration — the consideration that God, who
had adopted them as well as their fathers, is faithful and immutable. It
is, however, no great wonder if the faithful, even in prayer, have in
their hearts divers and conflicting affections. But the Holy Spirit, who
dwells in them, by assuaging the violence of their sorrow, pacifies all
their complaints and leads them patiently and cordially to obey.
Moreover, when they here say that their fathers have declared to them
the deliverances which God had accomplished in behalf of his Church,
what the fathers did in this respect corresponds with the precept of the
law, by which the fathers were commanded to teach their children. And
all the faithful ought to reflect that the same charge is enjoined upon
them by God even to this day. He communicates to them the doctrine of
salvation, and commits it to their charge for this purpose — that they
may transmit it to their posterity, and, as much as in them lies,
endeavor to extend its authority, that his worship may be preserved from
age to age.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span><span id="x.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**3** *For they got not possession of the land
by their own sword.* Here the sacred writer confirms by contrast what he
has just said; for if they obtained not possession of the land by their
own power and skill, it follows that they were planted in it by the hand
of another. The multitude of men who went out of Egypt was very great;
but not being trained to the art of war, and accustomed only to servile
works, they would soon have been defeated by their enemies, who far
excelled them in numbers and strength. In short, there were not wanting
evident signs by which the people were made to know as well their own
weakness as the power of God; so that it was their bounden duty to
confess that the land was not conquered by their own sword, and also,
that it was the hand of God which had preserved them. The Psalmist, not
content with mentioning *thy right hand,* adds, *thy arm,* to amplify
the matter, and give greater weight to his discourse, that we may know
that they were preserved in a wonderful manner, and not by any ordinary
means. *The light of thy countenance* is here taken, as in other places,
for the manifestation of the divine favor. As, on the one hand, when God
is afflicting us severely, he seems to frown upon us, and to overshadow
his face with thick clouds; so, on the other, when the Israelites,
sustained by his power, overthrew their enemies without any great
difficulty, and pursued them in every direction far and near, it is
said, that then they beheld the face of God serene and placid, just as
if he had manifested himself in a visible manner near them. Here it is
necessary to observe the mode of reasoning which the prophet employs,
when he argues that it is by the free gift of God that the people
obtained the land in heritage, seeing they had not acquired it by their
own power. We then truly begin to yield to God what belongs to him, when
we consider how worthless our own strength is. And certainly, the reason
why men, as it were through disdain, conceal and forget the benefits
which God has conferred on them, must be owing to a delusive
imagination, which leads them to arrogate somewhat to themselves as
properly their own. The best means, therefore, of cherishing in us
habitually a spirit of gratitude towards God, is to expel from our minds
this foolish opinion of our own ability. There is still in the
concluding part of the verse another expression, which contains a more
illustrious testimony to the grace of God, when the Psalmist resolves
the whole into the good pleasure of God: *Thou hadst a favor for them.*
The prophet does not suppose any worthiness in the person of Abraham,
nor imagine any desert in his posterity, on account of which God dealt
so bountifully with them, but ascribes the whole to the good pleasure of
God. His words seem to be taken from the solemn declaration of Moses,

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>“The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor
choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; (for ye were
the fewest of all people;) but because the Lord loved you,” (<span
id="x.i-p14.1"></span>[Deut. 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>Special mention is here made of the land of
Canaan; but the prophet has stated the general principle why it was that
God vouchsafed to reckon that people for his flock and peculiar
heritage. And certainly, the source and origin of the Church is the free
love of God; and whatever benefits he bestows upon his Church, they all
proceed from the same source. The reason, therefore, why we are gathered
into the Church, and are nourished and defended by the hand of God, is
only to be sought in God. Nor does the Psalmist here treat of the
general benevolence of God, which extends to the whole human race; but
he discourses of the difference which exists between the elect and the
rest of the world; and the cause of this difference is here referred to
the mere good pleasure of God.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
44:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**4**. Thou, even thou, art my King,  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) O God! command \[or ordain\]
deliverances for Jacob. **5**. Through thee we have pushed \[or
smitten\] with the horn our adversaries: in thy name we have trampled
under foot those that rose u, against us. **6**. For I will not trust in
my bow, and my sword will not save me. **7**. Surely thou hast saved us
from our enemies, and hast put to shame those that hated us. **8**. In
God we will boast all the day, and confess thy name for ever. Selah.

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span><span id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span>**4.** *Thou, even thou, art my King, O God!*
In this verse the faithful express still more plainly what I have
already alluded to a little before, namely, that the goodness of God was
not only apparent in the deliverance of his people, but also flowed upon
them in continued succession from age to age; and therefore it is said,
*Thou, even thou, art my King* In my judgment, the demonstrative pronoun
<span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>הוא, *hu,* imports as much as if the prophet
had put together a long series of the benefits of God after the first
deliverance; so that it might appear, that God, who had once been the
deliverer of his people, did not show himself otherwise towards their
posterity: unless, perhaps, it might be considered as emphatic, and
employed for the purpose of asserting the thing stated the more
strongly, namely, that the faithful praise God alone as the guardian of
their welfare to the exclusion of all others, and the renunciation of
aid from any other quarter. Hence they also present the prayer, that God
would ordain and send forth new *deliverances* to his people; for, as he
has in his power innumerable means of preservation and deliverance, he
is said to appoint and send forth deliverances as his messengers
wherever it seems good to him.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span><span id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *Through thee we have pushed, or
smitten, with the horn our adversaries.*  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) The prophet here declares in what
respect God had manifested himself to be the King of this people. He did
so by investing them with such strength and power, that all their
enemies stood in fear of them. The similitude, taken from bulls, which
he here uses, tends to show, that they had been endued with more than
human strength, by which they were enabled to assail, overturn, and
trample under foot, every thing which opposed them. *In God,* and *in
the name of God,* are of the same import, only the latter expression
denotes, that the people had been victorious, because they fought under
the authority and direction of God. It ought to be observed, that what
they had spoken before concerning their fathers, they now apply to
themselves, because they still formed a part of the same body of the
Church.

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>And they do this expressly to inspire
themselves with confidence and courage, for had they separated
themselves from their fathers, this distinction would, in a certain
sense, have interrupted the course of God’s grace, so that it would have
ceased to flow down upon them. But now, since they confess that whatever
God had conferred upon their fathers he had bestowed upon them, they may
boldly desire him to continue his work. At the same time, it ought to be
observed again in this place, that, as I have stated a little before,
the reason why they ascribe their victories wholly to God is, that they
were unable to arrive at such a consummation by *their own sword or
their own bow.* When we are led to consider how great is our own
weakness, and how worthless we are without God, this contrast much more
clearly illustrates the grace of God. They again declare, (verse 7,)
that they were saved by the power of God, and that he also had chased
away and put to shame their enemies.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span><span id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span>**8.** *In God we will boast*  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) *all the day* This is the conclusion
of the first part of the psalm. To express the meaning in a few words,
they acknowledge, that in all ages the goodness of God had been so great
towards the children of Abraham, that it furnished them with continual
matter of thanksgiving. As if the thing were still present to their
view, they acknowledge that, without ceasing, they ought to give praise
to God, because they had flourished and triumphed, not merely for one
age, or a short period of time, but because they had continued to do so
successively from age to age,  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)
for whatever prosperity had befallen them, they ascribe it to the grace
of God. And, certainly, it is then that men experience from the
prosperity which befalls them, a holy and a well-regulated joy, when it
bursts forth in the praises of God.  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) Let us then, in the first place, bear
in mind that this verse relates to the time of joy and prosperity in
which God manifested his favor towards his people; secondly, that the
faithful here manifest that they are not ungrateful, inasmuch as, having
laid aside all vain boasting, they confess that all the victories by
which they had become great and renowned proceeded from God, and that it
was by his power alone that they had hitherto continued to exist, and
had been preserved in safety; and, thirdly, that it was not only once or
twice that matter of joy had been afforded them, but that this existed
for a long time, inasmuch as God had manifested towards them, during a
long and uninterrupted period, divers proofs and tokens of his paternal
favor, so that the continuance, and, so to speak, the long experience
they had had of it, ought to have been the means of confirming their
hope.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
44:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**9**. Nevertheless thou hast abhorred us,
 <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) and put us to shame: and thou
goest not forth with our armies. **10**. Thou hast made us to turn back
from the enemy: and they that hate us have made of us a spoil for
themselves. **11**. Thou hast given us as sheep for food: and thou hast
scattered us among the heathen. **12**. Thou hast sold thy people, and
not become rich,  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) and thou hast
not increased the price of them. **13**. Thou hast made us a reproach to
our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.
**14**. Thou hast made us a byword among the heathen, and a nodding of
the head among the people.

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span><span id="x.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>**9.** *Nevertheless thou hast abhorred us*
Here follows a complaint, in which they bewail their present miseries
and extreme calamity. There is here described such a change as showed
not only that God had ceased to exercise towards them his accustomed
favor, but also, that he was openly adverse and hostile to his people.
First, they complain that they have been rejected as through hatred, for
such is the proper import of the word <span id="x.iii-p7.1"></span>זנחת,
*zanachta,* which, along with others, I have translated *abhorred* If,
however, any would rather translate it *to forget,* or *to be cast off*,
I have no great objection to it. They next add, that they had been *put
to shame,* namely, because it must necessarily follow that every thing
should go ill with them when deprived of the protection of God. This
they declare immediately after, when they say, that God *no longer goes
forth with their armies* — goes forth as their leader or standard-bearer
when they go forth to war.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span><span id="x.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span>**10.** *Thou hast made us to turn back from
the enemy.* Here the people of God still further complain, that he had
made them to flee before their enemies, and had given them up as a prey
to be devoured by them. As the saints firmly believe that men are strong
and valiant only in so far as God upholds them by his secret power, they
also conclude, that when men flee, and are seized with trembling, it is
God who strikes them with terror, so that the poor wretched creatures
are deprived of reason, and both their skill and courage fail them. The
expression here used is taken from the Law, <span
id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>[De 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)<span
id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>, where Moses says,

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span>“How should one chase a thousand, and two
put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the
Lord had shut them up?”

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>The faithful, fully persuaded of this truth,
do not ascribe to fortune the change which had passed over them, that
those who were wont vigorously and fearlessly to assail their enemies,
were now terrified by their very appearance; but they feel assured that
it was by the appointment of heaven that they were thus discomfited, and
made to flee before their enemies. And as they formerly confessed that
the strength which they had hitherto possessed was the gift of God, so,
on the other hand, they also acknowledge that the fear by which they are
now actuated was inflicted upon them as a punishment by God. And when
God thus deprived them of courage, they say that they are exposed to the
will of their enemies; for in this sense I interpret the word <span
id="x.iii-p11.1"></span>למו, *lamo,* which I have rendered, *for
themselves,* namely, that their enemies destroyed them at their pleasure
and without any resistance, as their prey.

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span><span id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>To the same purpose is that other
comparison, (verse 11) in which they say that *they were given as sheep
for food*  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) By this the prophet
intimates, that being already vanquished previous to the battle, they
fell down, as it were, upon the earth before their enemies, ready to be
devoured by them,  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) and not fit
for any thing else than to gratify their insatiable cruelty. It ought to
be observed, that when the faithful represent God as the author of their
calamities, it is not in the way of murmuring against him, but that they
may with greater confidence seek relief, as it were, from the same hand
which smote and wounded them. It is certainly impossible that those who
impute their miseries to fortune can sincerely have recourse to God, or
look for help and salvation from him. If, therefore, we would expect a
remedy from God for our miseries, we must believe that they befall us
not by fortune or mere chance, but that they are inflicted upon us
properly by his hand. Having stated that they were thus abandoned to the
will of their enemies, they add, at the same time, that they were
*scattered among the heathen:* a dispersion which was a hundred times
more grievous to them than death. The whole glory and felicity of that
people consisted in this, that, being united under one God and one King,
they formed one body; and that such being the case, it was a sign that
the curse of God lay heavy upon them to be mingled among the heathen,
and scattered hither and thither like broken members.

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span><span id="x.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span>**12** *Thou hast sold thy people, and not
become rich.* In saying that they were sold without any gain, it is
meant that they were exposed to sale as slaves that are contemptible,
and of no value. In the second clause, too, *And hast not increased the
price of them,* there seems to be an allusion to the custom of exposing
things to auction, and selling them to the highest bidder. We know that
those slaves who were sold were not delivered to the buyers till the
price of them had been increased by bidding. Thus the faithful mean,
that they were cast out as being altogether worthless, so that their
condition had been worse than that of any bond-slave.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) And as they rather appeal to God than
turn to their enemies, of whose pride and cruelty they had just cause to
complain, let us learn from this, that there is nothing better, or more
advantageous for us in our adversity, than to give ourselves to
meditation upon the providence and judgment of God. When men trouble us,
it is no doubt the devil who drives them to it, and it is with him we
have to do; but we must, notwithstanding, raise our thoughts to God
himself, that we may know that we are proved and tried by him, either to
chastise us, or to exercise our patience, or to subdue the sinful
desires of our flesh, or to humble us and train us to the practice of
self-denial. And when we hear that the Fathers who lived under the Law
were treated so ignominiously, there is no reason why we should lose
courage by any outrage or ill treatment, if God should at any time see
meet to subject us to it. It is not here said simply that God sold some
people, but that he sold his own people, as if his own inheritance were
of no estimation in his sight. Even at this day, we may in our prayers
still make the same complaint, provided we, at the same time, make use
of this example, for the purpose of supporting and establishing our
faith, so that, however much afflicted we may be, our hearts may not
fail us. In <span id="x.iii-p18.1"></span>[Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003)<span id="x.iii-p18.1"></span>,
God, using the same form of speech, says that he sold his people without
price; but there it is to be understood in a different sense, namely, to
show that he will have no difficulty in redeeming them, because he is
under no obligation to those that bought them, and had received nothing
from them in return.

<span id="x.iii-p19"></span><span id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p20"></span>**13** *Thou hast made us a reproach to our
neighbors* Here the Psalmist speaks of their neighbors, who were all
actuated either by some secret ill-will, or avowed enmity to the people
of God. And certainly it often happens, that neighborhood, which ought
to be the means of preserving mutual friendship, engenders all discord
and strife. But there was a special reason in respect of the Jews; for
they had taken possession of the country in spite of all men, and their
religion being hateful to others, so to speak, served as a trumpet to
stir up war, and inflamed their neighbors with rage against them. Many,
too, cherished towards them a feeling of jealousy, such as the Idumeans,
who were inflated on the ground of their circumcision, and imagined that
they also worshipped the God of Abraham as well as the Jews. But what
proved the greatest calamity to them was, that they were exposed to the
reproach and derision of those who hated them on the ground of their
worship of the true God. The faithful illustrate still farther the
greatness of their calamity by another circumstance, telling us, in the
last clause of the verse, that they were met by reproaches on all sides;
for they were beset round about by their enemies, so that they would
never have enjoyed one moment of peace unless God had miraculously
preserved them. Nay, they add still farther, (verse 14,) that they were
a *proverb, a byword,* or *jest,* even among the nations that were far
off. The word <span id="x.iii-p20.1"></span>משל, *mashal,* which is
translated *proverb,* might be taken in the sense of a *heavy
imprecation* or *curse,* as well as of *a byword or jest;* but the sense
will be substantially the same, namely, that there were no people under
heaven held in greater detestation, insomuch that their very name was
bandied about every where in proverbial allusions, as a term of
reproach. To the same purpose also is *the wagging,* or *shaking of the
head,* which occurs in <span id="x.iii-p20.2"></span>[Ps
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#000)<span id="x.iii-p20.2"></span>, of
which we have already spoken. There can be no doubt that the faithful
recognised this as inflicted upon them by the vengeance of God, of which
mention was made in the Law. In order to arouse themselves to the
consideration of the judgments of God, they carefully compared with the
threatenings of God all the punishments which he inflicted upon them.
But the Law had declared beforehand, in express terms, this derision of
the Gentiles, which they now relate as a thing that had come to pass,
(<span id="x.iii-p20.3"></span>[De
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003)<span id="x.iii-p20.3"></span>.)
Moreover, when it is said, *among the heathen,* and *among the people,*
the repetition is very emphatic and expressive; for it was a thing quite
unseemly and intolerable, that the heathen nations should presume to
torment with their scoffings the chosen people of God, and revile them
by their blasphemies at their pleasure. That the godly complained not of
these things without cause is abundantly obvious from a passage in
Cicero, in his oration in defense of Flaccus, in which that heathen
orator, with his accustomed pride, scoffs no less against God than
against the Jews, asserting that it was perfectly clear that they were a
nation hated of the gods, inasmuch as they had often, and, as it were,
from age to age, been wasted with so many misfortunes, and in the end
subjected to a most miserable bondage, and kept, as it were, under the
feet of the Romans.  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143)

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
44:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**15**. My reproach is daily  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) before me, and the shame of my face
hath quite covered me, **16**. Because of the voice of him who
reproached me; because of the face of the enemy and the avenger. **17**.
All this has come upon us, and we have not forgotten thee, nor dealt
falsely in thy covenant: **18**. Our heart has not turned back, nor have
our steps declined from thy path. **19**. Although thou hast wasted us
in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death:
**20**. If we have forgotten the name of our God, and have stretched out
our hands to a strange god: **21**. Shall not God search this out? for
he knoweth the secrets of the heart.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span><span id="x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>**15** *My reproach is daily before me.* The
Hebrew words <span id="x.iv-p6.1"></span>כלהיום, *col-hayom,* mean all
the day, and denote long continuance: but they may be understood in two
ways, either for the whole or entire day, from morning to evening, or
for continued succession of days. According to either of these
interpretations, the meaning is, that there is no end to their
misfortunes. As to the change of the number from the plural to the
singular, it is not at all inconsistent that what is spoken in the name
of the Church should be uttered, as it were, in the person of one man.
The reason is added why they were so overwhelmed with shame, that they
dared not to lift up their eyes and their *face,* namely, because they
had no respite, but were incessantly subjected to the insolence and
reproach of their enemies. Had they been allowed to hide themselves in
some corner, they might have endured, as well as they were able, their
calamities in secret; but when their enemies openly derided them with
the greatest insolence, it served to redouble the wound inflicted upon
them. They, therefore, complain that their calamities had accumulated to
such an extent, that they were forced unceasingly to hear blasphemies
and bitter reproaches. They describe their enemies by the epithet
*avengers,* a term which, among the Hebrews, denotes barbarity and
cruelty, accompanied with pride, as we have remarked on the 8th Psalm

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span><span id="x.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span>**17** *All this has come upon us, etc.* As
they have already attributed to God all the afflictions which they
endured, if they should now say that they were undeservedly afflicted,
it would be the same thing as to accuse God of injustice; and thus what
is here spoken would no longer be a holy prayer, but rather an impious
blasphemy. It is, however, to be observed, that the faithful, although
in their adversities they do not perceive any obvious reason for being
so dealt with, yet they rest assured of this, and regard it as a fixed
principle, that God has some good reasons for treating them so severely.
At the same time, it is proper to observe, that the godly do not speak
in this place of the time past, but rather allege their patient
endurance, which was no small token of their piety, since, in the most
humble manner, they thus bowed their neck to the yoke of God. We see how
the great majority of men murmur and obstinately fret against God, like
refractory horses which rage furiously against their masters, and strike
them with their feet. And, therefore, we know that the man who, in
affliction, imposes a holy restraint upon himself, that he may not by
any impatience be carried away from the path of duty, has made no
inconsiderable attainments in the fear of God. It is an easy matter even
for hypocrites to bless God in the time of their prosperity; but as soon
as he begins to deal hardly with them, they break forth into a rage
against him. Accordingly, the faithful declare that, although so many
afflictions as they endured tended to turn them aside from the right
path, they did not forget God, but always served him, even when he did
not show himself favorable and merciful towards them. They do not,
therefore, proclaim their virtues in a former and distant period of
their history, but only allege, that even in the midst of afflictions
they steadfastly kept *the covenant of God* It is well known, that long
before the persecution of Antiochus, there were many abuses and
corruptions which provoked the vengeance of God against them, so that,
in respect of that period, they had no ground to boast of such integrity
as is here described. True it is that, as we shall very soon see, God
spared them, thus showing that they had been afflicted more for his
name’s sake than for their own sins; but the forbearance which God
exercised towards them in this respect was not sufficient to warrant
them to plead exemption from guilt. We must, therefore, consider that in
this place they do nothing more than allege their own patience, in that,
amidst such grievous and hard temptations, they had not turned aside
from the service of God. In the first place, they affirm, *We have not
forgotten thee:* for, indeed, afflictions are, as it were, like so many
clouds which conceal heaven from our view, so that God might then
readily slip from our remembrance, as if we were far removed from him.
They add, secondly, *We have not dealt falsely in thy covenant:* for, as
I have said, the wickedness of men discovers itself more especially when
they are tried more severely than they had anticipated. Thirdly, they
declare *that their heart had not turned back* And, lastly, *that their
footsteps declined not from the paths of God.* As God is daily inviting
us, so our hearts must be always ready to proceed in the paths into
which he calls us. Hence follows the direction of our ways; for by our
outward works, and by our whole life, we testify that our heart is
unfeignedly devoted to God. Instead of the translation, *Nor have our
steps declined,* which I have given, some suggest another reading, which
is not without some degree of plausibility, namely, *Thou hast made our
steps to decline;* for, in the first place, the term <span
id="x.iv-p8.1"></span>תט, *tet,* may be so rendered; and, secondly,
according to the arrangement of the words, there is no negative in this
clause. As to the meaning, however, I am not at all of their opinion;
for they connect this passage with that in <span
id="x.iv-p8.2"></span>[Isa 63:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#017)<span
id="x.iv-p8.2"></span>,

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>“O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy
ways?”

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span>The complaint which is here made amounts
rather to this, That the faithful are like poor wretched creatures
wandering in desert places, seeing God had withdrawn his hand from them.
The expression, *The paths of God,* does not always refer to doctrine,
but sometimes to prosperous and desirable events.

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span><span id="x.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span>**19** *Although thou hast broken us in the
place of dragons.* In the Hebrew it is, *For thou hast broken us, etc.;*
but the causal particle, <span id="x.iv-p12.1"></span>כי, *ki,*
according to the idiom of the Hebrew language, is often taken in the
sense of *although* or *when.*  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145)
And certainly it must be so rendered in this place, for these three
verses are connected, and the sentence is incomplete till the end of the
words, *For he knoweth the secrets of the heart.* The faithful repeat
more largely what we have already seen, namely, that although plunged
into the greatest depth of miseries, yet they continued steadfast in
their resolution, and in the right way. If we consider the distressing
circumstances in which they were placed, it will not appear to us a
hyperbolical mode of speech, when they say that they were *broken* even
within the depths of the sea; for by *the place of dragons* I understand
not the deserts and solitary places, but the deepest gulfs of the sea.
Accordingly, the word <span id="x.iv-p13.2"></span>תנים, *tannim,* which
others translate *dragons,*  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) I
would rather render *whales,*  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147)
as it is also understood in many other places. This interpretation is
obviously confirmed by the following clause, in which they complain that
*they had been covered with the shadow of death,* which implies that
they were swallowed up of death itself. Let us, however, remember, that
in these words the Holy Ghost dictates to us a form of prayer; and that,
therefore, we are enjoined to cultivate a spirit of invincible fortitude
and courage, which may serve to sustain us under the weight of all the
calamities we may be called to endure, so that we may be able to testify
of a truth, that even when reduced to the extremity of despair, we have
never ceased to trust in God; that no temptations, however unexpected,
could expel his fear from our hearts; and, in fine, that we were never
so overwhelmed by the burden of our afflictions, however great, as not
to have our eyes always directed to him. But it is proper for us to
notice still more particularly the style of speaking here employed by
the faithful. In order to show that they still continued steadfastly in
the pure service of God, they affirm that they have not lifted up their
hearts or their hands to any but to the God of Israel alone. It would
not have been enough for them to have cherished some confused notion of
the Deity: it was necessary that they should receive in its purity the
true religion. Even those who murmur against God may be constrained to
acknowledge some Divinity; but they frame for themselves a god after
their own pleasure. And this is an artifice of the devil, who, because
he cannot at once eradicate from our hearts all sense of religion,
endeavors to overthrow our faith, by suggesting to our minds these
devices — that we must seek another God; or that the God whom we have
hitherto served must be appeased after another manner; or else that the
assurance of his favor must be sought elsewhere than in the Law and the
Gospel. Since, then, it is a much more difficult matter for men, amidst
the tossings and waves of adversity, to continue steadfast and tranquil
in the true faith, we must carefully observe the protestation which the
Holy Fathers here make, that even when reduced to the lowest extremity
of distress by calamities of every kind, they nevertheless did not cease
to trust in the true God.

<span id="x.iv-p16"></span>This they express still more clearly in the
following clause, in which they say, *We have not stretched out our
hands*  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) *to a strange god.* By
these words they intimate, that, contented with God alone, they did not
suffer their hopes to be divided on different objects, nor gazed around
them in search of other means of assistance. Hence we learn, that those
whose hearts are thus divided and distracted by various expectations are
forgetful of the true God, to whom we fail to yield the honor which is
due to him, if we do not repose with confidence in him alone. And
certainly, in the true and rightful service of God, faith and
supplication which proceeds from it hold the first place: for we are
guilty of depriving him of the chief part of his glory, when we seek
apart from him in the least degree our own welfare. Let us then bear in
mind, that it is a true test of our piety, when, being plunged into the
lowest depths of disasters, we lift up our eyes, our hopes, and our
prayers, to God alone. And it only serves to demonstrate more
convincingly and clearly the impiety of Popery, when, after having
confessed their faith in the one true God with the mouth, its rotaries
the next moment degrade his glory by ascribing it to created objects.
They indeed excuse themselves by alleging, that in having recourse to
Saint Christopher and other saints of their own making, they do not
claim for them the rank of Deity, but only employ them as intercessors
with God to obtain his favor. It is, however, well known to every one,
that the form of the prayers which they address to the saints,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) is in no respects different from those
prayers which they present to God. Besides, although we should yield
this point to them, it will still be a frivolous excuse to pretend that
they are seeking advocates or intercessors for themselves. This is as
much as to say, that Christ is not sufficient for them, or rather, that
his office is wholly lost sight of among them. Moreover, we should
carefully observe the scope of this passage. The faithful declare, that
they did not stretch forth their hands to other gods, because it is an
error too common among men to forsake God, and to seek for other means
of relief when they find that their afflictions continue to oppress
them. So long as we are gently and affectionately treated of God we
resort to him, but as soon as any adversity befalls us we begin to
doubt. And if we are pressed still further, or if there be no end to our
afflictions, the very continuance of them tempts us to despair; and
despair generates various kinds of false confidence. Hence arises a
multitude of new gods framed after the fancy of men. Of *the lifting up
of the hands* we have spoken elsewhere.

<span id="x.iv-p19"></span><span id="x.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p20"></span>**21** *Shall not God search this out?* We
have here a solemn and emphatic protestation, in which the people of God
dare to appeal to him as the judge of their integrity and uprightness.
From this it appears, that they did not plead their cause openly before
men, but communed with themselves as if they had been before the
judgment-seat of God; and moreover, as a token of still greater
confidence, they add, that nothing is hidden from God. Why is it that
hypocrites often call God to witness, if it is not because they imagine
that, by concealing their wickedness under some specious disguise, they
have escaped the judgment of God? and thus they would represent the
character of God to be different from what it is, as if by their
deceptions they could dazzle his eyes. Whenever, therefore, we come
before God, let us at the same time remember, that there is nothing to
be gained by any vain pretense in his presence, inasmuch as he knows the
heart.

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
44:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**22**. Surely for thy sake we are killed all
the day; we are accounted as sheep for slaughter. **23**. Arise, O Lord!
why sleepest thou? awake, do not forget us or ever.  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) **24**. Why hidest thou thy face? wilt
thou forget our misery and our affliction  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) **25**. For our soul is humbled to the
dust: our belly cleaveth to the earth. **26**. Arise for our help, and
redeem us, for thy goodness’ sake.

<span id="x.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p6"></span><span id="x.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p7"></span>**22** *Surely for thy sake we are killed all
the day.* Here the faithful urge another reason why God should show
mercy to them, namely, that they are subjected to sufferings not on
account of crimes committed by themselves, but simply because the
ungodly, from hatred to the name of God, are opposed to them. “This,” it
may be said, “seems at first sight a foolish complaint, for the answer
which Socrates gave to his wife was apparently more to the purpose,
when, upon her lamenting that he was about to die wrongfully,  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) he reproved her saying, That it was
better for him to die innocently than from any fault of his own. And
even the consolation which Christ sets forth

<span id="x.v-p9"></span>‘Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness’ sake,’  
<span id="x.v-p9.2"></span>[Mt
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span id="x.v-p9.2"></span>,

<span id="x.v-p10"></span>seems to differ widely from the language here
expressed by the people of God. It seems also opposed to what Peter
says,

<span id="x.v-p11"></span>‘Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed;  
but let him glorify God on this behalf.’ —<span
id="x.v-p11.2"></span>[1Pe 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#016)<span
id="x.v-p11.2"></span>,

<span id="x.v-p12"></span>“To this I answer, That although it is the
greatest alleviation of our sorrow that the cause for which we suffer is
common to us with Christ himself, yet it is neither in vain nor out of
place that the faithful here plead with God that they suffer wrongfully
for his sake, in order that he may the more vigorously set himself for
their defense. It is right that he should have respect to the
maintenance of his glory, which the wicked endeavor to overthrow, when
they insolently persecute those who serve him. And from this it appears
the more clearly that this psalm was composed when the people languished
in captivity, or else when Antiochus laid waste the Church, because
religion was at that time the cause of suffering. The Babylonians were
enraged by the constancy of the people, when they perceived that the
whole body of the Jews, vanquished and routed as they were, ceased not
on that account to condemn the superstitions of the country; and the
rage of Antiochus was wholly bent upon extinguishing entirely the name
of God. Moreover, what made the thing appear more strange and difficult
to bear was, that God, so far from repressing the insolence and the
wrongs inflicted by the wicked, left them, on the contrary, to continue
in their cruelty, and gave them, as it were, loose reins. Accordingly,
the godly declare that *they are killed all the day long,* and that they
are counted of no more value than *sheep for slaughter* It is, however,
proper always to bear in mind, what I have already remarked, that they
were not so free from all blame as that God, in afflicting them, might
not justly chastise them for their sins. But whilst in his incomparable
goodness he fully pardons all our sins, he yet allows us to be exposed
to unmerited persecutions, that we may with greater alacrity glory in
bearing the cross with Christ, and thereby become partakers with him in
his blessed resurrection. We have already said, that there was no other
reason why the rage of the enemy was so inflamed against them, but that
the people would not revolt from the law, and renounce the worship of
the true God. It now remains for us to apply this doctrine to our own
circumstances; and, first, let us consider that it becomes us, after the
example of the fathers, patiently to submit to the afflictions by which
it is necessary to seal the confession of our faith; and, secondly, that
even in the deepest afflictions we must continue to call upon the name
of God and abide in his fear. Paul, however, in his Epistle to the
Romans, chapter 8:36, proceeds still farther; for he quotes this not
only by way of example, but also affirms that the condition of the
Church in all ages is here portrayed. Thus, then, we ought to regard it
as a settled point, that a state of continual warfare in bearing the
cross is enjoined upon us by divine appointment. Sometimes, it is true,
a truce or respite may be granted us; for God, has compassion upon our
infirmity: but although the sword of persecution is not always
unsheathed against us, yet, as we are the members of Christ, it behoves
us always to be ready to bear the cross with him. Lest, therefore, the
severity of the cross should dismay us, let us always have present to
our view this condition of the Church, that as we are adopted in Christ,
we are appointed to the slaughter. If we neglect to do this, the same
thing will befall us which happens to many apostates; for as it is in
their judgment too severe and wretched a state, even while they live, to
be continually dying, to be exposed to the mockery of others, and not to
have one moment free from fear, — to rid themselves of that necessity
they shamefully forsake and deny Christ. In order, therefore, that
weariness, or dread of the cross, may not root up from our hearts true
godliness, let us continually reflect upon this, that it behoves us to
drink the cup which God puts into our hands, and that no one can be a
Christian who does not dedicate himself to God.

<span id="x.v-p13"></span><span id="x.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p14"></span>**23** *Arise, O Lord! why sleepest thou?*
Here the saints desire that God, having pity upon them, would at length
send them help and deliverance. Although God allows the saints to plead
with him in this babbling manner, when in their prayers they desire him
to rise up or awake; yet it is necessary that they should be fully
persuaded that he keeps watch for their safety and defense. We must
guard against the notion of Epicurus, who framed to himself a god who,
having his abode in heaven,  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)
delighted only in idleness and pleasure. But as the insensibility of our
nature is so great, that we do not at once comprehend the care which God
has of us, the godly here request that he would be pleased to give some
evidence that he was neither forgetful of them nor slow to help them. We
must, indeed, firmly believe that God ceases not to regard us, although
he appears not to do so; yet as such an assurance is of faith, and not
of the flesh, that is to say, is not natural to us,  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) the faithful familiarly give utterance
before God to this contrary sentiment, which they conceive from the
state of things as it is presented to their view; and in doing so, they
discharge from their breasts those morbid affections which belong to the
corruption of our nature, in consequence of which faith then shines
forth in its pure and native character. If it is objected, that prayer,
than which nothing is more holy, is defiled, when some froward
imagination of the flesh is mingled with it, I confess that this is
true; but in using this freedom, which the Lord vouchsafes to us, let us
consider that, in his goodness and mercy, by which he sustains us, he
wipes away this fault, that our prayers may not be defiled by it.

<span id="x.v-p17"></span><span id="x.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p18"></span>**25** *For our soul is humbled to the dust*
The people of God again deplore the greatness of their calamities, and
in order that God may be the more disposed to help them, they declare to
him that they are afflicted in no ordinary manner. By the metaphors
which they here employ, they mean not only that they are cast down, but
also that they are crushed and laid upon the earth, so that they are not
able to rise again. Some take the word *soul* for the body, so that
there would be in this verse a repetition of the same sentiment; but I
would rather take it for the part in which the life of man consists; as
if they had said, We are cast down to the earth, and lie prostrate upon
our belly, without any hope of getting up again. After this complaint
they subjoin a prayer, (verse 26,) that God would *arise for their help*
By the word *redeem* they mean not ordinary kind of help, for there was
no other means of securing their preservation but by redeeming them. And
yet there can be no doubt, that they were diligently employed in
meditating upon the great redemption from which all the deliverances
which God is daily effecting in our behalf, when he defends us from
dangers by various means, flow as streams from their source. In a
previous part of the psalm, they had boasted of the steadfastness of
their faith; but to show us that, in using this language, they boasted
not in their own merits, they do not claim here some recompense for what
they had done and suffered for God. They are contented to ascribe their
salvation to the unmerited goodness of God as the alone cause of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc09009.htm#fr_128) <span
id="x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x-p5"></span> Dr Geddes supposes with Calvin that this psalm
was composed during the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes; and that
Matthias may have been its author. See <span id="x-p5.1"></span>[1 Macc.
1:0](../../../bib/apo/ma1001.htm#000), [1 Macc.
2:0](../../../bib/apo/ma1002.htm#000)<span id="x-p5.1"></span>. Walford
refers it to the same period. There is, certainly, no part of the
history of the Jews with which we are acquainted, to which the statement
made in the 17th verse is so applicable as to the time when they were so
cruelly persecuted for their religion by Antiochus Epiphanes, King of
Syria, and when, notwithstanding, the great mass of the people displayed
an invincible determination to keep themselves from the pollutions of
idolatry, and to adhere to the worship of the true God.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc09009.htm#fr_129) <span
id="x.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p3"></span> That is, the Canaanites.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc09009.htm#fr_130) <span
id="x.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p4"></span> “<span id="x.i-p4.1"></span>Ascavoir, nos
peres.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Namely, our fathers.” Israel is here compared
to a vine planted in the promised land. See <span
id="x.i-p4.2"></span>[Ex 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)<span
id="x.i-p4.2"></span>; <span id="x.i-p4.3"></span>[Isa
5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p4.3"></span>. See
also <span id="x.i-p4.4"></span>[Ps
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)<span id="x.i-p4.4"></span>, where
this elegant figure is carried out with remarkable force and beauty of
language.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc09009.htm#fr_131) <span
id="x.i-p4.5"></span>

<span id="x.i-p5"></span> The Canaanites.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc09009.htm#fr_132) <span
id="x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p6"></span> “<span id="x.i-p6.1"></span>Ascavoir, nos
peres.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, our fathers.” The reading in our
English version is, “and cast them out,” namely, the heathen. But
Calvin’s rendering seems to be more suitable to the genius of the Hebrew
poetry, and it also agrees with the meaning of the original. “The whole
metaphor,” says Dr Geddes, “is taken from the vine, or some other
luxuriant tree. In our common version, ‘and cast them out,’ the
parallelism is lost, and the beauty of the sentence disappears.” The
Hebrew verb here used is generally applied to the germination of plants,
or to the shooting and spreading forth of branches. God caused his
chosen people to spread abroad, to cast or shoot forth like the branches
of a vine.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc09009.htm#fr_133) <span
id="x.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span> Geddes reads, “Our King” “The Hebrew,” says
he, “has *my King*; but as the Psalmist speaks in the name of his
nation, the plural number is preferable in English, as in numerous other
instances.” “The speaker throughout the psalm,” says Walford, “is the
Church, which accounts for the use of both the singular and plural
numbers in different parts.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc09009.htm#fr_134) <span
id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span> The allusion is to the pushing, striking, or
butting of oxen and other animals with their horns, and means *to
vanquish* or *subdue*, (<span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>[De
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017)<span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p9.2"></span>[1Ki
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011)<span id="x.ii-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p9.3"></span>[Da
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004)<span id="x.ii-p9.3"></span>.)
“Literally,” says Dr Adam Clarke, “We will toss them in the air with our
horn; a metaphor taken from an ox or bull tossing the dogs into the air
which attack him.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc09009.htm#fr_135) <span
id="x.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span> Hammond reads, “We have praised God.” He
considers the preposition <span id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>ב, *beth*,
prefixed to the name of God, as a pleonasm.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc09009.htm#fr_136) <span
id="x.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>Mais que la
chose a continue, d’aage en aage.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc09009.htm#fr_137) <span
id="x.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p15.1"></span>Quand d’icelle
ils entrent a rendre louanges a Dieu.” — *Fr*. “When from it they are
led to give praise to God.”

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc09009.htm#fr_138) <span
id="x.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou, mis en
oubli.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, hast forgotten us.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc09009.htm#fr_139) <span
id="x.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span> ”<span id="x.iii-p4.1"></span>C’est, sans
aucun profit pour toy.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, without any profit to
thee.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc09009.htm#fr_140) <span
id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span> “This very strongly and strikingly
intimates the extent of the persecution and slaughter to which they were
exposed; there being no creature in the world of which such vast numbers
are constantly slaughtered as of sheep, for the subsistence of man. The
constancy of such slaughter is also mentioned in verse 22, as
illustrating the continual oppression to which the Hebrews were
subject.” — *Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc09009.htm#fr_141) <span
id="x.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p15.1"></span>Prests a
estre par eux devorez.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc09009.htm#fr_142) <span
id="x.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span> As if they had said, Thou hast sold us to
our enemies at whatever price they would give; like a person who sells
things that are useless at any price, not so much for the sake of gain,
as to get quit of what he considers of no value and burdensome.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc09009.htm#fr_143) <span
id="x.iii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p21.1"></span>Et comme
tenue sous les pieds des Romains.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc09009.htm#fr_144) <span
id="x.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, tout le
jour.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, all the day.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc09009.htm#fr_145) <span
id="x.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p13.1"></span>Il y a en
Hebrieu, Car tu nous as, etc. Mais souvent selon la maniere de la langue
Hebraique, Car, se prend pour Combien que, ou Quand.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc09009.htm#fr_146) <span
id="x.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p14.1"></span>Lequel les
autres traduisent dragons.” This is the sense in which the expression is
understood by several eminent critics. Aquila explains it thus: “In a
desert place where great serpents are found;” and Bishop Hare thus: “In
desert places among wild beasts and serpents. *The place of dragons*,
observes Bishop Mant, appears to mean the wilderness; in illustration of
which, it may be noticed from Dr Shaw, that ‘vipers, especially in the
wilderness of Sin, which might be called the inheritance of dragons,
(see <span id="x.iv-p14.2"></span>[Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)<span id="x.iv-p14.2"></span>,)
were very dangerous and troublesome; not only our camels, but the Arabs
who attended them, running every moment the risk of being bitten.’”
Viewed in this light, we must understand the language either as meaning
that the Israelites had been driven from their dwellings and places of
abode, and compelled to dwell in some gloomy wilderness infested by
serpents; or that the fierce and cruel persecutors into whose hands God
had delivered them are compared to serpents, and that the circumstances
in which the chosen tribes were now placed resembled those of a people
who had fallen into a wilderness, where they heard nothing but the
hissing of serpents, and the howlings of beasts of prey.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc09009.htm#fr_147) <span
id="x.iv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p15"></span> Williams reads, “*In the place of
sea-monsters*, perhaps crocodiles;” and thinks the allusion is to a
shipwreck.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc09009.htm#fr_148) <span
id="x.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p17"></span> That is, in the attitude of worship.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc09009.htm#fr_149) <span
id="x.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p18"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p18.1"></span>Que le
formulaire des prieres qui ils font aux saincts.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc09009.htm#fr_150) <span
id="x.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p3"></span> Fry reads the last clause, “Awake, do not fail
for ever;” and observes, “The term is sometimes applied to the failing
of a stream through drought.”

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc09009.htm#fr_151) <span
id="x.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p4"></span> “<span id="x.v-p4.1"></span>Et oublies nostre
affliction et nostre oppression?” — *Fr*. “And forgettest our affliction
and our oppression?”

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc09009.htm#fr_152) <span
id="x.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p8"></span> “<span id="x.v-p8.1"></span>Quand elle se
lamentant de ce qu’on le faisoit-mourir a tort.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc09009.htm#fr_153) <span
id="x.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p15"></span> “<span id="x.v-p15.1"></span>Lequel estant au
ciel.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc09009.htm#fr_154) <span
id="x.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p16"></span> “<span id="x.v-p16.1"></span>C’est dire, en
nostre sens naturel.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 45](cc09010)
