[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09004)  [Next](cc09006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>PSALM 40

<span id="vi-p2"></span>David, being delivered from some great danger,
and it may be, not from one only, but from many, extols very highly the
grace of God, and by means of this, his soul is filled with admiration
of the providence of God, which extends itself to the whole human race.
Then he protests that he will give himself wholly to the service of God,
and defines briefly in what manner God is to be served and honored.
Afterwards, he again returns to the exercise of thanksgiving, and
celebrates the praises of the Eternal by rehearsing many of his glorious
and powerful deeds. Lastly, when he has complained of his enemies, he
concludes the psalm with a new prayer.

<span id="vi-p3"></span>To the chief musician. A Psalm of David.

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
40:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1**. In waiting I waited  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) for Jehovah, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry. **2**. And he drew me out of the roaring pit, out of the
miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my steps. **3**.
And he hath put into my mouth a new song, even praise to our God: many
shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in Jehovah.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span><span id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**1.** *In waiting I waited* The beginning of
this psalm is an expression of thanksgiving, in which David relates that
he had been delivered, not only from danger, but also from present
death. Some are of opinion, but without good reason, that it ought to be
understood of sickness. It is rather to be supposed that David here
comprehends a multitude of dangers from which he had escaped. He had
certainly been more than once exposed to the greatest danger, even of
death, so that, with good reason, he might be said to have been
swallowed up in the gulf of death, and sunk in the *miry clay* It,
nevertheless, appears that his faith had still continued firm, for he
ceased not to trust in God, although the long continuance of the
calamity had well nigh exhausted his patience. He tells us, not merely
that he had waited, but by the repetition of the same expression, he
shows that he had been a long time in anxious suspense. In proportion
then as his trial was prolonged, the evidence and proof of his faith in
enduring the delay with calmness and equanimity of mind was so much the
more apparent. The meaning in short is, that although God delayed his
help, yet the heart of David did not faint, or grow weary from delay;
but that after he had given, as it were, sufficient proof of his
patience, he was at length heard. In his example there is set before us
this very useful doctrine, that although God may not forthwith appear
for our help, but rather of design keep us in suspense and perplexity,
yet we must not lose courage, inasmuch as faith is not thoroughly tried,
except by long endurance. The result, too, of which he speaks in terms
of praise, ought to inspire us with increased fortitude. God may succor
us more slowly than we desire, but, when he seems to take no notice of
our condition, or, if we might so speak, when he seems to be inactive or
to sleep, this is totally different from deceit: for if we are enabled
by the invincible strength and power of faith to endure, the fitting
season of our deliverance will at length arrive.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span><span id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**2.** *And he drew me out of the roaring
pit.* Some translate, *from the pit of desolation,*  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) because the verb <span
id="vi.i-p9.2"></span>שאה, *shaah,* from which the noun <span
id="vi.i-p9.3"></span>שאום, *shaon,* is derived, signifies *to destroy*
or *to waste,* as well as *to resound* or *echo.* But it is more
appropriate to consider that there is here an allusion to the deep
gulfs, where the waters gush with a tumultuous force.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) By this similitude he shows that he was
placed in as imminent peril of death as if he had been cast into a deep
pit, roaring with the impetuous rage of waters. To the same purpose also
is the similitude of *the miry clay,* by which he intimates that he had
been so nearly overwhelmed by the weight of his calamities, that it was
no easy matter to extricate him from them. Next, there follows a sudden
and incredible change, by which he makes manifest to all the greatness
of the grace which had been bestowed upon him. He declares that *his
feet were set upon a rock,* whereas formerly he had been overwhelmed
with water; and that his *steps were established* or *upheld,* whereas
before they were not only unsteady and slippery, but were also stuck
fast in the mire.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span><span id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**3.** *And he hath put into my mouth a new
song* In the first clause of the verse he concludes the description of
what God had done for him. By God’s putting *a new song into his mouth*
he denotes the consummation of his deliverance. In whatever way God is
pleased to succor us, he asks nothing else from us in return but that we
should be thankful for and remember it. As often, therefore, as he
bestows benefits upon us, so often does he open our mouths to praise his
name. Since God, by acting liberally towards us, encourages us to sing
his praises, David with good reason reckons, that having been so
wonderfully delivered, the matter of a new song had been furnished to
him. He uses the word *new* in the sense of exquisite and not ordinary,
even as the manner of his deliverance was singular and worthy of
everlasting remembrance. It is true, that there is no benefit of God so
small that it ought not to call forth our highest praises; but the more
mightily he stretches forth his hand to help us, the more does it become
us to stir up ourselves to fervent zeal in this holy exercise, so that
our songs may correspond to the greatness of the favor which has been
conferred upon us.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>*Many shall see it* Here the Psalmist extends
still farther the fruit of the aid which he had experienced, telling us,
that it will prove the means of instruction common to all. And certainly
it is the will of God that the benefits which he bestows upon any
individual of the faithful should be proofs of the goodness which he
constantly exercises towards all of them, so that the one, instructed by
the example of the other, should not doubt that the same grace will be
manifested towards himself. The terms *fear,* and *hope,* or *trust,* do
not seem at first view to harmonise; but David has not improperly joined
them together; for no man will ever entertain the hope of the favor of
God but he whose mind is first imbued with the fear of God. I understand
*fear* in general to mean the feeling of piety which is produced in us
by the knowledge of the power, equity, and mercy of God. The judgment
which God executed against the enemies of David served, it is true, to
inspire all men with fear; but, in my opinion, David rather means, that
by the deliverance which he had obtained, many would be induced to yield
themselves to the service of God, and to submit with all reverence to
his authority, because they would know him to be the Judge of the world.
Now, whoever submits cordially to the will of God will of necessity join
hope with fear; especially when there is presented to his view the
evidence of the grace by which God commonly allures all men to himself;
for I have already said that God is presented to our view as merciful
and kind to others, that we may assure ourselves that he will be the
same towards us. As to the word *see,* of which David makes use, we are
to understand it as referring not only to the eyes, but chiefly to the
perception of the mind. All without distinction saw what had happened,
but to many of them it never occurred to recognize the deliverance of
David as the work of God. Since, then, so many are blind regarding the
works of God, let us learn, that those only are considered to see
clearly to whom the Spirit of understanding has been given, that they
may not occupy their minds in dwelling upon the mere events which take
place, but may discern in them by faith the secret hand of God.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
40:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Blessed is the man who hath set
Jehovah for his confidence, and hath not regarded the proud, and those
who turn aside to lying.  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) **5.**
Many are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, O Jehovah! my God:
and it is impossible to reckon up in order to thee,  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) thy counsels towards us. I will declare
and speak of them; they are more than can be told.

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span><span id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**4.** *Blessed is the man who hath set
Jehovah for his confidence* David here relates what ground for good hope
his deliverance would give to all the faithful; inasmuch as, setting
aside all the allurements of the world, they would thereby be encouraged
to commit themselves with confidence to the protection of God; persuaded
not only that they are happy who trust in him alone, but that all other
expectations at variance with this are deceitful and cursed. This
assurance is not natural to us, but is derived partly from the word of
God, and partly from his works; although, as I have said before, the
contemplation alone of the works of God would not kindle this light
within us, unless God, illuminating us by his word, should show us his
benevolence. After having promised to be gracious to us, in manifesting
also his goodness by indubitable proofs, he confirms with his own hand
what he had previously uttered with his lips. David, therefore, from the
fact of his having been restored to life from the abyss of death, justly
declares that the faithful are taught from this proof — what men are
naturally so reluctant to believe — that they are happy who trust in God
alone.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>As the instability of our nature commonly
tends to draw us downward, and as all of us, from our proneness to yield
to delusions, are tempted by many wicked examples, David immediately
adds, that he is blessed *who regardeth not the proud* Some, indeed,
render <span id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>רהבים, *rehabim, the rich,* or *the
great of this world,* but improperly, in my opinion; because *pride,*
and *turning aside to lies,* are two things which David here joins
together. *To regard the great of the earth,* therefore, does not
signify, as they suppose, to rely upon their power and riches, as if a
man’s welfare depended thereupon, but it rather means to be carried away
by their examples, to imitate their conduct. When we are everywhere
constantly seeing men puffed up with pride, who despise God, and place
their highest felicity in ambition, in fraud, in extortion, in guile, a
perverse desire of imitating them steals upon us by degrees; and,
especially when every thing turns out according to their wishes, a vain
and delusive expectation solicits us to try the same course. David,
therefore, wisely, and not without good reason, warns us, that in order
to have our mind constantly fixed in simple reliance upon God alone, we
must guard against those evil examples which ever seek to allure us on
all sides to apostatise from him. Moreover, when he says that the proud
*turn aside to lying,* or *vanity,*  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) in this way he describes briefly the
foolish confidence of the flesh. What else is the pride of those who put
their own fancies in the place of God but a vain illusion? Certainly the
man who, puffed up by the breath of fond conceit, arrogates any thing in
the least degree to himself, flatters himself to his own destruction. In
short, pride and vanity are opposed to the holy confidence which relies
upon God alone; for there is nothing more difficult to the flesh than to
trust in God alone, and the world is always full of proud and haughty
men, who, soothing themselves with vain allurements, would soon corrupt
the minds of the godly, if this arrest were not laid upon them, to
restrain, as with a bridle, their erroneous and extravagant opinions.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span><span id="vi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>**5.** *Many are thy wonderful works which
thou hast done, O Jehovah!* Interpreters are not entirely agreed as to
these words; but it is generally admitted that David here contemplates
with admiration the providence of God in the government of mankind. And
first of all, he exclaims that the *wonders of God’s works are great or
many;*  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) meaning by this, that God
in his inscrutable wisdom so governs human affairs, that his works,
which come to be little thought of by men, from their constant
familiarity with them, far surpass the comprehension of the human
understanding. Thus we find, that from one particular species he ascends
to the whole class; as if he had said, God has proved not only by this
particular act the paternal care which he exercises towards men, but
that, in general, his wonderful providence shines forth in the several
parts of creation. Then he adds, that *the counsels of God* concerning
us are so high and so hidden, that it is impossible to reckon them up in
order distinctly and agreeably to their nature. Some think that the word
<span id="vi.ii-p12.2"></span>אלינו, *elenu, towards us,* is employed by
way of comparison, in this sense, The counsels of God are far beyond the
reach of our understanding, (but David rather commends the care which
God vouchsafes to take of us;) and as, in this way, the connection of
the words is broken, they are constrained to render the word <span
id="vi.ii-p12.3"></span>ערוד, *aroch,* which I have rendered *to count
in order,* differently, namely, that none is equal to God, or can be
compared with him.  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) But that I may
not enter upon any lengthened refutation, the intelligent reader will
agree with me in considering that the true meaning is this: That God, by
his incomprehensible wisdom, governs the world in such a manner that we
cannot reckon up his works in their proper order, seeing our minds,
through their very dulness, fail us before we can reach to so great a
height. It follows, *to thee,* for although we should in so far reflect
how wonderfully the Lord can make provision for our wants, yet this
consideration is limited by the imperfection of our understanding: and
hence it falls far short of the infinite glory of God. Those who give
this explanation, that *the counsels of God* are not referred to him,
because the greatest part of men imagine that every thing is subject to
chance and fortune, as if David meant in passing to censure the
ingratitude of those who defraud God of his praise, are no doubt
mistaken as to the meaning. In stating, as David does, immediately
after, that however much he might set himself to rehearse the works of
God, he yet would fail ere he could declare the half of them; — in
stating this he shows with sufficient plainness that the godly and
devout meditation, in which the children of God are often engaged, gives
them only, as it were, a slight taste of them and nothing more. We have
now arrived then at the Psalmist’s meaning. Having spoken before of the
deliverance which God had vouchsafed to him, he takes occasion from it
to set forth the general providence of God in nourishing and sustaining
men. It is also his design in this to exhort the faithful to a
consideration of God’s providence, that they may not hesitate to cast
all their cares upon it. Whilst some are in constant pain by reason of
their own anxiety and discontent, or quake at the slightest breeze that
blows, and others labor hard to fortify and preserve their life by means
of earthly succours, — all this proceeds from ignorance of the doctrine,
that God governs the affairs of this world according to his own good
pleasure. And as the great majority of men, measuring the providence of
God by their own understanding, wickedly obscure or degrade it, David,
placing it on its proper footing, wisely removes this impediment. The
meaning of the sentence, therefore, amounts to this, that in the works
of God men should reverently admire what they cannot comprehend by their
reason; and whenever the flesh moves them to contradiction or murmuring,
they should raise themselves above the world. If God cease to work, he
seems to be asleep, because, binding up his hands to the use of outward
means, we do not consider that he works by means which are secret. We
may therefore learn from this place, that although the reason of his
works may be hidden or unknown to us, he is nevertheless wonderful in
his counsels.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>This verse is closely connected with the
preceding. No man places, as he ought, entire trust in God, but he who,
shutting his eyes upon external circumstances, suffers himself to be
governed by him according to his good pleasure. Moreover, having spoken
hitherto in the third person, David now suddenly addresses his
discourse, not, however, unadvisedly, to God, that he might lead us the
more effectually to this sobriety and discretion. When, however, he
affirms that the works of God cannot be distinctly known by us, it is
not for the purpose of deterring us from seeking the knowledge of them,
or from the examination of them, but only to lay a restraint upon our
rashness, which would otherwise go beyond the proper boundaries in this
respect. To this end, the words *to thee,* or *before thee,* are
expressly employed, by which we are admonished that however diligently a
man may set himself to meditate upon the works of *God,* he can only
attain to the extremities or borders of them. Although then so great a
height be far above our reach, we must, notwithstanding, endeavor, as
much as in us lies, to approach it more and more by continual advances;
as we see also the hand of God stretched forth to disclose to us, so far
as it is expedient, those wonders, which we are unable of ourselves to
discover. There is nothing so preposterous as to affect, of one’s own
accord, a gross ignorance of the providence of God, because as yet we
cannot comprehend it perfectly, but only discern it in part; even as at
this day we find some who employ all their endeavors to bury it in
oblivion, for no other pretense than that it surpasses our
understanding, as if it were unreasonable to allow to God anything more
than what appears right and proper, according to our carnal reason.
David acts very differently regarding it. Feeling all his senses
absorbed by an inconceivable majesty and brightness, which he could not
bear to look upon,  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) he confesses
frankly that these are wonderful things of which he could not comprehend
the reason; but still he does not abstain wholly and everywhere from
making mention of them, but, according to the measure of his capacity,
sets himself devoutly to meditate upon them. From this we learn how
foolish and vain a thing it is to say, by way of caution, that none
should speak of the counsels or purposes of God, because they are high
and incomprehensible. David, on the contrary, though he was ready to
sink under the weight, ceased not to contemplate them, and abstained not
from speaking of them, because he felt unequal to the task of rehearsing
them, but was content, after having declared his faith on this subject,
to finish his discourse in admiration.

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**6**. In sacrifice and oblation thou hast
not taken pleasure: thou hast bored my ears: thou hast not required
burnt offering nor sin-offering. **7**. Then I said, Lo! I come: in the
roll of the book it is written of me, **8**. That I may do thy pleasure,
O my God! I have delighted to do it, and thy law is in the midst of my
bowels. (<span id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>[Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)<span id="vi.iii-p2.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span><span id="vi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**6** *In sacrifice and oblation thou hast
not taken pleasure.* Here David offers not only the sacrifice of praise,
or, as the prophet Hosea calls it, (<span id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>[Ho
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>,)
“the calves of the lips,” but, in token of his gratitude, offers and
consecrates himself entirely to God; as if he had said, I am now wholly
devoted to God, because, having been delivered by his wonderful power, I
am doubly indebted to him for my life. At the same time, treating of the
true worship of God, he shows that it consists not in outward
ceremonies, but rather that it is spiritual. Accordingly, the meaning
is, that he came into the presence of God not only in the outward pomp
or ceremony and figures of the law, but that he brought with him the
true devotion of the heart. We know, indeed, that all men have some
sense of religion impressed upon their hearts, so that no one dares to
withdraw openly and wholly from his service, and yet the greater part of
men turn aside into winding and crooked paths; and hence it happens,
that in serving God in a perfunctory manner, their worship is scarcely
anything else than a mockery of him. We see then the reason why David,
on the present occasion, shows in what the true worship of God consists;
it is, that he may distinguish between himself and hypocrites, who draw
near to God with their lips only, or at least seek to pacify him with
cold and unmeaning ceremonies.

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>We now come to the exposition of the words.
I have no doubt that David, under the four different kinds of sacrifices
which he here enumerates, comprehends all the sacrifices of the law. His
meaning, to express it in a few words, is, that God requires not mere
ceremonies of those who serve him, but that he is satisfied only with
sincerity of heart, with faith and holiness of life: and that he takes
no pleasure merely in the visible sanctuary, the altar, the burning of
incense, the killing of beasts, the lights, the costly apparel, and
outward washings. From this he concludes, that he ought to be guided by
another principle, and to observe another rule in the service of God,
than a mere attention to these — that he should yield himself wholly to
God.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>*Thou hast bored my ears.* Some think that
in using this form of expression, David has a reference to the ordinance
under the Law of which we read in <span id="vi.iii-p7.2"></span>[Ex
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006)<span id="vi.iii-p7.2"></span>. If
any bond-servant, when the time of his being discharged from servitude
had arrived, made no account of his freedom, he was brought to the
public place of judgment, and having there declared that he wished to
continue in servitude, his master pierced his ear with an awl, as a mark
of perpetual bondage. But this mode of interpretation appears to be too
forced and refined.  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) Others more
simply consider that it is of the same meaning as to render fit, or
qualify for service, for David mentions not one ear only, but both. Men,
we know, are naturally deaf, because they are so dull, that their ears
are stopped until God pierce them. By this expression, therefore, is
denoted the docility to which we are brought and moulded by the grace of
the Holy Spirit. I, however, apply this manner of expression more
closely to the scope of the passage before us, and explain it in this
sense, That David was not slow and dull of hearing, as men usually are,
so that he could discern nothing but what was earthly in the sacrifices,
but that his ears had been cleansed, so that he was a better interpreter
of the Law, and able to refer all the outward ceremonies to the
spiritual service of God. He encloses the sentence, *Thou hast bored my
ears,* as it were, in parenthesis, whilst he is treating professedly of
sacrifices, so that the sentence might be explained in this way: Lord,
thou hast opened my ears, that I may distinctly understand whatever thou
hast commanded concerning the sacrifices, namely, that of themselves
they afford thee no pleasure: for thou, who art a Spirit, takest no
delight in these earthly elements, and hast no need of flesh or blood;
and, therefore, thou requirest something of a higher and more excellent
nature. If, however, it is objected that sacrifices were offered by the
express commandment of God, I have just said that David here
distinguishes between the spiritual service of God, and that which
consisted in outward types and shadows. And in making this comparison,
it is no great wonder to find him saying that the sacrifices are of no
value, since they were only helps designed to lead men to true piety,
and tended to a far higher end than that which was at first apparent.
Seeing, then, God made use of these elements, only to lead his people to
the exercises of faith and repentance, we conclude that he had no
delight in being worshipped by sacrifices. We must always bear in mind,
that whatever is not pleasing to God for its own sake, but only in so
far as it leads to some other end, if it be put in the place of his true
worship and service is rejected and cast away by him.

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span><span id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span>**7.** *Then said I, Lo! I come.* By the
adverb *then* he intimates, that he had not been a good scholar, and
capable of profiting by instruction, until God had opened his ears; but
as soon as he had been instructed by the secret inspirations of the
Spirit, he tells us, that then his heart was ready to yield a willing
and cheerful obedience. Here true obedience is very properly
distinguished from a constrained and slavish subjection. Whatever
service, therefore, men may offer to God, it is vain and offensive in
his sight, unless at the same time they offer themselves; and, moreover,
this offering of one’s self is of no value unless it be done willingly.
These words, *Lo! I come,* ought to be observed, and likewise the words,
*I have delighted to do thy will;* for the Hebrew word <span
id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>חפצתי, *chaphatsti,* means, I was well pleased,
or, I willingly condescended. Here David indicates his readiness to
yield obedience, as well as the cordial affection of his heart and
persevering resolution. His language implies, that he cordially
preferred the service of God to every other desire and care, and had not
only yielded a willing subjection, but also embraced the rule of a pious
and holy life, with a fixed and steady purpose of adhering to it. This
he confirms still further in the third clause of the verse, in which he
says, that *the Law of God* was deeply fixed *in the midst of his
bowels*  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) It follows from this,
first, that however beautiful and splendid the works of men may appear,
yet unless they spring from the living root of the heart, they are
nothing better than a mere pretense; and, secondly, that it is to no
purpose that the feet, and hands, and eyes, are framed for keeping the
Law, unless obedience begin at the heart. Moreover, it appears from
other places of Scripture, that it is the peculiar office of the Holy
Spirit to engrave the Law of God on our hearts. God, it is true, does
not perform his work in us as if we were stones or stocks, drawing us to
himself without the feeling or inward moving of our hearts towards him.
But as there is in us naturally a will, which, however, is depraved by
the corruption of our nature, so that it always inclines us to sin, God
changes it for the better, and thus leads us cordially to seek after
righteousness, to which our hearts were previously altogether averse.
Hence arises that true freedom which we obtain when God frames our
hearts, which before were in thraldom to sin, unto obedience to himself.

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span>*In the roll of the book* As the Septuagint
has made use of the word *head* instead of *roll,*  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) some have been inclined to philosophise
upon this clause with so much refinement of speculation, that they have
exposed themselves to ridicule by their foolish and silly inventions.
But the etymology of the word <span id="vi.iii-p16.15"></span>במגלת,
*bemegilath,* is the same as the Latin word *volumen,*  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) which we call *a roll* It is necessary to
ascertain in what sense David claims peculiarly to himself what is
common or alike to all men. Since the Law prescribes to all men the rule
of a holy and upright life, it does not appear, it may be said, that
what is here stated pertains to any one man or any set of men. I answer,
that although the literal doctrine of the Law belongs to all men in
common, yet as of itself it is dead, and only beats the air, God teaches
his own people after another manner; and that, as the inward and
effectual teaching of the Spirit is a treasure which belongs peculiarly
to them, it is written of them only in the secret book of God, that they
should fulfill his will. The voice of God, indeed, resounds throughout
the whole world, so that all who do not obey it are rendered
inexcusable; but it penetrates into the hearts of the godly alone, for
whose salvation it is ordained. As a general, therefore, enrols the
names of his soldiers, that he may know their exact number, and as a
schoolmaster writes the names of his scholars in a scroll, so has God
written the names of his children in the book of life, that he may
retain them under the yoke of his own discipline.

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span>There still remains another difficulty
connected with this passage. The Apostle, in <span
id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>[Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)<span id="vi.iii-p18.1"></span>,
seems to wrest this place, when he restricts what is spoken of all the
elect to Christ alone, and expressly contends that the sacrifices of the
Law, which David says are not agreeable to God in comparison of the
obedience of the heart, are abrogated; and when quoting rather the words
of the Septuagint,  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) than those of
the prophet, he infers from them more than David intended to teach. As
to his restricting this passage to the person of Christ, the solution is
easy. David did not speak in his own name only, but has shown in general
what belongs to all the children of God. But when bringing into view the
whole body of the Church, it was necessary that he should refer us to
the head itself. It is no objection that David soon after imputes to his
own sins the miseries which he endures; for it is by no means an
uncommon thing to find our errors, by a mode of expression not strictly
correct, transferred to Christ. As to the abrogation of the sacrifices
that were under the Law, I answer thus: That their abrogation may be
fairly inferred from the language of the prophets; for this is not like
many other places in which God condemns and rejects the sacrifices which
were offered by hypocrites, and which were deservedly offensive to him
on account of their uncleanness: for in these God condemns the outward
ceremony, on account of the abuse and corruption of it, which rendered
it nothing but a vain mockery; whereas here, when the Prophet speaks of
himself as one who worshipped God sincerely, and yet denies that God had
pleasure in these sacrifices, it may easily be inferred, that the
rudiments which God had enjoined upon his ancient people for a time had
some other end in view, and were only like infantile instructions
designed to prepare them for some higher state. But if their truth and
substance are contained in Christ, it is certain that they have been
abolished by his coming. They were indeed still in use in the time of
David: and yet he admonishes us that the true service of God, even when
performed without sacrifices, was perfect and complete in all its parts,
and every where; and that the ceremonies are things which might be
regarded as non-essential, and, as we speak, adventitious. This is
worthy of being noticed, that we may know that God, even after he has
removed the figures which he had commanded for a time, does not cease
always to resemble himself; for in these outward services he had respect
solely to men. As to this, that the Apostle, following the Septuagint,
has made subservient to his own use the word *body,* which is not used
here by David, in such an allusion there is no inconsistency; for he
does not undertake expressly to unfold and explain in every point the
Psalmist’s meaning: but as he had said, that by the one sacrifice of
Christ all the others had been abolished, he adds at the same time that
a body had been prepared for Christ, that by the offering up of it he
might fulfill the will of God.

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
40:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**9**. I have proclaimed thy righteousness in
the great assembly: behold, I will not refrain my lips: O Jehovah! thou
knowest it. **10**. I have not hidden thy righteousness within my heart;
I have declared thy truth and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy
goodness nor thy truth in the great assembly. **11**. O thou Jehovah!
withhold not thy tender mercies from me: let thy goodness and thy truth
always preserve me.

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span><span id="vi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>**9.** *I have proclaimed thy righteousness
in the great assembly.* Here David again brings forward his own
thankfulness, and for no other reason but to induce God to continue his
goodness towards him. God, whenever he manifests his liberality towards
us, encourages us to render thanks to him; and he continues to act in a
similar manner towards us when he sees that we are thankful and mindful
of what he has done for us. In the first place, David makes use simply
of the word *righteousness;* but it must be understood of the
righteousness of God, which he expressly mentions soon after. Nor does
he say, that it was only in the secret affection of the heart, or in
private, that he offered praise to God, but that he had openly
proclaimed it in the solemn assembly, even as the faithful in those days
were wont to testify their devotion by presenting peace-offerings to God
when they had been delivered from any great danger. *The great assembly*
of which he speaks is not to be understood of the concourse of people
that assemble at courts of law, or at the public market-places, but it
denotes the true and lawfully constituted Church of God, which we know
assembled in the place of his sanctuary. Accordingly, he declares that
he had not concealed in his heart the righteousness of God, which it
becomes us publicly to make known for the edification of one another.
Those who keep it hid in their hearts are surely seeking as much as in
them lies that the memory of God may be buried in oblivion. He calls
upon God as a witness of this, not only to distinguish between himself
and hypocrites, who often proclaim loudly, and with all their might, the
praises of God, and yet do so without the least spark of affection; but
also to make it the more abundantly obvious that he had sincerely and
heartily uttered the praises of God, and was careful not to defraud him
of any part of them. This affirmation teaches us that the subject which
is here treated of is one of no small importance; for although God
stands in no need of our praises, yet it is his will that this exercise
for many reasons should prevail amongst us.

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span><span id="vi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>**10** *I have not hidden thy righteousness
within my heart.* Here it is necessary to observe the accumulation of
terms which are employed to denote the same thing. To the righteousness
of God the Psalmist adds his truth, his salvation, and his mercy. And
what is the design of this, but to magnify and set forth the goodness of
God by many terms or expressions of praise? We must, however, notice in
what respects these terms differ; for in this way we may be able to
ascertain in what respects they apply to the deliverance of which David
here discourses. If these four things should be taken in their proper
order, *mercy* will hold the first place, as it is that by which alone
God is induced to vouchsafe, to regard us. *His righteousness* is the
protection by which he constantly defends his own people, and the
goodness by which, as we have already said elsewhere, he preserves them.
And, lest any should doubt that it will flow in a constant and
uninterrupted course, David adds in the third place *truth;* by which we
are taught that God continues always the same, and is never wearied of
helping us, nor at any time withdraws his hand. There is, at the same
time, implied in this an exhibition of the promises; for no man will
ever rightly take hold of the righteousness of God but he who embraces
it as it is offered and held forth in the Word. *Salvation* is the
effect of righteousness, for God continues to manifest his free favor to
his people, daily affording them aid and assistance, until he has
completely saved them.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span><span id="vi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span>**11** *O thou Jehovah! withhold not thy
tender mercies from me* We now see more clearly, what I have just
adverted to, that David speaks of his own thankfulness, that he might
secure a continuance of God’s favor towards him; and that he opened his
mouth in the praises of God, that he might continue to acquire new
favors, against which our perverse and ungrateful silence very often
closes the gate. We ought, therefore, carefully to observe the relation
which the clause, in which David affirms that he closed not his lips,
bears to what follows, namely, that God on his part would not contract
or stop up the course of his tender mercies; for by this we are taught
that God would always be ready to relieve us by his goodness, or rather
that it would flow down upon us as from a never-failing fountain, if our
own ingratitude did not prevent or cut off its course. *The tender
mercies* of God, which he expresses by the word <span
id="vi.iv-p9.1"></span>רחמיד, *rachamecha,* and of which he here speaks,
differ little from his goodness. It was not, however, without cause that
David chose to make this distinction. It could only be, first, because
he was unable otherwise to satisfy himself in extolling the grace of
God; and, secondly, because it was requisite to show that the source
from which the mercy and goodness of God proceed, when he is moved in
compassion for our miseries to aid and succor us. Then he places his
confidence of salvation in the goodness and faithfulness of God, for we
must of necessity begin (as I have said a little before) at the free
favor of God, that his bounty may extend even to us. But as we are
unable to discern that God is gracious to us until he grant us some
assurance of his love, his constancy is, with much propriety, placed in
connection with his truth in keeping his promises.

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
40:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012)<span id="vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>**12**. For innumerable evils have compassed
me on all sides; my iniquities have laid hold upon me, so that I cannot
look up:  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) they are more in number
than the hairs of my head; and my heart has failed me. **13**. Be thou
pleased, O Jehovah! to deliver me: O Jehovah! make haste to help me.
**14**. Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my
life to destroy it; let them be turned backward, and put to shame, that
seek after my hurt. **15**. Let them be destroyed for a reward of their
shame who have said to me,  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) Aha,
aha!

<span id="vi.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.v-p6"></span><span id="vi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p7"></span>**12.** *For innumerable evils have compassed
me on all sides* This phrase, in the original, denotes more than can be
expressed in an English translation; for he says, <span
id="vi.v-p7.1"></span>עלי *alay, upon me,* meaning by this, that he was
not only beset on all sides, but that also an accumulation of evils
pressed upon his head. He, however, does not now complain of being
punished unjustly, or above his desert, but rather confesses plainly
that it is the just recompense of his sins which is rendered to him. For
although the word <span id="vi.v-p7.2"></span>עון, *avon,* which we have
rendered *iniquity,* signifies also *the punishment of iniquity,* (as we
have elsewhere seen more than once;) yet we must take into consideration
the derivation of the word.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)
Accordingly, since David calls the afflictions which he endures the
fruit or effect of his transgressions, there is implied in this a humble
confession, from which we may ascertain with what reverence and meekness
he submitted to the judgments of God, seeing that, when overwhelmed with
an accumulation of miseries, he sets forth his sins in all their
magnitude and aggravation, lest he should suspect God of undue severity.
When we see David treated so severely, let us also learn, when we are
oppressed with extreme afflictions, and are groaning under them, humbly
to implore the grace and mercy of our Judge. Nor is it his design to
show that he had been stupid or hardened, when he says that *his heart
failed or forsook him.* His language means, that he was not only
broken-hearted, but that he lay as if he had been dead. We must,
however, understand this *fainting* or *failing of the heart* as
referring to the sense of the flesh; for his perseverance in prayer is a
certain proof that his faith was never altogether extinguished. But
since he was, in so far as man was concerned, destitute of counsel, and
was altogether without strength, it is not without cause that he says
that his heart failed him.

<span id="vi.v-p9"></span><span id="vi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p10"></span>**13.** *Be thou pleased, O Jehovah! to
deliver me.* The verb which David here makes use of, signifies to desire
a thing from pure kindness and good-will.  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) He desires, therefore, to be delivered by
the free mercy of God. As to his desire, that God would *make haste,* we
have elsewhere spoken of it. Even when God delays to help us, it is our
duty to contend against a feeling of weariness; but such is his
goodness, that he permits us to use this form of prayer, That he would
make haste according to our desires. Then, according to his usual
practice, citing his enemies to the judgment-seat of God, he feels
confident, that, on account of their cruelty, and unjust and wicked
hatred, he shall obtain what he asks. We must maintain it as a fixed
principle, that the more unjustly our enemies afflict us, and the more
cruelly they wrong us, God is so much the more disposed to give us help.
And it is no slight consolation that the mercy of God strives against
their wickedness, so that the more fiercely our enemies pursue us to
effect our hurt, the more ready is he to bring us help. We have already
frequently spoken of the feelings with which David uttered these
imprecations, and it is necessary here again to refresh our memories on
the subject, lest any man, when giving loose reins to his passions,
should allege the example of David in palliation or excuse. This wicked
and counterfeit imitation on the part of those who follow the powerful
impulse of the flesh, instead of being guided by the zeal of the Spirit,
is always to be held up to condemnation.

<span id="vi.v-p12"></span><span id="vi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p13"></span>When the Psalmist prays (verse 15) that his
enemies *may be destroyed for a reward of their shame,* the meaning is
this: As their sole desire has been to overwhelm me with shame, in order
that, while thus dismayed and confounded, they might make me the object
of their derision; so let a similar confusion fall upon their own heads.
In the second clause of the verse he describes the nature of this
confusion by relating the terms of their wicked triumphing, by which
they poured contempt upon him while he was so oppressed with misery and
affliction. We are here taught that, when our enemies shall have
persecuted us to the uttermost, a recompense is also prepared for them;
and that God will turn back, and cause to fall upon their own heads, all
the evil which they had devised against us; and this doctrine ought to
act as a restraint upon us, that we may behave ourselves compassionately
and kindly towards our neighbors.

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
40:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#016)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**16**. Let all those that seek thee be glad
and rejoice in thee: and let those that love thy salvation say
continually, Jehovah be magnified! **17**. But I am poor and needy:
Jehovah hath regarded me; thou art my help and my deliverer: O thou my
God! make no delay.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span><span id="vi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span>**16.** *Let all those that seek thee be glad
and rejoice in thee.* David here uses another argument — one which he
often adduces elsewhere — in order to obtain deliverance; not that it is
necessary to allege reasons to persuade God, but because it is
profitable to confirm our faith by such supports. As, then, it is the
will of God that he should be known in his gracious character, not only
of one or two, but generality of all men, whenever he vouchsafes
deliverance to any of his children, it is a common benefit which all the
faithful ought to apply to themselves when they see in the person of one
man in what manner God, who is never inconsistent with himself, will act
towards all his people. David, therefore, shows that he asks nothing for
himself individually but what pertains to the whole Church. He prays
that God would gladden the hearts of all the saints, or afford them all
common cause of rejoicing: so that, assured of his readiness to help
them, they may have recourse to him with greater alacrity. Hence we
conclude, that, in the case of every individual, God gives a proof of
his goodness towards us. What is added, *those that love thy salvation,*
is also worthy of being observed by us. We may infer from this, that our
faith is only proved to be genuine when we neither expect nor desire
preservation otherwise than from God alone. Those who devise various
ways and means of preservation for themselves in this world, despise and
reject the salvation which God has taught us to expect from him alone.
What had been said before, *those who seek thee,* is to the same
purpose. If any individual would depend wholly upon God, and desire to
be saved by his grace, he must renounce every vain hope, and employ all
his thoughts towards the reception of his strength. Here, again, we must
observe that two things are contrasted with each other. Formerly David
had said that the wicked *sought* his life; now he ascribes to the
faithful quite a contrary feeling, namely, that they seek God. In like
manner he had related the reproaches and derision of the ungodly, while
they said, *Aha, aha!* and now he introduces the godly speaking very
differently, saying, The Lord be magnified!

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span><span id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>**17.** *But I am poor and needy.* In this
concluding clause he mingles prayer with thanksgiving, although it may
be that he records a request which he had made when he was placed in
extreme danger. The first clause of the verse might be rendered thus:
Although I was miserable and poor, God did think upon me. As according
to the extent in which any one is afflicted, so is he despised by the
world, we imagine that he is disregarded by God, we must, therefore,
steadfastly maintain that our miseries in no respect produce on the part
of God a feeling of weariness towards us, so that it should become
troublesome to him to aid us. In this way, however, let us rather read
the clause: When I was miserable and poor, the Lord looked upon my
necessity: So that by this circumstance he enhances the grace of God. If
God anticipate us with his goodness, and do not wait till adversity
presses upon us, then his favor towards us is not so apparent. This
comparison, therefore, illustrates very clearly the glory of God in the
deliverance of David, inasmuch as he vouchsafed to stretch forth his
hand to a man who was despised and rejected of all men, nay, who was
destitute of all help and hope. Now, if it was necessary that David
should have been reduced to this extremity, it is no wonder if persons
in a more private station are often humbled after this manner, that they
may feel and acknowledge in good earnest that they have been delivered
out of despair by the hand of God. The simple and natural meaning of the
prayer is this, Lord, thou art my help and my deliverer, therefore delay
not to come to my aid. As it is a foolish thing to approach God with a
doubtful and wavering mind, the Psalmist takes courage, as he was wont
to do from his own experience, and persuades himself that the help of
God, by which he had been hitherto preserved, would not fail him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc09005.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>C’est,
paciemment.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, patiently.” Calvin in the text
gives the literal rendering of the Hebrew. *In waiting I waited* is a
Hebraism which signifies vehement desire, and yet entire resignation of
mind. “The doubling of the word,” says Ainsworth, “denotes earnestness,
constancy, patience.”

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc09005.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span> The Septuagint reads, “<span
id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>Εχ λάχχου ταλαιπωρίας.” — “Out of a pit of
misery;” and Ainsworth, “the pit of sounding calamity,” or “dungeon of
tumultuous desolation, which,” says he, “echoed and resounded with
dreadful noises.” “The sufferings of the Psalmist,” observes Bishop
Mant, “are here described under the image of a dark subterraneous cavern
from which there was no emerging; and where roaring cataracts of water
broke in upon him, overwhelming him on every side, till, as it is
expressed in the 18th psalm, ‘God sent from above and took him, and drew
him out of many waters.’”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc09005.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vi.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span> “Un marveilleux bruit.” — *Fr*. “A
marvellous noise.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc09005.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>A vanite.” —
*Fr*. “To vanity.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc09005.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>Devant toy.” —
*Fr*. “Before thee, or in thy presence.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc09005.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vi.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p9.1"></span>Ou vanite“ —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc09005.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>Sont grandes
ou infinies.” — *Fr*. “Are great or innumerable.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc09005.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vi.ii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span> “This verb,” says Ainsworth, “is sometimes
used for matching or comparing.” In this sense the word occurs in <span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ps 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)<span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>; and this is the sense in which the Septuagint
understands it here: “<span id="vi.ii-p13.2"></span>Καὶ τοῖς
διαλογισμοῖς σου οὐχ ἔστι τις ὁμοιωθήσεται σοι;” — “and in thy thoughts
there is none who shall be likened to thee.” Street reads, “There is
none to be compared to thee;” and observes, that “above sixty copies of
Dr Kennicott’s collection have <span id="vi.ii-p13.3"></span>ערוך, the
passive participle here, instead of <span id="vi.ii-p13.4"></span>ערך.”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc09005.htm#fr_86) <span
id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>Sentant tous
ses sens engloutis d’une majeste et resplendeur infinie, que sa veue
pouvoit porter.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc09005.htm#fr_87) <span
id="vi.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span> The objections to this interpretation are,

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>**1.** That the verb <span
id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>כרה *carah*, here used, does not mean *to bore*,
but that the radical idea of the word is, *to dig*, *to hollow out*; as
to dig a well, <span id="vi.iii-p9.2"></span>[Ge
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#025)<span id="vi.iii-p9.2"></span>; a
pit, <span id="vi.iii-p9.3"></span>[Ps
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)<span id="vi.iii-p9.3"></span>; to
carve or cut out a sepulcher from a rock, <span
id="vi.iii-p9.4"></span>[2Ch
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014)<span id="vi.iii-p9.4"></span>;
and hence we find it transferred from the grottoes of the sepulcher to
the quarry of human nature, <span id="vi.iii-p9.5"></span>[Isa.
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii-p9.5"></span>.
Williams, viewing the verb as properly signifying *digged*, *carved*, or
*cut out*, in the sense *of forming*, explains the words as if the
Psalmist had said, “Mine ears hast thou made, or *prepared*, for the
most exact and complete obedience.” Stuart, (Commentary on <span
id="vi.iii-p9.6"></span>[Heb 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii-p9.6"></span>,) and Davidson, (Sacred Hermeneutics, p. 461,)
viewing the word as meaning *digged*, *hollowed out*, simply in the
sense of *opening*, read, “Mine ears hast thou opened;” which they
explain as meaning, Thou hast made me obedient, or, I am entirely
devoted to thy service; observing, that *to open* or *uncover the ear*
was a customary expression among the Hebrews, to signify a revealing
something to any one, including the idea of listening to the
communication, followed by prompt obedience, <span
id="vi.iii-p9.7"></span>[Isa 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii-p9.7"></span>; <span id="vi.iii-p9.8"></span>[1 Samuel.
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#002)<span id="vi.iii-p9.8"></span>.
There is another verb of the same radical letters, which means to
*purchase* or *provide*; and this is the sense in which the LXX.
understood <span id="vi.iii-p9.9"></span>כרה, *carah*, as is evident
from their rendering it by <span id="vi.iii-p9.10"></span>κατηρτίσω

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span>**2.** That the verb used in Exodus is not
<span id="vi.iii-p10.1"></span>כרה, as here, but <span
id="vi.iii-p10.2"></span>רצע, *ratsang*

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>**3.** That only one ear was pierced, as
appears from the passages in the Pentateuch in which the rite is
described. But here the plural number is used, denoting both ears. From
these considerations, it is concluded that there is here no allusion to
the custom of boring the ear of a servant under the Law.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc09005.htm#fr_88) <span
id="vi.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span> This is the literal rendering of the
Hebrew, and means, As dear to me as life itself; (<span
id="vi.iii-p14.1"></span>[Joh
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span id="vi.iii-p14.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.iii-p14.2"></span>[Job
38:36](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#036)<span id="vi.iii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc09005.htm#fr_89) <span
id="vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span> Anciently, books did not consist, like
ours, of a number of distinct leaves bound together, but were composed
of sheets of parchment joined to each other, and rolled up for
preservation upon wooden rollers, as our charts of geography are; and in
this form are all the sacred MSS. of the Jewish synagogues to this day.
The *roll of the book*, therefore, simply means *the book* itself. With
respect to the reading of the Septuagint, “<span
id="vi.iii-p16.1"></span>Εν κεθαλίσδι βιβλίου;” — “In the head of the
book;” and which Paul, in <span id="vi.iii-p16.2"></span>[Heb
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007)<span id="vi.iii-p16.2"></span>,
quotes instead of the Hebrew: this is an expression which the LXX.
employ simply to mean *the book*, as in <span
id="vi.iii-p16.3"></span>[Ezr 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002)<span
id="vi.iii-p16.3"></span>; <span id="vi.iii-p16.4"></span>[Eze
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009)<span id="vi.iii-p16.4"></span>;
and <span id="vi.iii-p16.5"></span>[Eze
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)<span id="vi.iii-p16.5"></span>;
and not the *beginning* or *head of the book* At the extremity of the
cylinder on which the Hebrew <span id="vi.iii-p16.6"></span>כפר, <span
id="vi.iii-p16.7"></span>βιβλιου, book or manuscript, was rolled, were
*heads* or *knobs* for the sake of convenience to those who used the MS.
The *knob* or *head*, <span id="vi.iii-p16.8"></span>κεθαλις, is here
taken as a *part* put for the *whole* <span
id="vi.iii-p16.9"></span>Κεθαλις βιβλίου means therefore <span
id="vi.iii-p16.10"></span>βιβλιου, or <span
id="vi.iii-p16.11"></span>ספר, with a <span
id="vi.iii-p16.12"></span>κεθαλις, *i* *e*., a manuscript roll. —
*Stuart* on <span id="vi.iii-p16.13"></span>[Heb
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007)<span id="vi.iii-p16.13"></span>.
Hence it is evident, that we are not to understand this phrase, *the
head of the book*, as referring to that prophecy in <span
id="vi.iii-p16.14"></span>[Ge
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span id="vi.iii-p16.14"></span>.
As to what book is here referred to, there is some diversity of opinion
among interpreters. Some understand it to be the book of the divine
decrees, some the Pentateuch, and others all that was written concerning
Christ “in the Law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc09005.htm#fr_90) <span
id="vi.iii-p16.16"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span> <span id="vi.iii-p17.1"></span>Volumen is
from <span id="vi.iii-p17.2"></span>*volvo*, *I roll*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc09005.htm#fr_91) <span
id="vi.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span> The Septuagint here reads, “<span
id="vi.iii-p19.1"></span>Σῶμα δὲ κατηρτίσω μοι” — “But a body hast thou
prepared \[or fitted\] for me.” This reading is widely different from
that of our Hebrew Bibles; and, to account for it, critics and
commentators have had recourse to various conjectures: nor is the
subject without considerable difficulty. Some think that the Septuagint
has been corrupted, and others the Hebrew. Grotius is of opinion, and he
is followed by Houbigant, that the original reading of the Septuagint
was <span id="vi.iii-p19.2"></span>ἄκουσμα, *auditum*, which afterwards,
in the process of transcription, had been changed into <span
id="vi.iii-p19.3"></span>σῶμα; while Drs Owen and Hammond think that the
original reading was <span id="vi.iii-p19.4"></span>ὠτία, *ears* It is
conjectured by Kennicott that the Hebrew text has been changed from
<span id="vi.iii-p19.5"></span>אז גות, *az gevah*, *then a body*, into
<span id="vi.iii-p19.6"></span>אזנום, *aznayim*, *ears*; a conjecture
which meets with the approbation of Dr Lowth, Dr Adam Clarke, and Dr Pye
Smith. But it goes far to support the accuracy of the Hebrew text as it
now stands, that the Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate versions agree with
it, and that in all the MSS. collated by Kennicott and De Rossi there is
not a single variation. With respect to the Apostle’s quoting from the
Septuagint instead of the Hebrew, it is sufficient to say, that he did
so because the Septuagint was then in common use. And it is worthy of
observation, that his argument does not depend on the word, <span
id="vi.iii-p19.7"></span>σῶμα δὲ κατηρτίσω μοι: his design is to show
the insufficiency of the legal sacrifices, and to establish the efficacy
of Christ s *obedience* unto death; and his argument would be equally
complete had these words been omitted: for it is not made to depend on
the *manner* of the obedience. — See Archbishop Secker’s able
Dissertation on the subject in the Appendix to Merrick’s Notes on the
Psalms; and Stuart on <span id="vi.iii-p19.8"></span>[Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)<span id="vi.iii-p19.8"></span>,
and Excursus 20.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc09005.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>Mes iniquitez
m’ont attrappe, *voire en si grand nombre* que ne *les* ay peu veoir.” —
*Fr*. “My iniquities have laid hold upon me, *even in such vast numbers*
that I cannot see *them*.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc09005.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vi.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>Ou, dit de moy.”
— *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, who have said concerning me.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc09005.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vi.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p8"></span> The word <span id="vi.v-p8.1"></span>עוז,
*avon*, is derived from <span id="vi.v-p8.2"></span>עוה, *avah*, *he was
crooked*, *oblique*; and hence the noun signifies iniquity, depravity,
perverseness; but it is also put for the punishment due to iniquity. See
volume 1, p. 507, note.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc09005.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vi.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p11"></span> “<span id="vi.v-p11.1"></span>רצה, *retse*,
*be pleased* From <span id="vi.v-p11.2"></span>רצה, *ratsah*, *he wished
well*, *was pleased*, *accepted*, excluding any merit as a ground for
that acceptance.” — *Bythner*’*s Lyra*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 41](cc09006)
