[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09000)  [Next](cc09002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span id="ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
36](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#000)<span id="ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span>Almost all interpreters agree in supposing, that
in this psalm David in general expresses his wonder and amazement at the
goodness of God, because, in the exercise of his favor and mercy, he
bears with the wicked, who, notwithstanding, basely contemn him. The
opinion which I have formed is somewhat different. I think that the holy
prophet, being grievously troubled and harassed by wicked and ungodly
men, first complains of their depravity, and then seeks refuge in the
infinite goodness of God, which extends not only to all men in general,
but in a particular and special manner to his own children; and this he
does in order to console, and, so to speak, take his breath, in the
assurance that he shall at length be delivered since God is favorable to
him. This is evident from the conclusion of the psalm, in which he arms
and fortifies himself against all the assaults of the ungodly, by
reflecting that he is safe under the protection of God.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>To the chief musician. A Psalm of David, the
servant of Jehovah.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>Why the appellation, *the servant of God,* is
ascribed to David only in this place and in the eighteenth psalm, rather
than elsewhere, cannot positively be ascertained, unless that having
been victorious in a conflict, of all others the most difficult, he
proved himself to be a valiant warrior and an invincible champion in the
sight of God. We know how rare and singular a virtue it is, when
ungodliness is prevailing without restraint, and when the shade of its
obscurity darkens our spiritual vision, to look up, notwithstanding, by
the eye of faith, to the providence of God, which, by disposing our
minds to patience, may keep us constantly in the fear of God.

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
36:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Ungodliness saith to the wicked in the
midst of my heart, There is no fear of God before his eyes. **2.** For
he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be
hateful.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) **3.** The words of his
mouth are iniquity  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) and deceit; he
hath left off to understand that he may do good. **4.** He meditates
\[or devises\] iniquity upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that
is not good; and abhorreth not evil.

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span><span id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Ungodliness saith to the wicked in the
midst of my heart* Commentators are not agreed as to the interpretation
of the first verse. Literally it is, *The saying* \[or *speech*\] *of
transgression,* or rather, *Transgression saith to the wicked* As,
however, the letter <span id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>ל*, lamed,* is in Hebrew
sometimes used for <span id="ii.i-p7.2"></span>מן*, min,* some translate
it thus, *Ungodliness or transgression speaketh of the wicked in my
heart;* as if the prophet had said, I clearly perceive from the
wickedness which the ungodly commit, that they are not influenced by the
fear of God. But as there is no need to depart from the proper
signification of the words, I rather agree with others in supposing that
the language of the prophet is to this effect: The malice of the wicked,
though seemingly hidden and unknown, speaks aloud in my heart, and I am
a sure witness of what it says or suggests.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>And, first, it is to be observed, that the
prophet speaks not of outward faults, but penetrates even to the very
source; as if he had said, Although the wicked cloak their malice with
wily dissimulation, yet I know it so well that I seem to hear it
speaking. It is indeed true, that as the ungodly and profane rush
headlong into every kind of wickedness, as if they were never to be
called to render up an account of it, the judgment which David here
expresses may be formed even from their life; but his language is much
more emphatic when he says, that the servants of God openly perceive the
depravity of such persons hidden within the heart. Now David does not
speak of the wicked generally, but of the abandoned despisers of God.
There are many who indulge in their vices, who, notwithstanding, are not
intoxicated by the wretched infatuation which David here censures. But
when a man becomes hardened in committing sin, ungodliness at length
reduces him to such a state of insensibility, that, despising the
judgment of God, he indulges without fear in the practice of every sin
to which his depraved appetite impels him. A reckless assurance,
therefore, in the commission of sin, and especially where it is
associated with a contempt and scorn of every holy admonition, is, as it
were, an enchantment of Satan, which indicates that the condition of
such a person is indeed hopeless. And although true religion has the
effect of keeping the hearts of the godly in the fear of God, and drives
wicked thoughts far from their minds, yet this does not prevent them
from perceiving and understanding in their hearts how the ungodly are
agitated with horrible fury when they neither regard God nor are afraid
of his judgments.

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>*There is no fear of God before his eyes*
David shows in these few words the end of all evil suggestions; and it
is this, that the sense both of good and evil being destroyed or
suppressed, men shrink from nothing, as if there were not seated in
heaven a God, the Judge of all. The meaning therefore is, Ungodliness
speaks in my heart to the wicked man, urging him to the extremity of
madness, so that, laying aside all fear of God, he abandons himself to
the practice of sin; that is to say, I know as well what the ungodly
imagine in their hearts, as if God had set me as a witness or judge to
unveil their hypocrisy, under the mask of which they think their
detestable malice is hidden and deeply buried. When the wicked,
therefore, are not restrained by the fear of God from committing sin,
this proceeds from that secret discourse with themselves, to which we
have referred, and by which their understanding is so depraved and
blinded, that, like brute beasts, they run to every excess in rioting.
Since the eyes are, as it were, the guides and conductors of man in this
life, and by their influence move the other senses hither and thither,
it is therefore said that men have the fear of God before their eyes
when it regulates their lives, and by presenting itself to them on every
side to which they may turn, serves like a bridle to restrain their
appetites and passions. David, by using here a contrary form of
expression, means that the ungodly run to every excess in
licentiousness, without having any regard to God, because the depravity
of their own hearts has completely blinded them.

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span><span id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>**2** *For he flattereth himself in his own
eyes* Here the Psalmist shows by their fruits or the marks of their
character, that there is no fear of God among the wicked, seeing they
take such pleasure in committing deeds of wickedness, that, although
hateful in the sight of all other men, they still cherish the natural
obstinacy of their hearts, and wilfully harden themselves in their evil
course. First, he says that they nourish their vices by flatteries,
 <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) that they may not be dissatisfied
with themselves in sinning. But when he adds, *until their iniquity be
found to be hateful,* by these words he is to be understood as referring
to their determined obstinacy; for the meaning is, that while they
falsely flatter themselves, they proceed to such an extent in their evil
course, that their iniquity becomes hateful to all men. Some translate
the words thus: *So that he himself finds his own iniquity to be
hateful;* and understand them as meaning, that the wicked persist in
rushing headlong into sin without restraint, until, satiated or glutted
with the indulgence of their depraved desires, they begin to loathe it:
for even the most depraved are sometimes dissatisfied with themselves on
account of their sinful conduct. The first interpretation is, however,
the more natural, namely, that the wicked, though they are hateful to
all men on account of their iniquity, which, when once discovered and
made manifest, excites a general feeling of displeasure, are not
affected by any displeasure against themselves, but, on the contrary,
rather applaud themselves, whilst the people despise them, and abhor the
wickedness of their lives. The prophet, therefore, condemns them for
their infatuation in this, that while all others are offended at their
disgraceful conduct, they themselves are not at all affected by it. As
far as in them lies, they abolish all distinction between good and evil,
and lull their conscience into a state of insensibility, lest it should
pain them, and urge them to repentance. Certainly the infatuation here
described ought to be the subject of our serious consideration, the
infatuation which is manifested in this, that men who are given up to a
reprobate mind, while they render themselves hateful in the sight of all
other men, are notwithstanding destitute of all sense of their own sins.

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span><span id="ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span>**3.** *The words of his mouth are iniquity
and deceit.* The two clauses of this verse may be understood as
referring to the same thing, namely, that the wicked indulging in deceit
and vanity, will not receive or admit the light of understanding. This,
I apprehend, is the meaning of David. He reproves the wicked not merely
for circumventing others by their wiles and stratagems, but especially
because they are altogether destitute of uprightness and sincerity. We
have already said that the Psalmist is here speaking not of sinful and
wicked men, in whose hearts there still remains some fear of God, but of
the profane despisers of his name, who have given themselves up entirely
to the practice of sin. He therefore says that they have always in their
mouth some frivolous excuses and vain pretexts, by which they encourage
themselves in rejecting and scoffing at all sound doctrine. He then
adds, that they purposely suppress in themselves all knowledge or
understanding of the distinction between good and evil, because they
have no desire to become better than they are. We know that God has
given understanding to men to direct them to do what is good. Now David
says that the wicked shun it, and strive to deprive themselves of it,
that they may not be constrained to repent of their wickedness, and to
amend their lives. We are taught from this passage, that if at any time
we turn aside from the path of rectitude, the only remedy in such a case
is to open the eyes of our understanding, that we may rightly
distinguish between good and evil, and that thus we may be led back from
our wandering. When, instead of doing this, a man refuses instruction,
it is an indication that he is in a state of depravity altogether
desperate.

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span><span id="ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span>**4.** *He meditates iniquity upon his bed*
Here the sacred writer shows that the wickedness of the ungodly man is
of a secret and very determined character. It sometimes happens that
many, who otherwise are not disposed to wickedness, err and fall into
sin, because occasion presents itself all on a sudden; but David tells
us, that the wicked, even when they are withdrawn from the sight of men,
and in retirement, form schemes of mischief; and thus, although there is
not presented before them any temptation, or the evil example of others
to excite them to it, they, of their own accord, devise mischief, and
urge themselves to it without being impelled by any thing else. Since he
describes the reprobate by this distinguishing mark of character, that
*they devise mischief upon their beds,* true believers should learn from
this to exercise themselves when alone in meditations of a different
nature, and to make their own life the subject of examination, so that
they may exclude all evil thoughts from their minds. The Psalmist next
refers to their stubbornness, declaring *that they set themselves in a
crooked and perverse way;* that is to say, they purposely and wilfully
harden themselves in doing evil. Finally, he adds the reason of their
doing this: *They abhor not evil* Wilfully shutting their eyes, they
rush forward in their headlong course till they spontaneously yield
themselves the slaves of wickedness. Let us now shortly state the
contrast between the ungodly and the people of God, contained in the
preceding verses. The former deceive themselves by flattery; the latter
exercise over themselves a strict control, and examine themselves with a
rigid scrutiny: the former, throwing loose the reins, rush headlong into
evil; the latter are restrained by the fear of God: the former cloak or
disguise their offenses by sophistry, and turn light into darkness; the
latter willingly acknowledge their guilt, and by a candid confession are
brought to repentance: the former reject all sound judgment; the latter
always desire to vindicate themselves by coming to the open light of
day: the former upon their bed invent various ways of doing evil; the
latter are sedulously on their guard that they may not devise or stir up
within themselves any sinful desire: the former indulge a deep and fixed
contempt of God; the latter willingly cherish a constant displeasure at
their sins.

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
36:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** O Jehovah! thy mercy is unto the
heavens, and thy truth even unto the clouds. **6.** Thy righteousness is
as the mountains of God;  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) thy
judgments are a great deep:  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) O
Jehovah! thou preservest man and beast. **7**. O God! how excellent
 <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) is thy loving-kindness! therefore,
the children of men shall trust in the shadow of thy wings. **8.** They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou
shalt make them to drink of the river of thy pleasures. **9.** For with
thee  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) is the fountain of life; and in
thy light  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) shall we see light.

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span><span id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>**5.** *O Jehovah! thy mercy is unto the
heavens.* Commentators think that David, after having described the
great corruption and depravity which every where prevail in the world,
takes occasion from thence to extol in rapturous praises the wonderful
forbearance of God, in not ceasing to manifest his favor and good-will
towards men, even though they are sunk in iniquity and crime. But, as I
have already observed, I am of a somewhat different opinion. After
having spoken of the very great depravity of men, the prophet, afraid
lest he should become infected by it, or be carried away by the example
of the wicked, as by a flood, quits the subject, and recovers himself by
reflecting on a different theme. It usually happens, that in condemning
the wicked, the contagion of their malice insinuates itself into our
minds when we are not conscious of it; and there is scarcely one in a
hundred who, after having complained of the malice of others, keeps
himself in true godliness, pure and unpolluted. The meaning therefore
is, Although we may see among men a sad and frightful confusion, which,
like a great gulf, would swallow up the minds of the godly, David,
nevertheless, maintains that the world is full of the goodness and
righteousness of God, and that he governs heaven and earth on the
strictest principles of equity. And certainly, whenever the corruption
of the world affects our minds, and fills us with amazement, we must
take care not to limit our views to the wickedness of men who overturn
and confound all things; but in the midst of this strange confusion, it
becomes us to elevate our thoughts in admiration and wonder, to the
contemplation of the secret providence of God. David here enumerates
four cardinal attributes of Deity, which, according to the figure of
speech called *synecdoche,* include all the others, and by which he
intimates, in short, that although carnal reason may suggest to us that
the world moves at random, and is directed by chance, yet we ought to
consider that the infinite power of God is always associated with
perfect righteousness. In saying that the goodness of God is *unto the
heavens,* David’s meaning is, that in its greatness it is as high as the
heavens. In the same sense he adds, *Thy truth is even unto the clouds*
The term *truth* in this place may be taken either for the faithfulness
which God manifests in accomplishing his promises, or for the just and
well regulated character of his government, in which his rectitude is
seen to be pure and free from all deception. But there are many other
similar passages of Scripture which constrain me to refer it to the
promises of God, in the keeping and fulfilling of which he is ever
faithful.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span><span id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *Thy righteousness is as the
mountains of God* In this verse there is a commendation of God’s
righteousness, which the sacred writer compares to the high mountains,
(this being the manner of the expression — “the mountains of God,” for
we know that the Hebrews were accustomed to distinguish by the
appellation *divine,* or *of God,* whatever is excellent,) because his
glory shines forth more clearly there. In the last place, it is said,
that his *judgments are like a great and bottomless abyss.* By these
words he teaches us, that to whatever side we turn our eyes, and whether
we look upward or downward, all things are disposed and ordered by the
just judgment of God. This passage is usually quoted in a sense quite
different, namely, that the judgments of God far exceed our limited
capacity, and are too mysterious for our being able to comprehend them;
and, indeed, in this sense the similitude of an abyss is not
inappropriate. It is, however, obvious from the context, that the
language of the Psalmist is to be understood in a much more extensive
sense, and as meaning, that however great the depth of wickedness which
there is among men, and though it seems like a flood which breaks forth
and overflows the whole earth, yet still greater is the depth of God’s
providence, by which he righteously disposes and governs all things.
Whenever, therefore, our faith may be shaken by the confusion and
disorder of human affairs, and when we are unable to explain the reasons
of this disorder and confusion, let us remember that the judgments of
God in the government of the world are with the highest propriety
compared to a great depth which fills heaven and earth, that the
consideration of its infinite greatness may ravish our minds with
admiration, swallow up all our cares, and dispel all our sorrows. When
it is added in the end of the verse, *O Jehovah! thou preservest man and
beast,* the meaning is to this effect, that since God vouchsafes to
extend his providential care even to the irrational creation, much more
does he provide for the wants of men. And, indeed, whenever any doubt
may arise in our minds regarding the providence of God, we should
fortify and encourage ourselves by setting before us this consideration,
that God, who provides food for the beasts of the field, and maintains
them in their present state, can never cease to take care of the human
race. The explanation which some have given of the term *beasts,*
interpreting it allegorically of beastly men, I regard as too forced,
and reject it.

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span><span id="ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span>**7** *O God! how precious is thy
loving-kindness!* Some explain these words in this sense: That the mercy
of God is precious, and that the children of men who put their trust in
it are precious; but this is a sense too far removed from the words of
the text. Others understand them as meaning, that the mercy of God is
very great to the gods, that is to say, to the angels and the sons of
men; but this is too refined. I am also surprised that the Jewish
Rabbins have wearied and bewildered themselves, without any occasion, in
seeking to find out new and subtile interpretations, since the meaning
of the prophet is of itself perfectly evident; namely, that it is
because the mercy of God is great and clearly manifested, that the
children of men put their trust under the shadow of it. As David has
hitherto been speaking in commendation of the goodness of God, which
extends to every creature, the opinion of other commentators, who
consider that David is here discoursing of the peculiar favor which God
manifests towards his children, is in my judgment very correct. The
language seems to refer in general to all the sons of men, but what
follows is applicable properly to the faithful alone. In order to
manifest more clearly the greatness of divine grace, he thus speaks in
general terms, telling us, that God condescends to gather together under
his wings the mortal offspring of Adam, as it is said in <span
id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span
id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span>“What is man, that thou art mindful of
him?  
and the son of man, that thou visitest him?”

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>The substance of the passage is this: The
ungodly may run to every excess in wickedness, but this temptation does
not prevent the people of God from trusting in his goodness, and casting
themselves upon his fatherly care; while the ungodly, whose minds are
degraded, and whose hearts are polluted, never taste the sweetness of
his goodness so as to be led by it to the faith, and thus to enjoy
repose under the shadow of his wings. The metaphorical expression of
*wings,* as applied to God, is common enough in Scripture.  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) By it God teaches us that we are preserved
in safety under his protecting care, even as the hen cherishes her
chickens under her wings; and thus he invites us kindly and
affectionately to return to him.

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span><span id="ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span>**8.** *They shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of that house.* I have no doubt that by *the fatness of
God’s house* the prophet means the abundance of good things which is not
designed for all men indiscriminately, but is laid up in store for the
children of God who commit themselves wholly to his protection. Some
restrict the expression to spiritual graces; but to me it seems more
likely, that under it are comprehended all the blessings that are
necessary to the happiness and comfort of the present life, as well as
those which pertain to eternal and heavenly blessedness. It ought,
however, to be observed, that in the style of speaking which the prophet
here employs, the use of earthly blessings is connected with the
gracious experience of faith, in the exercise of which we can alone
enjoy them rightfully and lawfully to our own welfare. When the ungodly
glut themselves with the abundance of God’s benefits, their bodies
indeed grow fat like the flesh of cattle or swine, but their souls are
always empty and famished. It is the faithful alone, as I have said, who
are satisfied with the goodness of God towards them, because it is to
them a pledge of his fatherly love. The expression *meat* and *drink*
denotes a complete and perfect fullness, and the term *river,*  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) denotes an overflowing abundance.

<span id="ii.ii-p21"></span><span id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p22"></span>**9.** *For with thee is the fountain of
life* The Psalmist here confirms the doctrine of the preceding verse,
the knowledge of which is so profitable that no words can adequately
express it. As the ungodly profane even the best of God’s gifts by their
wicked abuse of them, unless we observe the distinction which I have
stated, it were better for us to perish a hundred times of hunger, than
to be fed abundantly by the goodness of God. The ungodly do not
acknowledge that it is in God they live, move, and have their being, but
rather imagine that they are sustained by their own power; and,
accordingly, David, on the contrary, here affirms from the experience of
the godly, and as it were in their name, that the fountain of life is in
God. By this he means, that there is not a drop of life to be found
without him, or which flows not from his grace. The metaphor of *light,*
in the last clause of the verse, is tacitly most emphatic, denoting that
men are altogether destitute of light, except in so far as the Lord
shines upon them. If this is true of the light; of this life, how shall
we be able to behold the light of the heavenly world, unless the Spirit
of God enlighten us? for we must maintain that the measure of
understanding with which men are by nature endued is such, that

<span id="ii.ii-p23"></span>“the light shineth in darkness,  
but the darkness comprehendeth it not,” (<span
id="ii.ii-p23.2"></span>[Joh 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="ii.ii-p23.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.ii-p24"></span>and that men are enlightened only by a
supernatural gift. But it is the godly alone who perceive that they
derive their light from God, and that, without it, they would continue,
as it were, buried and smothered in darkness.

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
36:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#010)<span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Prolong  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) thy mercy to them that know thee, and thy
righteousness to the upright in heart. **11.** Let not the foot of pride
come upon me, and let not the hand of the wicked remove me. **12.**
There the workers of iniquity are fallen: they are thrust down, and
shall not be able to rise.

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span>**10.** *Prolong thy mercy to them that know
thee.* David now sets himself to pray. And, first, he asks in general,
that God would continue his mercy to all the godly, and then he pleads
particularly in his own behalf, imploring the help of God against his
enemies. Those who affirm that God is here said to prolong or extend his
mercy because it is exalted above the heavens, indulge in a style of
speaking too puerile. When David spake of it in such terms in a
preceding verse, his intention was not, as I have already said, to
represent the mercy of God as shut up in heaven, but simply to declare
that it was diffused throughout the world; and here what he desires is
just this, that God would continue to manifest, even to the end, his
mercy towards his people. With the mercy of God he connects his
righteousness, combining them as cause and effect. We have already said
in another place, that the righteousness of God is manifested in his
undertaking the defense of his own people, vindicating their innocence,
avenging their wrongs, restraining their enemies, and in proving himself
faithful in the preservation of their welfare and happiness against all
who assail them. Now, since all this is done for them freely by God,
David, with good reason, makes mention particularly of his goodness, and
places it first in order, that we may learn to depend entirely upon his
favor. We ought also to observe the epithets by which he describes true
believers; first, he says, that *they know God;* and, secondly, that
*they are upright in heart.* We learn from this that true godliness
springs from the knowledge of God, and again, that the light of faith
must necessarily dispose us to uprightness of heart. At the same time,
we ought always to bear in mind, that we only know God aright when we
render to him the honor to which he is entitled; that is, when we place
entire confidence in him.

<span id="ii.iii-p7"></span><span id="ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p8"></span>**11.** *Let not the foot of pride come upon
me* As I have observed a little before, the Psalmist here applies to his
own circumstances the prayer which he had offered. But by including in
his prayer in the preceding verse all the children of God, he designed
to show that he asked nothing for himself apart from others, but only
desired that as one of the godly and upright, who have their eyes
directed to God, he might enjoy his favor. He has employed the
expressions, *the foot of pride,*  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)
and *the hand of the wicked,* in the same sense. As the wicked rush
boldly to the destruction of good men, lifting up their feet to tread
upon them, and having their hands ready to do them wrong, David entreats
God to restrain their hands and their feet; and thus he confesses that
he is in danger of being exposed to their insolence, abuse, and
violence, unless God come speedily to his aid.

<span id="ii.iii-p10"></span><span id="ii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p11"></span>**12.** *There the workers of iniquity are
fallen.* Here he derives confidence from his prayer, not doubting that
he has already obtained his request. And thus we see how the certainty
of faith directs the saints to prayer. Besides, still farther to confirm
his confidence and hope in God, he shows, as it were, by pointing to it
with the finger, the certain destruction of the wicked, even though it
lay as yet concealed in the future. In this respect, the adverb *there*
 <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) is not superfluous; for while the
ungodly boast of their good fortune, and the world applaud them, David
beholds by the eye of faith, as if from a watch-tower, their
destruction, and speaks of it with as much confidence as if he had
already seen it realised. That we also may attain a similar assurance,
let us remember, that those who would hasten prematurely the time of
God’s vengeance upon the wicked, according to the ardor of their
desires, do indeed err, and that we ought to leave it to the providence
of God to fix the period when, in his wisdom, he shall rise up to
judgment. When it is said, *They are thrust down,* the meaning is, that
they are agitated with doubt, and totter as in a slippery place, so that
in the midst of their prosperity they have no security. Finally, it is
added, that they shall fall into utter destruction, so that it can never
be expected that they shall rise again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc09001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>C’est, tant que
chacun commence a avoir en haine l’iniquite d’iceluy.” — *Fr*. *marg*.
“That is, so that every one begins to hate his iniquity.”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc09001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>Mensonge.” —
*Fr*. “Falsehood.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc09001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span> The verb <span id="ii.i-p12.1"></span>חלף,
*chalak*, which is rendered *flattereth*, signifies *to smooth*, and
means here, that the wicked man described endeavors by plausible
arguments to put a soft, smooth, and fair gloss on his wickedness, as if
there were nothing repulsive and hateful about it, nothing amiss or
blame-worthy in it; and in this way he deceives himself. This is the
sense expressed in the literal translation of Montanus, which seems very
forcible: “<span id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>Quoniam lenivit ad se in oculis
ipsius, ad inveniendum iniquitatem suam ad odiendam.” — “For he has
smoothed over \[or set a polish\] to himself in his own eyes, with
respect to the finding out of his iniquity, \[that is, so as not to find
it out,\] to hate it.” Horsley reads,

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>“For he giveth things a fair appearance to
himself,  
In his own eyes, so that he discovers not his own  
iniquityto hate it.”

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>“He sets such a false gloss,“ says this
critic, “in his own eyes, upon his worst actions, that he never finds
out the blackness of his iniquity, which, were it perceived by him,
would be hateful even to himself.” The wicked in all ages have thus
contrived to put a fair appearance upon the most unprincipled maxims and
pernicious practices. It will be seen that Montanus’ and Horsley’s
translation of the last clause of the verse gives a different meaning
from that given by Calvin. The original text is somewhat obscure and
ambiguous from its brevity; but it seems to support the sense given by
these critics. The Hebrew is, <span id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>למצא
עונולשנא, *limtso* *avono lisno*, *to find*, or *to*, *for*, or
*concerning the finding of*, \[the first word being an infinitive with
the prefix <span id="ii.i-p14.2"></span>ל, *lamed*,\] *his iniquity to
hate* \[*it*.\] “The prefix <span id="ii.i-p14.3"></span>ל,” says
Walford, “cannot, I imagine, be translated with any propriety by
*until*.” His rendering is,

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span> “For he flattereth himself in his own
sight,  
That his iniquity will not be found to be hateful:”

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>That is, will not be viewed by others as the
hateful thing which it really is. The original words will easily bear
this sense as well as that given by Montanus and Horsley.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc09001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span> In the French version it is, “<span
id="ii.ii-p3.2"></span>Comme hautes montagnes;” — “as the high
mountains;” and in the margin Calvin states that the Hebrew is, “<span
id="ii.ii-p3.3"></span>Montagnes de Dieu;” — “Mountains of God.” The
Hebrews were accustomed to describe things eminent, as Calvin observes
in his exposition of the verse, by adding to them the name of God; as,
“river of God;" <span id="ii.ii-p3.4"></span>[Ps
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)<span id="ii.ii-p3.4"></span>;
“mount of God,” <span id="ii.ii-p3.5"></span>[Ps
68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015)<span id="ii.ii-p3.5"></span>;
“cedars of God,” <span id="ii.ii-p3.6"></span>[Ps
80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010)<span id="ii.ii-p3.6"></span>;
“the trees of the Lord,” <span id="ii.ii-p3.7"></span>[Ps
104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)<span id="ii.ii-p3.7"></span>.
“The mountains of God,” therefore, here mean *the highest mountain*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc09001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.ii-p3.8"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span> Lowth reads, “A vast abyss.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc09001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span> Heb. — how precious.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc09001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>En toy.” —
*Fr*. “In thee.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc09001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>Par ta
clarte.” — *Fr*. “By thy light.”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc09001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p17.1"></span>Frequens in
Psalmis figura ab alio Cherubinorum Arcae,” etc. *i*.*e*. “A common
figure in the Psalms, taken more immediately, in my opinion, from the
wings of the Cherubim overshadowing the mercy-seat which covered the
ark; but more remotely from birds, which defend their young from the
solar rays by overshadowing them with their wings. See <span
id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Ps. 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008),
[Ps. 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001), [Ps.
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004), [Ps.
91:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#004)<span id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>,
etc., and <span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>[De
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)<span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>.”
— *Bishop Hare*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc09001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p20"></span> The words in the original are, <span
id="ii.ii-p20.1"></span>נחל עתיך, *nachal adanecha*, *the river of thy
Eden*, in which there is probably an allusion to the garden of <span
id="ii.ii-p20.2"></span>ערן Eden, and to the river which flowed through
and watered it.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc09001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span> Heb. Draw out at length.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc09001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p9"></span> That is, the foot of the proud man, as the
Chaldee translates it, the thing being put for the person in whom it is;
a mode of expression of frequent occurrence in Scripture. Thus *deceit*,
in <span id="ii.iii-p9.1"></span>[Pr
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#027)<span id="ii.iii-p9.1"></span>,
is put for *a deceitful man*; *poverty*, in <span
id="ii.iii-p9.2"></span>[2Ki
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014)<span id="ii.iii-p9.2"></span>,
*for poor people*, etc. There appears to be here an allusion to the
ancient practice of tyrants in treading upon their enemies, or in
spurning those who offended them from their presence with their feet.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc09001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p12"></span> Heb. <span id="ii.iii-p12.1"></span>שם
*sham*, *there*, that is, (pointing with the finger to a particular
place,) see there! lo! the workers of iniquity are fallen. “It
represents strongly before the eye,” says Mudge, “the downfall of the
wicked. Upon the very spot where they practice their treachery, they
receive their downfall.” A similar mode of expression occurs in <span
id="ii.iii-p12.2"></span>[Ps 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iii-p12.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 37](cc09002)
