[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc09010)  [Next](cc09012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 9: Psalms, Part II*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>PSALM 46

<span id="xii-p2"></span>This psalm seems to be an expression of
thanksgiving rather for some particular deliverance, than for the
constant aid by which God has always protected and preserved his Church.
It may be inferred from it that the city of Jerusalem. when stricken
with great terror, and placed in extreme danger, was preserved, contrary
to all expectation, by the unlooked for and miraculous power of God. The
prophet, therefore, whoever composed the psalm, commending a deliverance
so singularly vouchsafed by God, exhorts the faithful to commit
themselves confidently to his protection, and not to doubt that, relying
fearlessly upon him as their guardian and the protector of their
welfare, they shall be continually preserved in safety from all the
assaults of their enemies, because it is his peculiar office to quell
all commotions.

<span id="xii-p3"></span>To the chief musician of the sons of Korah, a
song upon Alamoth.

<span id="xii-p4"></span>Interpreters are not agreed as to the meaning
of the word <span id="xii-p4.1"></span>עלמות, *alamoth;* but without
noticing all the different opinions, I shall mention only two of them,
namely, that it was either an instrument of music, or else the
commencement of some common and well known song. The latter conjecture
appears to me the most probable. As to the time when this psalm was
written it is also uncertain, unless, perhaps, we might suppose that it
was written when the siege of the city was suddenly raised by the
terrible and sore destruction which God brought upon the army of
Sennacherib,  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) (<span
id="xii-p5.2"></span>[2Ki 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)<span
id="xii-p5.2"></span>.) This opinion I readily admit, because it accords
most with the whole scope of the psalm. It is abundantly manifest that
some favor of God, worthy of being held in remembrance, such as that
was, is here commended.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
46:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1**. God is our refuge and strength: he is
found an exceeding \[or superlative\] help in tribulations. **2**.
Therefore we will not fear, though the earth be moved, and the mountains
fall into the midst of the sea.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span><span id="xii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *God is our refuge and strength* Here
the Psalmist begins with a general expression or sentiment, before he
comes to speak of the more particular deliverance. He begins by
premising that God is sufficiently able to protect his own people, and
that he gives them sufficient ground to expect it; for this the word
<span id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>מחסה, *machaseh,* properly signifies. In
the second clause of the verse the verb *he is found,* which we
translate in the present, is in the past tense, *he has been found;*
and, indeed, there would be no impropriety in limiting the language to
some particular deliverance which had already been experienced, just as
others also have rendered it in the past tense. But as the prophet adds
the term *tribulations* in the plural number, I prefer explaining it of
a continued act, That God comes seasonably to our aid, and is never
wanting in the time of need, as often as any afflictions press upon his
people. If the prophet were speaking of the experience of God’s favor,
it would answer much better to render the verb in the past tense. It is,
however, obvious that his design is to extol the power of God and his
goodness towards his people, and to show how ready God is to afford them
assistance, that they may not in the time of their adversities gaze
around them on every side, but rest satisfied with his protection alone.
He therefore says expressly that God acts in such a manner towards them,
to let the Church know that he exercises a special care in preserving
and defending her. There can be no doubt that by this expression he
means to draw a distinction between the chosen people of God and other
heathen nations, and in this way to commend the privilege of adoption
which God of his goodness had vouchsafed to the posterity of Abraham.
Accordingly, when I said before that it was a general expression, my
intention was not to extend it to all manner of persons, but only to all
times; for the object of the prophet is to teach us after what manner
God is wont to act towards those who are his people. He next concludes,
by way of inference, that the faithful nave no reason to be afraid,
since God is always ready to deliver them, nay, is also armed with
invincible power. He shows in this that the true and proper proof of our
hope consists in this, that, when things are so confused, that the
heavens seem as it were to fall with great violence, the earth to remove
out of its place, and the mountains to be torn up from their very
foundations, we nevertheless continue to preserve and maintain calmness
and tranquillity of heart. It is an easy matter to manifest the
appearance of great confidence, so long as we are not placed in imminent
danger: but if, in the midst of a general crash of the whole world, our
minds continue undisturbed and free of trouble, this is an evident proof
that we attribute to the power of God the honor which belongs to him.
When, however, the sacred poet says, *We will not fear,* he is not to be
understood as meaning that the minds of the godly are exempt from all
solicitude or fear, as if they were destitute of feeling, for there is a
great difference between insensibility and the confidence of faith. He
only shows that whatever may happen they are never overwhelmed with
terror, but rather gather strength and courage sufficient to allay all
fear. *Though the earth be moved, and the mountains fall into the midst
of the sea,* are hyperbolical modes of expression, but they nevertheless
denote a revolution, and turning upside down of the whole world. Some
have explained the expression, *the midst of the sea,* as referring to
the earth. I do not, however, approve of it. But in order more fully to
understand the doctrine of the psalm, let us proceed to consider what
follows.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
46:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. Though the waters thereof roar and
rage  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) tempestuously: though the
mountains be shaken with the swelling thereof. Selah. **4**. The streams
of her river shall make glad the city of God, the sanctuary of the
tabernacles of the Most High. **5**. God is in the midst of her; she
shall not be moved: God will help her at the dawn of the morning.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>**3** *Though the waters thereof roar,* etc
This verse ought to be read in connection with the verse which follows,
because it is necessary to complete the sense, as if it had been said:
Though the waters of the sea roar and swell, and by their fierce
impetuosity shake the very mountains — even in the midst of these
dreadful tumults, the holy city of God will continue to enjoy comfort
and peace, satisfied with her small streams. The relative pronoun *her,*
according to the common usage of the Hebrew language, is superfluous in
this place. The prophet intended simply to say, that the small streams
of a river would afford to the holy city abundant cause of rejoicing,
though the whole world should be moved and destroyed. I have already
mentioned shortly before how profitable is the doctrine taught us in
this place, that our faith is really and truly tested only when we are
brought into very severe conflicts, and when even hell itself seems
opened to swallow us up. In like manner, we have portrayed to us the
victory of faith over the whole world, when, in the midst of the utmost
confusion, it unfolds itself, and begins to raise its head in such a
manner as that although the whole creation seem to be banded together,
and to have conspired for the destruction of the faithful, it
nevertheless triumphs over all fear. Not that the children of God, when
placed in peril, indulge in jesting or make a sport of death, but the
help which God has promised them more than overbalances, in their
estimation, all the evils which inspire them with fear. The sentiment of
Horace is very beautiful, when, speaking of the righteous man and the
man who feels conscious of no guilt, he says, (Car., Lib. iii., Od. 3,)

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>“<span id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>Dux inquieti
turbidus Adriae,  
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus,  
Si fractus illabitur orbis,  
Impavidum ferient ruinae.”

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>“Let the wild winds that rule the seas,  
Tempestuous, all their horrors raise;  
Let Jove’s dread arm with thunders rend the spheres;  
Beneath the crush of worlds undaunted he appears.”  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span>But as no such person as he imagines could
ever be found, he only trifles in speaking as he does. Their fortitude,
therefore, has its foundation in the assurance of the divine protection
alone, so that they who rely upon God, and put their trust in him, may
truly boast, not only that they shall be undismayed, but also that they
shall be preserved in security and safety amidst the ruins of a falling
world.

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>The prophet says expressly, that *the city
of God shall be glad,* although it had no raging sea, but only a gently
flowing stream, to set for its defense against those waves of which he
has made mention. By this mode of expression he alludes to the stream
which flowed from Shiloah, and passed through the city of Jerusalem.
Further, the prophet, I have no doubt, here indirectly rebukes the vain
confidence of those who, fortified by earthly assistance, imagine that
they are well protected, and beyond the reach of all danger. Those who
anxiously seek to strengthen themselves on all sides with the invincible
helps of the world, seem, indeed, to imagine that they are able to
prevent their enemies from approaching them, just as if they were
environed on all sides with the sea; but it often happens that the very
defenses which they had reared turn to their own destruction, even as
when a tempest lays waste and destroys an island by overflowing it. But
they who commit themselves to the protection of God, although in the
estimation of the world they are exposed to every kind of injury, and
are not sufficiently able to repel the assaults made upon them,
nevertheless repose in security. On this account, Isaiah (<span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Isa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006)<span
id="xii.ii-p12.1"></span>) reproves the Jews because they despised the
gently flowing waters of Shiloah, and longed for deep and rapid rivers.

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>In that passage, there is an elegant
antithesis between the little brook Shiloah on the one hand, and the
Nile and Euphrates on the other; as if he had said, They defraud God of
his honor by the unworthy reflection, that when he made choice of the
city of Jerusalem, he had not made the necessary provision in respect of
strength and fortifications for its defense and preservation. And
certainly, if this psalm was written after the slaughter and flight of
the army of Sennacherib, it is probable that the inspired writer
purposely made use of the same metaphor, to teach the faithful in all
ages, that the grace of God alone would be to them a sufficient
protection, independent of the assistance of the world. In like manner,
the Holy Spirit still exhorts and encourages us to cherish the same
confidence, that, despising all the resources of those who proudly
magnify themselves against us, we may preserve our tranquillity in the
midst of disquietude and trouble, and not be grieved or ashamed on
account of our defenseless condition, so long as the hand of God is
stretched out to save us. Thus, although the help of God comes to our
aid in a secret and gentle manner, like the still flowing streams, yet
it imparts to us more tranquillity of mind than if the whole power of
the world were gathered together for our help. In speaking of Jerusalem
as *the sanctuary of the tabernacles of the Most High,* the prophet
makes a beautiful allusion to the circumstances or condition of that
time: for although God exercised authority over all the tribes of the
people, yet he made choice of that city as the seat of royalty, from
which he might govern the whole nation of Israel. The tabernacles of the
Most High were scattered throughout all Judea, but still it was
necessary that they should be gathered together and united in one
sanctuary, that they might be under the dominion of God.

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span><span id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>**5.** *God is in the midst of her; she
shall not be moved. The Psalmist now* shows that the great security of
the Church consists in this, that God dwells in the midst of her; for
the verb which we translate, *shall be moved,* is of the feminine
gender, nor can it be referred to God, as if it were designed to teach
that God is immovable. The sentence must be explained in this way, The
holy city shall not be moved or shaken, because God dwells there, and is
always ready to help her. The expression, *the dawn of the morning*
 <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) denotes *daily,* as soon as the
sun rises upon the earth. The sum of the whole is, If we desire to be
protected by the hand of God, we must be concerned above all things that
he may dwell amongst us; for all hope of safety depends upon his
presence alone. And he dwells amongst us for no other purpose than to
preserve us uninjured. Moreover, although God does not always hasten
immediately to our aid, according to the importunity of our desires, yet
he will always come to us seasonably, so as to make apparent the truth
of what is elsewhere said,

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>“Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep,” (<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)<span id="xii.ii-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
46:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**6**. The peoples raged, the kingdoms were
moved: he uttered his voice  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) the
earth melted. **7**. Jehovah of armies is with us: the God of Jacob is
our fortress. Selah. **8**. Come ye, consider the works of Jehovah, what
desolations  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) he hath made in the
earth. **9**. He maketh battles to cease even to the end of the earth;
he breaketh the bow, he cutteth in pieces the spear; he burneth the
chariots with fire.  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) **10**. Be
still  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) and know that I am God: I
will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) **11**. Jehovah of armies is with us:
the God of Jacob is our fortress. Selah.

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span>**6** *The peoples raged* Since the Church
of God is never without enemies, and these very powerful, and such as
consequently fight against her with cruel and unbridled fury, the
prophet now confirms from experience the doctrine which he had advanced
concerning the impregnable character of the divine protection. He then
deduces from it this general ground of consolation, That it belongs
continually to God to restrain and quell all commotions, and that his
arm is strong enough to break all the efforts of the enemy. This
passage, I admit, might be understood in a more general sense, as
meaning that the city of God is liable to be assailed by many storms and
tempests; but that by the favor of God she is, nevertheless, always
preserved in safety. It is, however, more probable, as I have already
said at the beginning, that the Psalmist is here speaking of some
notable deliverance, in which God had given a striking proof of the
power and favor which he exercises in the constant preservation of the
Church. Accordingly, he relates what had taken place, namely, that the
enemies of the Church came with a dreadful host to waste and destroy it;
but that immediately, by *the voice of God,* they, as it were, *melted*
and vanished away. From this we derive an invaluable ground of
consolation, when it is said, That although the whole world rise up
against us, and confound all things by their increased madness, they can
be brought to nought in a moment, as soon as God shows himself favorable
towards us. The *voice of God,* no doubt, signifies his will or command;
but the prophet, by this expression, seems to have an eye to the
promises of God, by which he has declared, that he will be the guardian
and defender of the Church. At the same time, let us observe the
contrast which is here stated between the voice of God and the turbulent
commotions of the kingdoms of this world.

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>**7.** *Jehovah of armies is with us.* In
this verse we are taught how we shall be able to apply to our own use
the things which the Scriptures everywhere record concerning the
infinite power of God. We shall be able to do this when we believe
ourselves to be of the number of those whom God has embraced with his
fatherly love, and whom he will cherish. The Psalmist again alludes, in
terms of commendation, to the adoption by which Israel was separated
from the common condition of all the other nations of the earth. And,
indeed, apart from this, the description of the power of God would only
inspire us with dread. Confident boasting, then, arises from this, that
God has chosen us for his peculiar people, to show forth his power in
preserving and defending us. On this account, the prophet, after having
celebrated the power of God by calling him *the God of armies,*
immediately adds another epithet, *the God of Jacob,* by which he
confirms the covenant made of old time with Abraham, that his posterity,
to whom the inheritance of the promised grace belongs, should not doubt
that God was favorable to them also. That our faith may rest truly and
firmly in God, we must take into consideration at the same time these
two parts of his character — his immeasurable power, by which he is able
to subdue the whole world under him; and his fatherly love which he has
manifested in his word. When these two things are joined together, there
is nothing which can hinder our faith from defying all the enemies which
may rise up against us, nor must we doubt that God will succor us, since
he has promised to do it; and as to power, he is sufficiently able also
to fulfill his promise, for he is the God of armies. From this we learn,
that those persons err egregiously in the interpretation of Scripture,
who leave in entire suspense the application of all that is said
concerning the power of God, and do not rest assured that he will be a
Father to them, inasmuch as they are of his flock, and partakers of the
adoption.

<span id="xii.iii-p13"></span><span id="xii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p14"></span>**8** *Come ye, consider the works of
Jehovah* The Psalmist seems still to continue in this verse the history
of a deliverance by which God had given abundant evidence that he is the
most efficient and faithful protector of his Church, that the godly
might derive from it both courage and strength to enable them to
overcome whatever temptations might afterwards arise. The manifestations
which God has given of his favor towards us in preserving us, ought to
be kept continually before our eyes as a means of establishing in our
hearts a persuasion of the stability of his promises. By this
exhortation we have tacitly rebuked the indifference and stupidity of
those who do not make so great account of the power of God as they ought
to do; or rather, the whole world is charged with ingratitude, because
there is scarcely one in a hundred who acknowledges that he has abundant
help and security in God, so that they are all blinded to the works of
God, or rather wilfully shut their eyes at that which would,
nevertheless, prove the best means of strengthening their faith. We see
how many ascribe to fortune that which ought to be traced to the
providence of God. Others imagine that they obtain, by their own
industry, whatever God has bestowed upon them, or ascribe to second
causes what proceeds from him alone; while others are utterly lost to
all sense. The Psalmist, therefore, justly calls upon all men, and
exhorts them to consider the works of God; as if he had said, The reason
why men repose not the hope of their welfare in God is, that they are
indifferent to the consideration of his works, or so ungrateful, that
they make not half the account of them which they ought to do. As he
addresses himself in general to all men, we learn, that even the godly
themselves are drowsy and unconcerned in this respect until they are
awakened. He extols very highly the power of God in preserving his
chosen people, which is commonly despised or not estimated as it ought
to be, when it is exercised after an ordinary manner. He therefore sets
before them the desolations of countries, and marvellous devastations,
and other miraculous things, which more powerfully move the minds of
men. If any one would prefer to understand what follows — *He maketh
battles to cease* — of some special help vouchsafed by God, yet still it
must be considered as intended to lead the faithful to expect as much
help from him in future as they had already experienced. The prophet, it
appears, from one particular instance, designs to show in general how
mightily God is wont to defend his Church. At the same time, it happened
more than once, that God quelled throughout the land of Judea all the
dangerous tumults by which it was distracted, and drove away wars far
from it, by depriving the enemies of their courage, breaking their bows,
and burning their chariots; and it is very probable that the prophet,
froth a particular instance, here takes occasion to remind the Jews how
often God had disappointed the greatest efforts of their enemies. One
thing, however, is quite certain, that God is here set forth as adorned
with these titles, that we should look for peace from him, even when the
whole world is in uproar, and agitated in a dreadful manner.

<span id="xii.iii-p15"></span><span id="xii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p16"></span>**10** *Be still, and know that I am God*
The Psalmist seems now to turn his discourse to the enemies of the
people of God, who indulge their lust of mischief and revenge upon them:
for in doing injury to the saints they do not consider that they are
making war against God. Imagining that they have only to do with men,
they presumptuously assail them, and therefore the prophet here
represses their insolence; and that his address may have the more
weight, he introduces God himself as speaking to them. In the first
place, he bids them *be still, that they may know that he is God;* for
we see that when men are carried away without consideration, they go
beyond all bounds and measure. Accordingly, the prophet justly requires
the enemies of the Church to be still and hold their peace, so that when
their anger is appeased they may perceive that they are fighting against
God. We have in the fourth Psalm, at the fourth verse, a sentiment
somewhat similar, “Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own
heart upon your bed, and be still.” In short, the Psalmist exhorts the
world to subdue and restrain their turbulent affections, and to yield to
the God of Israel the glory which he deserves; and he warns them, that
if they proceed to act like madmen, his power is not enclosed within the
narrow limits of Judea, and that it will be no difficult matter for him
to stretch forth his arm afar to the Gentiles and heathen nations, that
he may glorify himself in every land. In conclusion, he repeats what he
had already said, that God has more than enough, both of weapons and of
strength, to preserve and defend his Church which he has adopted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc09011.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii-p5"></span> Others refer it, as Rosenmüller, to the
victory of Jehoshaphat, which was celebrated with great rejoicing, <span
id="xii-p5.1"></span>[2Ch
20:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#026)<span id="xii-p5.1"></span>.
It is, however, difficult or impossible to ascertain with certainty the
occasion on which it was composed. It seems rather the language of faith
under threatened difficulties, than of triumph over vanquished foes.
Thus, in the midst of threatened danger, it may be employed by
Christians to support their faith, hope, and peace. This was Luther’s
favorite psalm. He composed a famous version of it on his journey to the
Diet at Worms, where he went boldly to defend the Reformation at the
risk of his life; and he was wont to say when threatened with any fresh
trouble, “Come, let us sing the 46th Psalm.”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc09011.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
s’enfleront.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, swell.”

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc09011.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xii.ii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> Francis’ Translation of Horace.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc09011.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span> “*At the looking forth of the morning*;
that is, as the Greek explaineth it, ‘very early;’ when the morning
peereth or showeth the face.” — *Ainsworth*. “*As soon as the morning
appears* \[or *shows*\] *its face*; *i*.*e*., God will come very early
to her succor, before any enemy is awakened to annoy her.” — *Mudge*.
“*Before* *the dawn of the morning*; *i*.*e*., with the utmost readiness
and alacrity. The expression is borrowed from the conduct of a person
who, in his anxiety to accomplish a favorite object, engages in it
earlier than men ordinarily would. <span id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Jer.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025)<span id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>.” —
*French and Skinner*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc09011.htm#fr_177) <span
id="xii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
fait resonner.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “That is, made to resound.”

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc09011.htm#fr_178) <span
id="xii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>Ou, quels
deserts.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, what deserts.”

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc09011.htm#fr_179) <span
id="xii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span> There is probably here an allusion to the
ancient custom of collecting the arms and armor of the vanquished into a
heap, and setting it on fire. The image is employed to express complete
victory, and a perfect establishment of peace. This custom prevailed
among the Jews, and the first instance of it which we meet with is in
<span id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>[Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006)<span id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>.
It is also referred to in the description of the judgments of God upon
Gog, <span id="xii.iii-p5.2"></span>[Eze
39:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#008)<span
id="xii.iii-p5.2"></span>. This was also a Roman custom. Virgil alludes
to it in Aeneid, lib. 8, 50, 560. A medal struck by Vespasian the Roman
emperor to commemorate the termination of his wars both in Italy and
through all parts of the world, represents the Goddess of Peace holding
an olive-branch with one hand, and in the other a lighted torch, with
which she sets fire to a heap of armor.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc09011.htm#fr_180) <span
id="xii.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p6.1"></span>Ou,
arrestez, demeurez coy.” — *Fr*. *marg*. “Or, stop, be quiet.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc09011.htm#fr_181) <span
id="xii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>Par toute
la terre.” — *Fr*. “Through all the earth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 47](cc09012)
