[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nsd04)  [Next](nsd06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Notes on the Shoshonean Dialects of Southern California*, by A. L.
Kroeber, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO.

The dialect of San Juan Capistrano, sometimes called San Juaneño, or
merely Juaneño, has always been stated to be closely related to Luiseño.
The precise degree of its similarity and the nature of its differences
to Luiseño have however never been determined. In December, 1907, it was
found possible to spend a short time with an elderly Juaneño called Jose
de Gracia Cruz, born at the Mission and living almost within hail of it
and the present railroad station. The vocabulary obtained from him is
given below.

It appears that e and a somewhat approach each other in Juaneño, so that
it is at times difficult to decide with which quality a vowel is spoken.
Similarly the Juaneño vocabulary often has e where the corresponding
word as obtained in Luiseño has a. Glottal stops, indicated by an
apostrophe, are quite marked, as in Luiseño. There are a few aspirations
after vowels or final consonants, as in the words we‘, two, and we‘sa,
four. Comparison with other Shoshonean dialects shows these aspirations
to represent a former h, the vowel following which has been lost.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Velar k, written
as q, was heard a number of times from the Juaneño informant. It seems
likely that all k sounds are produced comparatively far back. <span
class="it">v</span> is bilabial, as always in Shoshonean. As in the
other Luiseño-Cahuilla dialects, <span class="it">ö</span> and <span
class="it">ü</span> are not found. A considerably palatalized t,
indicated by t•, was frequently heard where Luiseño has t, especially
when this sound is final. An sh sound with similar palatal quality has
been denoted by c•. These two sounds usually resemble t<sup>r</sup> and
c<sup>r</sup> and are similar to the palatal sounds of Yokuts, Salinan,
and other languages in Central California. The Dravidian sounds of the
t<sup>r</sup> series are probably similar.

There are instances of combinations of sounds at the ends of words due
to the dropping out of unaccented vowels; for instance, nucl,
fingernails, and momt•, ocean.

The possessive prefixes are:

<div align="center">

|       |                |
|-------|----------------|
| 1 s.  | no-, ne-, na-. |
| 2 s.  | o-.            |
| 3 s.  | po-            |
| 1 pl. | tcum-.         |

</div>

Before a-stems, the vowel of the prefix of the first person is a,
sometimes o; before e-stems, either e or o; before i-stems, o-stems,
u-stems, e, or occasionally o. There thus appears to be assimilation
only by a-stems. The primary form of the vowel of the prefix thus seems
to vary between o and e, the choice being determined usually, but not
always, by a principle of contrast. The vowels of the prefixes of other
persons, as well as the Luiseño forms, show no- to be the probable
original prefix. The ne-form is paralleled by the Cahuilla prefixes.

A number of the words obtained with possessive prefixes show an ending
-m, which cannot well be the plural suffix. Thus ne-mu<span
class="it">v</span>um, my nose, and sepul ne-pulum, one eye. This -m
recalls the final -n which is so frequent on Gabrielino forms with the
possessive prefix.

In discussing Cahuilla terms denoting parts of the body, it was pointed
out that these lacked noun-endings, and the question was raised whether
under any circumstances they could have endings, in that or other
Shoshonean dialects of Southern California. Juaneño tama-t•, tooth,
seems to answer this question,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

until it is remembered that tooth can denote a substance as well as an
organ. The form is therefore no doubt parallel with the only other
Juaneño term denoting a part of the body found without a prefix, yu-t•,
hair, and parallel also to Luiseño and Cahuilla yu-la, ou-la, te-il,
hair, blood, bone. The question therefore remains answered negatively
for the great mass and most distinctive nouns of this class.

Juaneño shows l where this is the noun-ending of Luiseño, Agua Caliente,
and Cahuilla; t or t• as equivalent of the noun-ending t in these other
dialects; <span id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11.md) and te as equivalent of
their c. It will be recalled from what has been said in connection with
Cahuilla that there is some approximation to this last equivalence in
Luiseño, where the ending c, when followed by the subjective suffix -a
or other vowels, becomes tc, as in ki-tc-a, house. Juaneño, like
Cahuilla, does not show the subjective suffix -a of Luiseño and Agua
Caliente.

Altogether the dialect of San Juan Capistrano shows no approximation to
Gabrielino <span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12.md) and cannot be considered
in any way a link between the Gabrielino and Luiseño-Cahuilla groups.
Within the Luiseño-Cahuilla group its closest relations are all to
Luiseño. It is a subdivision or dialect of Luiseño rather than a branch
of the general Luiseño-Cahuilla group.

*Vocabulary*.

One to five, sepul, we‘, pahai, we‘ sa´, maha´r.

Man, yeitc; woman, coñwāl; boy, amaiamel; girl, ne-witmal; baby,
eme´tikile; old man, naxanman; old woman, necimel; people, atāx-em.

My father, no-na´; my, his mother, ne-yo´, po-yo´; my son, no-qā´m; my
daughter, ne-cwā´m; my older brother, no-pā´c; my younger brother,
nopè’t; my older sister, no-qè’s; my younger sister, ne-pī’t; my
grandfather's father, no-piwu; my mother 's mother, no-tu.

Head, hair, yut•, ne-yu; ear, na-naqam; eye, ne-pulum; nose, ne-mu<span
class="it">v</span>um; mouth, no-t•em; tongue, ne-wèyem; tooth, tama´t•;
beard, ne-mūc•; neck, no-qlem; nail, nu-cl; hand, arm, na-mā; finger,
thumb, ne-yo‘; belly, ne-le’em; breast, na-ālem; back-bone, na-mātcam;
leg, ne-qāsem; foot, ne’-e’;

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

(bone, ne-wè´seqai); heart, ne-c•ūn; liver, ne-nòm; blood, no-o´u, o-ou;
lungs, na-s•<span class="it">v</span>as•<span class="it">v</span>a;
intestines, ne-c•ī.

House, kitc; my house, ne-ki; your house, o-ki; sweathouse, ha´selitc;
ceremonial enclosure, wa´mgutc; my bow, ne-qutup; my arrow, no-hu´; my
knife, no-pq; my pipe, no-hūqup; tobacco, pī<span class="it">v</span>et,
nepī<span class="it">v</span>em; pottery jar, qa<span
class="it">v</span>a’mal; metate, no-t•o´; mortar, no-t•ō´pe.

Sky, dūpitc; sun, teme’t; moon, mòil; star, c•ūel; night, tūkme’t; day,
teme-ña; rain, qwacq; snow, yūit; fire, qu’t; smoke, qūmet; ashes,
tè´leñetc; water, pā’l; land, èxel; sand, beach, èx<span
class="it">v</span>el; ocean, mòmt•; stream, wenitc; mountain, qawī’tc;
plain, pal<span class="it">v</span>intc; stone, tòt•; wood, qalāut.

Dog, awāl; bear, hunut•; coyote, ano´; deer, c•ūkt•; mountain sheep,
bāat•; panther, tukut•; fox, qaweutc; jackrabbit, cuitc; rabbit, dòct;
ground-squirrel, qèntc (Luiseño form given as qèñitc); mole (topo), mòt.

Eagle, acut; buzzard, yuñā<span class="it">v</span>itc; a hawk, pāksl;
raven, <span class="sc">g</span>awīiret; crow, a´lemel; owl, mūt•; small
owl, qoqū´l.

Rattlesnake, còut•; snake, paxa; small fish, kuyūmal; large fish,
tuc•uxo; whale, keyòt.

Fly, qwaal; flies, qwaalem; flea, moqwā’itc; louse, ola´t; bees,
cā´cañal-em; jicote, bumblebee, c•aka´; honey, c•aka po-pa´u, bee
its-water.

White, wāixant•; black, ye<span class="it">v</span>ātxant•; red,
koya´xu’itc; large, awo´lo<span class="it">v</span>; good, polò<span
class="it">v</span>; bad, hī´tciqute; much, muyuk; little, wena’ma’l.

I, nò; thou, om; we, tcā’am; ye, omo´m.

This, e<span class="it">v</span>i´; these, evi´m; that, wena´l; here,
a<span class="it">v</span>a´; there, wana´; who, hax; what, hi’ts;
where, metca´; near, metcqen; far, wam; up, ètc; down, tòx; north,
tamāmek; south, kwīmek; today, piī´qale; yesterday, tuku<span
class="it">v</span>; tomorrow, potòqole; yes, ohò´; no, qāi.

Eat, natcxun; drink, pa’; run, hux; dance, pel’e; sing, hèlex; sleep,
kūpla; speak, tèle; see, tèli’we; hear, naqma´a; kill, mòra; strike,
cīkwa; sit, pe<span class="it">v</span>e’x; walk, wekale; stand,
yū´liña, yū´daña.

hiqas o-t•uñ, what is your name,

nīk sepul, give me one.

sepul ne-pulum, one (my) eye.

pa’ pāl, toma agua.

pal pecī´tcqale, sale l’agua.

e<span class="it">v</span>è yuitc e´xel, this land, la tierra de aqui.

yemaik tapye tcòonem, long ago all died, ya se murieron todos. (Luiseño
yumaik, formerly; tap, to die, plural; tcounum, all.)

nonòxe ā’aq supul, I alone remain.

pò´xonem atāxem, puros Indios, true Indians.

metca’s o-ki, where is your house,

tcum-tela, our language.

wera’x, awake!

hūcu-<span class="it">v</span>ai, or: hūcu om wai, smoke, you!

Wiyō´t, dios (Ouiot, Wiyot).

Tciñitcnitc, tciñitcnic, diablo (Chinigchinich, Chungichnish).

tòitc, diablo (Luiseño towish, touch, spirit).

manap tòitc, tòitc is coming.

noo´nwom naxa´nmal, ya estoy viejo.

kī´tcmuñgm, southerners.

naqma´a no-tèle, hear my words!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[249:11](nsd05.htm#fr_11.md) On the other hand
Juaneño shows yu-t•, hair, where Luiseño has yu-la. This is one of many
instances proving that the Shoshonean noun-endings can not be traced
from dialect to dialect with only physiological modifications. Besides
phonetic change, analogy or other psychological factors have often been
of determining influence.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[249:12](nsd05.htm#fr_12.md) Except the possible
relation of -m to Gabrielino -n on nouns with a possessive prefix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gabrielino](nsd06.md)
