[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nsd06)  [Next](nsd08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Shoshonean Dialects of Southern California*, by A. L.
Kroeber, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SERRANO.

The Serrano dialect of Highland and Morongo possesses <span
class="it">ö</span>, <span class="it">ü</span>, and the other impure
vowels of most Shoshonean dialects; a number of vowels followed by
glottal stops; velars and sonants much like those of Cahuilla; palatal
t•, which is at first difficult to distinguish from tc; and r; but lacks
l. In many cases Serrano r is the direct equivalent of Luiseño-Cahuilla
l. The most striking characteristic of this Serrano dialect is a
peculiar pronunciation of the vowels, which makes many or most of them
sound as if followed by an English r as it is spoken by Americans. Where
this quality is most noticeable it has been indicated by <sup>r</sup>.
Some trace of this sound or quality, however, was heard in many words
where it was not indicated, and in many cases it was plainer than in
such words as English far. Serrano x and c

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

are difficult to distinguish, and x or h often corresponds to
Luiseño-Cahuilla c or s. The informants from whom the following
vocabulary was secured are Mrs. Jose Miguel, on the Banning reservation,
whose father was from Mission Creek, and whose forms are always placed
first; and Santos Manuel, born and living at San Manuel, whose form, if
obtained, is the second word given under each meaning.

One to ten, haukup, w<span class="it">o</span>r (wur), pahi, watca,
maha<sup>r</sup>tc, pa<span class="it">v</span>ahai, watc’ku<span
class="it">v</span>ik, wa’wutc, ma’ku<span class="it">v</span>ik,
war-maha<sup>r</sup>tc (waha-ma<sup>r</sup>hatc); eleven, pu’pa haupk;
twelve, pu’pa w<span class="it">ö</span>r; etc.; fifteen, pu’pa
maha<sup>r</sup>tc; twenty, w<span class="it">ö</span>h<span
class="it">ö</span> w<span class="it">ö</span>rmahatc; thirty, pahi
w<span class="it">ö</span>rmahatc; forty, watca w<span
class="it">ö</span>rmahatc.

Person, takt, people, takt-am; man, w<span class="it">u</span>t•-ic;
woman, nii<sup>r</sup>xt, n<span class="it">ü</span><sup>r</sup><span
class="it">ü</span><sup>r</sup>xt-it; boy, anyitci, kwakit (= child?);
girl, naa<sup>r</sup>xt•, naxt•; youth, tutciñt, tutcint; old man,
wut•-iwut•; old woman, niixt-awut•.

Head, forehead, ne-x<span class="it">ö</span>r, ne-c<span
class="it">ö</span>r; hair, ne-aya, ne-ay<span class="it">ü</span>n;
ear, ne-qar<span class="it">v</span>, ne-qar<span
class="it">v</span><sup>a</sup>; eye, no-u<span class="it">v</span>a,
nu-<span class="it">v</span>u; nose, ne-mukpi, nu-mukpi; mouth,
ne-x.i<sup>r</sup>t, a-x.i<sup>r</sup>t, n<span
class="it">ü</span>-x<span class="it">ü</span>ts, n<span
class="it">ü</span>-c<span class="it">ü</span>ts; tongue, ni-nañ; tooth,
ni-tam-am, a-tam-am, ni-tam; beard, ne-qa<sup>r</sup>ña-m; chin,
ne-<span class="it">ö</span>itam; neck, na-moi, n<span
class="it">ü</span>-mu<sup>i</sup>; throat,
na-ñe<sup>r</sup>he<sup>r</sup>, nu-ñu<sup>r</sup>he<sup>r</sup>; arm,
hand, ne-ma, n<span class="it">ü</span>-ma; elbow, ni-tca; nail,
ne-watc, n<span class="it">ü</span>-watc; belly, ni-t<span
class="it">u</span>r; breast, ni-tunu; back, ni-t<span
class="it">ö</span>xpi; shoulder, ne-xe<sup>r</sup>ka<sup>r</sup>,
ne-ce<sup>r</sup>e<sup>r</sup>ke<sup>r</sup>; leg, ni-tcak; foot,
ni-nara, ni-na<span class="it">v</span><span class="it">ü</span>; knee,
ni-tame<sup>r</sup>; bone, ne-e<sup>r</sup>; heart, ne-hun, nu-hun;
liver, ni-n<span class="it">u</span>m; skin, ni-tuk,
nu-q<sup>r</sup><span class="it">u</span>tc; blood, ne-itc, a-itc,
ne<sup>r</sup>-i<sup>r</sup>tc.

House, kitc; my house, ne-ki, n<span class="it">ö</span>-ki; thy house,
m<span class="it">ö</span>-ki; his house, a-ki; our house, itcam tc<span
class="it">ö</span>-ki; houses, ki-kitc; sweat-house, ü<sup>r</sup>t•.;
road, per<span class="it">u</span>kt.

Chief, kika; shaman, he<sup>r</sup>mtc, hü<sup>r</sup>m<sup>i</sup>tc.

Sky, tukubitc; sun, tamiat, damiat; moon, m<span class="it">ö</span>at•,
m<span class="it">u</span>atc; star, huut•, huutc; stars, huu-m; night,
tuk, duk; day, = sun; rainbow, ax<sup>r</sup>e<sup>r</sup>nina; cloud,
omukt; rain, w<span class="it">ö</span>ruñut, w<span
class="it">u</span>ruñut; snow, yuat; hail, t<span
class="it">ö</span>xput; fire, kut, gut; smoke, marat,
mera<sup>r</sup>t; ash, kukwut, gukut; coal, tuut•, duutc; water, paat•,
batc; ocean, lake, m<span class="it">ö</span>m’t, mum<sup>u</sup>t;
stream, wanut•; land, earth, t<span
class="it">ö</span><sup>ir</sup><span
class="it">v</span>a<sup>r</sup>tc, t<span
class="it">ü</span><sup>ir</sup><span
class="it">v</span>a<sup>r</sup>tc; mountain, qaitc, tceit; rock, d<span
class="it">ü</span>mat, d<span class="it">ü</span>m<span
class="it">u</span>t; salt, tcukat, tcuk<span class="it">v</span>at;
sand, <span class="it">ö</span><sup>r</sup>kat,
u<sup>r</sup>k<sup>i</sup>tc.

Wood, gwotcat, kotcat; grass, haamt; willow, hakat; chia seeds,
pahinatc; toloache, manit; tobacco, pi<span class="it">v</span>’t.

Dog, kwidji, k<sup>w</sup>utci; bear, hunat; wolf (kaurt•et•?), wanat•;
coyote, wahei, wahi; deer, huka’t, hukwa’t; mountain-sheep,
paa<sup>r</sup>t; panther or wildcat, tukutcuwut, tukut;
ground-squirrel, q<sup>r</sup>e<sup>r</sup>eñt; badger, huna<span
class="it">v</span>t; jackrabbit, huit; rabbit, terokt, d<span
class="it">ü</span>rukt.

Bird, witcit; eagle, abü<sup>r</sup>ñt; condor, qwat•, gwaatc; owl,
mumt; crow, qwam, gatcau<span class="it">v</span><span
class="it">u</span>’t; hummingbird, pitidi.

Rattlesnake, h<span class="it">ö</span><sup>r</sup>ñt, h<span
class="it">ü</span><sup>r</sup>ñt; frog, wakatat; fish, kihut•, kihutc;
fly, pitcutcu-am, pitcutcu-atc; flea, atuict-am, atuict; lice,
a’-a<sup>r</sup>tcam-am, atc<span class="it">ü</span>m-itc.

White, yarara; black, t<span class="it">ö</span>rnana; red, x<span
class="it">ö</span>rinka or x<span class="it">ö</span>dinka; large,
ati<span class="it">ö</span><sup>r</sup>t•; small, anyi-tci; good,
a’aiye-tc; bad, k<span class="it">ü</span>xani-tc.

I, n<span class="it">ö</span><sup>u</sup>, n<span class="it">ö</span>;
thou, <span class="it">ü</span>mi’i, <span class="it">ü</span>mii; we,
itcam; ye, <span class="it">ü</span>mam; this, i<span
class="it">v</span>’i; that, he,

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

ama; those, they, ām; here, ip-ya; there, amk-wa; far, puyañ, ama-it;
near, pipc; today, ama-i, mat•; yesterday, i<span class="it">v</span>in;
tomorrow, u<span class="it">v</span>a’-pyi, u<span
class="it">v</span>a’-im (the words for today, yesterday, and tomorrow
are evidently formed from demonstrative stems); much, w<span
class="it">ö</span>r’; who, hami; "nosotros," haminat.

The last is a term applied to the Gitanemuk and other northern Serrano
by their neighbors. It is taken from their language, and said to mean
"who is it?" It seems to be generally understood by the Indians as the
equivalent of "Serrano" as the designation of a linguistic group.

Eat, raakw, kwak<span class="it">ü</span>ñ; drink, pa’; sleep, lie,
kuman; walk, hatcik; run, ya; stand, tc<span class="it">u</span>n<span
class="it">u</span>rk, p<span class="it">ö</span>u<span
class="it">v</span>iu; sit, n<span class="it">ö</span>upk; give, mak;
kill, m<span class="it">ö</span><sup>r</sup>kan; dead, amomki; dance,
touxtu; sing, tcatcun; cry, yu’; shout, wi’n; jump, rhanki; fly, hinyik;
strike, w.e<sup>r</sup>ki<sup>r</sup><span class="it">v</span>.

The possessive prefixes as obtained with the stem ki, house, are, first
person n<span class="it">ö</span>-, ne-, second person m<span
class="it">ö</span>-, third person a-, first person plural tc<span
class="it">ö</span>-, second person plural <span class="it">ö</span>-.

The vowels of the Serrano possessive prefixes show a harmonic relation
to the stem vowels. In the first person ni- is generally used before a
and u stems; ne- before <span class="it">ö</span>, e, i, and sometimes a
and u. In a number of cases the San Manuel informant said n<span
class="it">ü</span>- where the Morongo speaker gave ne-. He also usually
made the prefix nu- before u stems. While it appears that the principle
determining the vowel of the prefix is primarily one of assimilation, it
is also clear that other factors have influence.

As regards words denoting parts of the body, most such nouns do not end
in vowels in Serrano, but all obtained lack the detachable noun
suffixes.

The plural suffix in all cases noted is -am, except in the word huu-m,
stars. The final consonant of the substantive is retained in the words
atuict, flea, and takt, person, before the plural suffix. It appears
that the final t of these words is the detachable noun ending, but this
is not certain. In the words huu-tc, star, pitcutcua-tc, fly, and
atc<span class="it">ü</span>m-itc, louse, the ending -tc is lost in the
formation of the plural. Huu-tc is of interest as the exact equivalent
of Luiseño-Cahuilla cu-l, in which the ending is not lost before the
plural suffix.

The Gitanemuk dialect of the Serrano group, of which a vocabulary has
been previously published, shows possessive prefixes closely similar to
those of San Manuel and Morongo Serrano and to those of Gabrielino. The
first person singular is ni-; the second person mu-, mo-, or mö-; the
third person a-; the first

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

person plural tca-. The demonstrative stems are i or iv for proximity
and am for distance. The substantival demonstratives are formed by an
ending -ts, which appears also in the interrogative hamits, who. The
adverbial demonstratives here and there are derived from the same stems
as this and that. Am-ai, today, appears to be demonstrative, and u<span
class="it">v</span>-api, tomorrow, is probably also demonstrative. The
interrogative stems are ha for who and where, hi for what. Words
denoting colors were obtained with a suffix -k. Most verbs were obtained
with a prefix or proclitic ni-, and a few show an analogous a-. It is
natural to look upon these elements as subjective parallels to the
possessive elements of nouns.

The Möhineyam or Mohave river dialect of the Serrano group shows the
plural suffix in the form -am, or -yam after vowels, in all words
obtained except hamaha<span class="it">v</span>a-yim, Mohave. Huu, star,
plural huu-yam, and dag<span class="sc">a</span>t, person, plural
dag<span class="sc">a</span>t-am, parallel the corresponding southern
Serrano forms.

While the Serrano of Highland and of Morongo is the same, it differs
from that of the lower Mohave river and of the Tehachapi region, from
which vocabularies under the name of Möhineyam and Gitanemuk have been
published. There is some difference in stems, and a general phonetic
divergence. The two northern dialects lack the peculiar r-like
inflection of the vowels of the San Bernardino Serrano. As compared with
this southern Serrano, the two northern dialects are quite similar. It
therefore appears that a general distinction can be made between the
Serrano dialects of the San Bernardino range, and those of the Mohave
desert and Tejon region to the north of this range. While all the
Serrano dialects are similar enough to be mutually intelligible, they
are thus more different than formerly believed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chemehuevi](nsd08)
