[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nsd09)  [Next](nsd11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Notes on the Shoshonean Dialects of Southern California*, by A. L.
Kroeber, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GIAMINA.

The Giamina have been described <span id="fr_19"></span>[18](#fn_18) as
a tribe in the San Joaquin valley, near Poso creek, and of doubtful
affiliation. A short vocabulary of about twenty words purporting to be
of the Giamina language was obtained from an old man unable to give
further information or to render explanations. While these words were
clearly Shoshonean, and yet clearly not from any known dialect, the
source of information was so slight, open to error, and uncorroborated,
that it seemed best not to attempt any definite assignment of Giamina to
the scheme of Shoshonean relationships. The possibility is by no means
excluded that the vocabulary obtained represents miscellaneous Yokuts
corruptions, either individual or tribal, or one or more Shoshonean
dialects. It has therefore been subjected to comparison with the mass of
Shoshonean dialects, with the following results:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

One, tcupu; L-C supul, supli, Gabr. puku, Serr. haukup, K R tcits, U-C
cui.

Two, hewe; Gabr. wehe.

Three, pohoim; Gabr., Luis., pahai, Kaw. pehei.

Four, wadja; Gabr., Serr., wadja, U-C watcuw-, Mono watsikw-, L-C
witcu<span class="it">w</span>, K R nanau.

Five, madjindji; K R mahitciña.

Six, pābahai; Gabr., Serr., pabahai, pabahi.

Person, x<span class="it">ö</span>xinil, xaxinil; K R añhanīl.

Man, m<span class="it">u</span><span class="it">u</span>t; Fern.
mut-īmt<span class="it">ü</span>, woman.

Woman, wi’ct; Serr., wihak-, gwihak-.

Deer, piāt; L-C, Serr., K R, baat, paat, mountain-sheep.

House, ni-ku; L-C, Gabr., Serr., nu-ki, my house.

Water, bal, bal-aku; K R, L-C, bal.

</div>

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Road, bèkt; L-C, Gabr., pet, Serr. per<span class="it">u</span>kt.

Mountain, tabakwan; Sh-C, M-P, toyap.

No, hahītcu, ahitciwa; K R hais, aic.

Much, many, em; Mono èwai, U-C a<span class="it">v</span>a-.

Drink, h<span class="it">ü</span><span class="it">ü</span>ka; U-C, Mono,
hi<span class="it">v</span>i; K R, ii, i<span class="it">ü</span>; Hopi,
hiiko.

Kill, mik’an; L-C mak-, mek-; Gabr., Serr., K R, muk.

</div>

A certain amount of distortion is visible in these alleged Giamina
words: hewe for wehe, ni-ku for nu-ki. There is also an element of
error: the words given for man and deer are evidently those for woman
and mountain-sheep. The vocabulary is however clearly not a corruption
of only one Shoshonean dialect, such as might arise from for instance a
Tübatulabal division being subjected to isolation and the influence of
Yokuts or other linguistically foreign neighbors, or from imperfect
apprehension, by a Yokuts group or individual, of a Shoshonean dialect.
The material shows most numerous resemblances to the Southern California
dialects; next, certain indubitable Kern River affinities; and finally,
scattered resemblances to various dialectic divisions. Therefore even if
the vocabulary is only a mutilation, and not a real Shoshonean dialect,
it is based on acquaintance with Shoshonean speech of several quite
distinct branches.

In spite of the uncertainty with which material must at best be invested
which was secured under the circumstances obtaining in this case, it is
not going too far to admit the possibility that the Giamina vocabulary
represents, in however mutilated form, a genuine form of Shoshonean
speech, quite distinct from any other known; in other words, a dialectic
branch or group coordinate with the major ones of the family. The
imperfection and scantiness of the material allows so large an
opportunity for the play of accident that it would be hazardous to build
any farther on this speculation. Nevertheless the former existence of
another distinct dialectic group of Shoshonean in this area is *a
priori* not so unlikely as might seem. Besides the quite fundamentally
divergent and isolated Kern River branch, the region adjacent to the
southernmost Sierra Nevada contains the specialized Shikaviyam dialect,
and the also specialized Kawaiisu offshoot of the Ute-Chemehuevi group.
Among the Yokuts, the Paleuyami, <span id="fr_20"></span>[19](#fn_19)
whose dialect is certainly much distorted from ordinary

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yokuts, occupied
Poso creek, the same stream to which the Giamina are attributed. A short
distance to the north, on the upper San Joaquin, were the
Toltichi, <span id="fr_21"></span>[20](#fn_20) whose relation to the
Yokuts, according to the present state of knowledge, was parallel to
that which the Giamina bear to the Shoshonean family. The region is
therefore one in which the crowding together of distinct languages, or
the evolution of local and strongly aberrant forms of speech, has
proceeded to an unusual extent. This fact is certain, whether or not
recognition is ultimately given to the supposed Giamina dialect. If it
is ever proved to have existed, it will not improbably furnish a link
between the Kern River and Southern California branches of Shoshonean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[263:18](nsd10.htm#fr_19) *Ibid*., 126.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[264:19](nsd10.htm#fr_20) Present series, II,
313, 347.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[265:20](nsd10.htm#fr_21) *Ibid*., II, 354.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: General Comparisons](nsd11)
