[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh12)  [Next](hloh14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IX

### THE LEGENDARY ORIGIN OF KAPA

Note: Dr. Brigham, the director of the Bishop Museum in Honolulu, well
says, "Kapa (tapa) is simply ka (the) and pa (beaten) or the beaten
thing."

The cloth used for centuries by the Hawaiians and some other Polynesians
was "the beaten thing" resulting from beating the inner mucilaginous
bark of certain trees into pulp and then into sheets which could be used
for clothing or covering.

The letters "k" and "t" have from time immemorial been interchangeable
among the Hawaiians, therefore the words "kapa" and "tapa" have both
been freely used as the name of the ancient wood-pulp cloth of the
Hawaiians.

The old people said that in the very long ago their ancestors did not
have anything like the kapa cloth which has been known for many
centuries. They said also that there was no kapa maoli, meaning that
there was nothing in nature which provided clothing or covering. Very
little reference is made in the legends to the use of skins as clothing,
although the dog and

{p. 60}

pig were brought with chickens by their early ancestors.

The clothing of the oldest time was sometimes made by tying dried banana
leaves around the body, and coverings were made by throwing dry banana
leaves over the body. Thus Kawelo was warmed and brought back to life,
according to one of the most famous legends of the island Kauai.

The long, fragrant leaves of the ti\[1\] plant were dried, soaked in
water until soft, the outside scraped off, then fastened together by
braiding or tying. In this way a very warm cloak was made and worn by
bird-catchers. They found it very good for shedding rain and keeping out
cold when they went into the mountains.

Sometimes the long leaves of the Lau-hala were thatched into covering
for the body as well as for the house. So also grass was braided into
very fine cloaks as well as into mats. Banana leaves hanging in strips
like a fringe were used for malos (loin cloths) for men, and pa-us
(skirts) for women.

For many generations the Hawaiians made most beautiful and costly
feather garments. They braided or wove a foundation mesh of very fine
vegetable fibres, such as the long threads of the ieie\[2\] vine. This
mesh was fashioned into a mahiole, or warrior's helmet, a kihei, or
shoulder

\[1. Cordyline terminalis.

2\. Freycinetii Arnotti.\]

{p. 61}

cape, or an ahuula, or long cloak, and covered with the most brilliant
red and golden feathers which could be secured from the birds of the
forest.

In the legend of Makuakaumana the gods Ka-ne and Kanaloa are represented
as feeling pity for one of their worshippers when they saw him shivering
in a fierce storm of cold rain; therefore they taught him how to make a
kihei, or shoulder cape. Great was the wonder of the people of the
northern side of the island of Oahu when he appeared among them and
taught them how to make cloaks like "the gift of the gods." The legend
is interesting, but only shows that the people sometime learned how to
make a work-day cloak. Presumably the Hawaiian method of pounding the
adhesive bark of certain trees until that bark becomes a pulpy mass and
then making it into sheets and drying it was used in Samoa and many
other islands of the Pacific Ocean and also even in Mexico hundreds of
years ago. Evidently the Hawaiian brought the art with him or learned it
from the sea rovers of about the tenth century. Nevertheless, the
Hawaiian legend of the origin of kapa is a myth well worth keeping on
record in Hawaiian literature. It was partly published in a native
paper, the *Kuokoa*, in 1865, but many references in other legends
printed about the same time fill out the story.

{p. 62}

BACK of Honolulu a beautiful valley rises in a gentle slope between two
rugged, precipitous ranges of lava mountains until it reaches cloudland
and drinks ceaselessly from the fountains of the sky. A stream of
laughing water rising from waterfalls blown into spray by swift winds
rushes and leaps in numberless cascades through pleasant groves down
this valley of restful shadows until it is lost in the coral reefs of an
iridescent sea.

This is the noted Nuuanu Valley of winding ways loved by sightseers as
they climb to the grand outlook over extinct craters, island coast and
boundless ocean, called "the view from Nuuanu Pali."

This was the valley supposed to have been the first habitation of the
gods, from which all life spread over the island group. Here the gnomes,
or the eepa people, had their home, and here the Menehunes (the fairies)
built a temple for "the child adopted by the gods."

The waters of the valley stream fertilized large areas where the valley
broadened into the broad

{p. 63}

seaside plain in which now lies the city of Honolulu. Here at Pu-iwa, by
the side of the running water, a farmer by the name of Maikoha lived
with his daughters, having no care except raising whatever food they
needed for themselves and for their tribute to the king and their
offerings to the gods.

Years passed by and Maikoha became weak and ill. The eepa people of the
upper valley had always sent driving rains and cold winds down the
valley, and Maikoha had cared little for them; but the old man at last
went into the days of death feeling a chill which struck to his very
heart. On his death-bed he called his daughters and commanded them to
listen carefully and to obey his words, saying: "When I die, bury my
body close to the waters of our pleasant stream. A tree will grow from
that burial-place. This tree will be to you for kapa, from which you
will make all things good for clothing as well as covering when you
sleep or are ill. The bark of this tree is the part you will use."

When death came, the daughters buried their father by the running water.
After a time a tree grew from the grave. The daughters saw that it was a
new tree such as they had never seen before. It was not tall and large,
but threw out a number of small, spreading branches. This was the
wauke\[1\] tree.

\[1. Broussonetia papyrifera.\]

{p. 64}

The daughters with great fear drew near to this monument which was over
their father's grave. They believed it was a gift from the aumakua, the
ghost-god, into which they supposed the spirit of their father had been
changed.

Reverently they touched the tree, broke off some of the branches,
stripped off the bark, and pounded and pounded until the pieces were
fastened together in a rude kind of cloth. Thus they found kapa, "the
beaten thing," and learned how to make it into small and large pieces
and out of these fashion such clothing as met their need.

Wherever they cut or broke the branches of this new tree the broken
pieces took root, or, if the fragments were caught by the swift-flowing
stream, they were tossed on the bank or carried and scattered over the
plain, and wherever they went they found a place to plant themselves
until they grew even to the sea.

Branches were carried to the other islands; thus the wauke became a
blessing to all the people. This tree under the name "aute," which is
the same as wauke, was a blessing to many Polynesians, from Tahiti to
New Zealand.

In after years other trees, such as the mamaki,\[1\] the maa-loa and
po-ulu, were found to have bark

\[1. Pipturus Albidus.\]

{p. 65}

from which kapa could be made; but the old people said, "From the wauke
we get the best kapa for fine, soft clothing."

Maikoha became the chief aumakua, or ancestor-god, of the Hawaiian
kapa-makers, and has been worshipped for generations. When they planted
the wauke branches, or shoots, prayers and incantations and sacrifices
were offered to Maikoha. Before branches were cut and placed in bundles
to be carried to a field set apart for kapa-making, the favor of Maikoha
was again sought.

One of the daughters of Maikoha, whose name was Lau-hu-iki, became the
aumakua of all those who pounded the prepared bark, for to her was given
the power of finding kapa in the bark of the wauke-tree, and she had the
power of teaching how to pound as well as bless the labor of those who
worshipped her.

The other daughter, Laa-hana, Was also worshipped as an aumakua by those
who used especially marked clubs while beating the bark into patterns or
marked lines, for they said she learned how to scratch the clubs with
sharks' teeth so that marks would be left in the pounded sheets. She was
also able to teach those who worshipped her to mark figures or patterns
on the pounded kapa.

Thus Maikoha and his daughters became the

{p. 66}

chief gods of the kapa-makers; but other ancestral gods were also found
from time to time as some new step was taken in perfecting the art.

Ehu, a man, was made the aumakua of kapa-dyers because he learned how to
dip the cloth in dyes and give it color. He discovered the red dye in
the blood of the kukui\[1\] tree; therefore prayers were offered to him
and sacrifices laid on his altar when the kapa-maker desired to color
some of the work.

A small corner in a house in the kapa-field usually had a very small
pile of stones called "the altars." Here small offerings of leaves or
fruit could be placed while the worshipper chanted his prayer.

Kapa-dyers searched forests for trees and plants which could give
life-blood for different dyes. The sap of these plants was carefully put
in bamboo joints and carried to the place where the pounders sang and
worked.

Offerings of leaves and fruits and flowers were made to Ehu from time to
time while the dyes were being collected as well as when they were used
to color the kapa.

Sometimes the sheets were spotted by sprinkling colors over them.
Sometimes they were marked in lines and figures by using bamboo splints
or bamboos with ends pounded into brush-like

\[1. Aluerites Moluccana.\]

{p. 67}

fibres. Stone cups were kept in the kapa-fields for the dye and the
marking-splint.

Sometimes torn-up pieces of dyed kapas were pounded up with new sheets,
producing a mottled effect. White kapas of the best texture were used in
the temples to cover the gods during certain parts of the temple
ceremonies. They were also used to mark a strict tabu. When kapa was
laid on an object, it meant that it was not to be touched under pain of
punishment by the guarding aumakua. Fastened to a staff and placed in a
path, it meant that this path was tabu. It was in this way that tabu
standards were placed around the temples.

A kapa dipped in a black dye was kept for the death covering, especially
for those of very high rank.

Sometimes the perfumes of sweet flowers or the oil of such trees as the
iliahi\[1\] (sandalwood) were pounded into the kapa while it was being
made. The perfumes were made in this way. The sweet-smelling things were
placed in a calabash and covered with water. Hot stones were put in the
water and the fragrance drawn out of the plants. The water was boiled
away until the perfume became very strong. This was done with the
sweet-scented flowers of the niu\[2\] (coconut) and of the
lau-hala,\[3\] and

\[1. Santalum Freycinetianum.

2\. Cocos nucifera.

3\. Pandanus adoratissimus.\]

{p. 68}

the wood of the iliahi and other fragrant plants.

When the kapas were perfumed, they were dried inside a house so that the
fragrance should not be lost.

Sometimes the kapas were well scraped with pieces of shell or rubbed
with stones, then were rolled in dirt and put in a calabash and well
soaked for a long time. When these kapas were washed, scraped and
pounded again, they became very soft. Often the kapa-maker would take
these sheets of kapa and spread them over a layer of cold, wet,
fresh-water moss, leaving them all night for the dew to fall upon. These
kapas became very bright and shining. Sometimes finished kapas were
oiled so that they became excellent protectors from the wet and cold of
heavy mists and rains. These oiled kapas were frequently varnished by
being rubbed with eggs. Spider eggs were considered the best for this
purpose.

In the early time a flat stone was used upon which to pound out the
sheets of kapa, but blocks of wood and long, heavy sticks were found to
give the best results. These were called kua-kuku. A block cut in a
certain way was very much liked by the women, for it gave back a soft
sound with the rhythmic beat of the mallets, accompanied by their own
chants

{p. 69}

and incantations to Maikoha or one of the other aumakuas.

Hina, the mother of the demi-god Maui, was the great kapa-maker of the
legends of the ancient Hawaiians. It is said that she still spreads her
kapas in the sky. They are the beautiful clouds of all colors, sometimes
piled up and sometimes lying in sheets. When fierce winds blow and lift
and toss the cloud kapas and roll off the stones which Hina has placed
on them to hold them down, or when she throws off the stones herself,
the noise of the rolling stones is the thunder which men hear.

When Hina rolls the cloud sheets together, the folds glisten and flash
in the light of the sun; thus what men call lightning is the sunlight
leaping from sheet to sheet of Hina's kapas in cloudland.

{p. 70}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. Creation of Man](hloh14.md)
