[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh22)  [Next](hloh24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XIX

### THE TWO FISH FROM TAHITI

STRANGERS to Hawaiian history should know that to the Hawaiians Tahiti
meant any far-away or foreign land. Tahiti belongs to the Society
Islands. Centuries ago it was one of the points visited by the Vikings
of the Pacific, the Polynesian sea-rovers, among whom certain chiefs of
the Hawaiian Islands were not the least noted. They sailed to Tahiti and
Samoa and other islands of the great ocean and returned after many
months, celebrating their voyages in personal chants.

Thus the names of places many hundreds of miles distant from the
Hawaiian group were recorded in the chants and legends of the most
famous families of Hawaiian chiefs and kings. Some of the names brought
back by the wanderers appear to have been given to places in their own
homeland. A large district on the island of Maui, where, it is said, the
friends of a Viking would gather for feasting and farewell dancing, was
named Kahiki-nui (The great \[1\]Tahiti). A point of land not far from
this district was

\[1. "T" and "K" are interchangeable.\]

{p. 139}

called Keala-i-kahiki (The-way-to-Tahiti). These names are not of recent
origin, but are found in the scenes described by roving ancestors noted
in genealogies of long ago. Probably about the same time that the
Vikings of Scandinavia were roaming along the Atlantic coasts the
Pacific seamen were passing from group to group among the Pacific
islands.

After many voyages and several years probably the people who never
wandered became careless concerning the specific name of the place to
which some of their friends had sailed, and included the whole outside
world in the comprehensive declaration, "Gone to Tahiti" (Kahiki). At
any rate, this has been the usage for some centuries among the
Hawaiians.

The story I am about to tell you came to me as a marvellous, mysterious,
miraculous myth of the long ago, when strange powers dwelt in both
animals and men, and when cannibalism might have been carried on to be
reported later under the guise of eating the flesh of beast or fish. In
the long ago there were two "fish" crossing the trackless waters of the
Pacific Ocean. Their home was in one of the far-away lands, known as
Tahiti. These "fish" were great canoes filled with men. They decided
that they would like to visit some of the lands about which they had
heard in the legends related by their fathers. {p. 140} They knew that
certain stars were always in certain places in the sky during a part of
every year. By sailing according to these stars at night and the sun by
day they felt confident that they could find the wonderful fire-land of
Hawaii about which they had been taught in the stories of returned
travellers. So the two "fish"--the two boats--after weary days and
nights of storm and calm, of soft breeze and strong, continuous winds,
found the northeast side of the island of Oahu with its rugged front of
steep, precipitous rocks. The travellers landed first on a point of land
extending far out into the sea, terminating in a small volcano. Here
they made examination of the unfriendly coast and decided to journey
entirely around the island, one fish, or boat, going toward the north
and the other toward the south. They were apparently intending to pass
around the island and find an appropriate location for a settlement.
Possibly they planned to make a permanent home or hoped to meet some
good community into which they might be absorbed. The point of land
which marked the separation of the two companies is called Makapuu. The
boat which sailed toward the north found no good resting-place until it
came to the fishing-village of Hauula. The stories told by the old
natives of the present time do not give any details of the meeting
between the strangers and the

{p. 141}

people residing in the village. Evidently there, was dissension and at
last a battle. The whole story is summed up by the Hawaiian legend in
the saying: "The fish from Tahiti was caught. by the fishermen of
Hauula. They killed it and cut it up into pieces for food." Thus the
visitors found death instead of friendship, and cannibalism was thereby
veiled by calling the victims "fish" and the victory a "catch."

The custom of hiding hints of cannibalistic feasts and more definite
human sacrifices under the name of "fish" continued through the
centuries even after the discovery of the islands by Captain Cook and
the advent of white men. David Malo, a native writer, who, about the
year 1840, wrote a concise sketch of Hawaiian history and customs,
described the capture of human sacrifices by the priests when needed for
temple worship. He says: "The priest conducted a ceremony called
Ka-papa-ulua. It was in this way: The priest accompanied by a number of
others went out to sea to fish for ulua with hook and line, using squid
for bait. If they were unsuccessful and got no ulua they returned to
land and went from one house to another, shouting out to the people
within and telling them some lie or other and asking them to come
outside. If any one did come out, him they. killed, and, thrusting a
hook in his mouth, carried

{p. 142}

him away to the heiau \[temple\]." This sacrifice was called ulua, and
was placed before the god of the temple as if it were a fish. Sometimes
a part of the body, usually an eye, was eaten during the ceremonies of
consecrating the offering to the idol. This custom has passed the test
of centuries and probably was the last remnant of cannibalism in the
Hawaiian Islands. It endured even to the time of the abolition of the
temples and their idols.

The second fish from Tahiti had gone on southward in its journey around
the island of Oahu. It passed the rough and desolate craters of Koko
Head on the eastern end of the island. It swam by Diamond Head and the
beautiful Waikiki Beach. Either the number of the inhabitants was so
large that they were afraid to make any stay or else they preferred to
make the complete circuit of the island before locating, for they
evidently made only a very short stay wherever they landed, and then
hurried on their journey. By the time they reached Kaena, the
northwestern cape of Oahu, they were evidently anxious concerning their
missing companions. Not a boat on the miles of water between Kaena and
Kahuku, the most northerly point on the island. The legend says that the
fish changed itself into a man and went inland to search the coast for
its friend, but the search

{p. 143}

was unsuccessful. It was now a weary journey from point to point,
watching the sea and exploring all the spots on the beach where it
seemed as if there was any prospect of finding a trace of their expected
friends. Where a break in the coral reef permitted their boat to
approach the land they forced their way to shore. Then when the thorough
search failed again, the boat was pushed out over the line of white
inrolling breakers to the great sea until at last the Tahitians carne to
Kahuku.

Now they appeared no longer as "fish," but went to the village at Kahuku
as men. They made themselves at home among the people and were invited
to a great feast. They heard the story of a battle with a great fish at
Hauula and the capture of the monster. They heard how it had been cut up
and its fragments widely distributed among the villages on the northwest
coast. Evidently provision had been made for several great feasts. The
people of Kahuku, although several miles distant from Hauula, had
received their portion. The friendly strangers must share this great
gift with them. But the men from Tahiti with heavy hearts recognized the
fragments as a part of their companion. They could not partake of the
feast, but by kindliness and strategy they managed not only to decline
the invitation, but also to secure some

{p. 144}

portions of the flesh to carry down to the sea. These were thrown into
the water, and immediately came to life. They had the color of blood as
a reminder of the death from which they had been reclaimed. Ever after
they bore the name "Hilu-ula," or "the red Hilu."

Then the "fish" from Tahiti went on around to Hauula. They went up to
the tabu land back of Hauula. They pulled up the tabu flags. Then they
dammed up the waters of the valley above the village until there was
sufficient for a mighty flood. The storms from the heavy clouds drove
the people into their homes. Then the Tahitians opened the flood-gates
of their mountain reservoir and let the irresistible waters down upon
the village. The houses and their inhabitants were swept into the sea
and destroyed. Thus vengeance came upon the cannibals.

The Tahitians were "fish," therefore they went back into the ocean to
swim around the islands. Sometimes they came near enough to the haunts
of fishermen to be taken for food. They bear the name "hilu." But there
are two varieties. The red hilu is cooked and eaten, but never eaten
without having felt the power of fire. The trace of the cannibal feast
is always over its flesh. Therefore it has to be removed by purification
of the flames over which it is prepared for food. The blue hilu, the
natives

{p. 145}

say, is salted and eaten uncooked. Thus the legend says the two fish
came from Tahiti, and thus they became the origin of some of the
beautiful fish whose colors flash like the rainbow through the clear
waters of Hawaii.

Another legend somewhat similar to this is told by the natives of
Hauula. There is a valley near this village called Kaipapau
(The-valley-of-the-shallow-sea). Here lived an old kahuna, or priest,
who always worshipped the two great gods Ka-ne and Kanaloa. These gods
had their home in the place where the old man continually worshipped
them, but they loved to go away from time to time for a trip around the
island. Once the gods came to their sister's home and received from her
dried fish for food. This they carried to the sea and threw into the
waters, where it became alive again and swam along the coast while the
gods journeyed inland. By and by they came to the little river on which
the old man had his home. The gods went inland along the bank of the
river, and the fish turned also, forcing their way over the sand-bank
which marked the mouth of the little stream. Then they went up the river
to a pool before the place where the gods had stopped. Ever since, when
high water has made the river accessible, these fish, named ulua, have
come to the place where the gods were worshipped by the kahuna and

{p. 146}

where they rested and drank awa with him. When the gods had taken enough
of the awa of the priest they turned away with the warning that when he
heard a great noise on the shore he must not go down to see what the
people were doing, but ask what the excitement was about, and if it was
a shark or a great fish he was to remain at home. He must not go to that
place.

A few days later a big wave came up from the sea and swept over the
beach. When the water flowed back there was left a great whale, the tail
on the shore and the head out in the sea. The people came to see the
whale. They thought that it was dead. They played on its back and leaped
into the deep waters from its head. Their shouts of joy and loud
laughter reached the ears of the priest, who was living inland. Then the
people came to the riverside to gather vines and flowers with which to
make wreaths. Probably it was the intention of the villagers to cut the
great fish into pieces and have a feast. The old priest was very anxious
to see the marvellous fish. He forgot the warning of the gods and went
to the seaside. The people shouted for the old man to come quickly. The
old priest stood by the tail of the great fish. As if to welcome him the
tail moved. He climbed on the back and ran to the head and leaped into

{p. 147}

the sea. The people cheered the priest as he returned to the beach and a
second time approached the whale. Again there was the motion of the
tail, and again the priest ran along the back, but as he leaped the
whale caught him and carried him away to Tahiti. Therefore a name was
given to a point of land not far from this place-the name
"Ka-loe-o-ka-palaoa" (The cape of the whale).

{p. 148}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Iwa, the Notable Thief of OahU](hloh24.md)
