[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh25)  [Next](hloh27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXII

### KAWELO

MANY Kawelos are named in the legends of the islands of Oahu and Kauai,
but one only was the strong, the mighty warrior who destroyed a gigantic
enemy who used trees for spears. He was known as Kawelo-lei-makua when
mentioned in the genealogies.

Kawelo's great-uncle, Kawelo-mahamahala, was the king of Kauai. The land
prospered and was quiet under him. When he died, the people worshipped
him as a god. They said he had become a divine shark, watching over the
seacoasts of his island. At last they thought it had become a stone
god-one point the head and one the tail, one side red and the other
black. His grandson, Kawelo-aikanaka, who became king of Kauai, was born
the same day that brought Kawelo-lei-makua into the world. They were
always known as Aikanaka and Kawelo. There was also born that same day
Kauahoa, who became the giant of Kauai, and the personal enemy of
Kawelo. In their infancy the three boys were taken by their grandparents
to Wailua, and brought up near each other under different caretakers.

{p. 174}

Some of the legends say that Kawelo's oldest brother, Kawelo-mai-huna,
was born an eepa--a child poorly formed, but having miraculous powers.
When born, the servants wrapped this child in a tapa sheet and thought
to bury it, but a fierce storm arose. There were sharp lightnings and
loud thunder. Strong winds swept around the house. So they put the
bundle in a small calabash, covered it with a feather cloak, and hung it
in the top of the house. The grandparents came and prophesied a
marvellous future for this child. The father started to take down the
calabash, but saw only a cloud of red feathers whirling and concealing
all the upper corner. The old people, with heads bowed down, were
uttering incantations. There came a sound of raindrops falling on the
leaves of the forest trees, and a rainbow stood over the door. The
voices of beautiful green birds (the Elepaio) were heard all around, and
rats ran over the thatch of the roof. Then the old people said: "This
child has become an eepa. He will appear as man or bird or fish or rat."

Other children were born, then Kawelo, and last of all his faithful
younger brother, Kamalama. The old people who took care of Kawelo were
his grandparents. They taught the signs and incantations and magic of
Hawaiian thought. They frequently went inland to the place where

{p. 175}

their best food was growing. They always prepared large calabashes full
of poi and other food, thinking to have plenty when they returned; but
each time all the food was eaten. They decided that it was better to
provide sports for Kawelo than to leave him idle while they were away,
so they went to the forest with their servants and made a canoe. After
many days their work was done, and they returned to prepare food. Poi
was made, and all kinds of food were placed in the ovens for cooking.
Then they heard a sound like that of a strong wind tearing through the
forest. They heard the squeaking voices of many rats. Soon they went to
see the canoe in the forest, but it was gone. They returned home to cat
the poi and cooked food, but they were all gone--only the leaves in
which the food had been wrapped lay in the oven. Kawelo told his
grandparents that little people with rat-whiskers had carried the boat
down to the river and then had eaten all the food. One, larger than the
others, had called to him, "E Kawelo, here is your plaything, the
canoe."

Kawelo went down to the river. All day long he paddled up and down the
river, and all day long his strength. grew with each paddle-stroke. Thus
day by day he paddled from morning until night, and no one in all the
island had such renown for handling a canoe.

{p. 176}

The other boys were carefully trained in all games of skill, in boxing,
wrestling, spear-throwing, back-breaking, and other athletic exercises.
Kauahoa was very jealous of Kawelo's plaything, and asked his caretakers
to make something for him, so they made a kite (a pe-a) and gave it to
their foster-child. That kite rose far up in the heavens. Loud were the
shouts of the people as they saw this beautiful thing in the sky. Kawelo
asked for a kite, and in a few days took one out to fly by the side of
Kauahoa's kite. He let out the string and it rose higher and higher, and
the people cheered loudly. Kawelo came nearer and nearer to Kauahoa and
pulled his kite down slowly and then let it go quickly. His kite leaped
from side to side, and twisted its strings around that held by Kauahoa
and broke it, and the kite was blown far over the forest, at a place
called Kahoo leina a pe-a (The-kite-falling). Kawelo said the wind was
to blame, so Kauahoa, although very angry, could find no cause for
fighting. Then the grandparents taught Kawelo to box and wrestle and
handle the war spear. Thus the boys grew in stature and in enmity.

After a time the king of Kauai died and Aikanaka became king. The
legends say the rats warned Kawelo, and he and his grandparents fled to
the island of Oahu. The boat flew over

{p. 177}

the sea like a malolo (flying-fish), leaping over the waves at the
strong stroke of Kawelo. The rats under their king were concealed in the
canoe, and were carried over to the new home. Kawelo's elder brothers
and parents had been living for some time on the beach of Waikiki near
Ulukou\[1\] by the mouth of the stream Apuakehau. The grandparents took
Kawelo and Kamalama inland and found a beautiful place among taro
patches and cultivated fields for their home. It was said that when they
came to the beach one young man went down into the water and carried the
canoe inland. Kawelo called him and adopted him as one of the family.
The boy's name was Kalaumeke (A-kind-of-ti-leaf). The boy said he was
not as strong as he appeared to be, for he had the aid of many little
long-whiskered people; his real power lay in spear-throwing and
club-fighting. There was only one other young man who was his equal--a
youth from Ewa, whose name was Kaeleha. Kawelo sent for this man and
took him into his family. They dwelt for some time, cultivating the
place where the royal lands now lie, back of the Waikiki beach.

One day they heard great shouting and clapping of hands on the beach,
and Kawelo went down to see the sport. His brothers had been well taught
all the arts of boxing and wrestling, and they

\[1. Site of Moana Hotel.\]

{p. 178}

were very strong; but they were not able to overthrow a very strong man
from Halemanu. Kawelo challenged the strong man. His elder brothers
ridiculed him, but Kawelo persevered. The strong man was much larger and
taller than Kawelo. He uttered his boast as Kawelo came before him.
"Strong is the koa\[1\] of Halemanu. The kona \[wind\] cannot bend it."
Kawelo boasted in reply, "Mauna Waialeale will try against Mauna Kaala."
Then the strong man said: "When I call 'swing your hands' we will fall
against each other." With this word he advanced and struck at Kawelo,
bending him over, but not knocking him down. Kawelo, returned the blow
with such force that the mighty boxer fell dead. Kawelo, gave the body
to the king of Oahu to be carried as a sacrifice to the gods in the
heiau, or temple, Lualualei at Waianae. "This is said to have been a
very ancient temple belonging to the chief Kakuhihewa."

Kawelo's brothers were greatly mortified to see their younger brother
accomplish what they had failed to do, so in their shame they returned
to Kauai with their parents.

The king of Oahu gave Kawelo lands. His grandparents built him a house.
It was well thatched except the top. He was a high tabu chief, and the
kahunas (priests) said he must

\[1. A tree--Acacia koa.\]

{p. 179}

finish it with the work of his own hands. This he thought he would do
with the beautiful feathers of the red and yellow birds. He lay down and
slept. When he awoke he saw his rat-brother, who had miraculous power,
finishing all the roof with most beautiful feathers of red and gold. The
king of Oahu came to see this wonderful place, and blessed it, and
lifted his tabu from it so that it would belong fully to Kawelo,
although it was more beautiful than that of the king himself.

Kawelo, learned the hula (dance), and went around the island attending
all hula gatherings until the people called him "the great hula chief."
At the village of Kaneohe he met the most beautiful woman of that part
of the island, Kane-wahine-ike-aoha. He married her, gave up the hula,
and returned home to learn the art of battle with spears and clubs. No
one was more strong or more skilful than his wife's father. Kawelo sent
his wife to the other side of the island to ask her father to teach him
to fight with the war-club. She went to her father and persuaded him to
aid Kawelo. For many days they practised together, until Kawelo was
mighty in handling both spear and club.

After this Kawelo, learned the prayers and incantations and offerings
upon which good fishing depended. Then he took the fisherman and went
out in the ocean to do battle with a

{p. 180}

great fish which had terrified the people of Oahu many years. This was a
kupua, or magic fish, possessing exceeding great powers. As they went
out from Waikiki, with one stroke of the paddle Kawelo sent the canoe to
Kou, with another stroke he passed to Waianae, and then began to fish
from the shore far out to the sea, using a round, deep net. This method
of fishing continues to the present day. A fish is caught and a weight
tied to it so that it must swim slowly. Other fish come to see the
stranger, and the net is drawn around them. Many good fish were caught,
but the great fish did not come. Again Kawelo came to hunt this
Uhumakaikai, but the Uhu sent fierce storm-waves against the canoe to
drive it to land. Kawelo held the boat strongly with his paddle. Soon
the Uhu appeared, trying to strike the boat and upset it. Kawelo and his
fisherman carefully watched every move and balanced the boat as needed.
Kawelo's net was in the water, its mouth open, and its full length
dragging far behind the boat. The Uhu was swimming around the net as if
despising its every motion, but Kawelo swept the net sideways and the
fish found himself swimming into the net. Kawelo swiftly rushed the net
forward until the Uhu was fully enclosed. Then came a marvellous
fish-battle. The waves swept high around the boat. Kawelo and the

{p. 181}

fisherman covered it so that the water poured off rather than into it.
Then the Uhu swam swiftly out into the blue waters. The fisherman begged
Kawelo to cut the cord which held the net. Far out they went--out to the
most distant island, Niihau. Kawelo saw a great battle in the net which
held the Uhu. There were many fish inside attacking the Uhu. They were a
kind of whiskered fish, biting like rats, digging their teeth into the
flesh of the great fish. Kawelo uttered incantations, and the fish
became weaker and weaker until it ceased to struggle. Kawelo paddled
with strong strokes back to Oahu.

Meanwhile the brothers and parents, who had gone to Kauai, were in great
trouble under the persecutions of Aikanaka and his strong man Kauahoa.
At last the mother sent the brothers to Oahu after Kawelo. They came to
Waikiki while Kawelo was away trying to kill the Uhu. The youngest
brother, Kamalama, received them and sent two messengers to find Kawelo.
He recited a family chant, in which the names of the visiting brothers
as well as the name of Kawelo's gods were honored. He charged them to
remember the brothers' names or they would have trouble. They paddled
out on the ocean calling for Kawelo and repeating the names from time to
time. Suddenly a high surf wave

{p. 182}

caught their canoe and overturned it, leaving them to struggle in the
fierce waters. Soon they saw Kawelo coming with his great fish near his
canoe. "O Kawelo!" they cried. "We had the names of your friends from
Kauai--but our trouble in the water made us forget." Then Kawelo,
recited his chant, giving his brothers' names and also those of the tabu
gods. Only the chiefs to whom the gods belonged could speak their names.
When Kawelo uttered their names, the two men cried out, "Those are the
men, and Kuka-lani-ehu is their god." Kawelo was very angry at the
desecration of the name of his family god in the mouths of the common
men. He stuck his paddle deep into the sea, tearing the coral reef to
pieces, but the great fish caught on the coral and Kawelo could not row
to the men. They rushed their boat to the beach and escaped. Kawelo,
then took a part of the captured fish and offered it for sacrifice in
the temple at Waianae. The rest he brought to his people at Waikiki.

As he came near the shore he called for his spear-throwers to meet him
on the beach. Seven skilled men stood before him as he landed. They
hurled their spears at one time straight at him, but he moved himself
skilfully from side to side and threw the ends of his malo (loincloth)
around them and caught them all

{p. 183}

together. Then he called his two adopted boys to throw. This they did
with great skill, but he caught both spears in one hand. Kamalama took
two spears, and Kawelo's wife stood on one side with a fishhook and line
in her hand. As the spears flew by her she threw out the hook and caught
each one.

The story of the Kauai trouble was soon told. The king of Oahu furnished
a large double canoe. From his father-in-law Kawelo secured the historic
battle-weapons--war-club and spear--with which he had learned to fight.
Food in abundance was placed on the boats, and the household went back
to Kauai to wage war with Aikanaka and Kauahoa, stopping at the heiau
Kamaile--afterward called Ka-ne i ka pua lena (Ka-ne of the yellow
flower)--to offer sacrifices. Some legends say this temple was at
Makaha, and that Kane-aki was the name. This Ka-ne was one of the gods
of Kawelo. Kawelo, according to one legend, had his people tie him in a
mat as if dead as they approached Wailua, the home of Aikanaka. The
beach was covered with people--the warriors of Aikanaka. As the double
canoe came to the beach, the people made ready to attack. They waited,
however, for the newcomers to land and prepare for fight. This was a
formal courtesy always demanded by the ethics of olden times. When all
was ready, Kamalama

{p. 184}

stood by the apparently dead body of Kawelo, and pulled a cord which
unloosed the mats. Kawelo rose up with his war-club and spear in hand
and rushed upon the multitude. He struck from side to side, and the
people fell like the leaves of trees in a whirlwind.

Again new bodies of warriors hastened from Aikanaka. Kamalama, the seven
spearmen and the two adopted boys fought this army and drove it back
under a cliff where Aikanaka had his headquarters. The seven spearmen,
known in the legends as Naulu (the-seven-bread-fruit-trees), were afraid
and retreated to the boat.

Two noble chiefs asked Aikanaka for two large bodies of men (two
four-hundreds), but Kawelo and his handful of helpers defeated them with
great slaughter. Thus several larger bodies of soldiers were destroyed,
and Aikanaka became cold and afraid in his heart.

Then Kahakaloa, the best skilled in the use of war-clubs in all the
islands, rose up and went down with the two hundred warriors to fight
with Kawelo and his family. The father-in-law of Kawelo knew this chief
well and thought that by him Kawelo might be killed if he went to Kauai,
but Kawelo had learned strokes of the club not understood on Kauai. Soon
all the warriors were slain, and Kahakaloa stood alone against Kawelo.
As they faced each other Kahakaloa

{p. 185}

swiftly struck Kawelo, but Kawelo while falling gave his club an upward
stroke, breaking his enemy's arm. In the next struggle Kawelo's swift
upward stroke killed his foe.

Then Kauahoa, the strongest, tallest and most skilful man of Kauai,
arose and went down to meet Kawelo. Kauahoa took a magic koa-tree, root,
stem and branches, for his club with which to fight Kawelo. His heart
was full of anger as he remembered the troubles between Kawelo and
himself in their boyhood. As he passed the multitude of his dead people
he became beside himself with rage and rushed upon Kawelo. Kawelo
stationed his wife on one side with her powerful fishhooks and lines to
catch the branches of the mighty tree and hold them fast. Some of the
legends say that she was very skilful in the use of the ikoi. This was a
straight, somewhat heavy, stick with a strong cord fastened around the
middle. It was said that she was to throw this stick over the branches,
whirling and twisting the cord around them, greatly entangling them, so
that she could pull the tree to one side. Kawelo ordered his warriors to
watch the spots of sunlight sifting through the branches. As the tree
was hurled down upon them they must leap into the open places and seize
the branches, holding on as best they could. When the giant struck down
with

{p. 186}

his strange war-club, Kawelo's friends followed his directions, while he
leaped swiftly to one side and ran around back of Kauahoa while he was
bending over trying to free his tree from its troubles. Kawelo struck
down with awful force, his war-club cutting Kauahoa in pieces, which
fell by the side of the koa-tree.

Somewhere in the battles waged by Kawelo along the coasts of Kauai he
was fighting with his giant enemy and struck his spear against the
mountain ridge at Anahola, piercing it through and through, leaving a
great hole through which the sky is always to be seen.

Aikanaka fled to the region near Hanapepe, where he dwelt in poverty.
Kawelo divided the districts of Kauai among his warriors. Kaeleha
received the district in which Aikanaka was sheltered. Soon this adopted
son of Kawelo met the daughter of Aikanaka and married her. After a
while he wanted Aikanaka to again rule the island. He proposed rebellion
and told Aikanaka that they could destroy Kawelo because he had never
learned the art of fighting with stones. He only understood the use of
the war-club and spear. They ordered the women and children to gather
great piles of stones to hurl against Kawelo.

When Kawelo heard about this insurrection, he was very angry. He seized
his war-club,

{p. 187}

Kuikaa, and hastened to Hanapepe. As he came near he saw that the people
had barricaded his way with canoes, and that back of these canoes were
many large piles of stones in the care of warriors. He raised his
war-club and leaped toward his enemies. A sling-stone reached him. Then
the stones came like heavy rain. He dodged, but there were so many that
when he avoided one he would be struck by others. He was bruised and
wounded and stunned until he sank to the ground unconscious under the
fierce shower.

The people rejoiced, and, to make death sure, threw off the stones and
beat the body with clubs until it was cold and they could detect no sign
of breathing.

Aikanaka had built a new unu, or heiau, at Mauilli {*sic*}, in the
district of Koloa, but no man had been offered as a sacrifice upon its
altars. He thought he would take Kawelo as the first human sacrifice.
The people carried the body of Kawelo to the pa, or outside enclosure,
of the temple, but it was dark when they arrived, and they laid the body
down, covering it with banana leaves, saying they would come the next
morning and place the body on the altar, where it should lie until
decomposition had taken place.

Two watchmen had been appointed, one of whom was a near relative to
Kawelo. He soon

{p. 188}

discovered that Kawelo was not dead. He told Kawelo about the plan to
place him on the altar in the morning. He covered Kawelo again, placing
his war-club by his side. In the morning the chiefs and people came to
the heiau with Aikanaka and Kaeleha. When all were gathered together the
watchman whispered to Kawelo. The leaves were thrown off, and Kawelo
attacked the multitude and destroyed all who had rebelled against him.

Some of the legends say that Aikanaka had placed Kawelo on the
sacrificial platform and in the morning had begun to offer the prayer
consecrating the dead body to the gods, when Kawelo struck him dead
before his own altar.

When this rebellion had been overcome, Kawelo gave a large district with
good lands to the watchman who had befriended him. He retained his
younger brother Kamalama in the district of Hanamaulu and committed
their parents to his care.

Kawelo, as was his right, ruled over all the island, passing from place
to place, establishing peace and prosperity. He made his home at Hana,
planting and fishing for himself, not burdening chiefs or people, but
beloved by all. Thus he gained the honored name Kawelo-lei-makua
(Kawelo, garland-of-his-parents).

{p. 189}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Chief Man-Eater](hloh27.md)
