[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh04)  [Next](hloh06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I

### THE MIGRATION OF THE HAWAIIANS

THE fountain source of the Mississippi has been discovered and
rediscovered. The origin of the Polynesian race has been a subject for
discovery and rediscovery. The older theory of Malay origin as set forth
in the earlier encyclopædias is now recognized as untenable. The Malays
followed the Polynesians rather than preceded them. The comparative
study of Polynesian legends leads almost irresistibly to the conclusion
that the Polynesians were Aryans, coming at least from India to Malasia
and possibly coming from Arabia, as Fornander of Hawaii so earnestly
argues. It is now accepted that the Polynesians did not originate from
Malay parentage, and that they did occupy for an indefinite period the
region around the Sunda Straits from Java to the Molucca Islands, and
also that the greater portion of the Polynesians was driven out from
this region and scattered over the Pacific in the early part of the
Christian Era. The legends that cluster around Wakea have greatly aided
in making plain some

{p. 2}

things concerning the disposition of the Polynesians. By sifting the
legends of Hawaii-loa we learn how the great voyager becomes one of the
first Vikings of the Pacific. His home at last is found to be Gilolo of
the Molucca Islands. From the legends we become acquainted with Wakea
(possibly meaning "noonday," or "the white time") and his wife Papa
(earth), the most widely remembered of all the ancestors of the
Polynesian race. Their names are found in the legends of the most
prominent island groups, and the highest places are granted them among
the demi-gods and sometimes among the chief deities. Their deeds belong
to the most ancient times--the creation or discovery of the various
islands of the Pacific world. Those who worshipped Wakea and Papa are
found in such widely separated localities that it must be considered
impossible for even a demi-god to have had so many homes. Atea, or
Wakea, was one of the highest gods of the Marquesas Islands. Here his
name means "light." The Marquesans evidently look back of all their
present history and locate Atea in the ancient homeland. Vatea in the
Society Islands, Wakea in Hawaii and New Zealand, Makea, Vakea and Akea
are phonetic variations of the one name when written down by the
students who made a written form for words repeated from generation to
generation by word of mouth

{p. 3}

alone. Even under the name "Wakea" this ancient chief is known in most
widely separated islands. The only reasonable explanation for this
widespread reference to Wakea is that he was an ancestor belonging in
common to all the scattered Polynesians. It seems as if there must have
been a period when Wakea was king or chief of a united people. He must
have been of great ability and probably was the great king of the United
Polynesians. If this were the fact it would naturally result that his
memory would be carried wherever the dispersed race might go.

In the myths and legends of the Hervey Islands, Vatea is located near
the beginning of their national existence. First of all the Hervey
Islanders place Te-ake-ia-roe (The root of all existence). Then there
came upon the ancient world Te Vaerua (The breath, or The life). Then
came the god time--Te Manawa roa (The long ago). Then their creation
legends locate Vari, a woman whose name means "the beginning," a name
curiously similar to the Hebrew word "bara," "to create," as in Gen. i.
1. Her children were torn out of her breasts and given homes in the
ancient mist-land, with which, without any preparation or introduction,
Hawaiki is confused in a part of the legend. It has been suggested that
this Hawaiki is Savaii of the

{p. 4}

Samoan Islands, from which the Hervey Islands may have had their origin
in a migration of the Middle Ages. One of the children of Vari dwelt in
"a sacred tabu island" and became the god of the fish. Another sought a
home "where the red parrots' feathers were gathered"--the royal feathers
for the high chiefs' garments. Another became the echo-god and lived in
"the hollow gray rocks." Another as the god of the winds went far out
"on the deep ocean." Another, a girl, found a home, "the silent land,"
with her mother. Wakea, or Vatea, the eldest of this family, remained in
Ava-iki (Hawaii), the ancestral home--"the bright land of Vatea." Here
he married Papa. This Ava-iki was to the Herveyites of later generations
the fiery volcanic under-world. When the long sea-voyages ceased after
some centuries, the islanders realized that Ava-iki was very closely
connected with their history. They had but a misty idea of far-off
lands, and they did know of earthquakes and lava caves and volcanic
fires-so they located Ava-iki as the secret world under their islands.
This under-world with legendary inconsistency was located on the ocean's
surface, when it became necessary to have their islands discovered by
the descendants of Vatea. According to the Hervey legends, Vatea was the
father of Lono and Kanaloa, two of the great gods of the Polynesians.
{p. 5} They were twins. Lono had three sons, whom he sent away. They
sailed out through many heavens and from Ava-iki pulled up out of the
deep ocean two of the Hervey Islands. The natives of the Hervey group
supposed that the horizon around their group enclosed the world. Beyond
this world line were heavens and heavens. A daring voyager by sailing
through the sky-line would break out from this world into an unknown
world or a heaven bounded by new horizons. Strangers "broke through"
from heaven, sometimes making use of the path of the sun. Thus about
twenty-five generations ago Raa (possibly Laa, the Hawaiian) broke down
the horizon's bars and established a line of kings in Raiatea. So also
when Captain Cook came to the Hervey Islands the natives said: "Whence
comes this strange thing? It has climbed up \[come up forcibly\] from
the thin land, the home of Wakea." He had pierced the western heavens
from which their ancestors had come.

When the sons of Lono unexpectedly saw a speck of land far away over the
sea, they cried out that here was a place created for them by their
deified ancestors. As they came nearer they "pulled up" the islands
until they grew to be high mountains rising from the deep waters. In
these mountains they found the lava caves

{p. 6}

and deep chasms which they always said extended down under the seas back
to Ava-iki. They made their caves a passageway for spirits to the fairy
home of the dead, and therefore into certain chasms cast the bodies of
the dead, that the spirit might more easily find the path to the
under-world.

Vatea was a descendant of "the long ago," according to the Hervey
legend. Wakea of Hawaii was a son of Kahiko, "the ancient." Wakea's home
is more definitely stated in the Hawaiian than in the Hervey legends. He
lived in O-Lolo-i-mehani, or The Red Lolo, a name confidently referred
by Fornander in "The Polynesian Race" to Gilolo, the principal island of
the Moluccas. The Red Lolo, as suggested by Fornander, would refer not
alone to volcanic action and its decaying debris, but would fittingly
designate the largest and most important island of the group. The fire
bursting from many volcanoes in the region of the Sunda Straits was
"royal" to the beholders, who felt that divine power was present in the
mysterious red flames. Hence all the Polynesian tribes invested the red
color with especial dignity as a mark of royalty and pre-eminence. It
was on the banners allowed only to chiefs when their boats sailed away
to visit distant lands. It was the color of the war cloaks of chiefly
warriors. In

{p. 7}

the recent days of the monarchy of Hawaii, the richest crimson was the
only color allowed in upholstering the great throne room. Gilolo might
worthily bear the name "The Red Lolo" in Hawaiian story. Here
Hawaii-loa, the first of the Polynesian Vikings, had his home. Here the
Chieftainess Oupe, a Polynesian princess, dwelt. In O-Lolo Wakea married
the granddaughter of Oupe, whose name was Papa. She is almost as widely
known in legends as her husband. Papa was said to be a tabued descendant
of Hawaii-loa and therefore superior in rank to Wakea. Papa is described
as "very fair and almost white." Her name means "earth," and Wakea's
name might mean "noonday." This, with the many experiences through which
they both passed, would lay the foundation for a very pretty sun-myth,
but we cannot avoid the human aspect of the legends and give them both a
more worthy position as ancestors of a scattered people.

Kahiko, the ancient, is recorded as having had three sons, from whom
descended the chiefs, the priests and the common people,--the
husbandmen,--almost a Shem, Ham and Japheth division. Other legends,
however, give Kahiko only two sons, the eldest, Wakea, having power both
as chief and priest. All the legends unite in making Wakea the head of
the class of chiefs. This would very readily explain the

{p. 8}

high place held by Wakea throughout Polynesia and also the jealous grasp
upon genealogical records maintained by the royal families of the
Pacific.

Wakea and Papa are credited with being the creators of many island
kingdoms of the Pacific. Sometimes the credit is given partly to a
mischievous fisherman-god, Maui, after whom one of the Hawaiian Islands
is named. One of the Hawaiian legends goes back to the creation or
discovery of Hawaii and ascribes the creation of the world to Wakea and
Papa. The two were living together in "Po"--"darkness," or "chaos." Papa
brought into existence a gourd calabash including bowl and cover, with
the pulp and seeds inside. Wakea threw the cover upward and it became
heaven. From the pulp and seeds he made the sky and the sun and moon and
stars. From the juice of the pulp he made the rain. The bowl he
fashioned into the land and sea. Other legends limit the creative labors
of Wakea to the Hawaiian group. With the aid of Papa he established a
portion of the islands; then discord entered the royal family and a
separation was decided upon. The Hawaiian custom has always been for
either chief or chiefess to exercise the right to divorce and to
contract the marriage ties. Wakea is said to have divorced Papa by
spitting in her face, according to an ancient

{p. 9}

custom. Wakea selected a chieftainess named Hina, from whom the island
Molokai (the leper island) received the name "Molokai-hina"--the ancient
name of the island. Morotai was also an island lying near Gilolo in the
Molucca group, and might be the place from which Wakea secured his
bride. Papa selected as her new husband a chief named Lua. The ancient
name of Oahu (the island upon which Honolulu is located) was
"Oahu-a-lua" (The Oahu of Lua). One of the Celebes Islands bears a name
for one of its districts very similar to Oahu--"Ouadju." Papa seems to
have been partially crazed by her divorce. She marries many husbands.
She voyages back and forth between distant islands. In an ancient
island, Tahiti, she bears children from whom the Tahitians claim
descent. In the Celebes she and her people experience a. famine and she
is compelled to send to O-Lolo for food. In New Zealand legend she
becomes the wife of Langi (Hawaiian Lani, or heaven), a union of "earth"
and "heaven." They have six children. Four of these are the chief gods
of ancient Hawaii: Ka-ne, "light"; Ku, "the builder"; Lono, "sound"; and
Kanaloa. Two of the children are not named in Hawaiian annals, unless it
might be that one, Tawhirri, should be represented in Kahili, the tall
standard used for centuries as the insignia of very high

{p. 10}

chief families. The other name, "Haumia," might possibly be Haumea, a
second name given to Papa in the legends. The Maoris of New Zealand
deify all of these six sons of Lani and Papa.

Ka-ne was "father of forests." He was very strong. In ancient days the
sky was not separated from the earth. He lifted up the heavens and
pushed down the earth--and thus made space for all things to grow. It
was while the sky rested its full weight upon the earth that the leaves
started into life, but were flat and thin because there was no chance to
become plump and full like the fruit which came later. Here is the
foundation for another sun-myth of the Pacific, wherein it might be said
light came and separating darkness from the earth brought life into the
world. Light could well be "the father of forests." The second son was
Tawhirri, "the father of winds and storms." A part of his name was
"matea," which might possibly be referred to Wakea. He dwelt in the
skies with his father Lani.

The third son was Lono, who was "the father of all cultivated food."

The fourth was Haumia, "the father of uncultivated food"--such food as
grew wild in the forests or among the herbs or in the midst of the
edible sea-mosses.

The fifth son was Kanaloa, "the father of all

{p. 11}

reptiles and fishes," at first dwelling in Hawaiki on the land with all
his descendants.

The sixth son was Ku "with the red face," "the father of fierce or cruel
men." Ku was easily made angry, and after a time waged war against his
brothers and their followers. There was great destruction, but Ku could
not win the victory alone. He was compelled to call upon Tawhirri, "the
father of winds and storms." Fierce men and fierce storms made it
difficult for the remainder of the household to escape. The "father of
forests" bowed to the earth under the terrific force of hurricanes and
tornadoes. The "fathers of foods" buried themselves deep in the ground
to escape destruction at the hands of cruel mankind and tempestuous
nature. Then came the bitter conflict between the family of Kanaloa and
their combined enemies. Cruel men were without pity in the blows dealt
against their inferior kindred. At last the fish fled to the sea and
sought safety in distant waters, finding homes where the children of Ku
did not care to follow. The reptiles fled inland to the secret recesses
of the mountains and forests. There they have kept their wild savage
life through the centuries even to the present day, as in Sumatra,
Borneo, the Celebes, the Philippines and other sections of the region
around the Sunda Straits. They are not now ocean

{p. 12}

lovers any more than in the ages past. They do not "go down to the sea
in ships." Neither do they love the coming of Dutch or Spanish or
American civilization. They seem to have an hereditary dislike for
strange and cruel men.

The sea rovers became great wanderers, carrying with them the name of
"Kanaloa" and planting it in almost all the Pacific islands to be
worshipped as one of the supreme gods.

How much these domestic troubles surrounding the name of Papa may have
had to do with an early migration of the Polynesians we do not know. It
may be that while the household was engaged in war the Malays came from
the north and with tornado power scattered the divided family,
compelling swift flight to distant lands. It is now understood that the
great dispersion of the Polynesians came from the incursions of the
powerful Malays during the second century of the Christian Era. Some of
the Hawaiian and New Zealand legends imply that for a number of
generations a part of the Polynesians remained in the old family home,
Hawaiki. The New Zealanders enter quite fully into the account of the
troubles attending the coming of their ancestors from Hawaiki. They
mention battles and domestic discords. They tell of the long journeys
and wearisome efforts put forth until their ancestors find Northern

{p. 13}

New Zealand, Ke-ao-tea-roa (The great white land). This was pulled up
out of the sea for them by Maui with his wonderful fish-hook. This story
of the magic fishing of the disobedient and mischievous Maui is common
in Polynesia.

After the discovery of New Zealand, boats were sent back to Hawaiki to
induce large companies of colonists to leave the land of warfare and
trouble and settle in rich lands bordering the beautiful bays of New
Zealand.

Like stories of discovery of new lands and return for friends adorn the
legends of all Polynesia. Wakea's descendants were clannish and stood by
each other in that great migration of the second century as well as in
the better-remembered journeys of later years. There seems to have been
a continued migration of the Polynesians. Sometimes they were apparently
fought off by the black race, as in Australia; sometimes they held their
own for a time, keeping the black men inland, as in Fiji; and sometimes
they struck out boldly for new lands, as when they sailed long distances
to the Hawaiian and Easter Islands. It is said that the purest forms of
the Polynesian language, most harmonious with one another, were carried
by the children of Wakea to the far distant islands of New Zealand,
Hawaii and Easter Island.

{p. 14}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Legendary Places In Honolulu](hloh06)
