[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh18)  [Next](hloh20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XV

### THE WONDERFUL SHELL

NEAR Niolapa, on the eastern side of Nuuanu Valley, is the stone where
Kapuni rested when he came after the shell known as the Kiha-pu. Kapuni
was a child of Kauhola, who was said to have been a chief, who was born,
was walking and had grown up, had become a father, a grandfather, and
had died, all in one day. Kapuni was born in Waipio Valley, and was
placed in the temple Pakaaluna and was made a god.

Two gods came from Puna. They were Kaakau and Kaohuwalu. They waited
above Hakalaoa looking down into Waipio. There they saw Kapuni leaping.
He touched a branch of a kukui-tree and fell down. He leaped again and
touched the short top branches of the kukui and fell down.

Kaakau said to Kaohuwalu, "Suppose we get Kapuni to go with us as our
travelling companion, one with us, in fierce storms, or in the cold
heavy dews of night."

Kaohuwalu assented, and they arose and went down. They called to Kapuni,
asking him to

{p. 106}

leap up. He tried again and again and always fell back.

Kaakau caught him as he fell and cut off part of his body because he was
too heavy, then he could fly to the sky and return again.

Kaakau asked him how be was succeeding. He replied, "Very well indeed; I
am swift in flight." Then Kaakau said, "Will you go with us on a
journey?" Kapuni said, "Yes."

They went away to the lands of Kahiki and returned to Kauai. From there
they heard the wonderful voice of a shell sounding from the temple
Waolani in Nuuanu Valley.

Kapuni said, "What is that thing which makes such a sound?"

Kaakau said, "That is a shell which belongs to the eepas \[gnomes\], the
people of Waolani, Oahu."

"I want that shell very much," said Kapuni. Kaakau told him that the
task would be very difficult and dangerous, for the shell was guarded by
watchmen from hill to hill, from the sea to the summit of the valley,
and along all the pathways to the neighboring villages.

The gods, however, crossed the channel to Oahu, and rested at night
above Kahakea. Here was a temple above Waolani. It was upon a hill. In
it was a noted drum. The name of that temple was Pakaaluna. Kapuni told
his friends to stay

{p. 107}

there waiting for him. If he did not return before the red dust of the
dawn was in the sky they would know be was dead. If he returned he would
have the shell.

Then he approached the prison enclosure outside the temple. Here he
waited by a rock for all the watchmen on the high places around the
temple to fall asleep. When the stars arose in the heavens above Nuuanu
and all were sound asleep he entered the temple and took the shell. He
flew away and found his companions-

They made a great jump and leaped to Kalaau Point. As they flew over the
water to Molokai the shell touched the top of a wave and sang with a
clear voice.

The god of Waolani Temple heard the shell singing, looked, and found
that it had been stolen. He rushed from the temple, flew over the Nuuanu
precipice and out into the channel from which he had heard the sound.

Kapuni hid among the waves, the shell ceased its song. The god of
Waolani went back and forth over the water, but could find nothing.

After the god gave up the search Kapuni went on to Molokai and then to
Maui and Hawaii. As it flew across the channel between Maui and Hawaii
the shell struck a high wave and broke off a corner.

{p. 108}

When they were on the hills of Hawaii they found the temple built at
Hainoa. There the gods of Hawaii were gathered together.

Kiha was high chief of Hawaii at that time, and had been dwelling in
Waipio Valley, cultivating his plant, planting awa, and building a
temple for his gods.

When that temple was finished and the tabu of silence lifted from all
the surrounding country he went to Kawaihae and built another temple,
establishing another altar for his gods. He placed the usual tabu upon
all the land around Kawaihae.

But the tabu was broken by the sound of that shell blown by the gods of
the Hainoa Temple. He was very much troubled, but the gods were too
strong for him. At last help came to him from Puapualenalena (The yellow
flower), a dog belonging to a master who had left his home in Niihau
some time before.

Puapualenalena was seeking his master, and found him on the uplands of
Hawaii.

The dog excelled in his skill as a thief, stealing pigs, chickens, tapa
cloth, all kinds of property for his master.

The master told that dog to get the tabu awa roots of the king, which
were growing on the hillsides of Waipio Valley.

When that place was stripped, he sent the dog

{p. 109}

to the precipices of Waimanu, and he took nearly all that was there.

Then the king commanded his people to watch the awa fields and catch the
one who was stealing his growing awa.

They began their watch. When the night was almost over and the dawn was
touching the sky they found the thief. These men followed the thief and
caught his master in a cave, all wrinkled from drinking much awa.

They took the master and the dog to the king Kiha as prisoners, and the
king planned to have them steal that shell which troubled him. If they
failed they should be put to death. This was the sentence of the king
upon his prisoners.

The master talked with his dog, and told him all the word of the king.
They planned to pay for the theft of the awa, but not by the death of
their bodies.

The dog went out to win the shell from the gods under cover of the
night, when the darkness was great and all kinds of shell voices were
mingling with other voices of the woodland and wilderness.

Then came the softly resonant voice of that shell blown by the gods.
According to an ancient chant, "The song of Kiha-pu calls Kauai,"
meaning the song is listened to from far distant Kauai.

{p. 110}

The dog ran swiftly while the sound of the shell was great, and hid in a
corner of a stone wall of the heiau. He waited and waited a long time.
The dawn was almost at hand. Then the watchers fell into deep sleep.

The dog crept softly inside, seized the shell and slipped it away from
its place, then leaped over six walls of the heiau, but touched the
seventh and outside wall. Then the shell sang out loud and clear.

The gods were aroused. They followed, but the dog leaped into a pool of
water and concealed himself and the shell while the gods dashed by. They
searched the road toward Waipio, then rushed toward the Kona district.

The dog flew from the pond down the precipice of Waipio, Valley and laid
the shell at the feet of Kiha, the king of Hawaii.

The dog and his master were given a high place in the affections of the
king.

The shell was renowned for its wonderful sound, and could call the
warriors of the king from any distance when the king caused it to be
blown. It was known as Kiha's shell, the Kiha-pu.

This shell was carefully preserved by the chiefs of Hawaii from that
ancient time. Generation after generation it was cared for. In the time
of Kamehameha III. it was kept in his

{p. 111}

palace. It was among the treasures of King Kalakaua, and now has its
resting-place in the hands of ex-Queen Liliuokalani in Honolulu.

When Kapuni died, his bones, worshipped a, one of the gods, were kept at
Kaawaloa until the tabu and the temples were overthrown.

{p. 112}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. The Ghost Dance on Punchbowl](hloh20.md)
