[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh15)  [Next](hloh17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XII

### THE GREAT DOG KU

##### KU-ILIO-LOA

KU, the dog-man, decided to come down from the clouds and visit mankind,
so he assumed the form of a little dog and went around almost unnoticed.

Ku saw a group of three rainbows moving from place to place or resting
for a long time above the home of a high chief. Sometimes the rainbows
went up to the forests of ohia and kukui-trees on the mountain-side.
Sometimes they rested over the deep pools made by the waterfalls of the
swiftly descending mountain streams. Most frequently the beautiful
colors were arched over a small grove of trees around a bathing-pool
protected on two sides by steep ledges of rock over which diverging
streams poured their cool waters which rose from the shadows and rippled
away through the little valley toward the sea. On the remaining side of
this sequestered nook was a sunny beach of black sand, back of which the
trees opened their promise of refreshing shade.

{p. 83}

Here Na-pihe-nui, the daughter of the high chief, came daily with her
company of maidens to bathe and sport in the water and then let the
afternoon hours pass in rest and pleasant conversation.

One day while diving into the pool from a shelf on the rocky ledge one
of the girls saw something moving on the shore. She called to her
companions and with them hastened to the place where their clothes had
been thrown down. Here they found a little white dog lying on the kapa
mantle of the princess.

For a time they played with the little stranger and were very much
delighted with his unusual intelligence. He gambolled around them in
great delight, obeying the call of one after the other, but showing very
marked preference for the princess. When the maidens returned home they
took the little dog with them and cared for him.

The high chief, Polihale, was interested in the peculiar powers
possessed by this strange dog. Perhaps he thought that it was under the
control of some spirit. His suspicions were in some way aroused and the
dog was watched. Soon the chief learned that this was a man of
marvellous ability, who could appear as a dog or a man at his own
pleasure. Then the chief called his retainers and ordered them to kill
this dog. They gathered stones and clubs and tried to surround

{p. 84}

it, but it dashed into the woods and made its escape. It was the great
dog Ku, who had seen the three rainbows and followed them to the
bathing-pool and then, having seen the princess, had determined to find
an opportunity to carry her away as his wife. This premature discovery
drove him away before he could accomplish his purpose.

Then Ku changed himself into a man of fine appearance and came boldly to
the high chief's home demanding the princess in marriage, but the chief,
warned by the omens as studied by his soothsayers, refused.

Ku was in great anger and threatened to kill the chief's people, and to
destroy the protectors of the princess, but the high chief drove him
away.

A dream came to the high chief, in which he saw the strange man coming
as a great dog. The next morning as he looked toward the mountains he
saw this same large dog stretching itself out of a cave on the
mountain-side; so he knew that this dog with magical powers would be a
very difficult enemy to overcome.

The chief soon learned that Ku was catching his people one by one and
devouring them and decided to take final issue with his enemy.

Selecting a cave he hid all the women of his family in it, placing the
princess in their care. They took provisions with them and prepared for
a long siege. Water could be found in the cave

{p. 85}

itself. Stones were placed before the opening so that the enemy would
find it hard to enter.

Then the high chief and his followers waged war against Ku, the dog-man,
but Ku was very strong and overthrew his pursuers when they closed in
around him. Many times he killed some of the chief's people and carried
their bodies away to feast upon them. He was also very swift in his
motion, rapidly passing from place to place. Sometimes he fell like a
flash of lightning upon a group of his foes and then in an incredibly
short time he would make an attack in a far distant place.

The high chief became desperate and offered sacrifices to his gods and
secured charms from his priests. Incantations and prayers were prepared
against Ku.

At last a terrific battle was fought and Ku was overpowered and beaten
to the ground. Still he fought fiercely, but the hard wooden spears
pierced him and the heavy clubs broke his bones, until he lay a crushed
and bleeding mass at the feet of his conquerors. Then they cut his body
in two pieces, throwing one piece to one side and the other to a place
some distance away. Then the power of the priests was invoked and the
two parts of the body of Ku-ilio-loa became two great stones which have
been objects of veneration among the Hawaiians for many years.

{p. 86}

Ku stretches his form along the mountains and sometimes reveals himself
as the great dog among the myriad shapes which the changing clouds are
ever assuming. Sometimes he is seen in the clouds of Oahu, and then
again his form is in the skies of other islands.

Note: The Hawaiian legends frequently unite animal and human forms and
characteristics in one individual, like the centaurs of Roman mythology.
In some cases the man always carries with him a part of the animal
shape. The legends of shark-men place the shark mouth between the
shoulders of the man, and he is compelled to always wear a cloak to
conceal his deformity.

Usually, however, the legends give to the human being the power to
change at will into the peculiar animal form with which he has affinity
without carrying with him any marks of his previous shape. In the Pele
legends a chief appears as a beautiful bird and later as a handsome man,
and marries the chiefess. When the hog-man Kamapuaa, however, courts
Pele he is compelled to hide his pig-like deformities under a covering
of kapa cloth.

The legend of the great dog Ku is somewhat reversed from the usual
order. Ku, the dog, was given the power to change himself into a man

{p. 87}

and return into his animal form whenever he wished.

The legend is unique in that it unites a beautiful nature-myth with a
history-myth of ferocious cannibalism.

Ku-ilio-loa is a magic dog who could be large or small at will. He
roamed over the mountains and could be seen at night stretching himself
from one peak to another or from the mountain height above his home in a
cave below. This is evidently a nature-myth. The clouds on the mountains
are ever multiform. Sometimes the dim mist in the moonlight rears its
dog-shaped head over the sloping hills and stretches its shadowy length
up to the faintly outlined peaks above; and sometimes the small cloud,
like a dog at rest, lies quietly in the skies above the mountain forest.
It was a beautiful outgrowth of Hawaiian imagination.

The same nature-myth has been applied to the cloud forms of lower Manoa
Valley, a suburb of Honolulu. This cloud-myth was known as the story of
Poki, the wonder-dog. He was often seen at night especially by those who
had stood on the sacred bell rock of Kamoiliili. This rock rang with a
sweet, strong tone when struck sharply. It had the power of giving clear
vision to the one who stood on it and absorbed its mysterious qualities.
The visitor must stand on the

{p. 88}

rock and utter his wish to see Poki. Then would his eyes be opened and
the wonder-dog of the mountains of Oahu would reveal himself stretched
along the mountains and silvered by the moonlight. Some of the later
Hawaiians say that this wonder-dog of Oahu is the spirit of the chief
Boki, who with his wife Liliha owned the lower part of the valley of
Manoa. Boki in the early days of missionary labor in the Hawaiian
Islands became desirous of seeing the world and adding to his riches;
therefore he fitted out two ships for foreign trade and sailed away. The
ship in which Chief Boki sailed was never heard from. Hence arose the
saying, "We will do this or that when Boki comes back."

But some of the people changed the thought of the old legend and claimed
that his spirit returned and now reveals himself as the dog watching
over his loved valley. Magic powers were given to Poki-so that he could
stretch himself along the mountains, his hind feet on the mountain ridge
and his head in the valley below. He could also extend himself to Nuuanu
Valley and sometimes spread his body over all the island. Probably the
only real connection of Chief Boki with the wonder-dog Poki is the
similarity of names. But the chief has been almost forgotten. Even the
wonder-dog is known only by the story-tellers, while the night clouds,
sometimes darkened by

{p. 89}

falling rain, sometimes enriched by the halo of lunar rainbows, and
sometimes glorified by the silver moonlight, continue to stretch from
peak to peak along the mountains and watch over all the various forms of
life in the valleys below.

Ku-ilio-loa, the great dog Ku, was destined to have another series of
legends grow up about his memory besides those suggested by the adoring
imaginations of nature lovers. It is difficult to analyze the influences
which brought the beautiful nature-myth down to the degradation of the
sensuous life of a brute. Perhaps the simplest thought is the best, and
the problem is solved by supposing that a chief by the name of Ku became
imbued with cannibalistic desires and when driven away from his
fellow-men made his home among the almost inaccessible peaks where
cloud-myth and cannibal-legend could very easily be interwoven with each
other as the memory of his horrible cannibal life became dimly connected
with the mysterious cloud-forms among which he died.

{p. 90}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. The Cannibal Dog-Man](hloh17.md)
