[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4003)  [Next](sbe4005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

## BOOK XX.

### PART II. SECTION XIII.

### Shan Mû, or 'The Tree on the Mountain <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_53).'

1\. Kwang-dze was walking on a mountain, when he saw a great tree <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_54) with huge branches and luxuriant foliage.
A wood-cutter was resting by its side, but he would not touch it, and,
when asked the reason, said, that it was of no use for anything,
Kwang-dze then said to his disciples, 'This tree, because its wood is
good for nothing, will succeed in living out its natural term of years.'
Having left the mountain, the Master lodged in the house of an old
friend, who was glad to see him, and ordered his waiting-lad to kill a
goose and boil it. The lad said, 'One of our geese can cackle, and the
other cannot;--which of them shall I kill?' The host said, 'Kill the one
that cannot cackle.'

Next day, his disciples asked Kwang-dze, saying, 'Yesterday the tree on
the mountain (you said) would live out its years because of the
uselessness of its wood, and now our host's goose has died because of
its want of power (to cackle);--which of these conditions, Master, would
you prefer to be in?' Kwang-dze laughed and said, '(If I said that) I
would prefer to be in a position between being fit to be useful and
wanting that fitness, that would

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

seem to be the right position, but it would not be so, for it would not
put me beyond being involved in trouble; whereas one who takes his seat
on the Tâo and its Attributes, and there finds his ease and enjoyment,
is not exposed to such a contingency. He is above the reach both of
praise and of detraction; now he (mounts aloft) like a dragon, now he
(keeps beneath) like a snake; he is transformed with the (changing)
character of the time, and is not willing to addict himself to any one
thing; now in a high position and now in a low, he is in harmony with
all his surroundings; he enjoys himself at case with the Author of all
things <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_55); he treats things as things,
and is not a thing to them:--where is his liability to be involved in
trouble? This was the method of Shän Näng and Hwang-Tî. As to those who
occupy themselves with the qualities of things, and with the teaching
and practice of the human relations, it is not so with them. Union
brings on separation; success, overthrow; sharp corners, the use of the
file; honour, critical remarks; active exertion, failure; wisdom,
scheming; inferiority, being despised:--where is the possibility of
unchangeableness in any of these conditions? Remember this, my
disciples. Let your abode be here,-in the Tâo and its Attribute <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_56).'

2\. Î-liâo <span id="fr_65"></span>[3](#fn_57), an officer of
Shih-nan <span id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_57), having an interview

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

with the marquis of Lû <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_58), found him
looking sad, and asked him why he was so. The marquis said, 'I have
studied the ways of the former kings, and cultivated the inheritance
left me by my predecessors. I reverence the spirits of the departed and
honour the men of worth, doing this with personal devotion, and without
the slightest intermission. Notwithstanding, I do not avoid meeting with
calamity, and this it is which makes me sad.' The officer said, 'The
arts by which you try to remove calamity are shallow. Think of the
close-furred fox and of the elegantly-spotted leopard. They lodge in the
forests on the hills, and lurk in their holes among the rocks;--keeping
still. At night they go about, and during day remain in their lairs; so
cautious are they. Even if they are suffering from hunger, thirst, and
other distresses, they still keep aloof from men, seeking their food
about the Kiang and the Ho;--so resolute are they. Still they are not
able to escape the danger of the net or the trap; and what fault is it
of theirs? It is their skins which occasion them the calamity.

'And is not the state of Kû your lordship's skin? I wish your lordship
to rip your skin from your body, to cleanse your heart, to put away your
desires, and to enjoy yourself where you will be

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

without the presence of any one. In the southern state of Yüeh, there is
a district called "the State of Established Virtue." The people are
ignorant and simple; their object is to minimise the thought of self and
make their desires few; they labour but do not lay up their gains; they
give but do not seek for any return; they do not know what righteousness
is required of them in any particular case, nor by what ceremonies their
performances should be signalised; acting in a wild and eccentric way as
if they were mad, they yet keep to the grand rules of conduct. Their
birth is an occasion for joy; their death is followed by the rites of
burial. I should wish your lordship to leave your state; to give up your
ordinary ways, and to proceed to that country by the directest course.'

The ruler said, 'The way to it is distant and difficult; there are
rivers and hills; and as I have neither boat nor carriage, how am I to
go?' The officer from Shih-nan rejoined, 'If your lordship abjure your
personal state, and give up your wish to remain here, that will serve
you for a carriage.' The ruler rejoined, 'The way to it is solitary and
distant, and there are no people on it;--whom shall 1 have as my
companions? I have no provisions prepared, and how shall I get food?-how
shall I be able to get (to the country)?' The officer said, 'Minimise
your lordship's expenditure, and make your wants few, and though you
have no provisions prepared, you will find you have enough. Wade through
the rivers and float along on the sea, where however you look, you see
not the shore, and, the farther you go, you do not see where your
journey is to end;--those who escorted you to the shore will

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

return, and after that you will feel yourself far away. Thus it is that
he who owns men (as their ruler) is involved in troubles, and he who is
owned by men (as their ruler) suffers from sadness; and hence Yâo would
neither own men, nor be owned by them. I wish to remove your trouble,
and take away your sadness, and it is only (to be done by inducing you)
to enjoy yourself with the Tâo in the land of Great Vacuity.

'If a man is crossing a river in a boat, and another empty vessel comes
into collision with it, even though he be a man of a choleric temper, he
will not be angry with it. If there be a person, however, in that boat,
he will bawl out to him to haul out of the way. If his shout be not
heard, he will repeat it; and if the other do not then hear, he will
call out a third time, following up the shout with abusive terms.
Formerly he was not angry, but now he is; formerly (he thought) the boat
was empty, but now there is a person in it. If a man can empty himself
of himself, during his time in the world, who can harm him?'

3\. Pei-kung Shê <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_59) was collecting
taxes for duke Ling of Wei, to be employed in making (a peal of) bells.
(In connexion with the work) he built an altar outside the gate of the
suburban wall; and in three months the bells were completed, even to the
suspending of the upper and lower (tiers). The king's son Khing-kî <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_60) saw them, and asked what

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

arts he had employed in the making of them. Shê replied, 'Besides my
undivided attention to them, 1 did not venture to use any arts. I have
heard the saying, "After all the carving and the chiselling, let the
object be to return to simplicity." I was as a child who has no
knowledge; I was extraordinarily slow and hesitating; they grew like the
springing plants of themselves. In escorting those who went and meeting
those who came, my object was neither to hinder the corners nor detain
the goers. I suffered those who strongly opposed to take their way, and
accepted those who did their best to come to terms. I allowed them all
to do the utmost they could, and in this way morning and evening I
collected the taxes. I did not have the slightest trouble, and how much
more will this be the case with those who pursue the Great Way (on a
grand scale)!'

4\. Confucius was kept (by his enemies) in a state of siege between Khän
and Zhâi <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_61), and for seven days had no
food cooked with fire to eat. The Thâi-kung Zân <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_62) went to condole with him, and said, 'You
had nearly met with your death.' 'Yes,' was the reply. 'Do you dislike
death?' 'I do.' Then Zän continued, 'Let me try and describe a way by
which (such a) death may be avoided.--In the eastern sea there are birds
which go by the name Of Î-îs <span id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_63); they
fly low and slowly as if they were deficient in power. They fly as if
they were

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

leading and assisting one another, and they press on one another when
they roost. No one ventures to take the lead in going forward, or to be
the last in going backwards. In eating no one ventures to take the first
mouthful, but prefers the fragments left by others. In this way (the
breaks in) their line are not many <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_64),
and men outside them cannot harm them, so that they escape injury.

'The straight tree is the first to be cut down; the well of sweet water
is the first to be exhausted. Your aim is to embellish your wisdom so as
to startle the ignorant, and to cultivate your person to show the
unsightliness of others. A light shines around you as if you were
carrying with you the sun and moon, and thus it is that you do not
escape such calamity. Formerly I heard a highly accomplished man say,
"Those who boast have no merit. The merit which is deemed complete will
begin to decay. The fame which is deemed complete will begin to wane."
Who can rid himself of (the ideas of) merit and fame, and return and put
himself on the level of the masses of men? The practice of the Tâo flows
abroad, but its master does not care to dwell where it can be seen; his
attainments in it hold their course, but he does not wish to appear in
its display. Always simple and commonplace, he may seem to be "bereft of
reason. He obliterates the traces of his action, gives up position and
power, and aims not at merit and fame. Therefore he does not censure
men, and men do not censure him. The perfect man does not seek to be
heard of; how is it that you delight in doing so

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

Confucius said, 'Excellent;' and thereupon he took leave of his
associates, forsook his disciples, retired to the neighbourhood of a
great marsh, wore skins and hair cloth, and ate acorns and chestnuts. He
went among animals without causing any confusion among their herds, and
among birds without troubling their movements. Birds and beasts did not
dislike him; how much less would men do so!

5\. Confucius asked Dze-sang Hû <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_65),
saying, 'I was twice driven from Lû; the tree was felled over me in
Sung; I was obliged to disappear from Wei; I was reduced to extreme
distress in Shang and Kâu <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_66); and I was
kept in a state of siege between Khän and Zhâi. I have encountered these
various calamities; my intimate associates are removed from me more and
more; my followers and friends are more and more dispersed;--why have
all these things befallen me?' Dze-sang Hû replied, 'Have you not heard
of the flight of Lin Hui of Kiâ <span
id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_67);--how he abandoned his round jade symbol
of rank, worth a thousand pieces of silver, and hurried away with his
infant son on his back? If it be asked, "Was it because of the market
value of the child?" But that value was small (compared with the value
of the jade token). If it be asked again, "Was it because of the
troubles

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

(of his office)?" But the child would occasion him much more trouble.
Why was it then that, abandoning the jade token, worth a thousand pieces
of silver, he hurried away with the child on his back? Lin Hui (himself)
said, "The union between me and the token rested on the ground of gain;
that between me and the child was of Heaven's appointment." Where the
bond of union is its profitableness, when the pressure of poverty,
calamity, distress, and injury come, the parties abandon one another;
when it is of Heaven's appointment, they hold in the same circumstances
to one another. Now between abandoning one another, and holding to one
another, the difference is great. Moreover, the intercourse of superior
men is tasteless as water, while that of mean men is sweet as new wine.
But the tastelessness of the superior men leads on to affection, and the
sweetness of the mean men to aversion. The union which originates
without any cause will end in separation without any cause.'

Confucius said, 'I have reverently received your instructions.' And
hereupon, with a slow step and an assumed air of ease, he returned to
his own house. There he made an end of studying and put away his books.
His disciples came no more to make their bow to him (and be taught), but
their affection for him increased the more.

Another day Sang Hû said further to him, 'When Shun was about to die, he
charged <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_68) Yü, saying, 'Be

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

upon your guard. (The attraction of) the person is not like that of
sympathy; the (power of) affection is not like the leading (of example).
Where there is sympathy, there will not be separation; where there is
(the leading of) example, there will be no toil. Where there is neither
separation nor toil, you will not have to seek the decoration of forms
to make the person attractive, and where there is no such need of those
forms, there will certainly be none for external things.'

6\. Kwang-dze in a patched dress of coarse cloth, and having his shoes
tied together with strings, was passing by the king of Wei, who said to
him, 'How great, Master, is your distress?' Kwang-dze replied, 'It is
poverty, not distress! While a scholar possesses the Tâo and its
Attributes, he cannot be going about in distress. Tattered clothes and
shoes tied on the feet are the sign of poverty, and not of distress.
This is what we call not meeting with the right time. Has your majesty
not seen the climbing monkey? When he is among the plane trees,
rottleras, oaks, and camphor trees, he grasps and twists their branches
(into a screen), where he reigns quite at his ease, so that not even
Î <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_69) or Phäng Mäng <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_69) could spy him out. When, however, he finds
himself among the prickly mulberry and date trees, and other thorns, he
goes cautiously, casts sidelong glances, and takes every trembling
movement with apprehension;--it is not that his sinews and bones

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

are straitened, and have lost their suppleness, but the situation is
unsuitable for him, and he cannot display his agility. And now when I
dwell under a benighted ruler, and seditious ministers, how is it
possible for me not to be in distress? My case might afford an
illustration of the cutting out the heart of Pî-kan <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_70)!'

7\. When Confucius was reduced to great distress between Khän and Khâi,
and for seven days he had no cooked food to eat, he laid hold of a
decayed tree with his left hand, and with his right hand tapped it with
a decayed branch, singing all the while the ode of Piâo-shih <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_71) . He had his instrument, but the notes
were not marked on it. There was a noise, but no blended melody. The
sound of the wood and the voice of the man came together like the noise
of the plough through the ground, yet suitably to the feelings of the
disciples around. Yen Hui, who was standing upright, with his hands
crossed on his breast, rolled his eyes round to observe him. Kung-nî,
fearing that Hui would go to excess in manifesting how he honoured
himself, or be plunged in sorrow through his love for him, said to him,
'Hui, not to receive (as evils) the inflictions of Heaven is easy; not
to receive (as benefits) the favours of men is difficult. There is no
beginning which was not an end. The Human and the Heavenly may be one

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and the same. Who, for instance, is it that is now singing <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_72)?' Hui said, 'I venture to ask how not to
receive (as evils) the inflictions of Heaven is easy.' Kung-nî said,
'Hunger, thirst, cold, and heat, and having one's progress entirely
blocked up;--these are the doings of Heaven and Earth, necessary
incidents in the revolutions of things. They are occurrences of which we
say that we will pass on (composedly) along with them. The minister of
another does not dare to refuse his commands; and if he who is
discharging the duty of a minister feels it necessary to act thus, how
much more should we wait with case on the commands of Heaven <span
id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_73)!'

'What do you mean by saying that not to receive (as benefits) the
favours of men is difficult?' Kung-nî said, 'As soon as one is employed
in office, he gets forward in all directions; rank and emolument come to
him together, and without end. But these advantages do not come from
one's self;--it is my appointed lot to have such external good. The
superior man is not a robber; the man of worth is no filcher;--if I
prefer such things, what am I <span id="fr_84"></span>[3](#fn_74)? Hence
it is said, "There is no bird wiser than the swallow." Where its eye
lights on a place that is not suitable for it, it does not give it a
second glance. Though it may drop the food from its

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

mouth, it abandons it, and hurries off. It is afraid of men, and yet it
stealthily takes up its dwelling by his; finding its protection in the
altars of the Land and Grain <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_75).

'What do you mean by saying that there is no beginning which was not an
end?' Kung-nî said, 'The change--rise and dissolution--of all things
(continually) goes on, but we do not know who it is that maintains and
continues the process. How do we know when any one begins? How do we
know when he will end? We have simply to wait for it, and nothing
more <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_76).'

'And what do you mean by saying that the Human and the Heavenly are one
and the same?' Kung-nî said, 'Given man, and you have Heaven; given
Heaven, and you still have Heaven (and nothing more). That man can not
have Heaven is owing to the limitation of his nature <span
id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_77). The sagely man quietly passes away with
his body, and there is an end of it.'

8\. As Kwang Kâu was rambling in the park of Tiâo-ling  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[4](#fn_78) he saw a strange bird which came from the
south. Its wings were seven cubits in width, and

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

its eyes were large, an inch in circuit. It touched the forehead of Kâu
as it passed him, and lighted in a grove of chestnut trees. 'What bird
is this?' said he, 'with such great wings not to go on! and with such
large eyes not to see me!' He lifted up his skirts, and hurried with his
cross-bow, waiting for (an opportunity to shoot) it. (Meanwhile) he saw
a cicada, which had just alighted in a beautiful shady spot, and forgot
its (care for its) body. (just then), a preying mantis raised its
feelers, and pounced on the cicada, in its eagerness for its prey,
(also) forgetting (its care for) its body; while the strange bird took
advantage of its opportunity to secure them both, in view of that gain
forgetting its true (instinct of preservation) <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_79). Kwang Kâu with an emotion of pity, said,
'Ah! so it is that things bring evil on one another, each of these
creatures invited its own calamity.' (With this) he put away his
cross-bow, and was hurrying away back, when the forester pursued him
with terms of reproach.

When he returned and went into his house, he did not appear in his
courtyard <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_80) for three months <span
id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_80). (When he came out), Lan Zü <span
id="fr_92"></span>[3](#fn_81) (his disciple) asked him, saying, 'Master,
why have you for this some time avoided the courtyard so much?'
Kwang-dze replied, 'I was guarding my person, and forgot myself; I was
looking at turbid water, till I

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

mistook the clear pool. And moreover I have heard the Master say <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_82), "Going where certain customs prevail, you
should follow those customs." I was walking about in the park of
Tiâo-ling, and forgot myself. A strange bird brushed past my forehead,
and went flying about in the grove of chestnuts, where it forgot the
true (art of preserving itself). The forester of the chestnut grove
thought that I was a fitting object for his reproach. These are the
reasons why I have avoided the courtyard.'

9\. Yang-dze, having gone to Sung, passed the night in a lodging-house,
the master of which had two concubines;--one beautiful, the other
ugly <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_83). The ugly one was honoured,
however, and the beautiful one contemned. Yang-dze asked the reason, and
a little boy of the house replied, 'The beauty knows her beauty, and we
do not recognise it. The ugly one knows her ugliness, and we do not
recognise it.' Yang-dze said, 'Remember it, my disciples. Act
virtuously, and put away the practice of priding yourselves on your
virtue. If you do this, where can you go to that you will not be
loved <span id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_84)?'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[27:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_61) See vol. xxxix, p.
151.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[27:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_62) Compare the accounts
of great trees in I, par. 6; IV, par. 1; et al.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[28:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_63) The Tâo; called <span
id="img_02800"></span> ![](img/02800.jpg), in Bk. XII, par. 5.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[28:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_64) But after all it comes
to be the same thing in point of fact with those who ground themselves
in the Tâo, and with others.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[28:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_66) The Î-liâo here was a
scion of the ruling House of Khû, and is mentioned fortunately in the
Supplement to the Zo-khwan, under the very year in which Confucius died
(B.C. 479). His residence was in the south of the 'Market Place' of the
city where he lived, <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> which is the
meaning of the Shih-nan in the text. The description of his character is
that no offer of gain could win him, and no threatening terrify him. We
find him here at the court of Lû in friendly conference with the
marquis, and trying to persuade him to adopt the ways of Tâoism, which
he presents to him under the figure of an allegory, an utopia called
'the State of Established Virtue,' in the south of Yüeh.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[29:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_67) Probably known to us
as 'duke Âi'.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[31:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_68) Pei-kung, 'Northern
Palace,' must have been the name of Shê's residence, and appears here as
if it were his surname.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[31:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_69) A son, probably of
king *K*ing of Kâu (B.C. 544-529).--On the whole paragraph, see par. 10
of the preceding Book.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[32:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_70) Compare Analects XI,
ii.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[32:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_71) We might translate
Thai-kung by 'the grand-duke.' We know nothing about him. He tries to
convert Confucius to Tâoism, just as Î-liâo does the marquis of Lû in
par. 2; and for a time at least, as Kwang-dze makes it appear, with more
success.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[32:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_72) Were these Î-îs
swallows? So some of the critics say.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[33:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_73) A clause of uncertain
meaning.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[34:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_74) Supposed to have been
a recluse.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[34:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_75) I do not know the
particulars of this distress in Shang and Kâu, or have forgotten them. A
still more full recital of the sage's misfortunes occurs in Lieh-dze,
VII, 8<sup>a</sup>.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[34:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_76) The text here appears
to be somewhat confused. Lin Hui is said to have been a man of the Yin
dynasty, and of a state which was called Kiâ, and for the verification
of such a state I have searched in vain. The explanation of his conduct
put here into his mouth is very good.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[35:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_77) The <span
id="img_03500"></span> ![](img/03500.jpg) of the text here are allowed
on all hands to be spurious, and <span id="img_03501"></span>
![](img/03501.jpg) have been substituted for them. What follows,
however, from Shun to Yü, is far from being clear, in itself, or in its
connexion.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[36:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_79) Î;--see Book. V, par.
2. Phäng Mäng was a contemporary of Î, learned archery from him, and
then slew him, that he might himself be the foremost archer in the
kingdom;--see Mencius IV, ii, 24.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[37:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_80) 'A spurious paragraph,
no doubt.' Lin Hsî-kung thus concludes what he has to say on this
paragraph; but it is not without its interest and lessons.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[37:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_81) I do not know who this
was, nor what his ode or air was. Lû Teh-ming read the character <span
id="img_03700"></span> ![](img/03700.jpg), and says that Piâo-shih was
one of the old royal Tîs who did nothing. In all my texts it is wrongly
printed with three <span id="img_03701"></span> ![](img/03701.jpg).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[38:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_82) This question arose
out of the previous statement that man and Heaven might be one,--acting
with the same spontaneity.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[38:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_83) Confucius recognises
here, as he often does, a power beyond his own, 'his appointed lot,'
what we call destiny, to which the Tâo requires submission. This comes
very near to our idea of God.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[38:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_84) Human gifts had such
an attraction, that they tended to take from man his heavenly
spontaneity; and were to be eschewed, or received only with great
caution.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[39:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_85) What is said here
about the swallow is quite obscure. Hsî-kung says that all the old
attempts to explain it are ridiculous, and then propounds an ingenious
one of his own; but I will leave the passage with my reader to deal with
it as he best can.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[39:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_86) Compare with this how
in Book XVIII we find Kwang-dze singing by the dead body of his wife.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[39:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_87) That man is man and
not Heaven is simply from the limitation of his nature,--his 'appointed
lot.'

<span id="fn_78"></span>[39:4](sbe4004.htm#fr_88) Tâo-ling might be
translated 'Eagle Mount.' Where it was I do not know; perhaps the name
originated with Kwang-dze, and thus has become semi-historical.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[40:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_89) Kwang-dze might now
have shot the bird, but we like him the better for letting it alone.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[40:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_91) So then, masters of
schools, like Kwang-dze, received and taught their disciples in the
courtyard of their house;--in China as elsewhere. For three 'months,' it
is conjectured, we should read three 'days.'

<span id="fn_81"></span>[40:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_92) The disciple Lan Zü
appears here, but not, so far as I know, elsewhere.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[41:1](sbe4004.htm#fr_93) Who was this 'Master?'

<span id="fn_83"></span>[41:2](sbe4004.htm#fr_94) The story here is
found in Lieh-dze 11, 15 <sup>a, b</sup>. The Yang-dze is there Yang Kû,
against whom Mencius so often directed his arguments.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[41:3](sbe4004.htm#fr_95) See the greater part
of this paragraph in Prémare's 'Notitia Linguae Sinicae,' p. 200, with
his remarks on the style.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XXI. Thien Dze-fang.](sbe4005)
