<span id="P1500_429776"></span> <sup>110</sup> poo\\j tou\\j
a0qewta/touj poluqe/ouj.

<span id="P1503_429907"></span> <sup>111</sup> Fragments of a second
epistle of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, or of the treatise which was
inscribed the "Elenchus et Apologia." \[A former epistle was written
when Dionysius (of Rome) was a presbyter.\]

<span id="P1507_430203"></span> <sup>112</sup> And in what follows (says
Athanasius) he professes that Christ *is* always, as being the Word, and
the Wisdom, and the Power.

<span id="P1511_431576"></span> <sup>113</sup> Prov. viii. 30.

<span id="P1514_432029"></span> <sup>114</sup> John iv. 24.

<span id="P1515_432101"></span> <sup>115</sup> *Scil.* Wisdom.

<span id="P1516_432164"></span> <sup>116</sup> Wisd. vii. 25.

<span id="P1522_432626"></span> <sup>117</sup> From Athan., *Ep. de
decret. Nic. Syn.*, 4. 18. \[See remarks on *inevitable* discrepancies
of language and figurative illustrations at this formative period, vol.
iv. p. 223.\]

<span id="P1529_435815"></span> <sup>118</sup> Ex Athan., *Ep. de
decret. Nic. Syn.*, 4. 17.

<span id="P1535_437162"></span> <sup>119</sup> *Ibid.*, 4. 20.

<span id="P1536_437633"></span> <sup>120</sup> Rom. ii. 13; Jas. iv. 12.
The Greek word poihth/j meaning either *maker* or *doer*, causes the
ambiguity here and below.

<span id="P1537_437958"></span> <sup>121</sup> Isa. v. 7.

<span id="P1539_438026"></span> <sup>122</sup> Athanasius adds (*ut
supra*, 4. 21), that Dionysius gave various replies to those that blamed
him for saying that God is the Maker of Christ, whereby he cleared
himself.

<span id="P1543_439051"></span> <sup>123</sup> John i. 1. \[For r9hma,
see vol. ii. p. 15, this series.

<span id="P1544_439165"></span> <sup>124</sup> Ex Athan., *Ep. de
decret. Nic. Syn.*, 4. 25. \[P. 94, notes 1, 2, *infra*\]

<span id="P1545_439272"></span> <sup>125</sup> John i. 1. \[For r9hma,
see vol. ii. p. 15, this series.

<span id="P1546_439453"></span> <sup>126</sup> Prov. viii. 30.

<span id="P1550_439719"></span> <sup>127</sup> Ex Athan., *Ep. de
decret. Nic. Syn.*, 4. 18.

<span id="P1554_439838"></span> <sup>128</sup> Ex Athan., *Ep. de
decret. Nic. Syn.*, 4. 25. \[P. 94, notes 1, 2, *infra*\]

<span id="P1555_439981"></span> <sup>129</sup> Ps. xlv. 1.

<span id="P1556_440610"></span> <sup>130</sup> *Emanant.* \[P. 49,
*supra*, and vol. iii. p. 299, this series.\]

<span id="P1557_441245"></span> <sup>131</sup> Sermonem \[So Tertullian,
*Sermo*, vol. iii. p. 299, note 19.\]

<span id="P1561_441579"></span> <sup>132</sup> Ex Basilio, *lib. de
Spir. Sancto*, chap. 29.

<span id="P1565_441715"></span> <sup>133</sup> *Ibid. cap. penult.*, p.
61.

<span id="P1569_442178"></span> <sup>134</sup> Of the work itself
Athanasius thus speaks: Finally, Dionysius complains that his accusers
do not quote his opinions in their integrity, but mutilated, and that
they do not speak out of a good conscience, but for evil inclination;
and he says that they are like those who cavilled at the epistles of the
blessed apostle. Certainly he meets the individual words of his
accusers, and gives a solution to all their arguments; and as in those
earlier writings of his he confuted Sabellius most evidently, so in
these later ones he entirely declares his own pious faith. \[Conf.
*Hermas*, vol. iii. p. 15, note 7,with note 2, *supra.*\]

<span id="P1572_442846"></span> <sup>135</sup> Containing explanations
which were given as answers to questions proposed by that bishop on
various topics, and which have been received as canons. \[The
*Scholium*, p. 79, is transposed from here.\]

<span id="P1577_443342"></span> <sup>136</sup> a\\ponhstizesqai dei=.
Gentianus Hervetus renders this by *jejunandus sit dies Paschae*; and
thus he translates the word by *jejunare*, "to fast," wherever it
occurs, whereas it rather means always, *jejunium solvere*, it "to have
done fasting." In this sense the word is used in the *Apostolic
Constitutions* repeatedly: see book v. chap. 12, 18, etc. It occurs in
the same sense in the 89th Canon of the Concilium Trullanum. The usage
must evidently be the same here: so that it does not mean, What is the
proper hour for fasting on the day of Pentecost? but, What is the hour
at which the ante-paschal fast ought to be terminated-whether on the
evening preceding the paschal festival itself, or at cockcrowing, or at
another time?-Gall. See also the very full article in Suicer, *s.v.*

<span id="P1578_444152"></span> <sup>137</sup> I give the beginning of
this epistle of Dionysius of Alexandria also as it is found in not a few
manuscripts, viz. e0pesteila/j moi...th= tou= pa/sxa perilusei,-the
common reading being, th\\n tou= pasxa h9me/ran. And the perilusij tou=
pa/sxa denotes the close of the paschal fast, as Eusebius (*Hist.
Eccles.* v. 23) uses the phrase ta\\j tw=n a0sitiw=n e0piluseij,-the
verbs perilu/ein, apolu/ein, e\\pilu/ein, katalu/ein, being often used
in this sense.-Cotelerius on the *Apostolic Constitutions*, v. 15.

<span id="P1579_444807"></span> <sup>138</sup> a0f' e9spe/raj.

<span id="P1580_444964"></span> <sup>139</sup> \[Note this and the
Nicene decision which made the Alexandrian bishop the authority
concerning the paschal annually, vol. ii. Elucidation II. p. 343.\]

<span id="P1581_445243"></span> <sup>140</sup> pa/nu memetrnme/nhn.

<span id="P1582_445884"></span> <sup>141</sup> kata\\ kairou\\j
e\\nhllagme/nouj.

<span id="P1583_446042"></span> <sup>142</sup> Matt. xxviii. 1.

<span id="P1584_446120"></span> <sup>143</sup> John xx. 1.

<span id="P1585_446481"></span> <sup>144</sup> th\|= e0pifwskou/sh\|=
mia=\| Sabba/twn.

<span id="P1586_447058"></span> <sup>145</sup> th= e\\pifwskou/sh\| ei0j
mi/an Sabba/twn.

<span id="P1587_447611"></span> <sup>146</sup> Matt. xxviii. 1-6.

<span id="P1588_447730"></span> <sup>147</sup> koino/thta.

<span id="P1589_447914"></span> <sup>148</sup> nu/kta baqei/an.

<span id="P1590_447965"></span> <sup>149</sup> o\\ye/, late.

<span id="P1591_448627"></span> <sup>150</sup> John xx. 1.

<span id="P1592_448719"></span> <sup>151</sup> para/
tou=to...proelhluq/ei.

<span id="P1593_449025"></span> <sup>152</sup> Luke xxiii. 56, xxiv. 1,
2.

<span id="P1594_449100"></span> <sup>153</sup> o@rqrou baqeoj.

<span id="P1595_449157"></span> <sup>154</sup> prou&gt;\\pofainome/nhn
au0th/n e0wqinh\\n e0mfanizei..

<span id="P1596_449698"></span> <sup>155</sup> Mark xvi. 1, 2.

<span id="P1597_450522"></span> <sup>156</sup> pro\\ nukto/j e@gguj h@dh
mesou/shj a0nie/ntaj.

<span id="P1598_450685"></span> <sup>157</sup> w9j par' o0ligon
prokatalu/ontaj to\\n dromon.

<span id="P1599_451219"></span> <sup>158</sup> \[1 Tim. iv. 8. Mark the
moderation of our author in contrast with superstition. But in our days
the peril is one of an opposite kind. Contrast St. Paul, 2 Cor. xi.
27.\]
