<span id="P1600_451444"></span> <sup>159</sup> That is, as Balsamon
explains, the six days of the week of our Lord's passion.

<span id="P1601_452602"></span> <sup>160</sup> To these canons are
appended the comments of Balsamon and Zonaras, which it is not necessary
to give here.

<span id="P1605_453263"></span> <sup>161</sup> Matt. ix. 20; Luke viii.
43.

<span id="P1609_453962"></span> <sup>162</sup> Referring to the
relations of marriage, dealt with in 1 Cor. vii. 5, etc.

<span id="P1613_454244"></span> <sup>163</sup> diakri/nontai.

<span id="P1614_454379"></span> <sup>164</sup> Rom. xiv. 23. \[Gr.
katake/kritai = is condemned = self-condemned. Wordsworth cites Cicero,
*De Officiis*, i. 30.\]

<span id="P1615_455274"></span> <sup>165</sup> \[The entire absence of
despotic authority in these episcopal teachings is to be noted. 2 Cor.
i. 24.\]

<span id="P1623_455583"></span> <sup>1</sup> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*,
vii. 11.

<span id="P1625_456472"></span> <sup>2</sup> Isa. xlix. 8.

<span id="P1627_456532"></span> <sup>3</sup> Reading e0peidh\\
punqa/nesqe, for which some codices give e0pei\\ punqa/nesqai.

<span id="P1628_456879"></span> <sup>4</sup> strathgw=n.
Christophorsonus would read strathgou= in the sense of *commander.* But
the word is used here of the *duumviri*, or magistrates of Alexandria.
And that the word strathgo/j was used in this *civil* acceptation as
well as in the common *military* application, we see by many examples in
Athanasius, Ammianus Marcellinus, and others. Thus, as Valesius remarks,
the *soldiers* (stratiwtw=n) here will be the band with the centurion,
and the attendants (u/phretw=n) will be the civil followers of the
magistrates.

<span id="P1629_457621"></span> <sup>5</sup> This happened in the first
persecution under Decius, when Dionysius was carried off by the decision
of the prefect Sabinus to Taposiris, as he informs us in his epistle to
Germanus. Certainly any one who compares that epistle of Dionysius to
Germanus with this one to Domitius, will have no doubt that he speaks of
one and the same event in both. Hence Eusebius is in error in thinking
that in this epistle of Dionysius to Domitius we have a narrative of the
events relating to the persecution of Valerian,-a position which may
easily be refuted from Dionysius himself. For in the persecution under
Valerian, Dionysius was not carried off into exile under military
custody, nor were there any men from Mareotis, who came and drove off
the soldiers, and bore him away unwillingly, and set him at liberty
again; nor had Dionysius on that occasion the presbyters Gaius and
Faustus, and Peter and Paul, with him. All these things happened to
Dionysius in that persecution which began a little before Decius
obtained the empire, as he testifies himself in his epistle to Germanus.
But in the persecution under Valerian, Dionysius was accompanied in
exile by the presbyter Maximus, and the deacons Faustus, and Eusebius,
and Chaeremon, and a certain Roman cleric, as he tells us in the epistle
to Germanus.-Valesius.

<span id="P1631_459500"></span> <sup>6</sup> e0n th=\| no/sw\|, Rufinus
reads nh/sw\|, and renders it, "But of the deacons, some died in the
island after the pains of confession." But Dionysius refers to the
pestilence which traversed the whole Roman world in the times of Gallus
and Volusianus, as Eusebius in his *Chronicon* and others record. See
Aurelius Victor. Dionysius makes mention of this sickness again in the
paschal epistle to the Alexandrians, where he also speaks of the deacons
who were cut off by that plague.-Vales.

<span id="P1632_460280"></span> <sup>7</sup> peristola\\j e0ktelei=n.
Christophorsonus renders it: "to prepare the linen cloths in which the
bodies of the blessed martyrs who departed this life might be wrapped."
In this Valesius thinks he errs by looking at the modern method of
burial, whereas among the ancient Christians the custom was somewhat
different, the bodies being dressed out in full attire, and that often
at great cost, as Eusebius shows us in the case of Astyrius, in the
*Hist. Eccles.*, vii. 16. Yet Athanasius, in his *Life of Antonius*, has
this sentence: "The Egyptians are accustomed to attend piously to the
funerals of the bodies of the dead, and especially those of the holy
martyrs, and to wrap then in linen cloths: they are not wont, however,
to consign them to the earth, but to place them on couches, and keep
them in private apartments."

<span id="P1635_461649"></span> <sup>8</sup> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*,
vi. 45.

<span id="P1637_461706"></span> <sup>9</sup> Jerome, in his *Catalogus*,
where he adduces the beginning of this epistle, gives Novatianus for
Novatus. So in the *Chronicon* of Georgius Syncellus we have Dionu/sioj
Nauatianw=\|. Rufinus' account appears to be that there were two such
epistles,-one to Novatus, and another to Novatianus. The confounding of
these two forms seems, however, to have been frequent among the Greeks.
\[See Lardner, *Credib., sub voce Novat.* Wordsworth thinks the Greeks
shortened the name, on the grounds which Horace notes *ad vocem*
"Equotuicum." *Satires*, I. v. 87.\]

<span id="P1638_462672"></span> <sup>10</sup> We read, with Gallandi,
kai0 h\\n ou0k a0docute0ra th=j e@neken tou= mh\\ i9dwlolatreu=sai
(*sic*) ginome/nhj, h9 e@neken tou@ mh\\ sxi/sai marturi/a. This is
substantially the reading of three Venetian codices, as also of
Sophronius on Jerome's *De vir. illustr.*, ch. 69, and Georgius
Syncellus in the *Chronogr.*, p. 374, and Nicephorus Callist., *Hist.
Eccles.*, vi. 4. Pearson, in the *Annales Cyprian.*, Num. x. p. 31,
proposes qu\\sai for sxi/sai. Rufinus renders it: "et erat non inferior
gloria sustinere martyrium ne scindatur ecclesia quam est illa ne idolis
immoletur."

<span id="P1641_463922"></span> <sup>11</sup> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*,
vi. 41, 42, 44. Certain codices read Fabianus for Fabius, and that form
is adopted also by Rufinus. Eusebius introduces this epistle thus: "The
same author, in an epistle written to Fabius bishop of Antioch, gives
the following account of the conflicts of those who suffered martyrdom
at Alexandria."

<span id="P1643_464410"></span> <sup>12</sup> kai\\ fqa/saj o9 kakw=n,
etc. Pearson *Annales Cyprian. ad ann.*, 249 § 1, renders it rather
thus: "et praevertens malorum huic urbi vates et auctor, quisquis ille
fuit, commovit," etc.

<span id="P1644_464902"></span> <sup>13</sup> eu0se/beian th/n
qrnskei/an daimo/nwn. Valesius thinks the last three words in the text (
= service to their demons) an interpolation by some scholiast. \[Note
qrhskei/an = *cultus*, Jas. i. 27.\]

<span id="P1646_466404"></span> <sup>14</sup> Heb. x. 30.

<span id="P1648_466735"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[To this day St.
Apollonia is invoked all over Europe; and votive offerings are to be
seen hung up at her shrines, in the form of teeth, by those afflicted
with toothache.\]

<span id="P1649_467078"></span> <sup>16</sup> ta/ th=j a0sebei/aj
khru/gmata. What these precisely were, it is not easy to say. Dionysius
speaks of them also as du/sfhma r9h/mata in this epistle, and as a@qeoi
fwnai in that to Germanus. Gallandi thinks the reference is to the
practice, of which we read also in the Acts of Polycarp, ch. 9, where
the proconsul addresses the martyr with the order: loido/rhson to\\n
Xristo/n-Revile Christ. And that the test usually put to reputed
Christians by the early persecutors was this cursing of Christ, we learn
from Pliny, book x. epist. 97. \[Vol. i. p. 41.\]

<span id="P1650_467675"></span> <sup>17</sup> Or, shrink from.

<span id="P1651_467848"></span> <sup>18</sup> e0fe/stion, for which
Nicephorus reads badly, 9Efe/sion.

<span id="P1652_468394"></span> <sup>19</sup> e0pipolu/.

<span id="P1653_468514"></span> <sup>20</sup> a0ql\\i/ouj. But Pearson
suggests a@qlouj, = "when insurrection and civil war took the place of
these persecutions." This would agree better with the common usage of
diade/xomai.

<span id="P1654_468884"></span> <sup>21</sup> a0sxoli/an tou= pro\\j
h\\maj qumou= labo/n/twn The Latin version gives "dum illorum cessaret
furor." W. Lowth renders,"dum non vacaret ipsis furorem suum in nos
exercere."

<span id="P1656_469119"></span> <sup>22</sup> This refers to the death
of the Emperor Philip, who showed a very righteous and kindly
disposition toward the Christians. Accordingly the matters here
recounted by Dionysius took place in the last year of the Emperor
Philip. This is also indicated by Dionysius in the beginning of this
epistle, where he says that the persecution began at Alexandria a whole
year before the edict of the Emperor Decius. But Christophorsonus, not
observing this, interprets the metabolh\\n th=j basilei/aj as signifying
a change in *the emperor's mind* toward the Christians, in which error
he is followed by Baronius, ch. 102.-Vales.

<span id="P1657_470092"></span> <sup>23</sup> In this sentence the Codex
Regius reads, to\\ pror0r9hqe\\n u9po\\ tou= Kuri/ou h9mw=n parabraxu/
to\\ foberw/taton, etc., = "the one intimated beforetime by our Lord,
*very nearly* the most terrible one." In Georgius Syncellus it is given
as h9 para\\ braxu/. But the reading in the text, a0pofai=non "setting
forth," is found in the Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and Savilii; and it
seems the best, the idea being that this edict of Decius was so terrible
as in a certain measure to represent the most fearful of all times,
viz., those of Antichrist.-Vales.

<span id="P1658_470806"></span> <sup>24</sup> a0ph/ntwn dedio/tej.

<span id="P1659_470957"></span> <sup>25</sup> oi9 de\\ dhmosieu/ontej
u9po\\ tw=n pra/cewn h@gonto. This is rendered by Christophorsonus,
"alii ex privatis aedibus in publicum raptati ad delubra ducuntur a
magistratibus." But dhmosieuontej is the same as ta\\ dhmo/sia
pra/ttontej, i.e., decurions and magistrates. For when the edict of
Decius was conveyed to them, commanding all to sacrifice to the immortal
gods, these officials had to convene themselves in the court-house as
usual, and stand and listen while the decree was there publicly recited.
Thus they were in a position officially which led them to be the first
to sacrifice. The word praceij occurs often in the sense of the acts and
administration of magistrates: thus, in Eusebius, viii. 11; in
Aristides, in the funeral oration on Alexander, ta\\ d' ei0j praceij te
kai\\ politeiaj, etc. There are similar passage also in Plutarch's
Politika\\ paragge/lmata, and in Severianus's sixth oration on the
Hexameron. So Chrysostom, in his eighty-third homily on Matthew, calls
the decurions tou\\j ta\\ politika\\ pra/ttontaj. The word
dhmosieu/ontej, however, may also be explained of those employed in the
departments of law or finance; so that the clause might be rendered,
with Valesius: "alii, qui in publico versabantur, rebus ipsis et
reliquorum exemplo, ad sacrificandum ducebantur." See the note in Migne.

<span id="P1660_472807"></span> <sup>26</sup> i0sxurizo/menoi here for
diisxurizo/menoi.-Vales.

<span id="P1661_473469"></span> <sup>27</sup> pro\\j to\\ e9ch=j
a0pei=pon. It may also mean, "renounced the faith in the prospect of
what was before them."

<span id="P1663_474903"></span> <sup>28</sup> A blessed one. Alluding to
Matt. v. 10, 12.

<span id="P1664_475149"></span> <sup>29</sup> meta\\ polu/n. But Codices
Med., Maz., Fuk., and Savilii, as well as Georgius Syncellus, read met'
ou0 polu/n, "after a short time."

<span id="P1665_475372"></span> <sup>30</sup> custh=raj.

<span id="P1667_475977"></span> <sup>31</sup> Here Valesius adds from
Rufinus the words kai\\'Ammwna/rion e@tera, "and a second Ammonarium,"
as there are four women mentioned.

<span id="P1669_476393"></span> <sup>32</sup> In Georgius Syncellus and
Nicephorus it is given as *Aster*. Rufinus makes the name Arsinus. And
in the old Roman martyrology, taken largely from Rufinus, we find the
form Arsenius.-Vales.

<span id="P1670_476598"></span> <sup>33</sup> In his *Bibliotheca*, cod.
cxix., Photius states that Isidorus was full brother to Pierius, the
celebrated head of the Alexandrian school, and his colleague in
martyrdom. He also intimates, however, that although some have reported
that Pierius ended his career by martyrdom, others say that he spent the
closing period of his life In Rome after the persecution
abated.-Ruinart.

<span id="P1672_478620"></span> <sup>34</sup> su/ntagma stratiwtiko/n.
Rufinus and Christophorsonus make n *turmam militum.* Valesius prefers
*manipulum* or *contubernium*. These may have been the apparitors or
officers of the *praefectus Augustalis*. Valesius thinks rather that
they were legionaries, from the legion which had to guard the city of
Alexandria, and which was under the authority of the *praefectus
Augustalis*. For at that time the *praefectus Augustalis* had charge of
military affairs as well as civil.

<span id="P1673_479660"></span> <sup>35</sup> ba/qron. Valesius supposes
that what is intended is the seat on which the accused sat when under
interrogation by the judge.

<span id="P1674_480201"></span> <sup>36</sup> qriambeu/ontoj au0tou/j.
Rufinus makes it, "God thus triumphing in them;" from which it would
seem that he had read di' au0tou/j. But qriambeu/ein is probably put
here for qriambeu/ein poiei=n as basileu/ein is also used by Gregory
Nazianzenus.

<span id="P1676_481452"></span> <sup>37</sup> That is, Nilopolis or
Niloupolis. Eusebius, bishop of the same seat, subscribed the Council of
Ephesus.-Reading.

<span id="P1677_481626"></span> <sup>38</sup> to\\ 9Ara/bion o@roj.
There is a *Mons Arabicus* mentioned by Herodotus (ii. 8), which Ptolemy
and others call Mons Troïcus.-Vales.

<span id="P1678_482011"></span> <sup>39</sup> This passage is notable
from the fact that it makes mention of the Saracens. For of the writers
whose works have come down to us there is none more ancient than
Dionysius of Alexandria that has named the Saracens. Ammianus
Marcellinus, however, writes in his fourteenth book that he has made
mention of the Saracens in the Acts of Marcus. Spartianus also mentions
the Saracens in his *Niger*, and says that the Roman soldiers were
beaten by them.-Vales. \["The barbarous Saracens:" what a *nominis
umbra* projected by "coming events," in this blissfully ignorant
reference of our author! Compare Robertson, *Researches*, on the
conquest of Jerusalem.\]

<span id="P1680_483172"></span> <sup>40</sup> As to the martyrs'
immediate departure to the Lord, and their abode with Him, see
Tertullian, *On the Resurrection of the Flesh*, ch. xliii., and *On the
Soul*, v. 55. \[Vol. iii. p. 576; *Ib.*, p. 231.\]

<span id="P1681_483446"></span> <sup>41</sup> That the martyrs were to
be Christ's assessors, judging the world with Him, was a common opinion
among the fathers. So, after Dionysius, Eulogius, bishop of Alexandria,
in his fifth book, *Against the Novatians*. Photius, in his
*Bibliotheca*, following Chrysostom, objects to this, and explains
Paul's words in 1 Cor. vi. 2 as having the same intention as Christ's
words touching the men of Nineveh and the queen of the south who should
rise up in the judgment and condemn that generation.

<span id="P1682_483977"></span> <sup>42</sup> sundika/zontej. See a
noble passage in Bossuet, Préface sur l'Apocal., § 28.

<span id="P1683_484314"></span> <sup>43</sup> Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

<span id="P1684_484540"></span> <sup>44</sup> Dionysius is dealing here
not with public communion, such as was the bishop's prerogative to
confer anew on the penitent, but with private fellowship among Christian
people.-Vales.

<span id="P1685_485076"></span> <sup>45</sup> a@dikon poihsw/meqa is the
reading of Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and Savil., and also of Georgius
Syncellus. Others read a@dekton poihso/meqa, "we shall treat it as
inadmissible."

<span id="P1686_485404"></span> <sup>46</sup> The words kai\\ to9n
Qeo\\n parocu/nomen, "and provoke God," are sometimes added here; but
they are wanting in Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., Savil., and in Georgius
Syncellus.

<span id="P1688_485668"></span> <sup>47</sup> Eusebius introduces this
in words to the following effect: "Writing to this same Fabius, who
seemed to incline somewhat to this schism, Dionysius of Alexandria,
after setting forth in his letter many other matters which bore on
repentance, and after describing the conflicts of the martyrs who had
recently suffered in Alexandria, relates among other things one
specially wonderful fact, which I have deemed proper for insertion in
this history, and which is as follows."

<span id="P1689_486367"></span> <sup>48</sup> That is, none either of
the clergy or of the people were moved by his prayers to consider him a
proper subject for absolution; for the people's suffrages were also
necessary for the reception into the Church of any who had lapsed, and
been on that account cut off from it. And sometimes the bishop himself
asked the people to allow absolution to be given to the suppliant, as we
see in Cyprian's Epistle 53, to Cornelius \[vol. v. p. 336, this
series\], and in Tertullian *On Modesty*, ch. xiii. \[vol. iv. p. 86,
this series\]. Oftener, however, the people themselves made intercession
with the bishop for the admission of penitents; of which we have a
notable instance in the Epistle of Cornelius to Fabius of Antioch about
that bishop who had ordained Novatianus. See also Cyprian, Epistle 59
\[vol. v. p. 355\].-Vales.

<span id="P1690_487701"></span> <sup>49</sup> In the African Synod,
which met about the time that Dionysus wrote, it was decreed that
absolution should be granted to lapsed persons who were near their end,
provided that they had sought it earnestly before their illness. See
Cyprian in the Epistle to Antonianus \[vol. v. p. 327, this
series\].-Vales.

<span id="P1691_488148"></span> <sup>50</sup> a0fiesqai. There is a
longer reading in Codices Fuk. and Savil., viz.: tw=n qeiwn dw/rwn th=j
metado/sewj a0ciou=sqai kai ou@twj afiesqai, "be deemed worthy of the
imparting of the divine gifts, and thus be absolved."

<span id="P1692_488481"></span> <sup>51</sup> Valesius thinks that this
custom prevailed for a long time, and cites a synodical letter of
Ratherius, bishop of Verona (which has also been ascribed to Udalricus
by Gretserus, who has published it along with his *Life of Gregory
VII.*), in which the practice is expressly forbidden in these terms:
"And let no one presume to give the communion to a laic or a woman for
the purpose of conveying it to an infirm person."

<span id="P1693_488937"></span> <sup>52</sup> a0pobre/cai. Rufinus
renders it by *infundere*. References to this custom are found in
Adamanus, in the second book of the *Miracles of St Columba*, ch 6; in
Bede, *Life of St. Cuthbert*, ch. 31, and in the poem on the life of the
same; in Theodorus Campidunensis, *Life of St. Magnus*, ch. 22; in
Paulus Bernriedensis, *Life of Gregory VII.*, p. 113.

<span id="P1694_489919"></span> <sup>53</sup> o9mologhqh=nai. Langus,
Wolfius, and Musculus render it *confiteri*, "confess." Christophorsonus
makes it *in numerum confessorum referri*, "reckoned in the number of
confessors:" which may be allowed if it is understood to be a reckoning
*by Christ.* For Dionysius alludes to those words of Christ in the
Gospel: "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father."-Vales.

<span id="P1697_490400"></span> <sup>54</sup> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*,
vi. 46.
