<span id="P1701_491318"></span> <sup>55</sup> In the second chapter of
the seventh book of his *Ecclesiastical History*, Eusebius says: "To
this Stephen, Eusebius wrote the first of his epistles on the matter of
baptism." And he calls this the *first*, because Dionysius also wrote
other four epistles to Xystus and Dionysius, two of the successors of
Stephen, and to Philemon, on the same subject of the baptizing of
heretics.-Gallandi.

<span id="P1703_491744"></span> <sup>56</sup> Eusebius introduces the
letter thus: "When he had addressed many reasonings on this subject to
him (Stephen) by letter, Dionysius at last showed him that, as the
persecution had abated, the churches in all parts opposed to the
innovations of Novatus were at peace among themselves." \[See vol. v. p.
275.\]

<span id="P1704_492128"></span> <sup>57</sup> kai\\ e@ti proswte/rw.
These words are omitted in Codices Fulk, and Savil., as also by
Christophorsonus; but are given in Codices Reg. Maz., and Med., and by
Syncellus and Nicephorus.

<span id="P1705_492383"></span> <sup>58</sup> Baronius infers from this
epistle that at this date, about 259 A.D., the Oriental bishops had
given up their "error," and fallen in with Stephen's opinion, that
heretics did not require to be rebaptized,-an inference, however, which
Valesius deems false. \[Undoubtedly so.\]

<span id="P1706_492901"></span> <sup>59</sup> The name assigned by the
pagans to Jerusalem was Aelia. It was so called even in Constantine's
time as we see in the *Tabula Peutingerorum* and the *Itinerarium
Antonini*, written after Constantine's reign. In the seventh canon of
the Nicene Council we also find the name Aelia. \[Given by Hadrian A.D.
135.\]

<span id="P1707_493251"></span> <sup>60</sup> The words koimhqentoj
'Aleca/ndrou are given in the text in connection with the clause
Mari=noj e\\n Tu/rw. They must be transposed however as in the
translation; for Mazabanes had succeeded Alexander the bishop of Aelia,
as Dionysius informs us in his Epistle to Cornelius. So Rufinus puts it
also in his Latin version.-Vales.

<span id="P1708_494039"></span> <sup>61</sup> Alluding to the generous
practice of the church at Rome in old times in relieving the wants of
the other churches, and in sending money and clothes to the brethren who
were in captivity, and to those who toiled in the mines. To this effect
we have the statement of Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, in his Epistle to
Soter, which Eusebius cites in his fourth book. In the same passage,
Eusebius also remarks that this commendable custom had been continued in
the Roman church up to his own time; and with that object collections
were made there, of which Leo Magnus writes in his *Sermones*.-Vales.
\[Note this to the eternal honour of this See in its early purity.\]

<span id="P1711_494963"></span> <sup>62</sup> \[In vol. v., to
illustrate the history of Cyprian, reference is made to this letter; and
in the Clark edition another rendering is there given (a preferable one,
I think) of this same letter, which I have thought better to reserve for
this place. It belongs here, and I have there noted its appearance in
this volume.\]

<span id="P1713_495477"></span> <sup>63</sup> \[proestw=tej. See Euseb.,
*Hist Eccles.*, book viii. capp. 2, 3 and 4; also vol. v., this series,
as above mentioned.\]

<span id="P1716_496473"></span> <sup>64</sup> Dionysius mentions letters
that had been written by him as well to the Presbyters Dionysius and
Philemon as to Stephen, on the baptism of heretics and on the Sabellian
heresy.

<span id="P1721_497638"></span> <sup>65</sup> Lib. vii. ch. 6.

<span id="P1722_497678"></span> <sup>66</sup> \[i.e., Sixtus II.\]

<span id="P1727_498402"></span> <sup>67</sup> Of Sixtus, bishop of Rome.
\[A.D. 257\].

<span id="P1729_499468"></span> <sup>68</sup> 1 Thess. v. 21. \[Euseb.,
vi. 7. The apostle is supposed to refer to one of the *reputed* sayings
of our Lord, gi/nesqe do/kimoi trapezitai = *examinatores*, i.e., of
coins, rejecting the base, and laying up in store the precious. Compare
Jer. xv. 19.\]

<span id="P1734_500652"></span> <sup>69</sup> \[I find that it is
necessary to say that the "Africans" of Egypt and Carthage were no more
negroes than we "Americans" are redmen. The Carthaginians were
Canaanites and the Alexandrians Greeks. I have seen Cyprian's portrait
representing him as a Moor.\]

<span id="P1735_501314"></span> <sup>70</sup> Deut. xix. 14.

<span id="P1738_501362"></span> <sup>71</sup> At that time presbyter of
Xystus, and afterwards his successor. He teaches that Novatian is
deservedly to be opposed on account of his schism, on account of his
impious doctrine, on account of the repetition of baptism to those who
came to him.

<span id="P1742_502211"></span> <sup>72</sup> Of a man who sought to be
introduced to the Church by baptism, although he said that he had
received baptism, with other words and matters among the heretics.

<span id="P1744_503839"></span> <sup>73</sup> \[Vol. v. See a reference
to Cyril's *Catechetical Lectures.*\]

<span id="P1747_504383"></span> <sup>74</sup> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*,
vi. 40, vii. 11.

<span id="P1749_504522"></span> <sup>75</sup> ou0demi/an e0p' e0mautou=
ballo/menoj. In Codex Fuk. and in the *Chronicon* of Syncellus it is
e0p' e0mautw=.. In Codices Maz. and Med. it is e0p' e0mauto/n. Herodotus
employs the phrase in the genitive form-ballo/menoj e0f' e0autou=
peprhxe, i.e., *seipsum in consilium adhibens, sua sponte et proprio
motu fecit.*

<span id="P1750_504932"></span> <sup>76</sup> a9lla\\ kai\\ pro/tepon.
Christophorsonus and others join the pro/teron, with the diwgmou=,
making it mean, "before the persecution." This is contrary to pure Greek
idiom, and is also inconsistent with what follows; for by the au0th=j
w@raj is meant the very hour at which the edict was decreed, diwgmo/j
here having much the sense of "edict for the persecution."-Vales.

<span id="P1751_505437"></span> <sup>77</sup> There was a body of men
called *frumentarii milites*, employed under the emperors as secret
spies, and sent through the provinces to look after accused persons, and
collect floating rumors. They were abolished at length by Constantine,
as Aurelius Victor writes. They were subordinate to the judges or
governors of the provinces. Thus this Frumentarius mentioned here by
Dionysius was deputed in obedience to Sabinus, the *praefectus
Augustalis.*-Vales.

<span id="P1752_506452"></span> <sup>78</sup> oi= pai=dej. Musculus and
Christophorsonus make it "children." Valesius prefers "domestics."

<span id="P1755_507517"></span> <sup>79</sup> a0ph/nteto/ tij tw@n
xwritw=n. In Codices Maz., Med., Fuk., and Savil., a0ph/nta is written;
in Georgius Syncellus it is a0phnta=to.

<span id="P1756_507682"></span> <sup>80</sup> xwritw=n rendered
*indigenarum* by Christophorsonus, and *incolarum*, "inhabitants," by
the interpreter of Syncellus; but it means rather "rustics." Thus in the
Greek Councils the tw=n xwrw=n presbu/teroi, *presbyteri pagorum*, are
named. Instead of xwritw=n, Codices Maz., Med., and Fuk. read xwrikw=n;
for thus the Alexandrians named the country people, as we see in the
tractate of Sophronius against Dioscorus, and the *Chronicon* of
Theophanes, p. 139.

<span id="P1757_508839"></span> <sup>81</sup> a0strw/twn skimpo/dwn.

<span id="P1758_509876"></span> <sup>82</sup> fora/dhn e0ch/gagon. The
fora/dhn may mean, as Valesius puts it, *in sella*, "on a stool or
litter."

<span id="P1760_510405"></span> <sup>83</sup> Tobit xii. 7.

<span id="P1761_510920"></span> <sup>84</sup> to\\ teleutaion e0pi to\\
prw=ton a0natre/xonti, i.e., to begin by interdicting him from holding
Christian assemblies, while the great question was whether he was a
Christian at all, would have been to place first what was last in order
and consequence.

<span id="P1762_511535"></span> <sup>85</sup> Acts v. 29.

<span id="P1764_511880"></span> <sup>86</sup> u9pemnhmati/sqh.

<span id="P1765_512080"></span> <sup>87</sup> a0gra/fwj.

<span id="P1766_514326"></span> <sup>88</sup> Germanus had accused
Dionysius of neglecting to hold the assemblies of the brethren before
the persecutions broke out, and of rather providing for his own safety
by flight. For when persecution burst on them, the bishops were wont
first to convene the people, in order to exhort them to hold fast the
faith of Christ; there infants and catechumens were baptized, to provide
against their departing this life without baptism, and the Eucharist was
given to the faithful.-Vales.

<span id="P1768_514957"></span> <sup>89</sup> ai0sqhth=j meta\\ tou=
Kuri/ou sunagwgh=j.

<span id="P1769_515160"></span> <sup>90</sup> w0j ei\\pon. Codices Maz.
and Med. give ei0pei=n, "so to speak;" Fuk. and Savil. give w0j ei\\pen
o a0po/stoloj, "as the apostle said." See on 1 Cor. v. 3.

<span id="P1770_515555"></span> <sup>91</sup> \[Acts xiv. 27; Rev. iii.
8. If the author here quotes the Apocalypse, it is noteworthy.
Elucidation, p. 110.\]

<span id="P1771_516454"></span> <sup>92</sup> h9maj de\\ mallon wn
o0dw\|= kai\\ prw/touj katalhfhsome/nouj e$tacen.

<span id="P1773_516953"></span> <sup>93</sup> ta0 Kollouqi/wnoj,
supplying me/rh, as Dionysius has already used the phrase ta\\ me/rh
th=j Libu/hj. This was a district in the Mareotic prefecture. Thus we
have mention made also of ta\\ Bouko/lou, a certain tract in Egypt,
deriving its name from the old masters of the soil. Nicephorus writes
Kolou/qion, which is probably more correct; for Kollouqi/wn is a
derivative from Colutho, which was a common name in Egypt. Thus a
certain poet of note in the times of Anastasius, belonging to the
Thebaid, was so named, as Suidas informs us. There was also a Coluthus,
a certain schismatic, in Egypt, in the times of Athanasius, who is
mentioned often in the *Apologia*; and Gregory of Nyssa names him
Acoluthus in his *Contra Eunomium*, book ii.-Vales.

<span id="P1774_518679"></span> <sup>94</sup> kata\\ meroj sunagwgai.
When the suburbs were somewhat distant from the city, the brethren
resident in them were not compelled to attend the meetings of the larger
church, but had meetings of their own in a basilica, or some building
suitable for the purpose. The Greeks, too, gave the name proa/steion to
places at some considerable distance from the city, as well as to
suburbs immediately connected with it. Thus Athanasius calls Canopus a
proa/steion; and so Daphne is spoken of as the proa/steion of Antioch,
Achyrona as that of Nicomedia, and Septimum as that of Constantinople,
though these places were distant some miles from the cities. From this
place it is also inferred that in the days of Dionysius there was still
but one church in Alexandria, where all the brethren met for devotions.
But in the time of Athanasius, when several churches had been built by
the various bishops, the Alexandrians met in different places, kata
me/roj kai dih\|rhme/nwj, as Athanasius says in his first Apology to
Constantius; only that on the great festivals, as at the paschal season
and at Pentecost, the brethren did not meet separately, but all in the
larger church, as Athanasius also shows us-Vales.

<span id="P1776_520213"></span> <sup>95</sup> a0pofa/seij.

<span id="P1777_520348"></span> <sup>96</sup> Maximus, in the scholia to
the book of Dionysius the Areopagite, *De coelesti hierarchia*, ch. 5,
states that Dionysius was by profession a *rhetor* before his
conversion: o9 gou=n me/gaj Dionu/sioj o0 'Alecandrewn e0piskopoj, o0
a9po\\ r0hto/rwn, etc.-Vales.

<span id="P1778_520770"></span> <sup>97</sup> tw=/n e0nanti/wn
a9peilwsn.

<span id="P1779_520985"></span> <sup>98</sup> This Sabinus had been
prefect of Egypt in the time of Decius; it is of him that Dionysius
writes in his Epistle to Fabius, which is given above. The Aemilianus,
prefect of Egypt, who is mentioned here, afterwards seized the imperial
power, as Pollio writes in his *Thirty Tyrants*, who, however, calls him
general (*ducem*), and not prefect of Egypt.-Vales.

<span id="P1782_521808"></span> <sup>99</sup> Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles.*,
vii. 1, 10, 23. Eusebius introduces this extract thus: "In an epistle to
Hermammon, Dionysus makes the following remarks upon Gallus" the
Emperor.

<span id="P1784_522286"></span> <sup>100</sup> kata\\ nou=n is the
reading in the Codices Maz., Med., Fuk, and Savil., and adopted by
Rufinus and others. But Robertus Stephanus, from the Codex Regius, gives
kata\\ r0ou=n, "according to the stream," i.e., favourably.

<span id="P1786_522748"></span> <sup>101</sup> Eusebius prefaces this
extract thus: "Gallus had not held the government two full years when he
was removed, and Valerian, together with his son Gallienus, succeeded
him. And what Dionysius has said of him may be learned from his Epistle
to Hermammon, in which he makes the following statement."

<span id="P1787_523196"></span> <sup>102</sup> e0co sia kai mh=nej
tessarakontadu/o. Rev. xiii. 5. Baronius expounds the numbers as
referring to the period during which the persecution under Valerian
continued: see him, under the year 257 A.D., ch. 7. \[See Introductory
Note, p. 78, *supra*. Here is a quotation from the Apocalypse to be
noted in view of our author's questionings, part i., i. 5, p. 83,
*supra*\]

<span id="P1788_523715"></span> <sup>103</sup> The text is, kai tou/twn
ma/lista ta\\ pro\\ au0tou= w9j ou@twj e@sxe sunnoei=u' e@wj h\[pioj
,etc. Gallandi emends the sentence thus: kai au0tou= ta\\ ma/lista pro\\
tou/twn, w9j ou0x ou@twj e@sxe, sunnoei\\n, ewj h\[pioj, etc. Codex
Regius gives w9j me\\n h@pioj. But Codices Maz. and Med. give e/wj
h\\pioj, while Fuk. and Savil. give e@wj ga/r h@pioj.

<span id="P1789_524326"></span> <sup>104</sup> He means the Emperor
Philip who, as many of the ancients have recorded, was the first of the
Roman emperors to profess the Christian religion. But as Dionysius
speaks in the plural number, to Philip may be added Alexander Severus,
who had an image of Christ in the chapel of his Lares, as Lampridius
testifies, and who favoured and sustained the Christians during the
whole period of his empire. It is to be noted further, that Dionysius
says of these emperors only that *they were said* and thought to be
Christians, not that they were so in reality.-Gallandi

<span id="P1790_525142"></span> <sup>105</sup> a0rxisuno/gwgoj.

<span id="P1791_525187"></span> <sup>106</sup> Baronius thinks that this
was that *Magus* who, a little while before the empire of Decius, had
incited the Alexandrians to persecute the Christians, and of whom
Dionysius speaks in his Epistle to Fabius. What follows here, however,
shows that Macrianus is probably the person alluded to.

<span id="P1792_526210"></span> <sup>107</sup> eu0daimh/sontaj. So
Codices Maz., Med., Fuk. and Savil. read: others give eu0saimonh/santaj.
It would seem to require eu0daimonh/sonta, "as if he would attain;" for
the reference is evidently to Valerian himself.

<span id="P1794_526576"></span> <sup>108</sup> By the au0toi=j some
understand toi=j basileu=si; others better, toi=j daimosi. According to
Valesius, the sense is this: that Macrianus having, by the help and
presages of the demons, attained his hope of empire, made a due return
to them, by setting Valerian in arms against the Christians.

<span id="P1795_527001"></span> <sup>109</sup> e0pi tw=n kaqo/lou logwn.
The Greeks. gave this name to those officials whom the Latins called
*rationales*, or *procuratores summae rei.* Under what emperor Macrianus
was procurator, is left uncertain here.

<span id="P1796_527312"></span> <sup>110</sup> ou0de/n eu@logon ou0de\\
kaqoliko\\n efro/nhsen. There is a play here on the two senses of the
word kaqoliko/j , as seen in the official title e0pi tw=n kaqo/lou
logwn, and in the note of character in ou0de\\ kaqoliko/n. But it can
scarcely be reproduced in the English.

<span id="P1797_527728"></span> <sup>111</sup> ouj0ai/ toi=j
profhteu/ousin a0po\\ kardiaj au0tw=n kai\\ to\\ kaqo/lou mh/
ble/pousin. The quotation is probably from Ezek. xiii. 3, of which
Jerome gives this interpretation: *Vae his qui prophetant ex corde suo
et omnino non vident.*

<span id="P1798_528319"></span> <sup>112</sup> Robertus Stephanus edits
th=j e9autou= e0kklhsi/aj, "from his Church," following the Codex
Medicaeus. But the best manuscripts give swthri/aj.

<span id="P1799_528558"></span> <sup>113</sup> A play upon the name
*Macrianus*, as connected with makra/n, "at a distance." \[This
playfulness runs through the section.\]
