<span id="P1801_529036"></span> <sup>114</sup> e0mpai/gmata.

<span id="P1802_529089"></span> <sup>115</sup> Isa. lxvi. 3, 4.

<span id="P1803_529126"></span> <sup>116</sup> Christophorsonus refers
this to Valerian. But evidently the ou\[toj de/ introduces a different
subject in Macrianus; and besides, Valerian could not be said to have
been originally unworthy of the power which he aspired to.

<span id="P1804_529537"></span> <sup>117</sup> to\\n basi/leion
u9podu=nai ko/smon.

<span id="P1805_529606"></span> <sup>118</sup> a0naph/rw.

<span id="P1806_529630"></span> <sup>119</sup> Joannes Zonaras, in his
*Annals*, states that Macrianus was lame.

<span id="P1807_530093"></span> <sup>120</sup> w\[n h0tu/xei. So Codex
Regius reads. But Codices Maz., Med., and Fuk. give hu0tu/xei, "in which
he succeeded."

<span id="P1808_530258"></span> <sup>121</sup> e0cwmo/rcato.

<span id="P1810_530385"></span> <sup>122</sup> Eusebius introduces the
extract thus: He (Dionysius) addressed also an epistle to Hermammon and
the brethren in Egypt; and after giving an account of the wickedness of
Decius and his successors, he states many other circumstances, and also
mentions the peace of Gallienus. And it is best to hear his own relation
as follows.

<span id="P1811_530727"></span> <sup>123</sup> This is rightly
understood of Macrianus, by whose treachery Valerian came under the
power of the Persians. Aurelius Victor, Syncellus, and others, testify
that Valerian was overtaken by that calamity through the treachery of
his generals.

<span id="P1812_531463"></span> <sup>124</sup> Isa. xlii. 9.

<span id="P1813_531779"></span> <sup>125</sup> prosta/j. But Valesius
would read prossta/j, *adstans.*

<span id="P1814_531859"></span> <sup>126</sup> prospela/saj is the
reading of three of the codices and of Nicephorus; others give
propela/saj.

<span id="P1816_532719"></span> <sup>127</sup> \[Rom xiii. 4, 6. St.
Paul's strong expressions in this place must explain these expressions.
A prince was, *quoad hoc*, comparatively speaking, godly and pious, as
he "attended continually to this very thing." So, "most religious," In
the Anglican Liturgy.\]

<span id="P1817_533082"></span> <sup>128</sup> Who ever expressed
himself thus,-that one after his seven years was passing his ninth year?
'I'his septennium (eptaethri/j) must designate something peculiar, and
different from the time following it. It is therefore the septennium of
imperial power which he had held along with his father. In the eighth
year of that empire, Macrianus possessed himself of the imperial honour
specially in Egypt. After his assumption of the purple, however,
Gallienus had still much authority in Egypt. At length, in the ninth
year of Gallienus, that is, in 261, Macrianus the father and the two
sons being slain, the sovereignty of Gallienus was recognised also among
the Egyptians. And then Gallienus gave a rescript to Dionysius, Pinna,
and Demetrius, bishops of Egypt, to re-establish the sacred places,-a
boon which he had granted in the former year. The ninth year of
Gallienus, moreover, began about the midsummer of this year; and the
time at which this letter was written by Dionysius, as Eusebius
observes, may be gathered from that, and falls consequently before the
Paschal season of 262 A.D.-Pearson, p. 72. Gall.

<span id="P1820_534234"></span> <sup>129</sup> Eusebius, *Hist.
Eccles.,* vii. 22. Eusebius prefaces the 21st chapter of his seventh
book thus: "When peace had scarcely yet been established, he (Dionysius)
returned to Alexandria. But when sedition and war again broke out, and
made it impossible for him to have access to all the brethren in that
city, divided as they then were into different parties, he addressed
them again by an epistle at the Passover, as if he were still an exile
from Alexandria." Then he inserts the epistle to Hierax; and thereafter,
in ch. xxii., introduces the present excerpt thus: "After these events,
the pestilence succeeding the war, and the festival being now at hand,
he again addressed the brethren by letters, in which he gave the
following description of the great troubles connected with that
calamity."

<span id="P1822_535292"></span> <sup>130</sup> ou0x o@pwj tw=n
e\\pilu/pwn is the reading of Codices Maz., Med., and Savil.; others
give, less correctly, e0piloipwn.

<span id="P1823_535501"></span> <sup>131</sup> The text gives, a0ll'
ou0d' ei/ tij perixarh\\j o@n oi/nqei=en ma/lista, which is put probably
for the mere regular construction, o@n oi@ointo a0n ma/lista perixarh=.
Nicephorus reads, ei@ tij perixarh\\j w@n oihqei/h. The idea is, that
the heathen could have no real festal time. All seasons, those
apparently most joyous, no less than those evidently sorrowful, must be
times void of all real rejoicing to them, until they learn the grace of
God.

<span id="P1824_536318"></span> <sup>132</sup> Ex. xii. 30.

<span id="P1827_537607"></span> <sup>133</sup> Dionysius is giving a
sort of summary of all the calamities which befell the Alexandrian
church from the commencement of his episcopal rule: namely, first,
persecution, referring to that which began in the last year of the reign
of Philip; then war, meaning the civil war of which he speaks in his
Epistle to Fabius; then pestilence, alluding to the sickness which began
in the time of Decius, and traversed the land under Gallus and
Volusianus.-Vales.

<span id="P1829_538998"></span> <sup>134</sup> a0namasso/menoi ta0j
a0lghdo/naj. Some make this equivalent to *mitigantes*. It means
properly to "wipe off," and so to become "responsible" for. Here it is
used apparently to express much the same idea as the two preceding
clauses.

<span id="P1830_539497"></span> <sup>135</sup> mo/nhj filofrosu/nhj
e@xesqai.

<span id="P1831_539631"></span> <sup>136</sup> The phrase periyhma
pa/ntwn refers to 1 Cor. iv. 13. Valesius supposes that among the
Alexandrians it may have been a humble and complimentary form of
salutation, e0gw/ eimi periyhma/ sou; or that the expression periyhma
pa/ntwn had come to be habitually applied to the Christians by the
heathen.

<span id="P1833_540355"></span> <sup>137</sup> u9pti/aij xersi. \[See
Introductory Note, p. 77.\]

<span id="P1834_540443"></span> <sup>138</sup> kaqairou=ntej.

<span id="P1835_540530"></span> <sup>139</sup> o9moforou=ntej.

<span id="P1836_541294"></span> <sup>140</sup> Compare Defoe, *Plague in
London.*\]

<span id="P1839_541379"></span> <sup>141</sup> Eusebius, *Hist.
Eccles.*, vii. 21. The preface to this extract in Eusebius is as
follows: "After this he (Dionysius) wrote also another Paschal epistle
to Hierax, a bishop in Egypt, in which he makes the following statement
about the sedition then prevailing at Alexandria."

<span id="P1841_541874"></span> <sup>142</sup> Or, for.

<span id="P1842_542409"></span> <sup>143</sup> mesaita/th th=j po/lewj.
Codex Regius gives tw= po/lewn. The sedition referred to as thus
dividing Alexandria is probably that which broke out when Aemilianus
seized the sovereignty in Alexandria. See Pollio's *Thirty Tyrants*.

<span id="P1843_542652"></span> <sup>144</sup> a@peiroj. But Codices
Fuk. and Savil. give a@poroj, "impracticable."

<span id="P1844_543474"></span> <sup>145</sup> a0kroto/mou. It may
perhaps mean "smitten" here.

<span id="P1846_544287"></span> <sup>146</sup> 'Ede/m.

<span id="P1847_544406"></span> <sup>147</sup> Written I'hw/n in Codex
Alexandrinus, but I'ew/n in Codex Vaticanus.

<span id="P1848_544840"></span> <sup>148</sup> i/xw=raj.

<span id="P1849_545443"></span> <sup>149</sup> w0moge/rontaj.

<span id="P1852_546141"></span> <sup>150</sup> e0k th=j d' e9ortastikh=j
e0pistolh=j. From the *Sacred Parallels of John of Damascus*, Works, ii.
p. 753 C, edit. Paris, 1712. In his *Ecclesiastical History*, book vii.
ch. 20, Eusebius says: "In addition to these epistles, the same
Dionysius also composed others about this time, designated his *Festival
Epistles*, and in these he says much in commendation of the Paschal
feast. One of these he addressed to Flavius, and another to Domitius and
Didymus, in which he gives the canon for eight years, and shows that the
Paschal feast ought not to be kept until the passing of the vernal
equinox. And besides these, he wrote another epistle to his
co-presbyters at Alexandria."

<span id="P1863_547763"></span> <sup>151</sup> P. 84, note 6.

<span id="P1864_547818"></span> <sup>152</sup> P. 82, note 6.

<span id="P1869_548338"></span> <sup>1</sup> See, in the *Bibliotheca
Veterum Patrum* of Gallandi, the Appendix to vol. xiv., added from the
manuscripts, after the editor's death by an anonymous scholar.

<span id="P1875_548560"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Compare the *Metaphrase*,
p. 9, *supra*. *Query*, are not these twin specimens of exegetical
exercises in the school at Alexandria?\]

<span id="P1881_548843"></span> <sup>2</sup> Matt i. 1.

<span id="P1886_549452"></span> <sup>3</sup> eij ton ai0w=na.

<span id="P1887_549495"></span> <sup>4</sup> ei0j to0u9j ai/w=naj.

<span id="P1890_549815"></span> <sup>5</sup> proai/resij.

<span id="P1893_550110"></span> <sup>6</sup> 1 Cor. iii. 19.

<span id="P1894_550343"></span> <sup>7</sup> ei\[pe, for which ei\\de,
"discerned," is suggested.

<span id="P1895_550599"></span> <sup>8</sup> 1 Kings iv. 32.
