<span id="P2104_600242"></span> <sup>1</sup> Vol. ii. p. 87, this
series.

<span id="P2105_601146"></span> <sup>2</sup> Vol. iv. p. 227.

<span id="P2106_602237"></span> <sup>3</sup> On St. Matt. i. 1-17.

<span id="P2108_602439"></span> <sup>4</sup> Vol. iv. p. 385.

<span id="P2114_603607"></span> <sup>5</sup> *Hist. Eccl.*, vi. 31.

<span id="P2117_604373"></span> <sup>6</sup> Cod. 34.

<span id="P2134_605254"></span> <sup>1</sup> This letter, as given by
Eusebius, is acephalous. A large portion of it is supplied by Cardinal
Angelo Mai in the *Bibliotheca nova Patrum*, vol. iv. pp. 231 and 273.
We enclose in brackets the parts wanting in Gallandi, who copied
Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, i. 7). On this celebrated letter of Africanus
to Aristides, consult especially Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, i. 7); also
Jerome, comm. on Matt. i. 16; Augustine, *Retract.*, ii. 7; Photius,
cod. xxxiv. p. 22; and in addition to these, Zacharias Chrysopol. in
*Bibl. P. P. Lugd.*, vol. xix. p. 751.

<span id="P2135_605953"></span> <sup>2</sup> dikai/wj.

<span id="P2136_606760"></span> <sup>3</sup> Ex. vi. 23.

<span id="P2137_606831"></span> <sup>4</sup> Ex. vi. 25.

<span id="P2138_607355"></span> <sup>5</sup> \[Heb. vii. 14.\]

<span id="P2139_608220"></span> <sup>6</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 12, etc.

<span id="P2143_609227"></span> <sup>7</sup> Here what is given in
Eusebius begins.

<span id="P2144_610249"></span> <sup>8</sup> Reading sunepepla/kh. Migne
would make it equivalent to "superimplexum est." Rufinus renders it,
"Reconjunctum namque est sibi invicem genus, et illud per Salomonem et
illud quod per Nathan deducitur," etc.

<span id="P2145_610507"></span> <sup>9</sup> a0nasta/sesin a0te/knwn.
Rufinus and Damascenus omit these words in their versions of the
passage.

<span id="P2149_611054"></span> <sup>10</sup> The reading of the Codex
Regius is a0kolouqi/an, i.e., succession; the other leading Mss. give
e0pollagh/n, i.e. interchange or confusion.

<span id="P2150_611565"></span> <sup>11</sup> But in our text in Luke
iii. 23, 24, and so, too, in the Vulgate, Matthat and Levi are inserted
between Heli and Melchi. It may be that these two names were not found
in the copy used by Africanus.

<span id="P2151_612308"></span> <sup>12</sup> Here Africanus applies the
term "widow" (xhreu/ousan) to one divorced an well as to one bereaved.

<span id="P2152_613030"></span> <sup>13</sup> kata\\ lo/gon.

<span id="P2153_613419"></span> <sup>14</sup> Two things may be remarked
here: first, that Africanus refers the phrase "as was supposed" not only
to the words "son of Joseph," but also to those that follow, "the son of
Heli;" so that Christ would be the son of Joseph by legal adoption, just
in the same way as Joseph was the son of Heli, which would lead to the
absurd and impious conclusion that Christ was the son of Mary and a
brother of Joseph married by her after the death of the latter. And
second, that in the genealogy here assigned to Luke, Melchi holds the
*third* place; whence it would seem either that Africanus's memory had
failed him, or that as Bede conjectures in his copy of the Gospel Melchi
stood in place of Matthat (Migne). \[A probable solution.\]

<span id="P2154_614466"></span> <sup>15</sup> Other Mss. read, "Adam the
son of God."

<span id="P2158_615035"></span> <sup>16</sup> The word "priest" is used
here perhaps improperly for "servant of the temple," i.e., iereuj for
i0ero/douloj.

<span id="P2159_615552"></span> <sup>17</sup> So Josephus styles him
"procurator of Judea, and viceroy" (e0pimelhth\\j th=j 'Iouai/aj, and
epi/tropoj).

<span id="P2160_615977"></span> <sup>18</sup> This whole story about
Antipater is fictitious. Antipater's father was not Herod, a servant in
the temple of Apollo, but Antipater an Idumean, as we learn from
Josephus (xiv. 2). This Antipater was made prefect of Idumea by
Alexander king of the Jews, and laid the foundation of the power to
which his descendants rose. He acquired great wealth, and was on terms
of friendship with Ascalon, Gaza, and the Arabians.

<span id="P2164_616554"></span> <sup>19</sup> Several Mss. read
a0rxiproshlu/twn for a@xri proshlu/twn, whence some conjecture that the
correct reading should be a@xri twsn a0rxiproshlu/twn, i.e., back to the
"chief proselytes,"-these being, as it were, patriarchs among the
proselytes, like Achior, and those who joined the Israelites on their
flight from Egypt.

<span id="P2165_617397"></span> <sup>20</sup> This word occurs in the
Septuagint version of Ex. xii. 19, and refers to the *strangers* who
left Egypt along with the Israelites. For Israel was accompanied by a
mixed body, consisting on the one hand of native Egyptians, who are
named au0to/xqonej in that passage of Exodus, and by the resident
aliens, who are called geiw=rai. Justin Martyr has the form gho/ran in
*Dialogue with Trypho*, ch. cxxii. The root of the term is evidently the
Hebrew rn

, "stranger."

<span id="P2166_618161"></span> <sup>21</sup> The word despo/sunoi was
employed to indicate the Lord's relatives, as being His according to the
flesh. The term means literally, "those who belong to a master," and
thence it was used also to signify "one's heirs."

<span id="P2167_618572"></span> <sup>22</sup> proeirhme/nhn. Nicephorus
reads prokeime/nhn.

<span id="P2168_618672"></span> <sup>23</sup> e0k te th=j biblou tw=n
h9merw=n. By this "Book of Days" Africanus understands those "day-books"
which he has named, a little before this, i0diwtika\\j a0pografa/j. For
among the Jews, most persons setting a high value on their lineage were
in the habit of keeping by them private records of their descent copied
from the public archives, as we see it done also by nobles among
ourselves. Besides, by the insertion of the particle te, which is found
in all our codices, and also in Nicephorus, it appears that something is
wanting in this passage. Wherefore it seems necessary to supply these
words, kai a0po\\ mnh/mhj e0j o@son e\\ciknou=nto, "and from memory,"
etc. Thus at least Rufinus seems to have read the passage, for he
renders it: Ordinem supradictae generationis partim memoriter, partim
etiam ex dierum libris, in quantum erat possibile, perdocebant (Migne).

<span id="P2172_620220"></span> <sup>24</sup> \[Elucidation I.\]

<span id="P2177_620308"></span> <sup>1</sup> Edited from two Munich
codices by J. Chr. von. Aretin, in his *Beiträge zur Geschichte und
Literatur*, anno 1804, p. ii. p. 49. \[I place this apocryphal fragment
here as a mere appendix to the Genealogical Argument. An absurd
appendix, indeed.\]

<span id="P2179_620777"></span> <sup>2</sup> Which is extant in two Mss.
in the Electoral Library of Munich, and in one belonging to the Imperial
Library of Vienna.

<span id="P2183_622801"></span> <sup>3</sup> The Mss. read ga/r, for.

<span id="P2184_622884"></span> <sup>4</sup> The term in the original
(a0lklari/aij) is one altogether foreign to Greek, and seems to be of
Arabic origin. The sense, however, is evident from the use of synonymous
terms in the context.

<span id="P2185_624459"></span> <sup>5</sup> There is a play upon the
words, perhaps, in the original. The Greek term for Juno (\#Hra) may be
derived from e@ra, *terra*, so that the antithesis intended is, "She is
no longer called *Earthly*, but *Heavenly*."

<span id="P2186_624786"></span> <sup>6</sup> i.e., Fountain, Spring, or
Stream.

<span id="P2187_625217"></span> <sup>7</sup> The initial letters of the
Greek 'Ihsou=j Xristo\\j Qeou= Ui0o9j Swth/r, i.e., "Jesus Christ the
Son of God the Savior." when joined together, make the word ixqu/j,
i.e., fish; and the fathers used the word, therefore, as a mystic symbol
of Christ, who could live in the depth of our mortality as in the abyss
of the sea. \[Vol. ii. p. 297.\]

<span id="P2188_626003"></span> <sup>8</sup> i.e., as sea, land, and
sky.

<span id="P2195_629093"></span> <sup>9</sup> qei/aj tu/xhj su/llhmma.

<span id="P2196_629213"></span> <sup>10</sup> e@llrafoj.

<span id="P2197_629315"></span> <sup>11</sup> e0mpraktou.

<span id="P2198_629654"></span> <sup>12</sup> The text gives qrobadei=,
for which Migne proposes qoru/bhqi.

<span id="P2199_629857"></span> <sup>13</sup> praktikou\\j fo/rouj.
