<span id="P3501_957149"></span> <sup>236</sup> The opening sentences of
this chapter are given in a very corrupt form in our Codex Casinensis.
Its text stands thus: "Tuum et ipsius indicio comprehensus es; haec enim
versum te locutus, ignorans, qui dum, me vis probra conjicere majori
culpae se succumbit. Dic age mihi studias qua Tiberio usque ad Probum
defuncti sunt, dicent ad Jesum nolite nos judicare," etc. We have
adopted these emendations: *tuimet* for *tuum et; adversum* for *versum;
ignoras* for *ignorans; in me* for *me; succumbis* for *se succumbit;
si, ut ais, qui a*, for *studias qua*; and *noli* for *nolite.*

<span id="P3502_958220"></span> <sup>237</sup> Supplying *missurum*,
which is not in the codex.

<span id="P3503_958527"></span> <sup>238</sup> Reading "noli nos tradere
tormentis," instead of the meaningless "noli nostra de tormentis" of the
codex.

<span id="P3504_959137"></span> <sup>239</sup> Reading *ut ais* instead
of *ut eas.*

<span id="P3505_959273"></span> <sup>240</sup> Gal. iii. 13.

<span id="P3506_959395"></span> <sup>241</sup> *Nec quemquam vivificat.*
2 Cor. iii. 6.

<span id="P3507_959490"></span> <sup>242</sup> 2 Cor. iii. 7.

<span id="P3508_959539"></span> <sup>243</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 56.

<span id="P3509_959640"></span> <sup>244</sup> Matt. xxii. 29.

<span id="P3510_959979"></span> <sup>245</sup> John i. 12.

<span id="P3511_960396"></span> <sup>246</sup> Matt. xiii. 35.

<span id="P3512_960491"></span> <sup>247</sup> Reading *reliqui per
ordinem* for the *qui per ordinem* of the codex.

<span id="P3513_960947"></span> <sup>248</sup> Rom. ii. 15.

<span id="P3514_961099"></span> <sup>249</sup> Rom. ii. 14.

<span id="P3515_961500"></span> <sup>250</sup> Reading "per hunc modum."
But the Codex Casinensis gives "per hunc mundum"-through this world.

<span id="P3516_962494"></span> <sup>251</sup> 2 Cor. iii. 7.

<span id="P3517_962577"></span> <sup>252</sup> Gal. iii. 13.

<span id="P3518_962641"></span> <sup>253</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 56.

<span id="P3520_963039"></span> <sup>254</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P3521_963459"></span> <sup>255</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P3522_963515"></span> <sup>256</sup> The text is "sufficit
tibi haec sunt an habes et alia." Routh proposes "sufficientia tibi haec
sunt," etc.

<span id="P3523_964227"></span> <sup>257</sup> Routh would make it =
*You* will come under the condemnation...*you* will have to bear: he
suggests *eris ergo* for *ero ego*, and *feras* for *feram.*

<span id="P3524_964516"></span> <sup>258</sup> Rom. v. 14.

<span id="P3525_964605"></span> <sup>259</sup> Rom. v. 14.

<span id="P3526_964770"></span> <sup>260</sup> *Nec aliter nisi essent
ingenita.* Routh, however, would read *esset* for *essent*, making it =
and that death could be nothing else than unbegotten.

<span id="P3527_965497"></span> <sup>261</sup> Reading *ex tempore* for
the corrupt *exemplo re* of the codex.

<span id="P3528_965635"></span> <sup>262</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 54.

<span id="P3529_965990"></span> <sup>263</sup> Wisd. i. 13.

<span id="P3530_966418"></span> <sup>264</sup> The text gives *discere*,
to learn; but *dicere* seems the probable reading.

<span id="P3532_967301"></span> <sup>265</sup> Reading *inquam* for the
*iniquam* of the Codex Casinensis. But Routh suggests *iniquae*, in
reference to what has been said towards the close of ch. xxviii.

<span id="P3533_967750"></span> <sup>266</sup> The codex gives, "cum eas
inimica semper memoriae ineresis sed oblivio;" which is corrected thus,
"cum eis inimica semper memoriae inhaesisset oblivio."

<span id="P3534_968532"></span> <sup>267</sup> The text writes it
*Juda.*

<span id="P3535_968795"></span> <sup>268</sup> Matt. xxiii. 35.

<span id="P3536_968906"></span> <sup>269</sup> This would appear to be
the meaning of these words, "transferens semper usque ad tempus in
similes illius," if we suppose the speaker still to be keeping Rom. v.
12-14 in view. Routh suggests *transiens.*

<span id="P3538_969562"></span> <sup>270</sup> Referring perhaps to Ps.
cv. 15.

<span id="P3539_969704"></span> <sup>271</sup> Reading *interitui
tradens* for the *interit ut tradens* of the codex.

<span id="P3540_970703"></span> <sup>272</sup> Reading *pacti* for the
*acti* of the codex.

<span id="P3541_971343"></span> <sup>273</sup> *Mors.*

<span id="P3542_971424"></span> <sup>274</sup> 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55.

<span id="P3544_971877"></span> <sup>275</sup> Gal. iii. 13.

<span id="P3545_972026"></span> <sup>276</sup> Recte videre. But perhaps
we should read "recte *vivere*," to lead a righteous life.

<span id="P3546_972130"></span> <sup>277</sup> The phrase is
*imaginariam legem.* On this expression there is a note in Migne, which
is worth quoting, to this effect: Archelaus calls the Old Testament an
*emblematic* or *imaginary law*, because it was the type or image of a
future new law. So, too, Petrus de Vineis, more than once in his
Epistles, calls a messenger or legate a *homo imaginarius*, as Du Cange
observes in his *Glossary*, because he represents the person by whom he
is sent, and, as it were, reflects his image. This word is also used in
a similar manner by the old interpreter of Evagrius the monk, in the
*Disputation between Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, and Simon the
Jew*, ch. 13, where the Sabbath is called the *requies imaginaria* of
that seventh day on which God rested. Hence Archelaus, in his answer to
the presbyter Diodorus, ch xli. beneath, devotes himself to proving that
the Old Testament is not to he rejected, because, like a mirror, it
gives us a true image of the new law.

<span id="P3547_973554"></span> <sup>278</sup> John v. 17.

<span id="P3548_973895"></span> <sup>279</sup> Reading "invisibilia
autem et intrinsecus." The Codex Casinensis has "invisibili autem et
trinsecus."

<span id="P3549_974390"></span> <sup>280</sup> *Absurdam*, standing
probably for a@topon, which may also be = flagitious.

<span id="P3550_974964"></span> <sup>281</sup> The codex reads,
"ultionem fecerat retorquebat." We adopt either "ultionem quam fecerat
retorquebat," or "ultionem fecit retorqueri."

<span id="P3551_975286"></span> <sup>282</sup> Num. xv. 32.

<span id="P3552_976014"></span> <sup>283</sup> Matt. xviii. 21.

<span id="P3553_976851"></span> <sup>284</sup> Matt. xii. 32.

<span id="P3554_977606"></span> <sup>285</sup> 1 Tim. i. 9.

<span id="P3555_978360"></span> <sup>286</sup> This is one of those
passages in which we detect the tendency of many of the early fathers to
adopt the peculiar opinions of the Jewish rabbis on difficult points of
Scripture. See also the *Disputation between Theophilus of Alexandria
and the Jew Simon*, ch. 13. In accordance with the opinion propounded
here by Archelaus, we find, for instance, in the *Scemoth Rabba*, p.
157, col. 1, that the making of the golden calf is ascribed to the
Egyptian proselytes. See the note in Migne. \[The passage is a note of
antiquity and in so far of authenticity.\]

<span id="P3556_979141"></span> <sup>287</sup> The text is in *quo nec
scelerum poenas aliquando rependeret.*

<span id="P3558_979737"></span> <sup>288</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P3559_980360"></span> <sup>289</sup> Reading *commonens* for
*communis ne. Communiens* is also suggested.

<span id="P3560_980914"></span> <sup>290</sup> Luke x. 18.

<span id="P3561_980963"></span> <sup>291</sup> We have another instance
here of a characteristic opinion of the Jewish rabbis adopted by a
Christian father. This notion as to the intercourse of the angels with
the daughters of men was a current interpretation among the Jews from
the times of Philo and Josephus, and was followed in whole or in part by
Tertullian, Justin, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras,
Methodius, Cyprian, Lactantius, etc. Consult the note in Migne; \[also
p. 131, note 2, *supra*\].

<span id="P3562_981523"></span> <sup>292</sup> We give the above as a
*possible* rendering. Routh, however, understands the matter otherwise.
The text is, "alii vero in felicitate hominum filiabus admisti a dracone
afflicti," etc. Routh takes the phrase *in felicitate* as = "adhuc in
statu felici existentes:" so that the sense would be, "others, while
they still abode in the blessed estate, had intercourse," etc. \[Routh,
*R. S.*, vol. v. pp. 118-122.\]

<span id="P3563_982581"></span> <sup>293</sup> Archelaus seems here to
assign a twofold etymology for the name *devil*, deriving the Greek
dia/boloj, accuser, from diaba/llw, in its two senses of *trajicere* and
*traducere*, to cross over and to slander.

<span id="P3564_982917"></span> <sup>294</sup> Matt. iv. 10.

<span id="P3565_983098"></span> <sup>295</sup> Matt. iv. 10.

<span id="P3566_983321"></span> <sup>296</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P3567_983561"></span> <sup>297</sup> Matt iii. 7, 8.

<span id="P3568_983855"></span> <sup>298</sup> Reading *a nobis* for the
*a vobis* of the codex.

<span id="P3569_984407"></span> <sup>299</sup> John i. 18.

<span id="P3570_984886"></span> <sup>300</sup> *Ex uno.*

<span id="P3571_985363"></span> <sup>301</sup> The sense is obscure
here. The text runs, "Interimere debes judicii ratione ut quis nostrum
fallat appareat." Migne proposes to read *rationem*, as if the idea
intended was this: That, consistently with his reasonings, Manes ought
not to admit the fact of a judgment, because the notions he has
propounded on the subject of men and angels are not reconcilable with
such a belief.-If this can be accepted as the probable meaning, then it
would seem that the use of the verb *interimere* may be due to the fact
that the Greek text gave a0na=irei=n, between the two senses of
which-viz to kill and to remove-the translator did not correctly
distinguish. Routh, however, proposes to read *interimi*, taking it as
equivalent to *condemnari*, so that the idea might be = on all
principles of sound judgment you ought to be condemned, etc.

<span id="P3572_986615"></span> <sup>302</sup> The codex reads simply,
*Dei servare mandata*. We may adopt either *Dei non servare mandata*, as
above, or, *Dei servare vel non servare mandata*, in reference to the
freedom of will, and so = they may or may not keep the commandments.

<span id="P3573_986938"></span> <sup>303</sup> The codex has
*praecedit*, for which *procedit* is proposed.

<span id="P3574_987229"></span> <sup>304</sup> Reading
"laederet-illuderetur." But might it not rather be
"laederet-*illidertur,*" not to bruise, but rather to be bruised, etc.?

<span id="P3575_987482"></span> <sup>305</sup> Luke x. 19.

<span id="P3577_987923"></span> <sup>306</sup> This appears to be
general sense of the very corrupt passage, "Quo videntur ostenso nulli
dubium est unusquisque in quamcunque elegerit partem propria usus
arbitrii potestate." In Migne it is amended thus: "Quo evidenter
ostenso, nulli dubium est, quod unusquisque in quamcunque elegerit
partem, propria usus fuerit arbitrii potestate."

<span id="P3578_988369"></span> <sup>307</sup> Adopting the emendation,
"si a Deo bonus, ut asseris, mendacem esse dixisti Jesum." In the Codex
Casinensis it stands thus: "sic a Deo bonus ut as mendacem esse dixisti
Jesus." But Routh woud substitute "si a Deo *diabolus*" = if the devil
is from God.

<span id="P3579_988777"></span> <sup>308</sup> The argumentation
throughout this passage seems to rest on the fact that, in support of
the dogma of the evil deity, Manes perverted, among other passages, our
Lord's words in John viii. 44, as if they were not only "Ye are of your
father the devil" but possibly also, "Ye are of the father of the
devil;" and again, "He is a liar, and the father of him *is the same.*"
Thus what Manes urges against Archelaus is this: If only what is good
proceeds from the Deity, and if He is the Supreme Good Himself, you make
out Jesus to have spoken falsely, when in John's Gospel He uses
expressions which imply that the devil's father is a liar, and also the
Creator of the *lying* devil.

<span id="P3580_990206"></span> <sup>309</sup> There are some words
deficient in this sentence. The text reads, "Manes dixit:... dico: et
adjecit, Omnis qui conditor est vel Creator aliquorum pater
eorum...condiderit appellatur." It is proposed to supply *jam* before
*dico*, and *quae* before *condiderit*.

<span id="P3581_991595"></span> <sup>310</sup> Reading *et effectum* for
the *ut effectum* of the codex.

<span id="P3582_992036"></span> <sup>311</sup> Or it may be
"cogitations," reading *cogitata* for *agitata.*

<span id="P3583_992266"></span> <sup>312</sup> *Conceptis in se
doloribus.*

<span id="P3584_993087"></span> <sup>313</sup> Gen. iii. 5.

<span id="P3585_994931"></span> <sup>314</sup> The text gives
*parturies*. Routh suggests *parturiens*. The sense then might be, But
if you repent, you will also deliver yourself of your burden like one
who brings to the birth.

<span id="P3586_995345"></span> <sup>315</sup> Reading *Domine* for
*Dominum*, which is given in the text.

<span id="P3587_995852"></span> <sup>316</sup> The quotation may refer
to Isa. xxvi. 18. \[A curious version.\]

<span id="P3588_996405"></span> <sup>317</sup> John viii. 44.

<span id="P3589_996504"></span> <sup>318</sup> *Conturbari.*

<span id="P3590_996730"></span> <sup>319</sup> *Translatis in se.*

<span id="P3591_997068"></span> <sup>320</sup> John xiii. 27.

<span id="P3592_997550"></span> <sup>321</sup> *Paenitentia*. \[2 Cor.
vii. 10.\]

<span id="P3594_998366"></span> <sup>322</sup> *Aetatis ac temporis
privilegio.*

<span id="P3595_998583"></span> <sup>323</sup> *Velociter.*

<span id="P3596_998667"></span> <sup>324</sup> *Nec in aliquo
remoratus.*

<span id="P3597_998724"></span> <sup>325</sup> The text gives "inter
unius anni spatium," for which *intra*, etc., is proposed. With certain
others of the fathers, Archelaus seems to assign but one year to the
preaching of Christ and to His working of miracles. See ch. xlix. \[Vol.
i. p. 391, this series.\]

<span id="P3598_999144"></span> <sup>326</sup> Referring probably to Heb
i. 3.

<span id="P3599_999353"></span> <sup>327</sup> Migne gives this sentence
as a direct statement. We adopt the interrogative form with Routh.
