<span id="P3900_1110992"></span> <sup>611</sup> Matt. iii. 17.

<span id="P3901_1111070"></span> <sup>612</sup> *Parat.*

<span id="P3902_1111241"></span> <sup>613</sup> *Inferre coneris.*

<span id="P3904_1111510"></span> <sup>614</sup> *Artifex.*

<span id="P3905_1112474"></span> <sup>615</sup> Phil. ii. 7.

<span id="P3906_1112682"></span> <sup>616</sup> *Hominem.*

<span id="P3907_1112943"></span> <sup>617</sup> *Hominem eum tantummodo
ex Maria.*

<span id="P3908_1113093"></span> <sup>618</sup> Or, effect, *per
profectum.*

<span id="P3909_1113216"></span> <sup>619</sup> Effect. \[i.e.,
progressively.\]

<span id="P3910_1113370"></span> <sup>620</sup> Routh puts this
interrogatively = Is it then your position that He really is a man, that
is to say, one who is flesh and blood' Well, but if so, then it will
follow, etc.

<span id="P3911_1113735"></span> <sup>621</sup> Or, *as.*

<span id="P3912_1113896"></span> <sup>622</sup> Reading "sicut homo, hac
opinione," for the "sicut homo ac opinione" of the Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3913_1114476"></span> <sup>623</sup> The Codex Casinensis
reads, "hanc quaestionem diffigenter aptare tam manifestarem atque
manifeste dissolverem." We follow the emendation, "hanc quaestionem
diligenter aptatam manifestarem," etc.

<span id="P3914_1115143"></span> <sup>624</sup> \[*A signum verecundiae*
which rebukes the awful inquisitiveness concerning the conception of
Mary which disgraced the late pontiff, Pius IX. To what blasphemous
pruriency of thought and expression has not such an invasion of decency
given rise! See St. Bernard, *Opp.* tom. i. p. 392. He rebukes the
heresy as profane.\]

<span id="P3915_1115621"></span> <sup>625</sup> The text gives *tempus
recusat.* Routh proposes *tempus requirit* = which the occasion
requires.

<span id="P3916_1116868"></span> <sup>626</sup> This is a purely
conjectural reading, "ut dicam silex," etc. The Codex Casinensis gives,
"ut dicam dilere non homo." But Routh, in reference to ch. xv., throws
out the idea that we should read *delire* = thou dotard, or, lunatic.
\[P. 190, *supra*, as if Manes = maniko\\j.\]

<span id="P3917_1117557"></span> <sup>627</sup> *Columbarium furem.*

<span id="P3918_1118005"></span> <sup>628</sup> The text gives *suae.*
Routh suggests *tuae.*

<span id="P3919_1118480"></span> <sup>629</sup> The text is, "non solum
autem, sed adventus nomen delebitur." It may perhaps be = and not the
foundation, but the name, of an advent would be done away.

<span id="P3920_1118899"></span> <sup>630</sup> Phil. ii. 7.

<span id="P3921_1119274"></span> <sup>631</sup> The text gives "*quo*
magnum," etc., for which we adopt "*quod* magnum," etc.

<span id="P3922_1119877"></span> <sup>632</sup> Matt. iv. 3.

<span id="P3923_1120060"></span> <sup>633</sup> Or perhaps, = which was
also, *quod erat tabernaculum*, etc.

<span id="P3924_1120182"></span> <sup>634</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives "Ignorabat autem propter qui genuisset Filium Dei praedicabat
regnum coelorum, qui erat," etc. We follow generally the emendations
adopted in Migne: "Ignorabat autem propter quid genuisset Filium Dei,
qui praedicabat regnum coelorum, quod erat habitaculum magnum," etc.
Routh would read "genitus esset Filius Dei," etc.

<span id="P3925_1120791"></span> <sup>635</sup> John xix. 37.

<span id="P3926_1121503"></span> <sup>636</sup> Matt. iii. 17.

<span id="P3927_1122197"></span> <sup>637</sup> *Pugillum plenum solis
mihi affer aut modium plenum.*

<span id="P3928_1123133"></span> <sup>638</sup> 2 Cor. v. 21.

<span id="P3929_1123316"></span> <sup>639</sup> *Partis.*

<span id="P3931_1123737"></span> <sup>640</sup> The text is, "et ultra
ei non sinerent ad propria remeare." Routh suggests *ultro* for *ultra.*

<span id="P3932_1124842"></span> <sup>641</sup> Reading *unus*, instead
of "*vos*, comitibus," etc.

<span id="P3933_1124962"></span> <sup>642</sup> Reading "quem etiam"
instead of "quae etiam."

<span id="P3934_1125207"></span> <sup>643</sup> Th; Codex Casinensis
gives, "ipse quidem me dicere recusavit," etc. We adopt the correction
in Migne, "sed ne ipse quidem dicere recusavit," etc.

<span id="P3937_1126327"></span> <sup>644</sup> *Superiores quidem
causas Domini*, etc.

<span id="P3938_1126802"></span> <sup>645</sup> Reading "sed et optimus
architectus ejus, fundamentum," etc. The Codex Casinensis has the
corrupt lection, "sed et optimos architectos ei fundamentum," etc. \[Had
this been said of Peter?\]

<span id="P3939_1127022"></span> <sup>646</sup> Cf. 1 Cor. iii. 10.
\[Had this been said of Peter, what then?\]

<span id="P3940_1127202"></span> <sup>647</sup> Cf. Acts xiv. 23.

<span id="P3941_1127578"></span> <sup>648</sup> Cf. 1 Tim. iii. 1.
\[Clement cap. xliv., vol. 1. p. 17, this series.\]

<span id="P3942_1128368"></span> <sup>649</sup> Various other forms are
found for this name Scythianus. Thus we find Scutianus and
Excutianus,-forms which may have arisen through mere clerical errors.
The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives Stutianus. \[But see Routh, *R.S.*, vol.
v. p. 186.\]

<span id="P3944_1130068"></span> <sup>650</sup> This seems the general
idea meant to be conveyed. The text, which is evidently corrupt, runs
thus: "in qua cum eum habitaret cum Aegyptiorum sapientiam didicisset."
The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "in qua cum habitaret, et Aegyptiorum,"
etc. In Migne it is proposed to fill up the lacunae thus: "in qua cum
diu habitaret, depravatus est, cum Aegyptiorum sapientiam didicisset."
Routh suggests, "in qua cum ea habitaret," etc.

<span id="P3945_1130728"></span> <sup>651</sup> The Codex Casinensis
reads *Terbonem* for *Terebinthum.* But in Cyril of Jerusalem, in his
*Catechesis*, 6, as well as in others, we regularly find Te/rbinqon,
*Terbinthum*, or *Terebinthum*, given as the name of the disciple of
Scythianus. The form *Tereventus* is also given; and the Codex Reg.
Alex. Vat. has *Terybeneus.* The statement made here as to these books
being written by Terebinthus is not in accordance with statements made
by Cyril and others, who seem to recognise Scythianus alone as the
author. As to the name Terebinthus itself, C. Ritter, in his *Die
Stupa's*, etc., p. 29 thinks that it is a Graecized form of a predicate
of Buddha, viz, *Tere-hintu*, Lord of the Hindoos. Others take it simply
to be a translation of the Hebrew hl/)

, the *terebinth.* See a note on this subject in Neander's *Church
Hist.*, ii. 166 (Bohn). \[Routh, *ut supra*, p. 187.\]

<span id="P3946_1131714"></span> <sup>652</sup> *Capitulorum.*

<span id="P3947_1131812"></span> <sup>653</sup> *Thesaurus.*

<span id="P3948_1132329"></span> <sup>654</sup> The Codex Reg. Alex.
Vat. inserts here, "omnibus quaecunque ejus fuerant congregatis" =
gathering together all that was his.

<span id="P3949_1132532"></span> <sup>655</sup> Reading "habetur." But
Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives *habitatur*, is inhabited.

<span id="P3950_1132946"></span> <sup>656</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives, "sed aliud cujusdam homine." We adopt "sed alium Buddam nomine,"
with which the narratives of Cyril, Epiphanius, and others agree. Routh
proposes "alio Buddam nomine" = by another name, Buddas. \[Buddha is a
*title*, not a name.\]

<span id="P3951_1133362"></span> <sup>657</sup> The text gives "natum
esse, simul et ab angelo." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads, "natum se
esse simulabat et ab angelo."

<span id="P3952_1133593"></span> <sup>658</sup> On these Persian
priests, see Epiphanius on this heresy, num. 3.

<span id="P3953_1133673"></span> <sup>659</sup> Reading *arguebant*,
with Routh, for *arguebat.*

<span id="P3954_1133814"></span> <sup>660</sup> *Animosa exaggeratio.*

<span id="P3955_1134035"></span> <sup>661</sup> *Ante seculum.*

<span id="P3956_1134372"></span> <sup>662</sup> Or, in the origins of
things, *principiis.*

<span id="P3957_1134728"></span> <sup>663</sup> *Particeps ejus.*

<span id="P3958_1134757"></span> <sup>664</sup> Reading *tunc* for
*nunc.*

<span id="P3959_1134869"></span> <sup>665</sup> *Solarium quoddam
excelsum.*

<span id="P3960_1135198"></span> <sup>666</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives, "ut inde ab aliquo convinci possit." But the Codex Reg. Alex.
Vat. reads, "ut ne ab aliquo," etc. We adopt, therefore, "ne ab aliquo,"
etc., taking the idea to be, as is suggested in Migne, that Manes went
up alone, because he feared that, if observed by Parcus and Labdacus,
the priests of Mithras, he might expose himself to punishment at the
hands of the Persian rulers for an offence against their religion.
\[*Manes* here seems put for Terebinthus.\]

<span id="P3961_1136031"></span> <sup>667</sup> *Sub terras eum detrudi
per spiritum.*

<span id="P3963_1136621"></span> <sup>668</sup> But the Codex Reg. Alex.
Vat. reads, "erat enim multum pecuniae arida"-for she had a great greed
for money.

<span id="P3964_1136899"></span> <sup>669</sup> But Cyril, Epiphanius,
and others, make the name Cubricus (Kou/brikoj).

<span id="P3965_1137282"></span> <sup>670</sup> *Versuum.*

<span id="P3966_1137659"></span> <sup>671</sup> This may express with
sufficient nearness the original, "nec Manem sed Manes."

<span id="P3967_1137888"></span> <sup>672</sup> The Codex Casinensis
gives *sexaginta* regularly. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. reads
*septuaginta*, seventy.

<span id="P3968_1138381"></span> <sup>673</sup> *Transfert* eos. It may
be also "translated them."

<span id="P3969_1139510"></span> <sup>674</sup> The text gives, "edictum
proposuit in vita," etc. For *in vita* it is proposed to read
*invitans*; and that is confirmed by the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat.

<span id="P3970_1139799"></span> <sup>675</sup> We adopt the reading
"qui cubum, guod nomen est tali, ludere solent." The text gives, "qui
cibum quod nomen est tale eludere solent." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat.
seems to read, "qui cubum quod nomen est aleae ludere solent."

<span id="P3971_1140483"></span> <sup>676</sup> *Ferri talento.*

<span id="P3972_1140708"></span> <sup>677</sup> The text gives, "quique
fugientes licet nunquam cessarunt," etc. Codex Reg. Alex. Vat has,
"licet nunquam cessarent" etc.

<span id="P3974_1141244"></span> <sup>678</sup> Reading "dicebam." But
the Codex Casinensis gives "dicebant," and the Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. has
"decebat"-as became them.

<span id="P3975_1141571"></span> <sup>679</sup> Reading "converti ad
salutem," for "conventi," etc., as it is given in the Codex Casinensis.

<span id="P3976_1142320"></span> <sup>680</sup> *Conscribebantur.*
\[Note this concerning the Christian books.\]

<span id="P3977_1142440"></span> <sup>681</sup> Nuntios. But Codex Reg.
Alex. Vat. gives "novitios," novices.

<span id="P3978_1143510"></span> <sup>682</sup> The text gives
"fatigarent." But Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. gives "fugarent"-expel.

<span id="P3979_1143640"></span> <sup>683</sup> The text gives
"invenientes." The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat. more correctly has
"inveniens"-when he came upon.

<span id="P3981_1145601"></span> <sup>684</sup> But Codex Reg. Alex.
Vat. reads "*Stracum* fluvium."

<span id="P3982_1146128"></span> <sup>685</sup> The text gives, "evadere
potuit dum nemo eum insequeretur. Sed populus, cum Archelai quem
libenter audiebant relatione teneretur." etc. The Codex Reg. Alex. Vat.
reads "evadere potuit dum ne eum insequeretur is populus, et Archelai
quem libenter audiebant relatione tenerentur." Routh suggests, "dum eum
nemo insequeretur, sed populus Archelai," etc.

<span id="P3983_1146678"></span> <sup>686</sup> The same Codex Vat.
reads Adrabion here.

<span id="P3984_1147214"></span> <sup>687</sup> 'I'he Codex Reg. Alex.
Vat. ends with these words.

<span id="P3985_1147479"></span> <sup>688</sup> \[See p. 177, *supra* A
fair discussion as to authenticity.\]

<span id="P3986_1147557"></span> <sup>689</sup> *Inscripsi.*

<span id="P3987_1148991"></span> <sup>690</sup> Codex Casinensis reads,
"non ex Manen originem mali hujus Manes esse." We adopt the conjecture,
"non ex Mane originem mali hujus manasse."

<span id="P3988_1149617"></span> <sup>691</sup> The following note on
this Basilides may be given from Migne:-"Although Eusebius (*Hist.
Eccles.*, iv. 7) tells us that the Basilides who taught heresy shortly
after the times of the apostles was an Alexandrian, and opened schools
of error in Egypt, the Basilides mentioned here by Archelaus may still
be one and the same person with that Alexandrian, notwithstanding that
it is said that he taught his heresy among the Persians. For it may very
well be the case that Basilides left Alexandria, and made an attempt to
infect the Persians also with his heretical dogmas. At the same time,
there is no mention among ancient authorities, so far as I know, of a
Persian Basilides. The Alexandrian Basilides also wrote twenty-four
books on the Gospel, as the same Eusebius testifies; and these do not
appear to be different from those books of *Tractates* which Archelaus
cites, and from the *Exegetics*, from the twenty-third book of which
certain passages are given by Clement of Alexandria in the fourth book
of his *Stromateis.* It is not clear however, whether that Gospel on
which Basilides wrote was the Gospel of the Apostles, or another which
he made up for himself, and of which mention is made in Origen's first
Homily on Luke, in Jerome's prologue to his Commentary on Matthew, and
in Ambrose's prologue to the Gospel of Luke." We may add that Gieseler
(*Studien und Kritiken*, i. 1830, p. 397) denies that the person meant
here is Basilides the Gnostic, specially on account of the peculiar
designation, *Basilides quidam antiquior.* But his objections are
combated by Baur and Neander. See the *Church History* of the latter,
ii. p. 50, ed. Bohn.

<span id="P3989_1151676"></span> <sup>692</sup> The text is, "aliis
dictis proposuit adversariis." Perhaps we may read. "aliorum dicta,"
etc.

<span id="P3990_1152078"></span> <sup>693</sup> The text is,
"necessarium sermonem uberemque salutaris sermo praestavit." May it be =
the word of salvation furnished the word which was requisite, etc.?

<span id="P3991_1152475"></span> <sup>694</sup> The text is, "per
parvulam divitis et pauperis naturam sine radice et sine loco rebus
supervenientem unde pullulaverit indicat." The reading seems defective.
But the general intention of this very obscure and fragmentary sentence
appears to be as given above. So Neander understands it as conveying a
figurative description of the two principles of light and darkness,
expressed in the Zoroastrian doctrine immediately cited,-the rich being
the good principle, and the poor the evil. He also supposes the phrase
"without root and without place" to indicate the "absoluteness of the
principle, that springs up all at once, and mixes itself up with the
development of existence."-See *Church History*, ii. 51 (Bohn). Routh
confesses his inability to understand what can be meant by the term
*parvulam*, and suggests *parabolam.*

<span id="P3992_1153326"></span> <sup>695</sup> *Caput.*

<span id="P3993_1153400"></span> <sup>696</sup> *Alium.*

<span id="P3994_1153420"></span> <sup>697</sup> Routh adopts the
interrogative form here, so as to make the connection stand thus: But is
this the only topic which the book contains? Does it not also contain
another discussion, etc.?

<span id="P3995_1153841"></span> <sup>698</sup> *Versibus.*

<span id="P3996_1153930"></span> <sup>699</sup> *Varietate.*

<span id="P3997_1154006"></span> <sup>700</sup> By the *barbari* here
are evidently meant the Persians.

<span id="P3998_1154270"></span> <sup>701</sup> Principles.

<span id="P3999_1154551"></span> <sup>702</sup> The text is, "non quae
esse dicebantur." Routh proposes, "non quae factae, or genitae, esse
dicebantur," = which were not declared to have been made.
