<span id="P4002_1155236"></span> <sup>703</sup> From Cyril of Jerusalem,
*Catecheses*, vi. § 27-29. \[And see the Introductory Notice, p, 175.\]

<span id="P4004_1155513"></span> <sup>704</sup> Reading o@plon
dikaiosu/nhj Others read o@plw\| = Archelaus met him with the buckler of
righteousness.

<span id="P4006_1156109"></span> <sup>705</sup> Ps. v. 9.

<span id="P4007_1156313"></span> <sup>706</sup> Deut. iv. 24.

<span id="P4008_1156564"></span> <sup>707</sup> Luke xii. 49.

<span id="P4009_1156659"></span> <sup>708</sup> 1 Sam. ii. 6.

<span id="P4010_1156733"></span> <sup>709</sup> Acts ix. 40.

<span id="P4011_1156785"></span> <sup>710</sup> Acts v. 10.

<span id="P4012_1156878"></span> <sup>711</sup> Deut. xxxii. 22.

<span id="P4013_1156995"></span> <sup>712</sup> Matt. xxv. 41.

<span id="P4014_1157093"></span> <sup>713</sup> Isa. xlv. 7.

<span id="P4015_1157184"></span> <sup>714</sup> Matt. x. 34. Various of
the Mss. add, e0pi\\ th\\n gh=n, upon the earth.

<span id="P4016_1157386"></span> <sup>715</sup> The text gives kaloi/.
Routh seems to prefer kakoi/, evil.

<span id="P4018_1157922"></span> <sup>716</sup> 2 Cor. iv. 4.

<span id="P4019_1158232"></span> <sup>717</sup> Matt. vii. 6.

<span id="P4020_1158473"></span> <sup>718</sup> Matt. xiii. 13. The text
is, i@na ble/pontej mh\\ ble/pwsi.

<span id="P4021_1158900"></span> <sup>719</sup> Matt. xxv. 29.

<span id="P4023_1158943"></span> <sup>720</sup> For ei/ de\\ dei kai
w9j, etc., various codices read ei0 de\\ dikai/wj, etc.

<span id="P4024_1159217"></span> <sup>721</sup> noh/mata, thoughts.

<span id="P4025_1159464"></span> <sup>722</sup> yuxh/n.

<span id="P4026_1160067"></span> <sup>723</sup> u9po/stasij.

<span id="P4027_1160508"></span> <sup>724</sup> e0fi/etai.

<span id="P4036_1161555"></span> <sup>725</sup> Translated from
Gallandi, *Vet. Patr. Biblioth*. The reverend translator is styled in
the Edinburgh edition, "Curate of Ilminster, Somerset."

<span id="P4045_1163274"></span> <sup>726</sup> *Cf.* Combef., *Auctar.
Noviss.*, part ii. p. 2; Cav., *Dissert. de. Script. Eccl.*, incert.
aetat. p. 2; Fabricius, *Bibl. Gr.*, tom. v. p. 287; Montfaucon, *Bibl.
Coisl.*, p 349, *seqq.*

<span id="P4046_1163600"></span> <sup>727</sup> Photius, *Epist. de
Manich., Bibliotheca Coisliniana*, p. 354.

<span id="P4051_1164070"></span> <sup>728</sup> Epiph., *Haer.*, lxviii.
n. 1, lxix. n. 2; Le Quien, *Oriens Christianis*, tom. ii. p. 597.

<span id="P4057_1165010"></span> <sup>729</sup> Meletius of Lycopolis, a
schismatical bishop of the third and fourth centuries. Athanasius tells
us that Meletius, who was Bishop of Lycopolis in Upper Egypt at the time
of the persecution under Diocletian and his successors, yielded to fear
and sacrificed to idols: and being subsequently deposed, on this and
other charges, in a Synod over which Peter, Bishop of Alexandria,
presided, determined to separate from the Church, and to constitute with
his followers a separate community. Epiphanius, on the other hand,
relates that both Peter and Meletius, being in confinement for the
faith, differed concerning the treatment to be used toward those who,
after renouncing their Christian profession, became penitent, and wished
to be restored to the communion of the Church. The Meletians afterwards
co-operated with the Arians in their hostility to Athanasius.-*See* Art.
Meletius, in Smith's Biograph. Dict.-Tr.

<span id="P4058_1167092"></span> <sup>730</sup> dioikh/seij.

<span id="P4071_1167401"></span> <sup>1</sup> A treatise on their tenets
by Alexander of Lycopolis, who first turned from paganism to the
Manichaean opinions.

<span id="P4076_1168720"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[Note the *practical*
character of Christian ethics, which he so justly contrasts with the
ethical philosophy of the heathen. This has been finely pointed out by
the truly illustrious William Wilberforce in his *Practical View*, cap.
ii. (Latin note), p. 25, ed. London, 1815.\]

<span id="P4078_1169159"></span> <sup>3</sup> e0n to=ij e0ristikoi=j.
The philosophers of the Megarean school, who were devoted to dialectics,
were nicknamed oi9 'Eistikoi/. *See* Diog. Laertius.

<span id="P4082_1170308"></span> <sup>4</sup> Manes, or Manichaeus,
lived about A.D. 240. He was a Persian by birth, and this accounts for
the Parseeism which can be detected in his teaching. He was probably
ordained a priest, but was afterwards expelled from the Christian
community, and put to death by the Persian government. His tenets spread
considerably, and were in early youth embraced by St. Augustine. \[See
*Confess.*, iii. 6.\]

<span id="P4083_1171315"></span> <sup>5</sup> Plato, *Timaeus*, 51.

<span id="P4084_1171492"></span> <sup>6</sup> In substance, but not in
words, Aristotle, *Met.*, Book A 4 (1070´ b).

<span id="P4089_1173344"></span> <sup>7</sup> dhmiourgo\\j.

<span id="P4093_1174475"></span> <sup>8</sup> dhmiourgo\\j.
