<span id="P6602_2064651"></span> <sup>123</sup> So the ms., followed by
Hildebrand and Oehler, reads and punctuates *quis mortuus? homo*, for
which all edd. read *mortuus est?* "Who died?"

<span id="P6603_2064825"></span> <sup>124</sup> Here, as in the whole
discussion in the second book on the origin and nature of the soul, the
opinions expressed are Gnostic, Cerinthus saying more precisely that
Christ having descended from heaven in the form of a dove, dwelt in the
body of Jesus during His life, but removed from it before the
crucifixion.

<span id="P6604_2065316"></span> <sup>125</sup> So the ms. by changing a
single letter, with LB. and others, *similitudine proxim-a* (ms. *o*)
*constitutum*; while the first ed., Gelenius, Canterus, Ursinus, Orelli,
and others, read *-dini proxime*- "settled very closely to analogy."

<span id="P6605_2065738"></span> <sup>126</sup> In the original
*latronibus*; here, as in the next chapter, used loosely to denote
lawless men.

<span id="P6606_2065897"></span> <sup>127</sup> So emended by Mercerus
for the ms. *vatis.*

<span id="P6607_2065967"></span> <sup>128</sup> So read in the ms.-not
*-tius*, as in LB. and Orelli.

<span id="P6608_2066226"></span> <sup>129</sup> Lit., "the ways of
things"-*vias rerum.*

<span id="P6609_2066406"></span> <sup>130</sup> The ms. reads
unintelligibly , which was, however, retained in both Roman edd.,
although Ursinus suggested the dropping of the *o*, which has been done
by all later edd.

<span id="P6610_2066670"></span> <sup>131</sup> The ms. reads, *quam nec
ipsam perpeti succubuisset vis*-"would his might," i.e., "would He with
His great power have stooped." Orelli simply omits *vis* as Canterus,
and seemingly the other later edd. do.

<span id="P6611_2067003"></span> <sup>132</sup> The ms. and 1st ed. read
*sati-s*, which has clearly arisen from *f* being confounded with the
old form of *s.*

<span id="P6613_2067363"></span> <sup>133</sup> The construction is a
little involved, *quae nulli nec homines scire nec ipsi qui appellantur
dii mundi queunt*-"which none, neither men can know, nor those...of the
world can reach, except those whom," etc.

<span id="P6614_2067933"></span> <sup>134</sup> In the Latin, *vel
potestate inversa*, which according to Oehler is the ms. reading, while
Orelli speaks of it as an emendation of LB. (where it is certainty
found, but without any indication of its source), and with most edd.
reads *universa*- "by His universal power."

<span id="P6615_2068423"></span> <sup>135</sup> So the ms. according to
Hildebrand, reading *praecipi=bat.* Most edd., however, following
Gelenius, read *faciebat*-"made them lame."

<span id="P6616_2068637"></span> <sup>136</sup> Lit., "to bind fast the
motions of the members," adopting the reading of most edd., *motus
alligare membrorum* (ms. *c-al-igare*).

<span id="P6617_2068801"></span> <sup>137</sup> The ms. reads *nervorum
duritiam*, for which Ursinus, with most edd., reads as above, merely
dropping *m*; Hildebrand and Oehler insert *in*, and read, from a
conjecture of Ursinus adopted by Elmenhorst, *c-ol-ligare*-"to bind into
stiffness."

<span id="P6618_2069490"></span> <sup>138</sup> Ursinus suggested *di*,
"most terrible," for the ms. *durissimis.*

<span id="P6619_2069837"></span> <sup>139</sup> So the ms. reading,
*multa mala de illarum contra insinuator* (*mala* is perhaps in the
abl., agreeing with a lost word), which has been regarded by Heraldus
and Stewechius, followed by Orelli, as mutilated, and is so read in the
first ed., and by Ursinus and LB. The passage is in all cases left
obscure and doubtful, and we may therefore be excused discussing its
meaning here.

<span id="P6620_2070328"></span> <sup>140</sup> Lit., "to the ends of
fitting duties."

<span id="P6621_2070579"></span> <sup>141</sup> In the original,
*seminaria abscidit*,-the former word used of nurseries for plants,
while the latter may be either as above (from *abscindo*), or may mean
"cut off " (from *abscido*); but in both cases the general meaning is
the same, and the metaphor is in either slightly confused.

<span id="P6622_2070988"></span> <sup>142</sup> Lit., "familiar to be
accosted,"-the supine, as in the preceding clause.

<span id="P6623_2071205"></span> <sup>143</sup> So the edd., reading
*corporalibus affectos malis*, but the ms. inserts after *malis* the
word *morbis* ("with evil bodily diseases"); but according to Hildebrand
this word is marked as spurious.

<span id="P6625_2071555"></span> <sup>144</sup> So the edd., reading
*nemo h-om-i-n-um*, except Hildebrand and Oehler, who retain the ms.
*om-n-i-um*-"no one of all."

<span id="P6626_2071702"></span> <sup>145</sup> John viii. 46: "Which of
you convinceth me of sin?"

<span id="P6627_2071905"></span> <sup>146</sup> So Heraldus and LB.,
followed by later edd., reading *exiliis* for the ms. *ex-uis*, for
which Gelenius, Canterus, and Ursinus read *et suis*-"and by their
slaughters."

<span id="P6628_2072427"></span> <sup>147</sup> Here, as frequently in
Arnobius, the comparative is used instead of the superlative.

<span id="P6629_2072760"></span> <sup>148</sup> "To posterity evil
reports of their own time"-*sui temporis posteris notas*-so emended by
Ursinus, followed by Orelli and Hildebrand, for the ms. *in temporis
posteri-s*, retained by LB., and with the omission of *s* in the 1st
ed.; but this requires our looking on the passage as defective.

<span id="P6630_2073160"></span> <sup>149</sup> The reference is clearly
to the well-known passage in Plato's *Republic.* \[See the sickening
details, book v. p. 282, Jowett's trans.\]

<span id="P6631_2073772"></span> <sup>150</sup> So Gelenius, LB., and
Orelli, reading *con-v-ell-e-re* for the ms. *con-p-ell-a-re*, "to
accost" or "abuse," which is out of place here. Canterus suggested
*com-p-il-are*, "to plunder," which also occurs in the sense "to
cudgel."

<span id="P6632_2074257"></span> <sup>151</sup> Supply, "do you pursue
Him so fiercely?"

<span id="P6633_2075155"></span> <sup>152</sup> These words are followed
in the edition of Gelenius by ch. 2-5 of the second book, seemingly
without any mark to denote transposition; while Ursinus inserted the
same chapters-beginning, however, with the last sentence of the first
chapter (read as mentioned in the note on it)-but prefixed an asterisk,
to mark a departure from the order of the ms. The later editors have not
adopted either change.

<span id="P6635_2075606"></span> <sup>153</sup> So Ursinus suggested in
the margin, followed by LB. and Orelli, reading *in privatam perniciem
p-a-r-atum* for the ms. *p-r-iv-atum*, which is clearly derived from the
preceding *privatam*, but is, though unintelligible also, retained in
the two Roman edd. The conclusion of the sentence is, literally,
"obstinacy of spirit."

<span id="P6636_2076720"></span> <sup>154</sup> In the original, *spe
salutis proposita atque amore incolumitatis.*

<span id="P6637_2076968"></span> <sup>155</sup> Lit., "is"-*est.*

<span id="P6638_2077068"></span> <sup>156</sup> So all the edd., reading
*fastidi-os-um supercilium*, which Crusius says the ms. reads with *os*
omitted, i.e., "pride, scorn."

<span id="P6639_2077655"></span> <sup>157</sup> So the edd., reading
*fatuita-tem*, for the ms. *fatuita-n-tem*, which may, however, point to
a verb not found elsewhere.

<span id="P6640_2078135"></span> <sup>158</sup> i.e., to friends and
foes alike. The ms. reads *aequaliter benignus hostibus dicere*, which
is retained by Orelli, supporting an ellipsis of *fuerit*, i.e. "*He
was* kind to say," which might be received; but it is more natural to
suppose that *-t* has dropped off, and read *diceret* as above, with the
two Roman editions and LB. Gelenius, followed by Ursinus, emended
*omnibus docuerit*-"with uniform kindness taught to all." It may be well
to give here an instance of the very insufficient grounds on which
supposed references to Scripture are sometimes based. Orelli considers
that Arnobius here refers (*videtur respexisse*, he says) to Col. i. 21,
22, "You, that were sometimes alienated and enemies in mind by wicked
works, yet now hath He reconciled in the body of His flesh through
death," to which, though the words which follow might indeed be thought
to have a very distant resemblance, they can in no way be shown to
refer.

<span id="P6641_2079506"></span> <sup>159</sup> i.e., from His
resurrection, which showed that death's power was broken by Him.

<span id="P6646_2079764"></span> <sup>1</sup> There has been much
confusion in dealing with the first seven chapters of this book, owing
to the leaves of the ms. having been arranged in wrong order, as was
pointed out at an early period by some one who noted on the margin that
there was some *transposition*. To this circumstance, however, Oehler
alone seems to have called attention; but the corruption was so
manifest, that the various editors gave themselves full liberty to
re-arrange and dispose the text more correctly. The first leaf of the
ms. concludes with the words *sine ullius personae discriminibus
inrogavit*, "without any distinction of person," and is followed by one
which begins with the words (A, end of c. 5) *et non omnium virtutum*,
"and (not) by an eager longing," and ends *tanta experiatur examina*,
"undergoes such countless ills" (middle of c. 7). The third and fourth
leaves begin with the words (B. end of c. 1) *utrum in
cunctos...amoverit? qui si dignos*, "Now if He was not worthy" (see
notes), and run on to end of c. 5, *quadam dulcedine*, "by some charm;"
while the fifth (C, middle of c. 7) begins *atque ne* (or *utrumne*)
*illum*, "whether the earth," and there is no further difficulty. This
order is retained in the first ed., and also by Hildebrand, who supposes
three lacunae at A, B, and C, to account for the abruptness and want of
connection; but it is at once seen that, on changing the order of the
leaves, so that they shall run B A C, the argument and sense are
perfectly restored. This arrangement seems to have been first adopted in
LB., and is followed by the later editors, with the exception of
Hildebrand.

<span id="P6649_2081845"></span> <sup>2</sup> Lit., "boil up with the
ardours of furious spirits."

<span id="P6650_2082182"></span> <sup>3</sup> Lit., "by the heats of."

<span id="P6651_2082795"></span> <sup>4</sup> So Meursius, reading *a-*
for the ms. *o-ptaret*, which is retained by LB., Orelli, and others.
The ms. reading is explained, along with the next words *vota
immortalitatis*, by Orelli as meaning "sought by His prayers," with
reference to John xvii. 24, in which he is clearly mistaken. Heraldus
conjectures *p-o-r-ta-s a-p-er-taret*, "opened paths...and the gates of
immortality."

<span id="P6652_2083230"></span> <sup>5</sup> The words which follow,
*ut non in cunctos*, etc., have been thus transposed by Heraldus,
followed by later editors; but formerly they preceded the rest of the
sentence, and, according to Oehler, the ms. gives *utrum*, thus: "(You
ask) whether He has both extended to all...ignorance? who, if He was
not," etc. Cf. book i. (this page) note 3, *supra*

<span id="P6653_2083703"></span> <sup>6</sup> So the ms., reading
*periculum i-g-n-ora-tionis*, for which Meursius suggests
*i-n-teri-tionis*-"danger of destruction.."

<span id="P6655_2083912"></span> <sup>7</sup> Pl.

<span id="P6656_2083997"></span> <sup>8</sup> This seems the true
rationale of the sentence, viewed in relation to the context.
Immediately before, Arnobius suggests that the hatred of Christ by the
heathen is unjustifiable, because they had suffered nothing at His
hands; now an opponent is supposed to rejoin, "But He has deserved our
hatred by assailing our religion." The introductory particles *at enim*
fully bear this out, from their being regularly used to introduce a
rejoinder. Still, by Orelli and other editors the sentence is regarded
as interrogative, and in that case would be, "Has He indeed merited our
hatred by driving out," etc., which, however, not merely breaks away
from what precedes, but also makes the next sentence somewhat lame. The
older editors, too, read it without any mark of interrogation.

<span id="P6657_2085071"></span> <sup>9</sup> i.e., according to Orelli,
to the wants of men; but possibly it may here have the subjunctive
meaning of "more full of service," i.e., to God.

<span id="P6658_2085383"></span> <sup>10</sup> So the ms., reading
*perpetuarum pater, fundator conditor rerum*, but all the editions
*pa*-ri-*ter*, "alike," which has helped to lead Orelli astray. He
suggests *et fons est perpetu us pariter*, etc., "perpetual
fountain,...of all things alike the founder and framer." It has been
also proposed by Oehler (to get rid of the difficulty felt here) to
transfer *per metathesin*, the idea of "enduring," to God; but the
reference is surely quite clear, viewed as a distinction between the
results of God's working and that of all other beings.

<span id="P6659_2086316"></span> <sup>11</sup> So the ms. and almost all
edd, reading *da verum judicium*, for which Heraldus suggested *da
naturae*, or *verum animae judicium*, "give the judgment of nature," or
"the true judgment of the soul," as if appeal were made to the inner
sense; but in his later observations he proposed *da puerum judicem*,
"give a boy as judge," which is adopted by Orelli. Meursius, merely
transposing *d-a*, reads much more naturally *ad*-"at a true judgment."

<span id="P6660_2087012"></span> <sup>12</sup> The ms. reading is *illum
testem d-e-um constituimus improbarum*, retained in the edd. with the
change of *-arum* into *-orum*. Perhaps for *deum* should be read
*r-e-r-um*, "make him witness of wicked things." With this passage
compare iii. 31-33.

<span id="P6662_2087618"></span> <sup>13</sup> It seems necessary for
the sake of the argument to read this interrogatively, but in all the
edd. the sentence ends without any mark of interrogation.

<span id="P6663_2087816"></span> <sup>14</sup> Typhus-tu=foj.

<span id="P6664_2088051"></span> <sup>15</sup> Lit., "He chose...to
stand."

<span id="P6666_2088479"></span> <sup>16</sup> Lit. "the ignorance of
wretched men from the worst robbers," i.e., the false prophets and
teachers, who made a prey of the ignorant and credulous. John viii. 46.

<span id="P6667_2088754"></span> <sup>17</sup> Lit., "Are *the things*
clear with you which," etc.

<span id="P6668_2088886"></span> <sup>18</sup> So the ms., followed by
both Roman edd., Hildebrand and Oehler, reading *passa*, which Cujacius
(referring it to *patior*, as the editors seem to have done generally)
would explain as meaning "past," while in all other editions *cassa*,
"vain," is read.

<span id="P6669_2089409"></span> <sup>19</sup> Lit., "the touching of no
anticipation."

<span id="P6670_2089480"></span> <sup>20</sup> Lit., "purer reasoning."

<span id="P6671_2089817"></span> <sup>21</sup> Lit., "that is." This
clause Meursius rejects as a gloss.

<span id="P6672_2089994"></span> <sup>22</sup> i.e., If you believe
Christ's promises, your belief makes you lose nothing should it prove
groundless; but if you disbelieve them, then the consequences to you
will be terrible if they are sure. This would seem too clear to need
remark, were it not for the confusion of Orelli in particular as to the
meaning of the passage.

<span id="P6674_2090398"></span> <sup>23</sup> Lit., "most worthy even
of weeping and pity."

<span id="P6675_2090734"></span> <sup>24</sup> *Redarguat*. This sense
is not recognised by Riddle and White, and would therefore seem to be,
if not unique, at least extremely rare. The derivative *redargutio*,
however, is in late Latin used for "demonstration," and this is
evidently the meaning here.

<span id="P6676_2091086"></span> <sup>25</sup> *Fidem vobis faciunt
argumenta credendi.* Heraldus, joining the two last words, naturally
regards them as a gloss from the margin; but read as above, joining the
first and last, there is nothing out of place.

<span id="P6677_2091595"></span> <sup>26</sup> Lit., "tranquillity being
assumed, passed to placid feelings."

<span id="P6678_2092238"></span> <sup>27</sup> *Res*, "the thing."

<span id="P6679_2092574"></span> <sup>28</sup> Lit., "on chance
encounters."

<span id="P6680_2092905"></span> <sup>29</sup> *Rationes cognitas*.
There is some difficulty as to the meaning of these words, but it seems
best to refer them to the *argumenta credendi* (beginning of chapter,
"do not even these proofs"), and render as above. Hildebrand, however,
reads *tortiones*, "they accept the tortures which they know will befall
them."

<span id="P6681_2093301"></span> <sup>30</sup> The ms. reads *et non
omnium*, "and by a love *not* of all the virtues," changed in most edd,
as above into *atque omnium*, while Oehler proposes *et novo omnium*,
"and by fresh love of all," etc. It will be remembered that the
transposition of leaves in the ms. (note on ii. 1) occurs here, and this
seems to account for the arbitrary reading of Gelenius, which has no ms.
authority whatever, but was added by himself when transposing these
chapters to the first book (cf. p. 432, n. 14), *atque nectare ebrii
cuncta contemnant*-"As if intoxicated with a certain sweetness and
nectar, they despise all things." The same circumstance has made the
restoration of the passage by Canterus a connecting of fragments of
widely separated sentences and arguments.

<span id="P6682_2094118"></span> <sup>31</sup> Lit., "all the things of
the world." Here the argument breaks off, and passes into a new phase,
but Orelli includes the next sentence also in the fifth chapter.

<span id="P6684_2094465"></span> <sup>32</sup> Lit., "to the assent of
that credulity."

<span id="P6685_2094543"></span> <sup>33</sup> So the ms., reading
*conditi vi mera*, for which Orelli would read with Oudendorp,
*conditae*-"by the pure force of *recondite* wisdom." The ms., however,
is supported by the similar phrase in the beginning of chap. 8, where
*tincti* is used.

<span id="P6686_2094863"></span> <sup>34</sup> So the ms., reading
*aliud*, for which Stewechius, adopting a suggestion of Canterus,
conjectures, *altius et profundius*-"something deeper and more
profound." Others propose readings further removed from the text; while
Obbarius, retaining the ms. reading, explains it as "not common."

<span id="P6687_2095624"></span> <sup>35</sup> Lit., "because *you are,*
etc."

<span id="P6688_2095761"></span> <sup>36</sup> Lit., "either yourselves
to utter," etc.

<span id="P6689_2095904"></span> <sup>37</sup> *Incomptus*, for which
Heraldus would read *inconditus*, as in opposition to "harmonious." This
is, however, unnecessary, as the clause is evidently opposed to the
*whole* of the preceding one,

<span id="P6690_2096161"></span> <sup>38</sup> No trace of either of
these works has come down to us, and therefore, though there has been
abundance of conjecture, we can reach no satisfactory conclusion about
them. It seems most natural to suppose the former to be probably part of
the lost satires of Lucilius, which had dealt with obscene matters, and
the author of the latter to be the Atellane poet of Bononia. As to this
there has been some discussion; but, in our utter ignorance of the work
itself, it is as well to allow that we must remain ignorant of its
author also. The scope of both works is suggested clearly enough by
their titles-the statue of Marsyas in the forum overlooking nightly
licentious orgies; and their mention seems intended to suggest a covert
argument against the heathen, in the implied indecency of the knowledge
on which they prided themselves. For *Fornicem Lucilianum* (ms.
*Lucialinum*) Meursius reads *Caecilianum.*

<span id="P6691_2097496"></span> <sup>39</sup> Lit., "Has that *thing*
published never struck," etc. There is clearly a reference to 1 Cor.
iii. 19, "the wisdom of this world." The argument breaks off here, and
is taken up from a different point in the next sentence, which is
included, however, in this chapter by Orelli.

<span id="P6693_2097877"></span> <sup>40</sup> So Gelenius, followed by
Canterus and Orelli, reading *primum et ipsi*, by rejecting one word of
the ms. (*et quae*). Canterus plausibly combines both words into
*itaque*-"therefore." LB. reads *ecquid*-"do you at all," etc., with
which Orelli so far agrees, that he makes the whole sentence
interrogative.

<span id="P6694_2098586"></span> <sup>41</sup> So restored by
Stewechius; in the first ed. *perspiciam* (instead of *am-us*) "if I
perceive the truth," etc.

<span id="P6695_2098798"></span> <sup>42</sup> So the ms. very
intelligibly and forcibly, *res...invida*, but the common reading is
*invid-i-a*-"whom something...with envy." The train of thought which is
merely started here is pursued at some length a little later.

<span id="P6696_2099337"></span> <sup>43</sup> The ms. gives *fedro*,
but all editions, except the first, Hildebrand, and Oehler, read
*Phaedone*, referring, however, to a passage in the first Alcibiades
(st. p. 129), which is manifestly absurd, as in it, while Alcibiades
"cannot tell what man is," Socrates at once proceeds to lead him to the
required knowledge by the usual dialectic. Nourry thinks that there is a
general reference to *Phaedr.*, st. p. 230,-a passage in which Socrates
says that he disregards mythological questions that he may study
himself. \[P. 447, note 2, *infra*.\]

<span id="P6697_2100268"></span> <sup>44</sup> Lit., "changed with the
rottenness of some moisture." The reference is probably to the statement
by Socrates (*Phaedo*, st. p. 96) of the questions with regard to the
origin of life, its progress and development, which interested him as a
young man.

<span id="P6698_2100544"></span> <sup>45</sup> So the ms., LB., and
Oehler, but the other edd. make the verb plural, and thus break the
connection.

<span id="P6699_2100818"></span> <sup>46</sup> Lit., "established in the
common senses."
