<span id="P7200_2260509"></span> <sup>482</sup> Lit., "of the
intestines"-*extorum.*

<span id="P7201_2260665"></span> <sup>483</sup> In both Roman edd.,
*Theutatem*, i.e., Theutas. Cf. Plato, *Phoedrus*, st. p. 274.

<span id="P7203_2261354"></span> <sup>484</sup> i.e., Pluto.

<span id="P7204_2261742"></span> <sup>485</sup> Pl.

<span id="P7205_2261851"></span> <sup>486</sup> Lit., "Castors," i.e.,
Castor and Pollux.

<span id="P7206_2262518"></span> <sup>487</sup> i.e., *sine ullius
seminis jactu.*

<span id="P7207_2262656"></span> <sup>488</sup> Lit., "forms of bodily
circumscription."

<span id="P7209_2263548"></span> <sup>489</sup> Lit., "what we do is."

<span id="P7210_2263734"></span> <sup>490</sup> Lit., "thing."

<span id="P7211_2264826"></span> <sup>491</sup> Lit., "how many steps
are there of race."

<span id="P7212_2265204"></span> <sup>492</sup> i.e., Jupiter and Picus.

<span id="P7213_2265336"></span> <sup>493</sup> The ms. reads
*genitor...Latinus cujus*, some letters having been erased. The reading
followed above-*genitor is cujus*-was suggested to Canterus by his
friend Gifanius, and is found in the margin of Ursinus and Orelli.

<span id="P7214_2265747"></span> <sup>494</sup> Cf. above, "four hundred
years ago," etc., and i. ch. 13. It is of importance to note that
Arnobius is inconsistent in these statements. \[In the Edinburgh edition
we have here "fifteen hundred years;" etc., but it was changed, in the
*Errata*, to ten hundred and fifty.\]

<span id="P7215_2266591"></span> <sup>495</sup> Lit., "be nursed with
the breasts and dropt milk."

<span id="P7217_2266918"></span> <sup>496</sup> Lit., "of what space."

<span id="P7218_2267385"></span> <sup>497</sup> i.e., *re*.

<span id="P7219_2267484"></span> <sup>498</sup> So the ms. according to
Crusius and Livineius, reading *ac*; all edd. except Oehler read
*aut*-"head (i.e., source) or fountain."

<span id="P7221_2268264"></span> <sup>499</sup> The ms. reads
unintelligibly *vertitur solae*; for which LB., followed by the later
edd. reads, as above, *vertimur soli.*

<span id="P7222_2268537"></span> <sup>500</sup> Dr. Schmitz (Smith's
*Dict., 3. v.* Isis) speaks of these consuls as heading the revolt
against the decree of the senate, that the statues of Isis and Serapis
should be removed from the Capitol. The words of Tertullian (quoting
Varro as his authority) are very distinct: "The consul Gabinius...gave
more weight to the decision of the senate than the popular impulse, and
forbade their altars (i.e., those of Serapis, Isis, Arpocrates, and
Anubis) to be set up" (*ad Nationes*, i. 10, cf. *Apol.*, 6).

<span id="P7223_2269319"></span> <sup>501</sup> Cf. vii. 49.

<span id="P7224_2269532"></span> <sup>502</sup> Lit., "contained."

<span id="P7226_2270885"></span> <sup>503</sup> Pl.

<span id="P7227_2271353"></span> <sup>504</sup> Lit., "antiquity."

<span id="P7228_2271740"></span> <sup>505</sup> Lit., "things."

<span id="P7229_2271820"></span> <sup>506</sup> So Gelenius emended the
ms., reading *potens*-"being able," which he changed into *potest*, as
above, followed by later edd.

<span id="P7230_2272331"></span> <sup>507</sup> Lit., "by such kinds
of."

<span id="P7231_2272376"></span> <sup>508</sup> The ms. and first edd.
read *et potestatibus potestatum*-"and by powers of powers;" the other
edd. merely omit *potestatibus*, as above, except Oehler, who, retaining
it, changes *potesttum* into *protestata*-"being witnessed to by," etc.;
but there is no instance adduced in which the participle of this verb is
used passively.

<span id="P7233_2272931"></span> <sup>509</sup> These words having been
omitted by Oberthür, are omitted by Orelli also, as in previous
instances.

<span id="P7234_2273145"></span> <sup>510</sup> The ms. and first ed.
read *etiam moderata continuatio*; corrected, *et immod. con.* by
Gelenius.

<span id="P7235_2273787"></span> <sup>511</sup> So the edd., reading
*infantes stentoreos*, except Oehler, who retains the ms. reading
*centenarios*, which he explains as "having a hundred" heads or hands,
as the case might be, e.g., Typhon, Briareus, etc.

<span id="P7236_2274583"></span> <sup>512</sup> Lit., "measure."

<span id="P7237_2274626"></span> <sup>513</sup> Lit., "things."

<span id="P7238_2274751"></span> <sup>514</sup> Lit., "can be changed
with no novelty."

<span id="P7240_2275219"></span> <sup>515</sup> Lit., "provide,"
*conficiatis*, which, however, some would understand "consume."

<span id="P7241_2275787"></span> <sup>516</sup> Lit., "slaveries, their
free births being taken away."

<span id="P7242_2276060"></span> <sup>517</sup> Lit., "and."

<span id="P7243_2276340"></span> <sup>518</sup> So the ms. first five
edd., Hild. and Oehler, reading *adscribere infortunio voluptatem*,
which is omitted in the other edd. as a gloss which may have crept in
from the margin.

<span id="P7244_2276683"></span> <sup>519</sup> Lit., "our dark."

<span id="P7246_2277026"></span> <sup>520</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *in carcerem natum inegressum*; LB. and later edd. have
received from the margin of Ursinus the reading translated above,
*datum*, omitting the last word altogether, which Oehler, however, would
retain as equivalent to "not to be passed from."

<span id="P7248_2278231"></span> <sup>521</sup> Lit., "than an august
thing."

<span id="P7249_2278589"></span> <sup>522</sup> Orelli refers to Arrh.,
i. 12; but the doctrine there insisted on is the necessity of submission
to what is unavoidable. Oehler, in addition, refers to Epict., xxxii. 3,
where, however, it is merely attempted to show that when anything is
withheld from us, it is just as goods are unless paid for, and that we
have therefore no reason to complain. Neither passage can be referred to
here, and it seems as though Arnobius has made a very loose reference
which cannot be specially identified.

<span id="P7256_2280107"></span> <sup>1</sup> The ms., followed by
Oehler, reads *neque enim res stare...non potest, Christiana religio
aut*-"for neither can a thing not stand,...nor will the Christian
religion," etc., while L.B. merely changes *aut* into *et*-"for neither
can a thing, i. e., the Christian religion,...nor will it," etc. All
other edd. read as above, omitting *et*.

<span id="P7257_2280686"></span> <sup>2</sup> According to Crusius and
others, the ms. reads *finem*; but, according to Hild., *fidem*, as
above.

<span id="P7259_2281358"></span> <sup>3</sup> *Deus primus*, according
to Nourry, in relation to Christ; but manifestly from the scope of the
chapter, God as the fountain and source of all things.

<span id="P7260_2281729"></span> <sup>4</sup> Lit., " propitiate with
venerations."

<span id="P7261_2281934"></span> <sup>5</sup> So the ms., reading
*ducitur*; for which Oberthür, followed by Orelli, reads *dicitur*-" is
said."

<span id="P7263_2282451"></span> <sup>6</sup> Lit., "whatever belongs to
them feels itself to be comprehended with a tacit rendering also of
honour in," etc., *tacita et se sentit honorificentia*, read by later
edd. for the ms. *ut se sentit*-"but as whatever," retained by Hild. and
Oehler; while the first four edd. read *vi*-"feels itself with a silent
force comprehended in the honour in," etc.

<span id="P7264_2283337"></span> <sup>7</sup> So LB. and Orelli, reading
*alia etiamnum capita* for the ms. *alienum capita*, read in the first
five edd., *alia non capita*-"are others not chiefs;" Hild., followed by
Oehler, proposes *alia deûm capita*-"other gods."

<span id="P7267_2284716"></span> <sup>8</sup> According to Orelli's
punctuation, "whether there are these gods in heaven whom," etc.

<span id="P7268_2285463"></span> <sup>9</sup> So LB. and later edd.,
from a conj. of Meursius, reading *diebus lustricis* for the ms.
*ludibriis*; read by some, and understood by others, as *ludicris*,
i.e., festal days.

<span id="P7269_2285882"></span> <sup>10</sup> The ms. followed by Hild.
and Oehler, reads neque...*in ulla cognatione*-"in no relationship," for
which the other edd. give *cognitione*, as above.

<span id="P7271_2286228"></span> <sup>11</sup> So all edd., reading
*populares*, except Hild. and Oehler, who receive the conj. of
Rigaltius, *populatim*-"among all nations;" the ms. reading popularem.

<span id="P7272_2286395"></span> <sup>12</sup> *Censeri*, i.e, "written
in the list of gods."

<span id="P7273_2286527"></span> <sup>13</sup> Otherwise, "how many make
up the list of this name."

<span id="P7274_2286677"></span> <sup>14</sup> So Orelli, receiving the
emendation of Barth, *incogniti nomine*, for the ms. *in cognitione*,
*-one* being an abbreviation for *nomine*. Examples of such deities are
the Novensiles, Consentes, etc., cc. 38-41.

<span id="P7275_2287504"></span> <sup>15</sup> Lit., "who, except a few
gods, do not engage in the services of the rest."

<span id="P7276_2287723"></span> <sup>16</sup> Orelli would explain *pro
parte consimili* as equivalent to *pro uno vero Deo*-"for the one true
God."

<span id="P7278_2287975"></span> <sup>17</sup> Lit., "take the oaths of
allegiance" or military oaths, using a very common metaphor applied to
Christians in the preceding book, c. 5.

<span id="P7279_2288220"></span> <sup>18</sup> Lit., "suppliant hands."
It has been thought that the word *supplices* is a gloss, and that the
idea originally was that of a band of soldiers holding out their hands
as they swore to be true to their country and leaders; but there is no
want of simplicity and congruity in the sentence as it stands, to
warrant us in rejecting the word.

<span id="P7280_2289758"></span> <sup>19</sup> i.e., than the inventors
of such fables had shown.

<span id="P7281_2290084"></span> <sup>20</sup> Lit., "from us infants;"
i.e., as compared with such a man as Cicero.

<span id="P7282_2290178"></span> <sup>21</sup> *Secundas actiones*. The
reference is evidently to a second speaker, who makes good his
predecessor's defects.

<span id="P7284_2290526"></span> <sup>22</sup> Lit., "are unwilling to
admit into their ear the reading of opinions," etc.

<span id="P7285_2290737"></span> <sup>23</sup> Both Christians and
heathen, it is probable, were concerned in the mutilation of *de Nat.
Deorum*.

<span id="P7286_2291104"></span> <sup>24</sup> So Gelenius, reading
*dicta* for the ms. *dictitare.* The last verb is *comprobate*, read
*reprobate*-"condemn," by all edd. except Hild. and Oehler.

<span id="P7288_2291813"></span> <sup>25</sup> Lit., "with familiarity
of speech."

<span id="P7289_2292049"></span> <sup>26</sup> A formula used when they
sought to propitiate the author of some event which could not be traced
to a particular deity; referring also to the cases in which there were
different Opinions as to the sex of a deity.

<span id="P7290_2292566"></span> <sup>27</sup> Lit., "even of mean
understanding."

<span id="P7291_2292858"></span> <sup>28</sup> Lit., "by the renewing of
perpetual succession."

<span id="P7293_2292975"></span> <sup>29</sup> Lit., "that gods are
born."

<span id="P7294_2293191"></span> <sup>30</sup> Lit, "recurring,"
"arising again."

<span id="P7295_2293411"></span> <sup>31</sup> Lit., "make trial of
themselves by these laws of sex."

<span id="P7296_2293578"></span> <sup>32</sup> Lit., "all things," etc.

<span id="P7297_2293950"></span> <sup>33</sup> Lit., "if the impurity of
sexual union is wanting to the gods."

<span id="P7298_2294334"></span> <sup>34</sup> So the first five edd.

<span id="P7299_2294495"></span> <sup>35</sup> Lit., "the other
arrangement of members."
