<span id="P7401_2336153"></span> <sup>110</sup> Lit., "for the sake of
our name, men's affairs are made harassing."

<span id="P7402_2336310"></span> <sup>111</sup> Lit., "with flames of,"
etc.

<span id="P7403_2336419"></span> <sup>112</sup> The ms., according to
Crusius, reads *nos*-"us."

<span id="P7405_2336980"></span> <sup>113</sup> Three was the most
ancient number; and the names preserved by Pausanias, are Mele/th,
'Aoidh/, Mnh/mh.

<span id="P7406_2337149"></span> <sup>114</sup> Cicero (*de Nat. Deor.*,
iii. 21, a passage where there is some doubt as to the reading)
enumerates as the four Muses, Thelxiope, Aoede, Arche, Melete.

<span id="P7407_2337315"></span> <sup>115</sup> The ms. reads
*Murtylus*. Seven are said to have been mentioned by
Epicharmis,-Neilous, Tritone, Asopous, Heptapolis, Achelo誰s, Tipoplous,
and Rhodia.

<span id="P7408_2337619"></span> <sup>116</sup> The nine are Clio,
Euterpe, Thalia, Melpomene, Terpsichore, Erato, Polymnia, Ourania, and
Calliope (*Theog.*, 77-79).

<span id="P7410_2338047"></span> <sup>117</sup> Lit., "into the end of
the same opinion."

<span id="P7412_2338364"></span> <sup>118</sup> Lit., "in the middle,"
"intermediate."

<span id="P7413_2338436"></span> <sup>119</sup> i.e., Ephorus.

<span id="P7414_2338545"></span> <sup>120</sup> i.e., Hesiod.

<span id="P7415_2338771"></span> <sup>121</sup> Lit., "the undertaking
of religion itself is brought into the danger," etc.

<span id="P7416_2339037"></span> <sup>122</sup> An Umbrian village.

<span id="P7417_2339160"></span> <sup>123</sup> Lit., "that the number
is nine." \[i.e., a triad of triads; the base a triad, regarded, even by
heathen, as of mystical power.\]

<span id="P7418_2339393"></span> <sup>124</sup> A grammarian who lived
in the time of Augustus, not to be confounded with Cicero's
correspondent.

<span id="P7419_2339543"></span> <sup>125</sup> *Novitatum.*

<span id="P7420_2339733"></span> <sup>126</sup> The Etruscans held
(Pliny, *H. N.*, ii. 52) that nine gods could thunder, the bolts being
of different kinds: the Romans so far maintained this distinction as to
regard thunder during the day as sent by Jupiter, at night by Summanus.

<span id="P7421_2340165"></span> <sup>127</sup> So LB., reading *relig-*
for the ms. *reg-iones*.

<span id="P7423_2340882"></span> <sup>128</sup> Lit., "the very
skilful."

<span id="P7424_2341064"></span> <sup>129</sup> Lit., "if the number
nine bring on the name of," etc.

<span id="P7425_2341253"></span> <sup>130</sup> Lit., "gives another's
might and power to gods presiding."

<span id="P7426_2341638"></span> <sup>131</sup> Lit., "the title of this
name."

<span id="P7427_2341995"></span> <sup>132</sup> Lit., "after they have
finished the mortality of life," i.e., either as above, or "having
endured its perishableness."

<span id="P7428_2342241"></span> <sup>133</sup> Lit., "lying under."

<span id="P7429_2342349"></span> <sup>134</sup> So most edd., following
Gelenius, who reads *esse nomen* for the ms. *si omnes istud.*

<span id="P7430_2342480"></span> <sup>135</sup> Lit., "who have deserved
to," etc.

<span id="P7432_2342783"></span> <sup>136</sup> The ms. reads
*immortalium*, corrected in the edd. *urbem Ilium.*

<span id="P7433_2343246"></span> <sup>137</sup> Supposed to be either
the genius attending Jupiter; the family god as sent by him; or the
chief among the genii, sometimes mentioned simply as *Genius*.

<span id="P7434_2343459"></span> <sup>138</sup> Lit., "whom the
commonalty receives."

<span id="P7435_2343772"></span> <sup>139</sup> *Consentes* (those who
are together, or agree together, i. e, councillors) and *Complices*
(confederate, or agreeing) are said by some to be the twelve gods who
composed the great council of heaven; and, in accordance with this, the
words *una oriantur et occidant una* might be translated "rise and sit
down together," i.e., at the council table. But then, the names and
number of these are known; while Arnobius says, immediately after, that
the names of the dii Consentes are not known and has already quoted
Varro, to the effect that neither names nor number are known. Schelling
(端ber die Gotth. v. Samothr., quoted by Orelli) adopts the reading (see
following note), "of whom very little mention is made," i.e., in prayers
or rites, because they are merely Jove's councillors, and exercise no
power over men, and identifies them with the Samothracian
Cabiri-Ka/beiroi and Consentes being merely Greek and Latin renderings
of the name.

<span id="P7436_2344856"></span> <sup>140</sup> So the ms. and all edd.
reading *miserationis parcissimae*, except Gelenius, who reads *nationis
barbarissimae*-"of a most barbarous nation;" while Ursinus suggested
*memorationis parc.*-"of whom very little mention is made,"-the reading
approved by Schelling."

<span id="P7437_2345667"></span> <sup>141</sup> Lit., "shaken to its
foundations."

<span id="P7439_2346204"></span> <sup>142</sup> *Aeribus*. Cf.
Lucretius, ii. 633-636.

<span id="P7440_2346435"></span> <sup>143</sup> The ms. reads *manas*,
corrected as above by all edd. except Hild, who reads *Manias.*

<span id="P7441_2346810"></span> <sup>144</sup> The ms. reads
*effunctorum*; LB. *et funct.*, from the correction of Stewechius;
Gelenius, with most of the other edd., *def.*

<span id="P7443_2347145"></span> <sup>145</sup> The ms. and first ed.
omit *non.*

<span id="P7444_2347318"></span> <sup>146</sup> Lit., "because of
aversion."

<span id="P7445_2347799"></span> <sup>147</sup> Lit., "the form of their
race."

<span id="P7446_2347964"></span> <sup>148</sup> i.e., *ignorabitur et
nescietur.*

<span id="P7447_2348124"></span> <sup>149</sup> The ms. reads
*consolationem*-"for each consolation," i.e., to comfort in every
distress.

<span id="P7448_2348503"></span> <sup>150</sup> The ms. omits *et.*

<span id="P7450_2348615"></span> <sup>151</sup> The *dii inferi.*

<span id="P7451_2348661"></span> <sup>152</sup> The *dii superi.*

<span id="P7452_2348778"></span> <sup>153</sup> Saturn and Hercules were
so worshipped.

<span id="P7453_2348864"></span> <sup>154</sup> Apollo.

<span id="P7454_2349383"></span> <sup>155</sup> The ms., first five
edd., and Oehler read *terreor*-"terrified;" the others *tor.*, as
above, from the conjecture of Gifanius.

<span id="P7455_2349648"></span> <sup>156</sup> Cf. ch. 40, note 21. It
may further be observed that the Etruscans held that the superior and
inferior gods and men were linked together by a kind of intermediate
beings, through whom the gods took cognizance of human affairs, without
themselves descending to earth. These were divided into four classes,
assigned to Tina (Jupiter), Neptune, the gods of the nether world, and
men respectively.

<span id="P7456_2350485"></span> <sup>157</sup> So LB., Hild., and
Oehler, reading *nomine ne*; all others *ut*, the ms. having no
conjunction.

<span id="P7458_2350939"></span> <sup>158</sup> Lit., "it is fitting
that you stand in the limits of," etc.

<span id="P7459_2351206"></span> <sup>159</sup> i.e., Summus Manium,
Pluto.

<span id="P7466_2351960"></span> <sup>1</sup> Lit., "see altars built."

<span id="P7467_2352057"></span> <sup>2</sup> Lit., "in the regions of
heaven."

<span id="P7468_2352341"></span> <sup>3</sup> The ms. reads *tam*
(corrected by the first four edd. *tamen*) *in regionibus*-"in the
divine seats;" corrected, *religionibus*, as above, by Ursinus.

<span id="P7469_2352594"></span> <sup>4</sup> Lit., "to the deluding of
your deities."

<span id="P7471_2353180"></span> <sup>5</sup> Lit., "is contained in a
form of its own kind."

<span id="P7472_2353294"></span> <sup>6</sup> i.e., manliness.

<span id="P7473_2353664"></span> <sup>7</sup> Lit., "which it is easy to
perceive to be said by us with the greatest truth from,"etc.,-so most
edd. reading *nobis*; but the ms., according to Crusius, gives
*vobis*-"you," as in Orelli and Oberth端r.

<span id="P7474_2353997"></span> <sup>8</sup> Lit., "less auspicious."

<span id="P7475_2354088"></span> <sup>9</sup> The ms., first four edd.,
and Elmenhorst, read, *quae*-"which;" the rest, as above, *que.*

<span id="P7476_2354245"></span> <sup>10</sup> Lit., "what is opposed to
them named." *nominatum*; a correction by Oehler for the ms.
*nominatur*- "is named."

<span id="P7478_2354568"></span> <sup>11</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *signatorum*-"sealed;" the others, except Hild., *ignotorum*,
as above.

<span id="P7479_2355181"></span> <sup>12</sup> Lit., "drew the meaning
of her name."

<span id="P7480_2355461"></span> <sup>13</sup> Lit., "excelled the might
of all."

<span id="P7481_2355910"></span> <sup>14</sup> ms., "that these, too,"
i.e., as well as Luperca.

<span id="P7482_2356076"></span> <sup>15</sup> No such discussion occurs
in the preceding part of the work, but the subject is brought forward in
the end of chap. 8, p. 478, *infra*.

<span id="P7484_2356698"></span> <sup>16</sup> In the first sentence the
ms. reads *utrique*, and in the second *utique*, which is reversed in
most edd., as above.

<span id="P7485_2357136"></span> <sup>17</sup> Lit., "ever at hand with
gracious assistances."

<span id="P7486_2357340"></span> <sup>18</sup> Lit., "are not of."

<span id="P7487_2357708"></span> <sup>19</sup> 6 i.e., the field of
Cannae.

<span id="P7488_2357880"></span> <sup>20</sup> \[1 Kings xviii. 27.\]

<span id="P7490_2358067"></span> <sup>21</sup> Lit., "the parts."

<span id="P7491_2358289"></span> <sup>22</sup> Lit., "it cannot be
brought into any light of general understanding by you."

<span id="P7492_2358590"></span> <sup>23</sup> Lit., "convexity."

<span id="P7493_2358713"></span> <sup>24</sup> Lit., "be of."

<span id="P7494_2358865"></span> <sup>25</sup> Lit., "to the state of
the world."

<span id="P7495_2359003"></span> <sup>26</sup> Lit., "who have been so
formed, that some things are said by us," *nobis*, the reading of
Oberth端r and Orelli for the ms. *in nos*- "with regard to us," which is
retained by the first four edd., Elm., Hild. and Oehler.

<span id="P7496_2359845"></span> <sup>27</sup> i.e., *transit in
vocabulum sinistri*; *in* being omitted in the ms. and both Roman edd.

<span id="P7497_2360112"></span> <sup>28</sup> Lit., "the turning round
of the body being changed."

<span id="P7498_2360296"></span> <sup>29</sup> So Oehler, reading
*positione, sed tempore sed*, for the ms. *positionis et temporis et.*
