<span id="P8100_2550890"></span> <sup>46</sup> Lit., "is."

<span id="P8101_2551043"></span> <sup>47</sup> So the ms., both Rom.
edd., Hild., and Oehler, reading *quamvis poenam*; Gelenius, Canterus,
Elm, and Oberthür omit *vis*, and the other edd. *v*, i.e., "as to what
punishment the Egyptian," etc. This must refer to the cases in which the
sacred bull, having outlived the term of twenty-five years, was secretly
killed by the priests, while the people were taught that it had thrown
itself into the water.

<span id="P8102_2551571"></span> <sup>48</sup> i.e., "burial-places." By
this Oehler has attempted to show is meant the *Hebdomades vel de
Imaginibus* of Varro, a series of biographical sketches illustrated with
portraits, executed in some way which cannot be clearly ascertained.

<span id="P8103_2551818"></span> <sup>49</sup> ms. *Barronis.*

<span id="P8105_2552061"></span> <sup>50</sup> So the ms., first four
edd., and Oberthür, reading *Toli*, corrected *Oli* in the others, from
Servius (*ad. Aen.*, viii. 345). Arnobius himself gives the form Aulus,
i.e. Olus, immediately below, so that it is probably correct.

<span id="P8106_2552359"></span> <sup>51</sup> Lit., "the seats of."

<span id="P8107_2552677"></span> <sup>52</sup> Ursinus suggested
*Valerius Antias*, mentioned in the first chapter of the fifth book, a
conjecture adopted by Hild.

<span id="P8108_2552844"></span> <sup>53</sup> The ms., LB., Hild., and
Oehler read Aulus, and, acc. to Oehler, all other edd. *Tolus*. Orelli,
however, reads *Olus*, as above.

<span id="P8109_2553009"></span> <sup>54</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read *germani servuli vita* without meaning, corrected as above by
Gelenius, Canterus, Elm., and Oberthür, *ut a g. servulo*, and *ut a g.
servulis*-"by the slaves," in the others, except Oehler who reads as
above, *g. servulo ut.*

<span id="P8110_2553424"></span> <sup>55</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read unintelligibly *patientiae*, corrected *paternae* in Hild. and
Oehler, *patriae* in the rest.

<span id="P8111_2553836"></span> <sup>56</sup> Lit., "the perpetuity of
the omen sealed might stand."

<span id="P8112_2554219"></span> <sup>57</sup> Lit., "through the times
given to itself."

<span id="P8113_2554412"></span> <sup>58</sup> The ms. reads
*s-oli*,-changed into *Toli* by the first four edd., Elm., and Oberthür.
The others omit *s*.

<span id="P8115_2554780"></span> <sup>59</sup> \["Belittle." This word
here is noteworthy. President Jefferson is said to have coined it, and I
have never before seen it in a transatlantic book.\]

<span id="P8116_2555324"></span> <sup>60</sup> i.e., "which you pretend
to worship."

<span id="P8117_2555878"></span> <sup>61</sup> So the edd., reading
*formar-e*, except Hild. and Oehler, who retain the ms. reading
*i*-"that images be formed."

<span id="P8118_2556256"></span> <sup>62</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read corruptly *insolidi*, corrected *ita* or *sic coli*, as above,
in all except the last two edd.

<span id="P8120_2556707"></span> <sup>63</sup> \[It is manifest that
nothing of the kind was said by Christians. See p. 506, note 3,
*supra*.\]

<span id="P8121_2557015"></span> <sup>64</sup> i.e., you do not seek
access to the gods directly, and seek to do them honour by giving that
honour to the idols instead.

<span id="P8122_2557369"></span> <sup>65</sup> i.e., the transmission of
the sacrifice to the gods is made dependent on idols.

<span id="P8123_2557781"></span> <sup>66</sup> This corresponds exactly
to the English, "to shoot at the pigeon and hit the crow."

<span id="P8125_2558078"></span> <sup>67</sup> Lit., "with vicarious
substitution for." \[A very pertinent question as to the images
worshipped in Rome to this day. There is one *Madonna* of African hue
and features. See also *Murray's Handbook, Italy*, p. 72.\]

<span id="P8126_2558432"></span> <sup>68</sup> The ms. reads
*effigitur*, corrected as above, *effin.*, in all edd. except Hild., who
reads *efficitur*-"is made," and Stewechius, *effigiatur*-"is formed."

<span id="P8127_2558692"></span> <sup>69</sup> Lit., "boy's age."

<span id="P8128_2558754"></span> <sup>70</sup> *Flavus*, so invariably
associated with blue eyes, that though these are the feature brought
into contrast, they are only suggested in this way, and not directly
mentioned-a mode of speech very characteristic of Arnobius.

<span id="P8129_2559203"></span> <sup>71</sup> i.e., a fact which can be
seen to be true by appealing to analogy.

<span id="P8130_2559463"></span> <sup>72</sup> So the ms., LB., Hild.,
and Oehler, reading *donastis*, the others *donatis*-"you give."

<span id="P8131_2559692"></span> <sup>73</sup> As the appearance of the
moon is the same in some of its phases as in others, it is clear that
Arnobius cannot mean that it has thirty distinct forms. We must
therefore suppose that he is either speaking very loosely of change upon
change day after day, or that he is referring to some of the lunar
theories of the ancients, such as that a new moon is created each day,
and that its form is thus ever new (*Lucr.*, v. 729-748).

<span id="P8132_2560285"></span> <sup>74</sup> Lit., "is changed through
a thousand states with daily instability."

<span id="P8133_2560475"></span> <sup>75</sup> Lit., "are."

<span id="P8134_2560581"></span> <sup>76</sup> Lit., "intestine and
domestic."

<span id="P8135_2560708"></span> <sup>77</sup> The ms. reads *leon-e-s
torvissimam faciem*, emended, as above, *leonis t. f.*, in LB., Orelli,
Hild., and Oehler, and *l. torvissima facie*-"lions of very stern face,"
in the others. Nourry supposes that the reference is to the use of
lions, or lion-headed figures, as architectural ornaments on temples
(cf. the two lions rampant surmounting the gate of Mycenae), but
partially coincides in the view of Elm., that mixed figures are meant,
such as are described by Tertullian and Minucius Felix (ch. 28: "You
deify gods made up of a goat and a lion, and with the faces of lions and
of dogs"). The epithet *frugifer*, however, which was applied to the
Egyptian Osiris, the Persian Mithras, and Bacchus, who were also
represented as lions, makes it probable that the reference is to
symbolic statues of the sun.

<span id="P8136_2561760"></span> <sup>78</sup> Lit., "such a god to
whose form and appearance the likeness of this image has been directed."

<span id="P8137_2561932"></span> <sup>79</sup> Lit., "that."

<span id="P8138_2562066"></span> <sup>80</sup> The ms. and both Roman
edd. read unintelligibly *sanquineo decotoro*, for which *s. de colore*,
as above, has been suggested by Canterus, with the approval of Heraldus.

<span id="P8139_2562357"></span> <sup>81</sup> The ms. here inserts
*puetuitate*, for which no satisfactory emendation has been proposed.
The early edd. read *pituitate*, a word for which there is no authority,
while LB. gives *potus aviditate*-"drunk with avidity"-both being
equally hopeless.

<span id="P8140_2562612"></span> <sup>82</sup> ms. *sic*, corrected by
Gelenius *si*.

<span id="P8141_2562822"></span> <sup>83</sup> So Meursius, *ac dicere*,
for ms. *-cidere.*

<span id="P8143_2563105"></span> <sup>84</sup> It is worthy of notice
that although in this passage, as often elsewhere, Arnobius adheres
pretty closely to the argument proposed by Clemens Alexandrinus, he even
in such passages sometimes differs from it, and not at random. Thus
Clement speaks merely of a "stone," and Arnobius of an "unshaped stone."
The former expression harmonizes with the words of Maximus Tyrius
(*Serm.*, xxxviii. p. 225, Steph.), "The Arabians worship I know not
whom, but the image which I saw was a square stone;" while Suidas
(Küster's ed., s. v. qeu\\s !Arhj) agrees with Arnobius in calling it a
"stone, black, square, unfashioned" (a0tu/pwtoj). This is the more
noteworthy, as at times Arnobius would almost seem to be following
Clement blindly. \[See Clement, cap. iv. vol. ii. p. 184, this series.\]

<span id="P8144_2563962"></span> <sup>85</sup> So Arnobius renders
Clement's *Cithaeronian Hera.*

<span id="P8145_2564029"></span> <sup>86</sup> So corrected in the notes
of Canterus from Clem. for the ms. reading *Carios*, retained by the
first four edd. and Elmenh. In Icaria there was a temple of Diana called
Tauropo/lion.

<span id="P8146_2564459"></span> <sup>87</sup> The ms. and first four
edd. read *p-uteum*-"a well," corrected *plut.*, as above, by Gifanius,
and in the notes of Canterus.

<span id="P8147_2564615"></span> <sup>88</sup> The ms. reads *ethedius*,
corrected in the notes of Canterus.

<span id="P8148_2565069"></span> <sup>89</sup> So all edd., except both
Roman edd., which retain the ms. reading in the singular, *suffraginem.*

<span id="P8149_2565301"></span> <sup>90</sup> i. e., iii. 13. p. 467.

<span id="P8150_2565427"></span> <sup>91</sup> Lit., "it was allowed."

<span id="P8151_2565855"></span> <sup>92</sup> So Meursius suggested
*amentes* for the ms. reading *animantis* for which Heraldus proposed
*argumentis*-"by arguments."

<span id="P8153_2566891"></span> <sup>93</sup> Lit., "and most dissolved
with the laxity of feminine liquidity."

<span id="P8154_2567061"></span> <sup>94</sup> *Divendere.*

<span id="P8155_2567224"></span> <sup>95</sup> Lit., "with a workman's
preparing."

<span id="P8156_2567526"></span> <sup>96</sup> Lit., "is there any
figure to find."

<span id="P8157_2567612"></span> <sup>97</sup> *Habitus.*

<span id="P8158_2567763"></span> <sup>98</sup> *Ex foribus*. Cf.
Tertull., *de Idol.*, ch. 15: "In Greek writers we also read that Apollo
Qurai=oj and the *daemones Antelii* watch over doors."

<span id="P8159_2568147"></span> <sup>99</sup> So the edd, reading
*petas-un-culum* for the ms. *-io-*.

<span id="P8161_2569281"></span> <sup>100</sup> Lit., "are."

<span id="P8162_2569573"></span> <sup>101</sup> Lit., "with strife of
skills."

<span id="P8163_2569830"></span> <sup>102</sup> ms. *Phyrna*, but below
*Phryna*, which is read in both instances by Hild. and Oehler.

<span id="P8164_2570205"></span> <sup>103</sup> So Meursius, followed by
Orelli, reading *istic* for the ms. *iste.*

<span id="P8165_2570597"></span> <sup>104</sup> i.e., either the
conceptions in their minds, or realized in their works. Orelli, followed
by the German translator Besnard, adopting the former view, translates
"the ideas of the artists (die Ideale der Künstler) were full of fire
and life."

<span id="P8166_2570999"></span> <sup>105</sup> \[See note 15, p. 511.\]

<span id="P8167_2571234"></span> <sup>106</sup> \[True, alas! to this
day; notorious courtesans furnishing the models for the pictures and
statues worshipped as saints, angels, etc.\]

<span id="P8168_2571395"></span> <sup>107</sup> So Gelenius and
Canterus, reading *et* for ms. *est.*

<span id="P8169_2571572"></span> <sup>108</sup> Lit., "with exertion of
immense strength."

<span id="P8170_2571667"></span> <sup>109</sup> ms. Pantarches. This was
a very common mode of expressing love among the ancients, the name of
the loved one being carved on the bark of trees (as if the Loves or the
mountain nymphs had done it), on walls, doors, or, as in this case, on
statues, with the addition "beautiful" (Suidas, s. v. Kaloi/ and
9Ramnousi/a Ne/mesij, with Küster's notes). \[Vol. ii. p. 187, note 1,
this series.\]

<span id="P8171_2572814"></span> <sup>110</sup> Lit., "bones."

<span id="P8172_2572968"></span> <sup>111</sup> Lit., "conditions,"
*habitus.*

<span id="P8173_2573055"></span> <sup>112</sup> Lit., "similitude."

<span id="P8174_2573136"></span> <sup>113</sup> Lit., "first among."

<span id="P8175_2573257"></span> <sup>114</sup> Lit., "human things."

<span id="P8177_2573442"></span> <sup>115</sup> \[Isa. xl. 18-20, xliv.
9-20, xlvi. 5-8.\]

<span id="P8178_2573753"></span> <sup>116</sup> i.e., the faculty of
discernment, which is properly man's.

<span id="P8179_2573848"></span> <sup>117</sup> Lit., "are in the limits
of."

<span id="P8180_2573926"></span> <sup>118</sup> The ms. reads
*his*-"these", emended, as above, *vobis* in the margin of Ursinus,
Elm., and LB.

<span id="P8181_2574112"></span> <sup>119</sup> Lit., "and humble."

<span id="P8182_2574336"></span> <sup>120</sup> i.e., a respectable
woman.

<span id="P8183_2574439"></span> <sup>121</sup> i.e., the elephant's
tusk.

<span id="P8184_2574846"></span> <sup>122</sup> So Salmasius, followed
by Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading *furfuraculis*, and LB., reading
*perforaculis* for the ms. *furfure aculeis.*

<span id="P8185_2575332"></span> <sup>123</sup> So the margin of
Ursinus, Meursius (according to Orelli), Hild., and Oehler, reading
*part-u-m* for the ms. *-e-*-"is a part of your labour," etc.

<span id="P8186_2575511"></span> <sup>124</sup> Lit., "of thy work and
fingers."

<span id="P8187_2575669"></span> <sup>125</sup> So the ms., both Roman
edd., Elm., and Orelli, reading *numinis favore*, for which LB. reads
*favorem*-"the favour of the propitious deity to succour." \[Isaiah's
argument reproduced.\]

<span id="P8189_2575972"></span> <sup>126</sup> Lit., "thrown together."

<span id="P8190_2576296"></span> <sup>127</sup> Rigaltius suggested
*confracta*-"shattered," for ms. *-flata.*

<span id="P8191_2577224"></span> <sup>128</sup> So the edd. reading
*cog-* for the ms. *cogit-amini.*

<span id="P8192_2577525"></span> <sup>129</sup> Lit., "be moved with
agitation of breathing."

<span id="P8193_2577625"></span> <sup>130</sup> Lit., "outside," i.e.,
before being in bodily forms.

<span id="P8194_2577707"></span> <sup>131</sup> So Ursinus and LB.,
reading *retin-e-nt* for the ms. *-ea-*, which can hardly be correct.
There may possibly be an ellipsis of *si* before this clause, so that
the sentence would run: "If they had any natural properties, (if) they
retain all these, what stupidity," etc.

<span id="P8195_2578325"></span> <sup>132</sup> Lit., "deprived of
moveableness of feeling."

<span id="P8197_2578490"></span> <sup>133</sup> Lit., "a rational
animal."

<span id="P8198_2579011"></span> <sup>134</sup> Lit., "with deceit of
vain credulity." The edd. read this as an interrogation: "Do you,
therefore, sink down, adore, and bring yourselves into disgrace?"

<span id="P8199_2579259"></span> <sup>135</sup> So Orelli, Hild., and
Oehler, adopting a conjecture of Graevius, *di-*, for the ms.
*de-ducere*-"to lead down."
