<span id="P8300_2611591"></span> <sup>13</sup> Lit., "in that in which
he is a god."

<span id="P8301_2611739"></span> <sup>14</sup> Lit., "uniformity of
quality being preserved."

<span id="P8303_2612329"></span> <sup>15</sup> The ms. and edd. read *ut
in operibus feratur cassis*-"so as to be borne among," emended by Hild.
and Oehler *teratur*-"worn away among."

<span id="P8304_2612541"></span> <sup>16</sup> Lit., "in vain errors of
inanity."

<span id="P8305_2612603"></span> <sup>17</sup> The ms. and edd. have
here *forte*-"perchance.'"

<span id="P8306_2612916"></span> <sup>18</sup> Lit., "gift of food."

<span id="P8307_2613442"></span> <sup>19</sup> \[It must have taken much
tine to overcome this distaste for the use of incense in Christian
minds. Let us wait for the testimony of Lactantius.\]

<span id="P8308_2613647"></span> <sup>20</sup> Or perhaps, simply, "the
sacrifice is a living one," *animalis est hostia*. Macrobius, however
(*Sat.*, iii. 5), quotes Trebatius as saying that there were two kinds
of sacrifices, in one of which the entrails were examined that they
might disclose the divine will, while in the other the life only was
consecrated to the deity. This is more precisely stated by Servius
(*Aen.*, iii. 231), who says that the *hostia animalis* was only slain,
that in other cases the blood was poured on the altars, that in others
part of the victim, and in others the whole animal, was burned. It is
probable, therefore that Arnobius uses the words here in their technical
meaning, as the next clause shows that none of the flesh was offered,
while the blood was allowed to fall to the ground. \[I am convinced that
classical antiquities must be more largely studied in the Fathers of the
first five centuries.\]

<span id="P8309_2614949"></span> <sup>21</sup> i.e., the juices which
formerly flowed through the living body.

<span id="P8311_2615546"></span> <sup>22</sup> The heathen opponent is
supposed to give up his first reason, that the sacrifices provided food
for the gods, and to advance this new suggestion, that they were
intended for their gratification merely.

<span id="P8312_2615849"></span> <sup>23</sup> Lit., "for the sake of."

<span id="P8313_2616152"></span> <sup>24</sup> Lit., "with the fleeting
tickling of."

<span id="P8314_2616431"></span> <sup>25</sup> Lit., "with the levities
of gladnesses.'"

<span id="P8315_2616759"></span> <sup>26</sup> i.e., pleasure.

<span id="P8316_2617773"></span> <sup>27</sup> *Naturalis initii
consortia.*

<span id="P8317_2617811"></span> <sup>28</sup> So the ms. and first ed.,
according to Oehler, reading *cred-e\~t*, the others *-i-*-"does."

<span id="P8318_2618090"></span> <sup>29</sup> Lit., "these."

<span id="P8319_2618305"></span> <sup>30</sup> Arnobius says that the
sacrifices give no pleasure to any being, or at least, if that is not
strictly true, that they give none to the gods. \[See Elucidation VI.,
*infra*.\]

<span id="P8321_2619084"></span> <sup>31</sup> So the ms., LB.,
Oberthür, Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading *consec-*, for which the
rest read *consen-taneum est credere*-"it is fitting to believe."

<span id="P8322_2619564"></span> <sup>32</sup> Lit., "motion of
anything."

<span id="P8323_2619750"></span> <sup>33</sup> Cf. i. 18.

<span id="P8325_2620549"></span> <sup>34</sup> Lit., "set in
indignations."

<span id="P8326_2620963"></span> <sup>35</sup> Lit., "if this
satisfaction of sacrifices is offered to."

<span id="P8327_2621133"></span> <sup>36</sup> So the ms. and most edd.,
reading *laeta*, for which Ursinus suggested *lauta*-"splendid," and
Heraldus *elata*- "exalted."

<span id="P8329_2622349"></span> <sup>37</sup> It is perhaps possible so
to translate the ms. *neque si sunt ulli apertissima potuit cognitione
dignosci*, retained by Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, in which case *si sunt
ui?li* must be taken as the subject of the clause. The other edd., from
regard to the construction, read *visi*-"nor, if they have been seen,
has it been possible."

<span id="P8330_2622941"></span> <sup>38</sup> Lit., "kept with
inviolable observance."

<span id="P8332_2623408"></span> <sup>39</sup> Lit., "work."

<span id="P8333_2623472"></span> <sup>40</sup> Lit., "remedy."

<span id="P8334_2623711"></span> <sup>41</sup> So *Panes* seems to be
generally understood, i.e., images of Pan used as playthings by boys,
and very much the same thing as the puppets-*pupuli*-already mentioned.

<span id="P8335_2623954"></span> <sup>42</sup> So *Panes* seems to be
generally understood, i.e., images of Pan used as playthings by boys,
and very much the same thing as the puppets-*pupuli*-already mentioned.

<span id="P8336_2624640"></span> <sup>43</sup> Lit., "to have liberal
pardons and free concessions."

<span id="P8338_2625210"></span> <sup>44</sup> Lit., "in these."

<span id="P8339_2625637"></span> <sup>45</sup> Lit., "following."

<span id="P8340_2625722"></span> <sup>46</sup> Lit., "to varieties of
manifold."

<span id="P8341_2626447"></span> <sup>47</sup> Lit., "leap into."

<span id="P8343_2628259"></span> <sup>48</sup> \[This very striking
passage should lead us to compare the widely different purpose of Judaic
sacrifices. See Elucidation VI., *infra*.\]

<span id="P8345_2628992"></span> <sup>49</sup> Lit., "from the hands to
us," *nobis*, the reading of the ms., both Roman edd., Gelenius, LB.,
and Oehler; for which the rest give *vobis*-"out of your hands."

<span id="P8346_2630006"></span> <sup>50</sup> i.e., the learned men
referred to above.

<span id="P8348_2630513"></span> <sup>51</sup> Lit., "whence."

<span id="P8349_2630565"></span> <sup>52</sup> Lit., "so innumerable."

<span id="P8350_2631149"></span> <sup>53</sup> Lit., "ruins."

<span id="P8351_2631774"></span> <sup>54</sup> So Canterus suggests
*conf-iunt* for the ms. *confic-*-"bring about,"

<span id="P8353_2632365"></span> <sup>55</sup> Lit., "it is a thing of
long and much speech."

<span id="P8354_2633181"></span> <sup>56</sup> Lit., "the fortunes of
perils."

<span id="P8355_2633325"></span> <sup>57</sup> The ms. reading is *hoc
est unus*, corrected *honestus*-"honourable" (which makes the comparison
pointless, because there is no reason why a rich man, if good, should
not be succored as well as a poor), in all edd., except Oehler, who
reads *seclestus*, which departs too far from the ms. Perhaps we should
read, as above, *inhonestus.*

<span id="P8356_2634065"></span> <sup>58</sup> So the ms., LB., Hild.,
and Oehler, and the other edd., adding *et auxilium*-"and help."

<span id="P8357_2634293"></span> <sup>59</sup> Lit., "whom not his mind,
but the necessity of his property, made restricted."

<span id="P8358_2634589"></span> <sup>60</sup> Lit., "inclines thither
whence."

<span id="P8359_2634713"></span> <sup>61</sup> i.e., the decision.

<span id="P8360_2635479"></span> <sup>62</sup> Lit., "both nations."

<span id="P8361_2636074"></span> <sup>63</sup> Lit., "the favours of
good work," *boni operis favor-es et*, the reading of Hild. and Oehler
(other edd. *-em*-"the favour of its service") for ms. *fabore sed.*

<span id="P8363_2637598"></span> <sup>64</sup> Lit., "of most powerful
name."

<span id="P8364_2637805"></span> <sup>65</sup> Lit., "imitating a
slave's servility"-*ancillatum*, the emendation of Hemsterhuis, adopted
by Orelli, Hild., and Oehler for the unintelligible ms. *ancillarum.*

<span id="P8365_2638209"></span> <sup>66</sup> Lit., "things."

<span id="P8367_2638408"></span> <sup>67</sup> Lit., "in higher places."

<span id="P8368_2638614"></span> <sup>68</sup> Lit., "what eminences is
it found to be added," *addier*. So Hild. and Oehler for the reading of
ms., first four edd., and Oberthür *addere*-"to add," emended in rest
from margin of Ursinus *accedere*, much as above.

<span id="P8369_2638851"></span> <sup>69</sup> So the ms., reading
*conjectionibus*, which is retained in no edd., although its primary
meaning is exactly what the sense here requires.

<span id="P8370_2639760"></span> <sup>70</sup> The last clause was
omitted in first four edd. and Elmh., and was inserted from the ms. by
Meursius.

<span id="P8372_2640043"></span> <sup>71</sup> Lit., "whom."

<span id="P8373_2640103"></span> <sup>72</sup> Lit., "say in the
proclamation of."

<span id="P8374_2640283"></span> <sup>73</sup> Lit., "more powerful
commands," i.e., by Christ's injunctions. It seems hardly possible that
any one should suppose that there is here any reference to Christ's
command to His disciples not to exercise lordship over each other, yet
Orelli thinks that there is perhaps a reference to Mark x. 42, 43. If a
particular reference were intended, we might with more reason find it in
1 Pet. ii. 17, "Honour all men."

<span id="P8375_2640905"></span> <sup>74</sup> Lit., "established in."

<span id="P8376_2642373"></span> <sup>75</sup> Lit., "weighed by their
own force," *vi.*

<span id="P8377_2642585"></span> <sup>76</sup> i.e., *altariaque haec
pulchra.*

<span id="P8379_2643084"></span> <sup>77</sup> Lit., "you show
yourselves," *praestatis.*

<span id="P8380_2643181"></span> <sup>78</sup> Lit., "most." So Tibullus
(*Eleg.*, ii. 1, 13): "Pure things please the gods. Come (i.e., to the
sacrifice) with clean garments, and with clean hands take water from the
fountain,"-perfect cleanliness being scrupulously insisted on.

<span id="P8381_2643480"></span> <sup>79</sup> This Heraldus explains as
"of worse omen," and Oehler as "more unclean."

<span id="P8382_2643788"></span> <sup>80</sup> *Ingenuae*, i.e., such as
any respectable person has.

<span id="P8383_2643975"></span> <sup>81</sup> To this the commentators
have replied, that mules, asses, and dogs were sacrificed to certain
deities. We must either admit that Arnobius has here fallen into error,
or suppose that he refers merely to the animals which were usually
slain, or find a reason for his neglecting it in the circumstances of
each sacrifice.

<span id="P8385_2646307"></span> <sup>82</sup> \[The wit of Arnobius
must be acknowledged in this scorching satire. Compare the divine
ordinances, Exod. xxix. 13, 14.\]

<span id="P8386_2646815"></span> <sup>83</sup> Lit., "by slaughters of,"
*caedibus.*

<span id="P8387_2647105"></span> <sup>84</sup> Lit., "under," i.e.,
under the sacrifices on your altars.

<span id="P8388_2647202"></span> <sup>85</sup> So all edd., reading
*cerne-*, except both Roman edd., Hild., and Oehler, who retain the ms.
*cerni-tis*-"you see."

<span id="P8389_2647599"></span> <sup>86</sup> In translating thus, it
has been attempted to adhere as closely as possible to the ms. reading
(according to Crusius) *qua si*-corrected, as above, *quae* in LB.; but
it is by no means certain that further changes should not he made.

<span id="P8390_2647884"></span> <sup>87</sup> Lit., "prepare luncheons
and dinners thence," i.e., from the putrefying carcasses.

<span id="P8392_2649404"></span> <sup>88</sup> The ms. and first four
edd. read *ingentibus scrofis*-"with huge breeding swine," changed by
rest, as above, *incient-*, from the margin of Ursinus.

<span id="P8393_2649594"></span> <sup>89</sup> Or "gloomy," *tetris*,
the reading of ms. and all edd. since LB., for which earlier edd. give
*atris*-"black."

<span id="P8394_2650419"></span> <sup>90</sup> Lit., "the tenderness
of."

<span id="P8395_2650500"></span> <sup>91</sup> \[The law of clean and
unclean reflects the instincts of man, as here appealed to; but compare
and *patiently study* these texts: Lev. x. 10 and Ezek. xxii. 26; Lev.
xi. and Acts x. 15; Rom. xiv. 14 and Luke xi. 41.\]

<span id="P8397_2650889"></span> <sup>92</sup> Lit., "more."

<span id="P8398_2651072"></span> <sup>93</sup> So the ms., Elm., LB.,
Orelli, Hild., and Oehler, reading *vicerit*, for which the others read
*jusserit*-"has bidden."
