<span id="P8400_2652172"></span> <sup>94</sup> Lit., "prevailing with
favourableness of omens," *ominum*, for which the ms. and first four
edd. read *h-*-"of men."

<span id="P8401_2652643"></span> <sup>95</sup> That Arnobius had good
reason to appeal to this scepticism as a fact, is evident from the lines
of Juvenal (ii. 149-152): "Not even children believe that there are any
Manes and subterranean realms."

<span id="P8403_2653444"></span> <sup>96</sup> Lit., "and." Immediately
after, the ms. is corrected in later writing *color-es* (for *-is*)-"and
the darkest colours."

<span id="P8404_2653799"></span> <sup>97</sup> *Similiter.* This is
certainly a suspicious reading, but Arnobius indulges occasionally in
similar vague expressions.

<span id="P8405_2653965"></span> <sup>98</sup> Lit., "is white."

<span id="P8406_2654034"></span> <sup>99</sup> Or, very probably, "the
membranes with (i.e., enclosing) the brains," *omenta cum cerebris*.

<span id="P8408_2655396"></span> <sup>100</sup> Goats were sacrificed to
Bacchus, but not, so far as is known, to Mercury. Cf. c. 16, p. 524, n.
3.

<span id="P8409_2657123"></span> <sup>101</sup> Lit. "by the paction of
some transaction is it," etc.

<span id="P8410_2657304"></span> <sup>102</sup> So all except both Roman
edd., which retain the ms. reading *desi-d-eret* (corrected *-n-* by
Gelenius)-"wish."

<span id="P8412_2657850"></span> <sup>103</sup> So the ms., Hild., and
Oehler, reading *d-atio*, approved of by Stewechius also. The others
read *r-*-"reasoning on behalf."

<span id="P8413_2658243"></span> <sup>104</sup> *Inci-ens* so corrected
in the margin of Ursinus for ms. *ing-*-"huge." Cf. ch. 18, p. 524, n.
10.

<span id="P8414_2658426"></span> <sup>105</sup> The ms. reads *excitata
conatus* (according to Hild.); corrected, as above, by the insertion of
*ad*.

<span id="P8415_2658861"></span> <sup>106</sup> *Quam*, i.e., the earth.

<span id="P8416_2658958"></span> <sup>107</sup> Singularly enough, for
*fecunditate* Oberthür reads *virginitate*-"inextinguishable virginity,"
which is by no means universally desired in the earth. Orelli, as usual,
copies without remark the mistake of his predecessor.

<span id="P8418_2660160"></span> <sup>108</sup> Lit., "more prompt to
lust of hurting."

<span id="P8419_2660702"></span> <sup>109</sup> Lit., "nature of
hurting."

<span id="P8421_2662308"></span> <sup>110</sup> The ms. reads *ad ea
quae facti sunt*, understood seemingly as above by the edd., by
supplying *ad* before *quae*. Oehler, however, proposes *quia*-"because
they were made *for them*." The reading must be regarded as doubtful.

<span id="P8422_2662570"></span> <sup>111</sup> i.e., if sacrifices
avail to counteract the malevolent dispositions of the gods.

<span id="P8423_2663059"></span> <sup>112</sup> Lit., "these." This
clause, omitted by Oberthür, is also omitted without remark by Orelli.

<span id="P8425_2664172"></span> <sup>113</sup> So the edd., reading
*farciminum* for the ms. *facinorum*, corrected by Hild. *fartorum*-"of
stuffings." Throughout this passage hardly one of the names of these
sacrificial dainties is generally agreed upon; as many are met with
nowhere else, the ms. has been adhered to strictly.

<span id="P8426_2664487"></span> <sup>114</sup> i.e., probably the
*hirciae*: of the others, *silicernia* seem to have been put on the
table at funerals.

<span id="P8427_2664768"></span> <sup>115</sup> i.e., *taeda.*

<span id="P8428_2664835"></span> <sup>116</sup> So Salmasius and
Meursius corrected the ms. *catillaminu-a-m* by omitting *a*.

<span id="P8429_2665362"></span> <sup>117</sup> i.e., tail-piece.

<span id="P8430_2666070"></span> <sup>118</sup> *Salsamina*, by which is
perhaps meant the grits and salt cast on the victim; but if so, Arnobius
is at variance with Servius (Virgil, *Ecl.*, viii. 81), who expressly
states that these were of spelt mixed only with salt; while there is no
trace elsewhere of a different usage.

<span id="P8431_2666481"></span> <sup>119</sup> The first four edd.
retain the unintelligible ms. *dirae.*

<span id="P8432_2666612"></span> <sup>120</sup> i.e., the entrails. The
ms., first four edd., and Elm. read *illa.*

<span id="P8433_2666722"></span> <sup>121</sup> So the ms., LB.,
Oberthür, Orelli, Hild., and Oehler; but *aerumnae* is found in no other
passage with this meaning.

<span id="P8434_2666884"></span> <sup>122</sup> Lit., "first heads in
gullets."

<span id="P8435_2667030"></span> <sup>123</sup> By this, and the word
which follows, we know from the etymology that "offerings" to the gods
must be meant, but we know nothing more.

<span id="P8437_2668313"></span> <sup>124</sup> i.e., cut off for
sacrifice.

<span id="P8438_2668573"></span> <sup>125</sup> *Caro strebula.*

<span id="P8439_2668647"></span> <sup>126</sup> *Plasea.*

<span id="P8440_2668710"></span> <sup>127</sup> The ms. reads
unintelligibly *nomen quae*, corrected by Gelenius *omentum*, as above.

<span id="P8441_2669091"></span> <sup>128</sup> Lit., "admonish the ease
of the palate;" a correction of Salmasius, by omitting *a* from the ms.
*palati-a admoneant.*

<span id="P8442_2669520"></span> <sup>129</sup> *Naeniae.*

<span id="P8444_2669715"></span> <sup>130</sup> Lit., "these kinds of
ceremonies, too, were coupled and mixed," etc.

<span id="P8445_2670470"></span> <sup>131</sup> On this Oehler remarks,
that the books of Moses show that it was certainly used in the East in
the most ancient times. But Arnobius has expressly restricted his
statement to the use of incense "in these parts."

<span id="P8446_2671062"></span> <sup>132</sup> *Pium far.*

<span id="P8447_2671929"></span> <sup>133</sup> \[See p. 519, note 1,
*supra*.\]

<span id="P8450_2674685"></span> <sup>134</sup> Lit., "the returns by
which the vital alternation is restored and withdrawn."

<span id="P8451_2675020"></span> <sup>135</sup> So the ms., Hild., and
Oehler, reading *suffec-tionibus alienis*, for which the rest read
*suffi-*-"the fumigations of others."

<span id="P8452_2675789"></span> <sup>136</sup> Lit., "feel and receive
one contact."

<span id="P8453_2676376"></span> <sup>137</sup> Lit., "as each has been
made for the touching of a thing coming from without."

<span id="P8454_2676481"></span> <sup>138</sup> So Gelenius and later
edd., reading *afficitur* for the unintelligible reading of ms. and
Roman edd., *efficit*-"effects."

<span id="P8455_2677506"></span> <sup>139</sup> So all edd., without
remark, reading *cog-it-atione*, although "meditation" has nothing to do
with the sense of smell, and has not been previously mentioned. We
should probably read *cog-n-atione*- "relation," i.e., to such objects.

<span id="P8457_2677892"></span> <sup>140</sup> So LB. and Oehler,
reading *ni-si*. (ms. *si*), and other edd. inserting *non*, the
negative being absolutely necessary to the sense, and supplied in the
next clause.

<span id="P8458_2678103"></span> <sup>141</sup> Lit., "nor will it have
its cause."

<span id="P8459_2678808"></span> <sup>142</sup> Although this is clearly
the meaning, Stewechius explained *solidos* by referring to the ancient
belief that such offerings should be wholly consumed, and no fragment
left.

<span id="P8460_2679279"></span> <sup>143</sup> *Briae*, drinking-cups,
but of their peculiar shape or purpose we know nothing.

<span id="P8461_2679493"></span> <sup>144</sup> Lit., "badly."

<span id="P8462_2679831"></span> <sup>145</sup> Lit., "being strangled,
may be."

<span id="P8464_2680363"></span> <sup>146</sup> So LB., Orelli, and
Oehler, reading with Salmasius *m-u-scos* (ms. *-i-*). Gelenius proposed
*cnissas*, which would refer to the steam of the sacrifices.

<span id="P8465_2680963"></span> <sup>147</sup> Lit., "interior."

<span id="P8466_2681246"></span> <sup>148</sup> So most edd., reading
*nimirum quia plus valet*, for which the ms., followed by both Roman
edd., Hild., and Oehler, read *primum. q. v.*, which Hild. would explain
"because it prevails above all *rather* than;" but this is at least very
doubtful.

<span id="P8468_2682665"></span> <sup>149</sup> *Vino inferio.*

<span id="P8469_2683099"></span> <sup>150</sup> Lit., "bound by
religion."

<span id="P8470_2683221"></span> <sup>151</sup> This is admirably
illustrated in an inscription quoted by Heraldus: "Jupiter most
excellent, supreme, when this day I give and dedicate to thee this
altar, I give and dedicate it with these conditions and limits which I
say openly to-day."

<span id="P8471_2684512"></span> <sup>152</sup> *Circumscriptione
verborum.*

<span id="P8473_2685189"></span> <sup>153</sup> *Symphoniae.* Evidently
musical instruments; but while Isidore speaks of them as a kind of drum,
other writers call them trumpets and pipes.

<span id="P8474_2685842"></span> <sup>154</sup> At daybreak on opening,
and at night on closing the temple, the priests of Isis sang hymns in
praise of the goddess (cf. Jos. Scaliger, *Castigationes ad Cat.*, etc.,
p. 132); and to these Arnobius refers sarcastically, as though they had
been calls to awake, and lullabies to sing her asleep.

<span id="P8475_2686334"></span> <sup>155</sup> At daybreak on opening,
and at night on closing the temple, the priests of Isis sang hymns in
praise of the goddess (cf. Jos. Scaliger, *Castigationes ad Cat.*, etc.,
p. 132); and to these Arnobius refers sarcastically, as though they had
been calls to awake, and lullabies to sing her asleep.

<span id="P8476_2686905"></span> <sup>156</sup> i.e., March 27th, marked
*Lavatio* in a calendar prepared during the reign of Constantius.

<span id="P8477_2687138"></span> <sup>157</sup> Lit., "and some rubbing
of cinders added," *aliqua frictione cineris*; an emendation of Ursinus
for the possibly correct ms. *anti-qua f. c.*-"the ancient rubbing,"
i.e., that practiced in early times.

<span id="P8478_2687531"></span> <sup>158</sup> Lit., "anniversary."

<span id="P8479_2687731"></span> <sup>159</sup> So the later edd.,
adopting the emendation of *ad suas usiones* for the corrupt ms. *ad*
(or *ab*) *suasionibus*.

<span id="P8480_2687871"></span> <sup>160</sup> i.e., feast at which the
image of Ceres was placed on a couch, probably the *Cerealia*,
celebrated in April. This passage flatly contradicts Prof. Ramsay's
assertion (*Ant.*, p. 345) that *lectisternium* is not applied to a
banquet offered to a goddess; while it corroborates his statement that
such feasts were ordinary events, not extraordinary solemnities, as Mr.
Yates says (Smith's *Ant.*, s. v.). See p. 519, n. 2.

<span id="P8481_2688457"></span> <sup>161</sup> Lit., "the impression of
the cushions is lifted up and raised," i.e., smoothed.

<span id="P8482_2688574"></span> <sup>162</sup> Thus the 25th of January
is marked as the birthday of the Graces, the 1st of February as that of
Hercules, the 1st of March as that of Mars, in the calendar already
mentioned.

<span id="P8484_2688928"></span> <sup>163</sup> The former dedicated to
Flora (cf. iii. 25), the latter to Cybele.

<span id="P8485_2689215"></span> <sup>164</sup> Singular.

<span id="P8486_2689351"></span> <sup>165</sup> So the margin of
Ursinus, Elm., LB., Orelli, Hild., and Oehler; the ms. reading not being
known.

<span id="P8487_2690139"></span> <sup>166</sup> Lit., "in dancing
motions."

<span id="P8488_2690315"></span> <sup>167</sup> So Meursius, Orelli, and
Oehler, reading *existimat-ve*, all the others retaining the ms.
*-ur-*-"Is Flora thought to be treated," etc.

<span id="P8489_2690972"></span> <sup>168</sup> Lit., "adapts."

<span id="P8490_2691427"></span> <sup>169</sup> Here also there is doubt
as to what the reading of the ms. is. The 1st ed. reads *sine
culpa*-"without blame." which is hardly in keeping with the context,
emended *causa*, as above, by Gelenius.

<span id="P8491_2691773"></span> <sup>170</sup> So Orelli explains
*certare hos spiritu* as referring to a contest in which each strove to
speak or sing with one breath longer than the rest.

<span id="P8493_2693373"></span> <sup>171</sup> Lit., "an animal of no
value."

<span id="P8494_2693630"></span> <sup>172</sup> Lit., "the modesty of
their humility."

<span id="P8495_2693962"></span> <sup>173</sup> Lit., "they contain
their nature in a corporeal form."

<span id="P8496_2694486"></span> <sup>174</sup> Lit., "of."

<span id="P8497_2694724"></span> <sup>175</sup> Cf. p. 531, n. 8.

<span id="P8499_2695134"></span> <sup>176</sup> Lit., "by opposition of
the parts of each." Considerable difficulty has been felt as to the
abrupt way in which the book ends as it is arranged in the ms. Orelli
has therefore adopted the suggestion of an anonymous critic, and
transposed cc. 35, 36, 37 to the end. This does not, however, meet the
difficulty; for the same objection still holds good, that there is a
want of connection and harmony in these concluding chapters, and that,
even when thus arranged, they do not form a fitting conclusion to the
whole work.
