<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb14)  [Next](spb16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

### EVENING SERVICE FOR SABBATHS AND FESTIVALS

*Reader*.—Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

*Congregation in an undertone:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Blessed, praised, glorified, exalted and extolled be
the name of the supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who
is the first and the last, and beside him there is no God. Extol ye him
that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before him.
His name is exalted above all blessing and praise. Blessed be His name,
whose glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. Let the name of the Lord be
blessed from this time forth and for evermore.</span>

</div>

*Cong. and Reader*.—Blessed is the Lord who is to be blessed for ever
and ever.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who at thy word
bringest on the evening twilight, with wisdom openest the gates of the
heavens, and with understanding changest times and variest the seasons,
and arrangest the stars in their watches in the sky, according to thy
will. Thou createst day and night; thou rollest away the light from
before the darkness, and the darkness from before the light; thou makest
the day to pass and the night to approach, and dividest the day from the
night, the Lord of hosts is thy name; a God living and enduring
continually, mayest thou reign over us for ever and ever. Blessed art
thou, O Lord, who bringest on the evening twilight.

With everlasting love thou hast loved the house of Israel, thy people; a
Law and commandments, statutes and judgments hast thou taught us.
Therefore. O Lord

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

our God, when we lie down and when we rise up we will meditate on thy
statutes: yea, we will rejoice in the words of thy Law and in thy
commandments for ever; for they are our life and the length of our days
and we will meditate on them day and night. And mayest thou never take
away thy love from us. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who lovest thy people
Israel.

*When Prayers are not said with the Congregation, add:—*

<span class="small">God, faithful King!</span>

Deut. vi. 4–9.

Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

<span class="small">Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for
ever and ever.</span>

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee
this day, shalt be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them
diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest
in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest
down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon
thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou
shalt write them upon the door posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Deut. xi. 13–21.

And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my
commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God,
and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, that I will
give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter
rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
And I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat
and be satisfied. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived,
and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; and the anger
of the Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and ye perish
quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore
shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul: and ye
shall bind them for a sign upon your

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall
teach them your children, talking of them when thou sittest in thine
house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and
when thou risest up. And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of
thine house, and upon thy gates: that your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your children, upon the land which the Lord sware unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.

Numbers xv. 37–41.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel, and bid them that they make them a fringe upon the corners of
their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the
fringe of each corner a cord of blue: and it shall be unto you for a
fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of
the Lord, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and
your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray: that ye may remember and
do

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your God,
who brought you out of the Land of Egypt, to be your God; I am the Lord
your God.

True and trustworthy is all this, and it is established with us that he
is the Lord our God, and there is none beside him, and that we, Israel,
are his people. It is he who redeemed us from the hand of kings, even
our King, who delivered us from the grasp of all the terrible ones; the
God, who on our behalf dealt out punishment to our adversaries, and
requited all the enemies of our soul; who doeth great things past
finding out, yea, and wonders without number; who holdeth our soul in
life, and hath not suffered our feet to be moved; who made us tread upon
the high places of our enemies, and exalted our horn over all them that
hated us; who wrought for us miracles and vengeance upon Pharaoh, signs
and wonders in the land of the children of Ham; who in his wrath smote
all the first-born of Egypt, and brought forth his

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

people Israel from among them to everlasting freedom; who made his
children pass between the divisions of the Red Sea, but sank their
pursuers and their enemies in the depths. Then his children beheld his
might; they praised and gave thanks unto his name, and willingly
accepted his sovereignty. Moses and the children of Israel sang a song
unto thee with great joy, saying, all of them,

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the mighty ones? Who is like unto
thee, glorious in holiness, revered in praises, doing wonders?

Thy children beheld thy sovereign power, as thou didst cleave the sea
before Moses: they exclaimed, This is my God! and said,

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

And it is said, For the Lord hath delivered Jacob, and redeemed him from
the hand of him that was stronger than he. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
hast redeemed Israel.

Cause us, O Lord our God, to lie down in peace, and raise us up, O our
King, unto life. Spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace; direct us
aright through thine own good counsel; save us for thy name's sake; be
thou a shield about us; remove from is every enemy, pestilence, sword,
famine and sorrow;

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="small">remove also the adversary from before us and from
behind us. O shelter us beneath the shadow of thy wings; for thou, O
God, art our Guardian and our Deliverer; yea, thou, O God, art a
gracious and merciful King; and guard our going out and our coming in
unto life and unto peace from this time forth and for evermore; yea,
spread over us the tabernacle of thy peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who spreadest the tabernacle of peace over us and over all thy people
Israel, and over Jerusalem.</span>

*On Sabbaths:—*

Exodus xxxi. 16, 17.

<span class="small">And the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath,
to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations, for an everlasting
covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever,
that in six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the
seventh day he rested, and ceased from his work.</span>

*On Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles, say:—*

<span class="small">And Moses declared the set feasts of the Lord unto
the children of Israel.</span>

*On New Year:—*

<span class="small">Blow the horn on the new moon, at the beginning of
the month, for our day of festival: for it is a statute for Israel, a
decree of the God of Jacob.</span>

*On the Day of Atonement:—*

<span class="small">For on this day shall atonement be made for you to
cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye be clean before the
Lord.</span>

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great -name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed. for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye,. Amen.

*On Festivals say the appropriate Amidoth*.

<span class="small">O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
declare thy praise.</span>

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things;: who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in.
life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own Bake, O living
God.</span>

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the
First Day of Passover say:—*

<span class="small">Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to
fall.</span>

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy
rememberest thy creatures unto life?</span>

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

Thou didst hallow the seventh day unto thy name, as the end of the
creation of heaven and earth; thou didst bless it above all days, and
didst hallow it above all seasons; and thus it is written in thy Law:

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on
the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God
blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it because he rested thereon
from all his work which God had created and made.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy
commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law;

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify
our hearts to serve thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our
God, let us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy
name, rest thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

*On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the
following is added:—*

<span class="small">Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance
rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our
fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy
city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance
and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this
day of</span>

*On New Moon—*

<span class="small">the New Moon.</span>

*On Passover—*

<span class="small">the Feast of Unleavened Bread.</span>

*On Tabernacles say—*

<span class="small">the Feast of Tabernacles.</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our well-being;
be mindful of us for blessing,</span>

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="small">and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation
and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save
us; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and
merciful God and King.</span>

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks
unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto
thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy
miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits
which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art
all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose
lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee

*On Chanukah say:—*

<span class="small">We thank thee, etc., [p.
63](spb05.htm#page_63).</span>

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a
happy life.</span>

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the
sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless
thy people Israel at all times and at every hour with thy peace.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">In the book of life, blessing, peace and good
sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all
the people of the rouse of Israel, for a happy life and for peace.
Blessed art thou, O Lord; who makest peace.</span>

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

and let my soul pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me,
speedily make their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs.
Do it for the sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do
it for the sake of thy holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order
that thy beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and
answer me. Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be
acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh
peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel,
and say ye, Amen.

<span class="small">May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our
fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our
portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the
days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah
and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as
in ancient years.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Reader and Congregation repeat from "And the heaven" to "and
made."*

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on
the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God
blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it, because he rested thereon
from all his work which God had created and made.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

*The following to "the Sabbath," is omitted when Prayers are not said
with the Congregation:—*

*Reader*.—Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God
of Abraham, God of Isaac and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered
God, the most high God, Possessor of heaven and earth.

*Reader and Cong*.—He with his word was a shield to our forefathers, and
by his bidding will quicken the dead; the holy God (on the Sabbath of
Penitence say, "holy King"), like unto whom there is none; who giveth
rest to his people on his holy Sabbath day, because he took pleasure in
them to grant them rest. Him we will serve with fear and awe, and daily
and constantly we will give thanks unto his name in the fitting forms of
Blessings. He is the God to who, thanksgivings are due, the Lord of
peace, who halloweth the Sabbath and blesseth the seventh day, and in
holiness giveth rest unto a people sated with delights, in remembrance
of the creation.

*Reader*.—Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us
by thy commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with
thy goodness, gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve
thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit
thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

*Reader*.—May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by
their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Reader*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Reader*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*The following is not said on Festivals, on the Intermediate Sabbath of
a Festival, or on the evening after a Festival:—*

Mishnah, Treatise Sabbath, ch. ii.

1\. With what materials may the Sabbath lamp be lighted, and with what
may it not be lighted? It may not be lighted with cedar-bast, nor with
uncombed flax, nor with floss-silk, nor with willow-fibre, nor with
nettle fibre, nor with waterweeds

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (all these forming
imperfect wicks). It may also not be lighted with pitch, nor with liquid
wax, nor with oil made from the seeds of the cotton plant, nor with oil
which, having been set apart as a heave-offering and having become
defiled, is condemned to be destroyed by burning, nor with the fat from
the tails of sheep, nor with tallow. Nahum the Mede, says one may use
tallow when it has been boiled, but the other sages say, that whether so
prepared or not, it may not be used. 2. On a festival one may not use
such consecrated oil as has been condemned, after defilement, to be
burnt. R. Ishmael says, one may not, from respect to the Sabbath, use
tar. The sages permit the use of all kinds of oil; the oil of sesamum,
of nuts, of radish seeds, of fish, of colocynth seeds, as well as tar
and naphtha. R. Tarphon says, one may use no other than olive oil for
lighting the Sabbath lamp. 3. No part of a tree may be used as a wick
for lighting, with the exception of flax (spoken of in Joshua ii. 6 as
"the flax of a tree"); nor is any part of a tree, if used in the
construction of a tent, capable of acquiring pollution according to the
law concerning the pollution of tents, except flax. If a slip of cloth
has been folded but not singed, R. Eliezer says it may become unclean,
and may not be used as a wick for lighting; R. Akiba says it remains
clean, and may be used. 4. One may not perforate an egg-shell, fill it
with oil, and place it above the opening of the lamp, so that drops of
oil may fall therein; he may not even employ an earthenware vessel in
this manner; but R. Jehudah permits it. If, however, the potter had
originally joined the two parts, then it is allowed, because it is
actually only one vessel. A person may not fill a bowl with oil, place
it by the side of the lamp, and put the end of the wick into it, so that
it may draw the oil to the flame; but R. Jehudah permits it. 5. He who
extinguishes the light, because he is in fear of heathens, or robbers,
or of en evil spirit. or to enable a sick person to sleep, is absolved;

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

if his object is to save the lamp, the oil, or the wick, he is guilty of
a breach of the Sabbath law. R. Jose absolves from such guilt in every
case except in that of the one whose object is to save the wick, because
by thus extinguishing it, he converts it into a coal. 6. For three
transgressions women die in childbirth: because they have been negligent
in regard to their periods of separation, in respect to the consecration
of the first cake of the dough, and in the lighting of the Sabbath lamp.
7. Three things a man must say to his household on Sabbath eve towards
dusk: Have ye separated the tithe? Have ye made the Erub? Kindle the
Sabbath lamp. If it be doubtful whether it is dark, that which is
certainly untithed must not then be tithed, vessels must not be immersed
to purify them from their defilement, nor must the Sabbath lamps be
lighted; but that which is doubtfully untithed may be tithed, the Erub
may be made, and hot victuals may be covered to retain their heat.

Talmud Babli. End of Treatise Berachoth.

R. Eleazar said in the name of R. Chanina, The disciples of the sages
increase peace throughout the world, as it is said, And all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy
children. (Read not here *banayich*, by children, but *bonayich*, thy
builders.)—Great peace have they who love thy Law; and there is no
stumbling for them. Peace be within thy rampart, prosperity within thy
palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sakes I would fain speak peace
concerning thee. For the sake of the house of the Lord our God I would
seek thy good. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord
will bless his people with peace.

*Kiddush is said by the Reader, [p. 181](spb16.htm#page_181)*.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to
him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us
like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a
portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend
the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings,
the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid
the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens
above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is
our God; there is none else; in truth he is our King; there is none
besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day,
and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and
upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold
the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the
earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be
perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of
flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the
wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and
know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before
thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name
let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do
thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is
thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in
thy Law,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Lord shall
reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over
all the earth: in that lay shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

*The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner*.

*Mourner*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your if e and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Mourner*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Mourner*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and
honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be
he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and
consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Mourner*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Mourner*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

1\. Magnified and praised be the living God: he is, and there is no
limit in time unto his being.

2\. He is One, and there is no unity like unto his unity; inconceivable
is he, and unending is his unity.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

3\. He hath neither bodily form nor substance: we can compare nought
unto him in his holiness.

4\. He was before anything that hath been created—even the first: but
his existence had no beginning.

5\. Behold he is the Lord of the universe: to every creature he teacheth
his greatness and his sovereignty.

6\. The rich gift of his prophecy he gave unto the men of his choice, in
whom he gloried.

7\. There hath never yet arisen in Israel a prophet like unto Moses, one
who hath beheld his similitude.

8\. The Law of truth God gave unto his people by the hand of his
prophet, who was faithful in his house.

9\. God will not alter nor change his Law to ever, lasting for any
other.

10\. He watcheth and knoweth our secret thoughts: he beholdeth the end
of a thing before it existeth.

11\. He bestoweth lovingkindness upon a man according to his work; he
giveth to the wicked evil according to his wickedness.

12\. He will send our anointed at the end of days, to redeem them that
wait for the end—his salvation.

13\. In the abundance of his lovingkindness God will quicken the dead.
Blessed for evermore be his glorious name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*On the Eve of Sabbaths and of Holydays it is customary for Parents,
either at the conclusion of the Service in Synagogue, or upon reaching
their Home, to pronounce the following Benediction upon their
Children:—*

*To Sons say:—*

God make thee as Ephraim and Manasseh.

*To Daughters say:—*

God make thee as Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel and Leah.

*To Sons and Daughters:—*

The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and
give thee peace.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

The following is said in the Home by the Master of the House:—

Proverbs xxxi. 10–31.

A woman of worth who can find? For her price is far above rubies. The
heart of her husband trusteth in her; and he shall have no lack of gain.
She doeth him good and not evil all the days of her life. She seeketh
wool and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands. She is like the
merchant-ships; she bringeth her food from afar. She riseth also while
it is yet night, and setteth forth provision for her household, and
their portion for her maidens. She considereth a field, and buyeth it:
with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard. She girdeth her
loins with strength, and maketh strong her arms. She perceiveth that her
earnings are good: her lamp goeth not out by night. She putteth her
hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle. She stretcheth out
her hand to the poor; yea, she putteth forth her hands to the needy. She
is not afraid of the snow for her household; for all her household are
clothed with scarlet. She maketh for herself coverings of tapestry; her
clothing is fine linen and purple. Her husband is known in the gates,
when he sitteth among the elders of the land. She maketh linen garments
and selleth them; and delivereth girdles unto the merchant. Strength and
majesty are her clothing; and she laugheth at the time to come. She
openeth her mouth with wisdom; and the law of lovingkindness is on her
tongue. She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not
the bread of idleness. Her children rise up and call her happy; her
husband also, and he praiseth her, saying, Many daughters have done
worthily, but thou excellest them all. Favor is false, and beauty is
vain; but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Give her
of the fruit of her hands; and let her works praise her in the gates.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kiddush for Sabbath Evening](spb16)

</div>
