<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb16)  [Next](spb18) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

### MORNING SERVICE FOR SABBATHS AND FESTIVALS.

*Begin page [2](spb04.htm#page_2) to "the Lord is One," [p.
43](spb05.htm#page_43). Then continue as follows:—*

The breath of every living being shall bless thy name, O Lord our God,
and the spirit of all flesh shall continually glorify and exalt thy
memorial, O our King; from everlasting to everlasting thou art God; and
beside thee we have no King who redeemeth and saveth, setteth free and
delivereth, who supporteth and hath mercy in all times of trouble and
distress; yea, we have no King but thee.

He is God of the first and of the last, the God of all creatures, the
Lord of all generations, who is extolled with many praises, and guideth
his world with lovingkindness and his creatures with tender mercies. The
Lord slumbereth not, nor sleepeth; he arouseth the sleepers and
awakeneth the slumberers; he maketh the dumb to speak, loseth the bound,
supporteth .the falling, and raiseth up the bowed.

To thee alone we give thanks. Though our mouths were full of song as the
sea, and our tongues of exultation as the multitude of its waves, and
our lips of praise as the wide-extended firmament; though our eyes shone
with light like the sun and the moon, and our hands were spread forth
like the eagles of heaven, and our feet were swift as hinds, we should
still be unable to thank thee and to bless thy name, O Lord our God and
God of our fathers, for one thousandth or one ten thousandth

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

part of the bounties which thou hast bestowed upon our fathers and upon
us. Thou didst redeem us from Egypt, O Lord our God, and didst release
us from the house of bondage; during famine thou didst feed us, and
didst sustain us in plenty; from the sword thou didst rescue us, from
pestilence thou didst save us, and from sore and lasting diseases thou
didst deliver us. Hitherto thy tender mercies have helped us, and thy
lovingkindnesses have not left us: forsake us not, O Lord our God, for
ever. Therefore the limbs which thou hast spread forth upon us, and the
spirit and breath which thou hast breathed into our nostrils, and the
tongue which thou hast set in our mouths, lo, they shall thank, bless,
praise, glorify, extol, reverence, hallow and assign kingship to thy
name, O Our King. For every mouth shall give thanks unto thee, and every
tongue shall swear unto thee; every knee shall bow to thee, and
whatsoever is lofty shall prostrate itself before thee; all hearts shall
fear thee, and all the inward parts and reins shall sing unto thy name,
according to the word that is written, All my bones shall say, Lord, who
is like unto thee? Thou deliverest the poor from him that is stronger
than he, the poor and the needy from him that robbeth him. Who is like
unto thee, who is equal to thee, who can be compared unto thee, O God,
great, mighty, and awful, most high God, Possessor of heaven and earth?
We will praise,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

laud and glorify thee, and we will bless thy holy name, as it is said,
(A Psalm of David,) Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within
me, bless his holy name. Thou art God in thy power and might, great in
thy glorious name, mighty for ever and awful by thy awful acts, the King
who sitteth upon a high and lofty throne.

He who inhabiteth eternity, exalted and holy is his name; and it is
written, Exult in the Lord, O ye righteous; praise is seemly for the
upright.

By the mouth of the upright thou shalt be praised, by the words of the
righteous thou shalt be blessed, by the tongue of the loving ones thou
shalt be extolled, and in the midst of the holy thou shalt be hallowed.

In the assemblies also of the tens of thousands of thy people, the house
of Israel, thy name, O our King, shall be glorified with joyous dies in
every generation; for such is the duty of all creatures in thy presence,
O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to thank, praise, laud, glorify,
extol, honor, bless, exalt and adore thee, even beyond all the words of
song and praise of David the son of Jesse, thy servant and anointed.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

Praised be thy name for ever, O our King, the great and holy God and
King, in heaven and on earth; for unto thee, O Lord our God and God of
our fathers, song and praise are becoming, hymn and psalm, strength and
dominion, victory, greatness and might, renown and glory, holiness and
sovereignty, blessings and thanksgivings from henceforth even for ever.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, God and King, great in praises, God of
thanksgivings, Lord of wonders, who makest choice of song and psalm, O
King and God, the life of all worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye. Amen.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

*Reader*.—Bless ye the Lord who is to be blessed.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Blessed is the Lord who is to be blessed for ever
and ever.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who formest
light and createst darkness, who makest peace and createst all things.

*Congregation in an undertone*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Blessed, praised, glorified, exalted and extolled be the name of the
supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he, who is the first and
the last, and beside him there is no God. Extol ye, him that rideth upon
the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice be, fore him. His name is
exalted above all blessing and praise. Blessed be His name, whose
glorious kingdom is for ever and ever. Let the name of the Lord be
blessed from this time forth and for evermore.

</div>

* <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_16) On Festivals falling, on
week-days say, "Who in mercy."*

All shall thank thee, and all shall praise thee, and all shall say,
There is none holy like the Lord. All shall extol thee for ever, thou
Creator of all things, O God who openest every day the doors of the
gates of the East, and cleavest the windows of the firmament, bringing
forth the sun from his place, and the moon from her dwelling,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

giving light to the whole world and to its inhabitants whom thou
createst by thy attribute of mercy. In mercy thou givest light to the
earth and to there that dwell thereon, and in thy goodness renewest the
creation every day continually; O King, who alone wast exalted from
aforetime, praised, glorified and extolled from days of old. O
everlasting God, in thine abundant mercies, have mercy upon us, Lord of
our strength, Rock of our stronghold, Shield of our salvation, thou
Stronghold of ours! There is none to be compared unto thee, neither is
there any beside thee; there is none but thee: who is like unto thee?
There is none to be compared unto thee, O Lord our God, in this world,
neither is there any beside thee, O our King, for the life of the world
to come; there is none but thee, O our Redeemer, for the days of the
Messiah; neither is there any like unto thee. O our Saviour, for the
resurrection of the dead.

God, the Lord over all works, blessed is he, and ever to be blessed by
the mouth of everything that hath breath. His greatness and goodness
fill the universe; knowledge and understanding surround him: he is
exalted above the holy Chayoth and is adorned in glory above the
celestial chariot <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_17): purity and
rectitude are before his throne,

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

lovingkindness and tender mercy before his glory. The luminaries are
good which our God hath created: he formed them with knowledge,
understanding and discernment; he gave them might and power to rule in
the midst of the world. They are full of lustre, and they radiate
brightness: beautiful is their lustre throughout all the world. They
rejoice in their going forth, and are glad in their returning; they
perform with awe the will of their Master. Glory and honor they render
unto his name, exultation and rejoicing at the remembrance of his
sovereignty. He called unto the sun, and it shone forth in light: he
looked, and ordained the figure of the moon. All the hosts on high
render praise unto him, the Seraphim, the Ophanim and the holy Chayoth
ascribing glory and greatness

To the God who rested from all his works, and on the seventh day exalted
himself and sat upon the throne of his glory; who robed himself in glory
on the day of rest, and called the Sabbath day a delight. This is the
praise of the Sabbath day, that God rested thereon from all his work,
when the Sabbath day itself offered praise and said, "A Psalm, a song of
the Sabbath day, It is good to give thanks into the Lord." <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_18) Therefore let all his creatures glorify
and bless God; let them render praise, honor

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

and greatness to the God and King who is Creator of all things, and who,
in his holiness, giveth an inheritance of rest to his people Israel on
the holy Sabbath day. Thy name, O Lord our God, shall be hallowed, and
thy remembrance, O our King, shall be glorified in heaven above and on
earth beneath. Be thou blessed, O our Savior, for the excellency of thy
handiwork, and for the bright luminaries which thou hast made: they
shall glorify thee for ever.

Be thou blessed, O our Rock, our King and Redeemer, Creator of holy
beings, praised be thy name for ever, O our King; Creator of ministering
spirits, all of whom stand in the heights of the universe, and proclaim
with awe in unison aloud the words of the living God and everlasting
King. All of them are beloved, pure and mighty, and all of them in dread
and awe do the will of their Master: and all of them open their mouths
in holiness and purity, with song and psalm, while they bless and
praise, glorify and reverence, sanctify and ascribe sovereignty to—

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

The name of the Divine King, the great, mighty and dreaded One, holy is
he; and they all take upon themselves the yoke of the kingdom of heaven
one from the other, and give sanction to one another to hallow their
Creator: in tranquil joy of spirit, with pure speech and holy melody
they all respond in unison, and exclaim with awe:

Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his
glory.

And the Ophanim and the holy Chayoth with a noise of great rushing,
upraising themselves towards the Seraphim, thus over against them offer
praise and say:

Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

To the blessed God they offer pleasant melodies; to the King, the living
and ever-enduring God, they utter hymns and make their praises heard;
for he alone performeth mighty deeds, and maketh new things; he is the
Lord of battles; he soweth righteousness, causeth salvation to spring
forth, createth remedies, and is revered in praises. He is the Lord of
wonders, who in his goodness reneweth the creation every day
continually; as it is said, (O give thanks) to him that maketh great
lights, for his lovingkindness

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

endureth for ever. O cause a new light to shine upon Zion, and may we
all be worthy soon to enjoy its brightness. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
Creator of the luminaries.

With abounding love hast thou loved us, O Lord our God, with great and
exceeding pity hast thou pitied us. O our Father, our King, for our
fathers’ sake, who trusted in thee, and whom thou didst teach the
statutes of life, be also gracious unto us and teach us. O our Father,
merciful Father, ever-compassionate, have mercy upon us: O put it into
our hearts to understand and to discern, to mark, learn and teach, to
heed, to do and to fulfil in love all the words of instruction in thy
Law. Enlighten our eyes in thy Law, and let our hearts cleave to thy
commandments, and unite our hearts to love and fear thy name, so that we
be never put to shame. Because we have trusted in thy holy, great and
revered name, we shall rejoice and be glad in thy salvation. O bring us
in peace from the four corners of the earth, and make us go upright to
our land; for thou art a God who worketh salvation. Thou hast chosen us
from all peoples and tongues, and hast brought us near unto thy great
name for ever in faithfulness, that we might in love give thanks unto
thee and proclaim thy unity. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast chosen
thy people Israel in love.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

*When Prayers are not said with the Congregation, add:—*

<span class="small">God, faithful King!</span>

Deut. vi. 4–9.

Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

<span class="small">Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for
ever and ever.</span>

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee
this day, shall be upon thine heart: and thou shalt teach them
diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest
in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest
down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign -upon
thine hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes. And thou
shalt write them upon the door posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.

Deut. xi. 13–21.

And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my
commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul, that I will
give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter
rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
And I will give grass in thy field for thy cattle, and thou shalt eat
and be satisfied. Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived
and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; and the anger
of the Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, and the land yield not her fruit; and ye perish
quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you. Therefore
shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul; and ye
shall bind them for a sign upon your hand, and they shall be for
frontlets between your eyes. And ye shall teach them your children,
talking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest
by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou
shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates:
that your

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, upon the land
which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of the
heavens above the earth.

Numbers xv. 37–41.

And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel,. and bid them that they make them a fringe upon the corners of
their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the
fringe of each corner a cord of blue: and it shall be unto you for a
fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of
the Lord, and do them; and that ye go not about after your own heart and
your own eyes, after which ye use to go astray: that ye may remember and
do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God. I am the Lord your
God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the
Lord your God.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

True and firm, established and enduring, right and faithful, beloved and
precious, desirable and pleasant, revered and mighty, well-ordered and
acceptable, good and beautiful is this thy word unto us for ever and
ever. It is true, the God of the universe is our King, the Rock of
Jacob, the Shield of our salvation: throughout all generations he
endureth and his name endureth; his throne is established, and his
kingdom and his faithfulness endure for ever. His words also live and
endure; they are faithful and desirable for ever and to all eternity, as
for our fathers so also for us, our children, our generations, and for
all the generations of the seed of Israel his servants.

For the first and for the last ages thy word is good and endureth for
ever and ever; it is true and trust, worthy, a statute which shall not
pass away. True it is that thou art indeed the Lord our God and the God
of our fathers, our King, our fathers’ King, our Redeemer, the Redeemer
of our fathers, our Maker, the Rock of our salvation; our Deliverer and
Rescuer from everlasting, such is thy name; there is no God beside thee.

Thou hast been the help of our fathers from of old, a Shield and Savior
to their children after them in every generation: in the heights of the
universe is thy habitation, and thy judgments and thy righteousness
reach to the furthest ends of the earth. Happy is the man who hearkeneth
unto thy commandments, and layeth up thy Law and thy word in his heart.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> True it is that
thou art indeed the Lord of thy people, and a mighty King to plead their
cause. True it is that thou art indeed the first and thou art the last
beside thee we have no King, Redeemer and Savior. From Egypt thou didst
redeem us, O Lord our God, and from the house of bondmen thou didst
deliver us; all their first-born thou didst slay, but thy first-born
thou didst redeem; thou didst divide the Red Sea, and drown the proud;
but thou madest the beloved to pass through, while the waters covered
their adversaries, not one of whom was left. Wherefore the beloved
praised and extolled God, and offered hymns, songs, praises, blessings
and thanksgivings to the King and God, who liveth and endureth; who is
high and exalted, great and revered; who bringeth low the haughty, and
raiseth up the lowly, leadeth forth the prisoners, delivereth the meek,
helpeth the poor, and answereth his people when they cry unto him; even
praises to the Most High God, blessed is he, and ever to be blessed.
Moses and the children of Israel sang a song unto thee with great joy,
saying. all of them,

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the mighty ones? Who is like unto
thee, glorious in holiness, revered in praises, doing marvels?

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span class="small">With a new song the redeemed people offered praise
unto thy name at the sea shore; they all gave thanks in unison, and
proclaimed thy sovereignty, and said,</span>

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

<span class="small">O Rock of Israel, arise to the help of Israel, and
deliver, according to thy promise, Judah and Israel. Our Redeemer, the
Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who hast redeemed Israel.</span>

*The following Prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," [p.
206](#page_206), is to be said standing*.

<span class="small">O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
declare thy praise.</span>

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in
life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living
God.</span>

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the
First Day of Passover, say:—*

<span class="small">Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to
fall.</span>

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy
rememberest thy creatures unto life?</span>

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead. \* (See page [199](#page_199)).

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the Holy King.</span>

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

*When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy
God," [p. 200](#page_200)*.

\* *Reader*.—We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they
sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy
prophet: And they called one unto the other and said,

*Cong*.—Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full
of his glory.

*Reader*.—Then with a noise of great rushing, mighty and strong, they
make their voices heard, and, upraising themselves toward the Seraphim,
they exclaim over against them, Blessed—

*Cong*.—Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

*Reader*.—From thy place shine forth, O our King, and reign over us, for
we wait for thee. When wilt thou reign in Zion? Speedily, even in our
days, do thou dwell there, and for ever. Mayest thou be magnified and
sanctified in the midst of Jerusalem thy city throughout all generations
and to all eternity. O let our eyes behold thy kingdom, according to the
word that was spoken in the songs of thy might by David, thy righteous
anointed:

*Cong*.—The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

*Reader*.—Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all
eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall
not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God
and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

Moses rejoiced in the gift of his portion, for thou didst call him a
faithful servant: a diadem of glory didst thou place upon his head, when
he stood before thee upon Mount Sinai; and in his hand he brought down
the two tables of stone, upon which the observance of the Sabbath was
prescribed, and. thus it is written in thy Law:

Exodus xxxi. 16, 17.

And the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the
Sabbath throughout their generations, for an everlasting covenant. It is
a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, that in six days
the Lord made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and ceased from his work.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

And thou didst not give it, O Lord our God, unto the nations of other
lands, nor didst thou, O our King, make it the heritage of worshipers of
idols, nor do the uncircumcised dwell in its rest; but unto thy people
Israel thou didst give it in love, unto the seed of Jacob whom thou
didst choose. The people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them
shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou
didst find pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thou didst
call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy
commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy
goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve
thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit
thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath,

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

*On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles
say:—*

Our God and God of our fathers! May our [remembrance](errata.htm#0)
rise, come and be accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our
fathers, of Messiah the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy
city, and of all thy people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance
and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this
day of

*On New Moon say:—*

<span class="small">the New Moon.</span>

*On Passover—*

<span class="small">the Feast of Unleavened Bread.</span>

On Tabernacles—

<span class="small">the Feast of Tabernacles.</span>

<span class="small">Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our
wellbeing; he mindful of us for blessing and save us unto life: by thy
promise of salvation and mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have
mercy upon us and save Is; for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou
art a gracious and merciful God and King.</span>

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

*Congregation in an undertone—*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and
the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings
be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and
hast preserved us; so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to
preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy
statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing
that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings
are due.</span>

</div>

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks
unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed into
thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy
miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits,
which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art
all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose
lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

*(On Chanukah say "We thank thee also," etc. [p.
63](spb05.htm#page_63).)*

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

For all these things thy name, O our King shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a
happy life.</span>

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

*At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is
introduced:—*

<span class="small">Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the
three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant,
which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as
it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face
to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face
unto thee, and give thee peace.</span>

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us
and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us
together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy
countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and
peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all
times and in every hour with thy peace.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">In the book of life, blessing, peace and good
sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all
thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed
art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.</span>

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy
commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel
of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy
name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy
holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones
may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the
words of my mouth

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my
Rock and my Redeemer. He who

maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for all
Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the
temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy
Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and
as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

*On New Moon, Festivals, the Intermediate Days of Festivals and on
Chanukah, Hallel, [p. 313](spb26.htm#page_313), is said after the
Amidah*

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

*Reader*.—May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by
their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Reader*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Reader*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[186:\*](spb17.htm#fr_18) *On Festivals falling
on Week-days*.

Who in mercy givest light to the earth and to them that dwell thereon,
and in thy goodness re-newest the creation every day continually. How
manifold are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy possessions. O King, who alone wast exalted <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> from aforetime, praised, glorified and
extolled from days of old; O everlasting God, in thine abundant mercies,
have mercy upon us, Lord of our strength Rock of our stronghold, Shield
of our salvation, thou Stronghold of ours! The blessed God, great in
knowledge, prepared and formed the rays of the sun: it was a boon he
produced as a glory to his name: he set the luminaries round about his
strength. The chiefs of his hosts are holy beings that exalt the
Almighty, and continually <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> declare the
glory of God and his holiness. Be thou blessed, O Lord our God, for the
excellency of thy handiwork, and for the bright luminaries which thou
hast made: they shall glorify thee for ever.

*Continue "Be thou blessed," see above*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[187:\*](spb17.htm#fr_19) Cf. Talmud Babli, Tr.
Chagigah, 13 b.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[188:\*](spb17.htm#fr_20) Midrash Tillim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Order of Reading the Law on Sabbaths and Festivals](spb18)

</div>
