<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb35)  [Next](spb37) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

### SERVICE FOR THE DAY OF ATONEMENT

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things, who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us
in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy
creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead.

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.)

Now, therefore, O Lord our God, impose thine awe upon all thy works, and
thy dread upon all that thou hast created, that all works may fear thee
and all creatures prostrate themselves before thee, that they may all
form a single band to do thy will with a perfect heart, even as we know,
O Lord our God, that dominion is thine, strength is in thy hand, and
might in thy right hand, and that thy name is to be feared above all
that thou hast created.

Give then glory, O Lord, unto thy people, praise to them that fear thee,
hope to them that seek thee, and free speech to them that wait for thee,
joy to thy land, gladness to thy city, a flourishing horn unto David thy
servant, and a clear shining light unto the son of Jesse, thine
anointed, speedily in our days.

Then shall the just also see and be glad, and the upright shall exult,
and the pious triumphantly rejoice, while iniquity shall close her
mouth, and all

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

wickedness shall be wholly consumed like smoke, when thou makest the
dominion of arrogance to pass away from the earth.

And thou, O Lord, shalt reign, thou alone over all thy works on Mount
Zion, the dwelling place of thy glory, and in Jerusalem, thy holy city,
as it is written in thy Holy Words, The Lord shall reign for ever, thy
God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.

Holy art thou, and dreaded is thy name, and there is no God beside thee,
as it is written, And the Lord of hosts is exalted in judgment, and the
holy God is sanctified in righteousness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the
holy King.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples, thou hast loved us and taken
pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast
sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service,
O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

*On Sabbath add the words in brackets*.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, \[this Sabbath day for
holiness and rest, and\] this Day of Atonement for pardon, forgiveness,
and atonement, that we may \[in love\] obtain pardon thereon for all our
iniquities; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from
Egypt.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be
accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah,
the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy
people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace,
lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this Day of Atonement.
Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us
for blessing, and save us unto life; by thy promise of salvation and
mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us;
for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and
merciful God and King.

Our God and God of our fathers, pardon our iniquities \[on this Sabbath
day, and\] on this Day of Atonement; blot out our transgressions and our
sins, and make them pass away from before thine eyes; as it is said, I
even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake;
and I will not remember thy sins. And it is said, I have blotted out, as
a cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a mist, thy sins: return unto me,
for I have redeemed thee. And it is said, For on this day shall
atonement be made for you, to cleanse you; from all your sins shall ye
be clean before the Lord. \[Our God and God of our fathers, accept our
rest.\] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us
with thy salvation; \[and let us inherit, O Lord our God, in love and
favor, thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rejoice
thereon\]; and purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; for thou art
the forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in
every generation, and beside thee we have no king who pardoneth and
forgiveth. Blessed art thou, O Lord, thou King, who pardonest and
forgivest our iniquities and the iniquities of thy people, the house of
Israel, who makest our trespasses to pass away year by year, King over
all the earth, who sanctifiest \[the Sabbath and\] Israel and the day of
Atonement.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of

*Congregation in an undertone*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and
the Creator of all things in the beginning.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy
name because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us so mayest
thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles
to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve
thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed
be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.</span>

</div>

our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks unto thee
and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto thy hand,
and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which
are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are
wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who are all-good,
whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being whose lovingkindnesses
never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

*At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader the following is
introduced:—*

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant,
which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as
it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face
to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face
unto thee, and give thee peace.

*At the Morning Service say:—*

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us
and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us
together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy
countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life,
lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and
may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and
in every hour with thy peace.

*At the Afternoon and Evening Service say:—*

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the
sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless
thy people Israel at all times and at every hour with thy peace.

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be
remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of
Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
makest peace.

Our God and God of our fathers,

let our prayer come before thee; hide not thyself from our supplication,
for we are not arrogant and stiff-necked, that we should say before
thee, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, we are righteous and have
not sinned; but verily, we have sinned.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

We have trespassed, we have been faithless, we have robbed, we have
spoken basely, we have committed iniquity, we have wrought
unrighteousness, we have been presumptuous, we have done violence, we
have forged lies, we have counselled evil, we have spoken falsely, we
have scoffed, we have revolted, we have blasphemed, we have been
rebellious, we have acted perversely, we have transgressed, we have
persecuted, we have been stiff-necked, we have done wickedly, we have
corrupted ourselves, we have committed abomination, we have gone astray,
and we have led astray.

We have turned aside from thy commandments and good judgments, and it
hath profited us nought. But thou art righteous in all that is come upon
us; for thou hast acted truthfully, but we have wrought unrighteousness.

What shall we say before thee, O thou who dwellest on high, and what
shall we recount unto thee, thou who abidest in the heavens? dost thou
not know all things, both the hidden and the revealed?

Thou knowest the secrets of eternity and the most hidden mysteries of
all living. Thou searchest the innermost recesses, and triest the reins
and the heart. Nought is concealed from thee, or hidden from thine eyes.

May it then be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to
forgive us for all our sins, to pardon us for all our iniquities, and to
grant us remission for all our transgressions.

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

For the sin which we have committed before thee tinder compulsion, or of
our own will;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in hardening of the
heart:

For the sin which we have committed before thee unknowingly;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with utterance of
the lips:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by unchastity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee openly and secretly:

For the sin which we have committed before thee knowingly and
deceitfully:

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in speech:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by wronging our
neighbor;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the sinful
meditating of the heart:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by association with
impurity;

And for the sin which have committed before thee by confession with the
mouth alone:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by despising parents and
teachers;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in presumption or in
error:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by violence;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the profanation
of the divine Name:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by unclean lips;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by folly of the
mouth:

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

For the sin which we have committed before thee by the evil inclination;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee wittingly or
unwittingly:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us
remission.

For the sin which we have committed before thee by denying and lying;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by taking of bribes:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by scoffing;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by slander:

For the sin which we have committed before thee in business;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee in eating and
drinking:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by usury and interest;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by the stretched
forth neck of pride:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by the conversation of
our lips;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with wanton looks:

For the sin which we have committed before thee with haughty eyes;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by effrontery:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us
remission.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

For the sin which we have committed before thee by breaking off the yoke
of thy commandments;

And for the sin which we have committed before them by contentiousness:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by ensnaring our
neighbor;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by envy:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by levity;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by being
stiff-necked:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by running to do evil;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by tale-bearing:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by vain oaths;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee by causeless hatred:

For the sin which we have committed before thee by breach of trust;

And for the sin which we have committed before thee with confusion of
mind:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us
remission.

And also for the sins for which we owe a burnt offering:

And for the sins for which we owe a sin offering:

And for the sins for which we owe an offering, varying according to our
means:

And for the sins for which we owe an offering, whether for certain or
for doubtful trespass.

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of chastisement:

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of forty
stripes:

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of death by the
hand of heaven:

And for the sins for which we are liable to the penalty of excision and
childlessness:

For all these, O God of forgiveness, forgive us, pardon us, grant us
remission.

And also for the sins for which we are liable to any of the four death
penalties inflicted by the court, stoning, burning, beheading, and
strangling; for the violation of positive, or for the violation of
negative precepts, whether these latter do or do not admit of a remedy
by the subsequent fulfilment of a positive command; for all our sins,
whether they be or be not manifest to us. Such sins as are manifest to
us, we have already declared and confessed unto thee, while such as are
not manifest unto us, are manifest and known unto thee, according to the
word that hath been spoken, The secret things belong unto the Lord our
God; but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children
for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law. For thou art the
forgiver of Israel and the pardoner of the tribes of Jeshurun in every
generation, and beside thee we have no king, who pardoneth and
forgiveth.

O my God, before I was formed I was nothing worth, and now that I have
been formed I am but as though I had not been formed. Dust am I in my
life: how much more so in my death. Behold I am before

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

thee like a vessel filled with shame and contusion, O may it be thy
will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, that I may sin no more, and
as to the sins I have committed, purge them away in thine abounding
compassion though not by means of affliction and sore diseases.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy
commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel
of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy
name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy
holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law, In order that thy beloved ones
may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the
words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before
thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high
places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the
temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy
Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and
as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Service for the Day of Atonement](spb37)

</div>
