<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb29)  [Next](spb31) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

### MEDITATION IN THE TABERNACLE.

*To be said in the Tabernacle on the first night of the Festival*.

May it be thy will, O Lord my God and God of my fathers, to let thy
divine presence abide among us. Spread over us the tabernacle of thy
peace in recognition of the precept of the Tabernacle which we are now
fulfilling, and whereby we establish in fear and love the unity of thy
holy and blessed name. O surround us with the pure and holy radiance of
thy glory, that is spread over our heads as the eagle over the nest he
stirreth up: and thence bid the stream of life flow in upon thy servant
(thy handmaid). And seeing that I have gone forth from my house abroad,
and am speeding the way of thy commandments, may it be accounted unto me
as though I had wandered far in thy cause. O wash me thoroughly from
mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Keep me in life, O Lord;
vouchsafe unto me the abundance of thy blessings; and to such as are
hungry and thirsty give bread and water unfailingly. Make me worthy to
dwell trustingly in the covert of thy shadowing wings at the time when I
part from the world. O deal graciously with us in the decree to which
thou settest thy seal, and make us worthy to dwell many days upon the
land, the holy land, ever serving and fearing thee. Blessed be the Lord
for ever. Amen and Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast
sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast commanded us to dwell in the
Tabernacle.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us
in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Service for the Festivals](spb31)

</div>
