<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb54)  [Next](spb56) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

### PRAYER IN THE HOUSE OF MOURNING

*After the ordinary Daily Service, the following Psalm (xlix.) is read
in the House of the Mourner. On those days on which Tachanun ([p.
70](spb05.htm#page_70)) is not said, Psalm xvi. p. 460, is substituted
for Psalm xlix*.

Psalm xlix. For the Chief Musician. A Psalm of the Sons of Korah.

Hear this all ye peoples; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world:
both low and high, rich and poor together. My mouth shall speak wisdom;
and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding. I will incline
mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying to the lyre. Wherefore
should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of them that would
supplant me compasseth me about, even of them that trust in their
wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches? None of
them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for
him: (for the redemption of their soul is costly, and must be let alone
for ever:) that he should still live always, that he should not see the
pit. For he will see that wise men die, the fool and the brutish
together perish, and leave their wealth to others. Their inward thought
is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places
to all generations; they call their lands after their own names. But man
that is in glory abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish. This is
the way of them that are foolish, and of those who after them take
pleasure in their speech. (Selah.) Like sheep they are laid in the
grave; death shall be their shepherd: but the upright shall have
dominion over them in the morning; and their form shall be for the grave
to consume, that there be no habitation for it. But God will redeem my
soul from the grasp of the grave: for he will receive me. (Selah.) Be
not thou afraid when a man becometh rich, when the glory of his house is
increased; for at his death he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall
not descend after him. Though while he lived he blessed his soul, and
though men praise thee that thou doest well unto thyself, he shall go to
the generation of his fathers, who shall never see the light. Man that
is in glory, but without understanding, is like the beasts that perish.

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

*In addition to the above, other appropriate Psalms, such as Psalms xv.,
[p. 445](spb47.htm#page_445); xc., [p. 26](spb05.htm#page_26); xci., [p.
27](spb05.htm#page_27); ciii., [p. 455](spb52.htm#page_455); and xxxix.,
or such passages as Proverbs xxxi. 10–31, [p. 180](spb15.htm#page_180),
should be read in the House of Mourning*.

Psalm xxxix.

*For the Chief Musician, for Jeduthun. A Psalm of David*.—I said, I will
take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my
mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. I was dumb, and kept
silence, I held my peace, and had no comfort: and my sorrow was stirred.
My heart was hot within me; while I was musing the fire kindled: then
spake I with my tongue: Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure
of my days, what it is; let me know how fleeting I am. Behold, thou hast
made my days as handbreadths; and my lifetime is as nothing before thee:
surely every man, though he stand firm, is but a breath. (Selah.) Surely
as a mere semblance every man walketh to and fro: surely they are
disquieted for vanity: he heapeth up riches and knoweth not who shall
gather them. And now, Lord, what wait I for? My hope is in thee. Deliver
me from all my transgressions; make me not the reproach of the foolish.
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it. Remove thy
stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. When thou
with rebukes dost chasten man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to
waste away like a moth: surely every man is a breath. (Selah.) Hear my
prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my
tears; for I am a stranger with thee, a sojourner, as all my fathers
were. O spare me, that I may again be glad, before I go hence, and be no
more.

O Lord and King, who art full of compassion, in whose hand is the soul
of every living thing and the breath of all flesh, who killest and
makest alive, who bringest down to the grave and bringest up again,
receive, we beseech thee, in thy great lovingkindness the soul of — who
hath been gathered unto his \[her\] people. Have mercy upon him

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[her\]; pardon
all his \[her\] transgressions, for there is not a righteous man upon
earth, who doeth good and sinneth not. Remember unto him \[her\] the
righteousness which he \[she\] wrought, and let his \[her\] reward be
with him \[her\], and his \[her\] recompense before him \[her\]. O
shelter his \[her\] soul in the shadow of thy wings. Make known to him
\[her\] the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. Vouchsafe unto him \[her\] of the
abounding happiness that is treasured up for the righteous, as it is
written, Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee
before the children of men!

O Lord, who healest the broken-hearted and bindest up their wounds,
grant thy consolation unto the mourners: put into their hearts the fear
and love of thee, that they may serve thee with a perfect heart, and let
their latter end be peace. Amen.

Like one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, and in
Jerusalem shall ye be comforted. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither
shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. He will destroy
death for ever; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all
faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the
earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service at the Setting of a Tombstone](spb56)

</div>
