<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb51)  [Next](spb53) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

### PRAYER TO BE SAID BY A SICK PERSON

Psalm xxiii.

*A Psalm of David*. The Lord is my shepherd: I shall not want. He maketh
me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.
He restoreth my soul: he guideth me in the paths of righteousness for
his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff,
they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of
mine enemies; thou hast anointed my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
Surely happiness and lovingkindness will follow me all the days of my
life; and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for length of days.

Psalm ciii.

*A Psalm of David*. Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me
bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and Forget not all his
benefits: who forgiveth all thine iniquity; who healeth all thy
diseases: who redeemeth thy life from the pit; who crowneth thee with
lovingkindness and tender mercies: who satisfieth thy mouth with good
things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's. The Lord
executeth righteous acts, and judgments for all that are oppressed. He
made known his ways unto Moses, his doings unto the children of Israel.
The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in
lovingkindness. He will not always contend; neither will he keep his
anger for ever. He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor requited
us after our iniquities. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so
mighty is his lovingkindness over them that fear him. As far as the east
is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.
Like as a father hath mercy upon his children, so the Lord hath mercy
upon them that fear him. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that
we are dust. As for man, his days are as grass; as the flower of the
field, so he flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone;
and the place thereof shall know it no more. But the lovingkindness of
the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and
his righteousness unto children's children, to such as keep his
covenant, and to those that remember his precepts to do them. The Lord

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

hath established his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over
all. Bless the Lord, ye his angels: ye mighty in strength, that fulfil
his word, hearkening unto the voice of his word. Bless the Lord, all ye
his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do his will. Bless the Lord, all ye
his works, in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul.

Psalm cxxxix.

*For the Chief Musician*. A Psalm of David. O Lord, thou hast searched
me, and knowest me. Thou knowest my down-sitting and mine uprising, thou
understandest my thoughts afar off. Thou siftest my path and my lying
down, and art familiar with all my ways. For while there is not yet a
word on my tongue, lo, thou, O Lord, knowest it all. Thou hast beset me
behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. Such knowledge is too
wonderful for me; it is too high, I cannot attain unto it. Whither can I
go from thy spirit? or whither can I flee from thy presence? If I ascend
into heaven, thou art there: or if I make the grave my bed, behold thou
art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. If I say, Let deep darkness cover me, and the
light about me be night; even the darkness darkeneth not from thee, but
the night is light as the day—the darkness is as the light. For thou
didst form my reins: thou didst weave me together in my mother's womb. I
will give thanks unto thee, for that I am fearfully and wonderfully
made: wonderful are thy works and that my soul knoweth right well. My
frame was not hidden from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the depths of the earth. Thine eyes did see mine unshapen
substance; and in thy book the days, even all of them that were to he
formed, were written, and for it also there was one among them. How
precious unto me are thy thoughts, O God! How great is the sum of them!
If I would count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I
awake, I am still with thee. O that thou wouldst slay the wicked, O God:
depart from me, ye bloodthirsty men: they who mention thee for
treachery, thine adversaries who take the name in vain. Do not I hate
them, O Lord, that hate thee? and do not I strive with those that rise
up against thee?

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I hate them with
perfect hatred: they are become mine enemies. Search me, O God, and know
my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any way of
sorrow in me, and lead me in the way everlasting

A prayer of the afflicted when he fainteth, and poureth out his
complaint before the Lord. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come
unto thee. Hide not thy face from me in the day of my distress: incline
thy ear unto me; in the day when I call answer me speedily. I beseech
thee, O Lord, Healer of all flesh, have mercy upon me, and support me in
thy grace upon my bed of sickness, for I am weak. Send me and all who
are sick among thy children relief and cure. Assuage my pain, and renew
my youth as the eagle's. Vouchsafe wisdom unto the physician that he may
cure my wound, and so that my health may spring forth speedily. Hear my
prayer, prolong my life, let me complete my years in happiness, that I
may be enabled to serve thee and keep thy statutes with a perfect heart.
Give me understanding to know that this bitter trial hath come upon me
for my welfare, so that I may not despise thy chastening nor weary of
thy reproof.

O God of forgiveness, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger and
abounding in lovingkindness, I confess unto thee with a broken and
contrite heart that I have sinned, and have done that which is evil in
thy sight. Behold, I repent me of my evil way, and return unto thee with
perfect repentance. Help me, O God of my salvation, that I may not again
turn unto folly, but walk before thee in truth and uprightness. Rejoice
the soul of thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed, save me, and I shall be saved,
for thou art my praise. Amen, and Amen!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Confession on a Death-Bed](spb53)

</div>
