[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft03)  [Next](pft05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### APONIBOLINAYEN AND THE SUN

*Tinguian*

One day Aponibolinayen and her sister-in-law went out to gather greens.
They walked to the woods to the place where the siksiklat grew, for the
tender leaves of this vine are very good to eat. Suddenly while
searching about in the underbrush, Aponibolinayen cried out with joy,
for she had found the vine, and she started to pick the leaves. Pull as
hard as she would, however, the leaves did not come loose, and all at
once the vine wound itself around her body and began carrying her
upward.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](pft68.htm#fn_0)

Far up through the air she went until she reached the sky, and there the
vine set her down under a tree. Aponibolinayen was so surprised to find
herself in the sky that for some time she just sat and looked around,
and then, hearing a rooster crow, she arose to see if she could find it.
Not far from where she had sat was a beautiful spring surrounded by tall
betel-nut trees whose tops were pure gold. Rare beads were the sands of
the spring, and the place where the women set their jars when they came
to dip water was a large golden plate. As Aponibolinayen stood admiring
the beauties of this spring, she beheld a small house nearby, and she
was filled with fear lest the owner should find her there. She looked
about for some means of escape and finally climbed to the top of a
betel-nut tree and hid.

Now the owner of this house was Ini-init,  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](pft68.htm#fn_1) the Sun, but he was never at home
in the daylight, for it was his duty to shine in the sky and give light
to all the world. At the close of the day when the Big Star took his
place in the sky to shine through the night, Ini-init returned to his
house, but early the next morning he was always off again.

From her place in the top of the betel-nut tree, Aponibolinayen saw the
Sun when he came home at evening time, and again the next morning she
saw him leave. When she was sure that he was out of sight she climbed
down and entered his dwelling, for she was very hungry. She cooked rice,
and into a pot of boiling water she dropped a stick which immediately
became fish,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](pft68.htm#fn_2) so that she had
all she wished to eat. When she was no longer hungry, she lay down on
the bed to sleep. Now late in the afternoon Ini-init returned from his
work and went to fish in the river near his house, and he caught a big
fish. While he sat on the bank cleaning his catch, he happened to look
up toward his house and was startled to see that it appeared to be on
fire.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](pft68.htm#fn_3) He hurried home, but
when he reached the house he saw that it was not burning at all, and he
entered. On his bed he beheld what looked like a flame of fire, but upon
going closer he found that it was a beautiful woman fast asleep.

Ini-init stood for some time wondering what he should do, and then he
decided to cook some food and invite this lovely creature to eat with
him. He put rice over the fire to boil and cut into pieces the fish he
had caught. The noise of this awakened Aponibolinayen, and she slipped
out of the house and back to the top of the betel-nut tree. The Sun did
not see her leave, and when the food was prepared he called her, but the
bed was empty and he had to eat alone. That night Ini-init could not
sleep well, for all the time he wondered who the beautiful woman could
be. The next morning, however, he rose as usual and set forth to shine
in the sky, for that was his work.

That day Aponibolinayen stole again to the house of the Sun and cooked
food, and when she returned to the betel-nut tree she left rice and fish
ready for the Sun when he came home. Late in the afternoon Ini-init went
into his home, and when he found pots of hot rice and fish over the fire
he was greatly troubled. After he had eaten he walked a long time in the
fresh air. "Perhaps it is done by the lovely woman who looks like a
flame of fire," he said. "If she comes again I will try to catch her."

The next day the Sun shone in the sky as before, and when the afternoon
grew late he called to the Big Star to hurry to take his place, for he
was impatient to reach home. As he drew near the house he saw that it
again looked as if it was on fire. He crept quietly up the ladder, and
when he had reached the top he sprang in and shut the door behind him.

Aponibolinayen, who was cooking rice over the fire, was surprised and
angry that she had been caught; but the Sun gave her betel-nut  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](pft68.htm#fn_4) which was covered with gold, and
they chewed together and told each other their names. Then
Aponibolinayen took up the rice and fish, and as they ate they talked
together and became acquainted.

After some time Aponibolinayen and the Sun were married, and every
morning the Sun went to shine in the sky, and upon his return at night
he found his supper ready for him. He began to be troubled, however, to
know where the food came from, for though he brought home a fine fish
every night, Aponibolinayen always refused to cook it.

One night he watched her prepare their meal, and he saw that, instead of
using the nice fish he had brought, she only dropped a stick into the
pot of boiling water.

"Why do you try to cook a stick?" asked Ini-init in surprise.

"So that we can have fish to eat," answered his wife.

"If you cook that stick for a month, it will not be soft," said
Ini-init. "Take this fish that I caught in the net, for it will be
good."

But Aponibolinayen only laughed at him, and when they were ready to eat
she took the cover off the pot and there was plenty of nice soft fish.
The next night and the next, Aponibolinayen cooked the stick, and
Ini-init became greatly troubled for he saw that though the stick always
supplied them with fish, it never grew smaller.

Finally he asked Aponibolinayen again why it was that she cooked the
stick instead of the fish he brought, and she said:

"Do you not know of the woman on earth who has magical power and can
change things?"

"Yes," answered the Sun, "and now I know that you have great power."

"Well, then," said his wife, "do not ask again why I cook the stick."

And they ate their supper of rice and the fish which the stick made.

One night not long after this Aponibolinayen told her husband that she
wanted to go with him the next day when he made light in the sky.

"Oh, no, you cannot," said the Sun, "for it is very hot up there,  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](pft68.htm#fn_5) and you cannot stand the heat."

"We will take many blankets and pillows," said the woman, "and when the
heat becomes very great, I will hide under them."

Again and again Ini-init begged her not to go, but as often she insisted
on accompanying him, and early in the morning they set out, carrying
with them many blankets and pillows.

First, they went to the East, and as soon as they arrived the Sun began
to shine, and Aponibolinayen was with him. They traveled toward the
West, but when morning had passed into noontime and they had reached the
middle of the sky Aponibolinayen was so hot that she melted and became
oil. Then Ini-init put her into a bottle and wrapped her in the blankets
and pillows and dropped her down to earth.

Now one of the women of Aponibolinayen's town was at the spring dipping
water when she heard something fall near her. Turning to look, she
beheld a bundle of beautiful blankets and pillows which she began to
unroll, and inside she found the most beautiful woman she had ever seen.
Frightened at her discovery, the woman ran as fast as she could to the
town, where she called the people together and told them to come at once
to the spring. They all hastened to the spot and there they found
Aponibolinayen for whom they had been searching everywhere.

"Where have you been?" asked her father; "we have searched all over the
world and we could not find you.'

"I have come from Pindayan," answered Aponibolinayen. "Enemies of our
people kept me there till I made my escape while they were asleep at
night"

All were filled with joy that the lost one had returned, and they
decided that at the next moon  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](pft68.htm#fn_6) they would perform a ceremony for
the spirits  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](pft68.htm#fn_7) and invite all
the relatives who were mourning for Aponibolinayen.

So they began to prepare for the ceremony, and while they were pounding
rice, Aponibolinayen asked her mother to prick her little finger where
it itched, and as she did so a beautiful baby boy popped out. The people
were very much surprised at this, and they noticed that every time he
was bathed the baby grew very fast so that, in a short time, he was able
to walk. Then they were anxious to know who was the husband of
Aponibolinayen, but she would not tell them, and they decided to invite
everyone in the world to the ceremony that they might not overlook him.

They sent for the betel-nuts that were covered with gold,  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](pft68.htm#fn_8) and when they had oiled them they
commanded them to go to all the towns and compel the people to come to
the ceremony.

"If anyone refuses to come, grow on his knee," said the people, and the
betel-nuts departed to do as they were bidden.

As the guests began to arrive, the people watched carefully for one who
might be the husband of Aponibolinayen, but none appeared and they were
greatly troubled. Finally they went to the old woman, Alokotan, who was
able to talk with the spirits, and begged her to find what town had not
been visited by the betel-nuts which had been sent to invite the people.
After she had consulted the spirits the old woman said:

"You have invited all the people except Ini-init who lives up above. Now
you must send a betel-nut to summon him. It may be that he is the
husband of Aponibolinayen, for the siksiklat vine carried her up when
she went to gather greens."

So a betel-nut was called and bidden to summon Ini-init.

The betel-nut went up to the Sun, who was in his house, and said:

"Good morning, Sun. I have come to summon you to a ceremony which the
father and mother of Aponibolinayen are making for the spirits. If you
do not want to go, I will grow on your head."  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](pft68.htm#fn_9)

"Grow on my head," said the Sun. "I do not wish to go."

So the betel-nut jumped upon his head and grew until it became so tall
that the Sun was not able to carry it, and he was in great pain.

"Oh, grow on my pig," begged the Sun. So the betel-nut jumped upon the
pig's head and grew, but it was so heavy that the pig could not carry it
and squealed all the time. At last the Sun saw that he would have to
obey the summons, and he said to the betel-nut:

"Get off my pig and I will go."

So Ini-init came to the ceremony, and as soon as Aponibolinayen and the
baby saw him, they were very happy and ran to meet him. Then the people
knew that this was the husband of Aponibolinayen, and they waited
eagerly for him to come up to them. As he drew near, however, they saw
that he did not walk, for he was round; and then they perceived that he
was not a man but a large stone. All her relatives were very angry to
find that Aponibolinayen had married a stone; and they compelled her to
take off her beads  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](pft68.htm#fn_10) and
her good clothes, for, they said, she must now dress in old clothes and
go again to live with the stone.

So Aponibolinayen put on the rags that they brought her and at once set
out with the stone for his home. No sooner had they arrived there,
however, than he became a handsome man, and they were very happy.

"In one moon," said the Sun, "we will make a ceremony for the spirits,
and I will pay your father and mother the marriage price  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](pft68.htm#fn_11) for you."

This pleased Aponibolinayen very much, and they used magic so that they
had many neighbors who came to pound rice  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](pft68.htm#fn_12) for them and to build a large
spirit house.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](pft68.htm#fn_13)

Then they sent oiled betel-nuts to summon their relatives to the
ceremony. The father of Aponibolinayen did not want to go, but the
betel-nut threatened to grow on his knee if he did not. So he commanded
all the people in the town to wash their hair and their clothes, and
when all was ready they set out.

When they reached the town they were greatly surprised to find that the
stone had become a man, and they chewed the magic betel-nuts to see who
he might be. It was discovered that he was the son of a couple in
Aponibolinayen's own town, and the people all rejoiced that this couple
had found the son whom they had thought lost. They named him Aponitolau,
and his parents paid the marriage price for his wife—the spirit house
nine times full of valuable jars.  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](pft68.htm#fn_14)

After that all danced and made merry for one moon, and when the people
departed for their homes Ini-init and his wife went with them to live on
the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Aponibolinayen](pft05)
