[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft14)  [Next](pft16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TREE WITH THE AGATE BEADS

*Tinguian*

More than a hundred seasons ago, a Tinguian went one day to the
mountains to hunt. Accompanied by his faithful dog, he made his way
steadily up the mountain side, only halting where it was necessary to
cut a path through the jungle. And the dog ran here and there searching
in the thick underbrush.

On and on he went without seeing any game, and then, when he was almost
at the top of the highest peak, the dog gave a sharp yelp, and out of
the brush leaped a fine deer. Zip! went the man's spear, and it pierced
the animal's side. For an instant he waited, but the deer did not fall.
On it ran with unslackened speed, and a moment later it plunged into a
hole in the ground with the man and dog in close pursuit.

A short distance from the entrance the cave opened out into large,
spacious rooms, and before he realized it the man was hopelessly lost In
the distance he could hear the baying of the dog, and with no other
guide he hurried on through the darkness.

Following the sound, he went for a long time from one unfamiliar room to
another, stumbling in the darkness and striking against the stone walls,
and then suddenly his outstretched hands grasped a small tree on which
berries grew.

Astonished at finding anything growing in this dark place, he broke off
a branch, and as he did so the shrub began to talk in a strange
language. Terrified, the man ran in the direction he had last heard the
dog, and a moment later he found himself in the open air on the banks of
the Abra River, with the dead deer at his feet.

When he examined the twig which he still held in his hand, he saw to his
great surprise that the berries were agate beads of great value.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](pft68.htm#fn_80) And packing the deer on his
back, he hastened home where he told his wonderful story.

The sight of the beautiful beads convinced the people that he told the
truth, and a number of men at once returned with him to secure the tree.

Their quest, however, was unsuccessful, for ere they reached the spot
the evil spirit had taken the tree away and on the walls of the cave it
had made strange carvings which even to this day can be seen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Striped Blanket](pft16)
