[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft21)  [Next](pft23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TURTLE AND THE LIZARD

*Tinguian*

A turtle and a big lizard once went to the field of Gotgotapa to steal
ginger,  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](pft68.htm#fn_87) When they reached
the place the turtle said to the lizard:

"We must be very still or the man will hear us and come out."

But as soon as the lizard tasted the ginger he was so pleased that he
said:

"The ginger of Gotgotapa is very good."

"Be still," said the turtle; but the lizard paid no attention to the
warning, and called louder than ever:

"The ginger of Gotgotapa is very good."

Again and again he cried out, until finally the man heard him and came
out of the house to catch the robbers.

The turtle could not run fast, so he lay very still, and the man did not
see him. But the lizard ran and the man chased him. When they were out
of sight, the turtle went into the house and hid under a cocoanut shell
upon which the man used to sit.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](pft68.htm#fn_88)

The man ran after the lizard for a long distance, but he could not catch
him. After a while he came back to the house and sat down on the shell.

By and by, the turtle called, "Kook." The man jumped up and looked all
around. Unable to tell where the noise came from, he sat down again,

A second time the turtle called, and this time the man looked everywhere
in the house except under the shell, but could not find the turtle.
Again and again the turtle called, and finally the man, realizing that
all his attempts were unsuccessful, grew so excited that he died.

Then the turtle ran out of the house, and he had not gone far before he
met the lizard again. They walked along together until they saw some
honey in a tree, and the turtle said:

"I will go first and get some of the honey."

The lizard would not wait, but ran ahead, and when he seized the honey,
the bees came out and stung him. So he ran back to the turtle for help.

After a while they came to a bird snare, and the turtle said:

"That is the silver wire that my grandfather wore about his neck."

Then the lizard ran fast to get it first, but he was caught in the snare
and was held until the man came and killed him. Then the wise turtle
went on alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Man with the Cocoanuts](pft23)
