[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft25)  [Next](pft27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IGOROT

### INTRODUCTION

Three or four days’ journey to the south and east of the Tinguian live
the Igorot; but so difficult are the trails over the mountains and
through the swift rivers that there is little intercourse between the
two tribes, consequently each believes the other a people to be feared.
Salt, weapons, and jars are sometimes exchanged, but the customs and
beliefs are not similar. Each group leads its own life and is governed
by its own spirits.

From a distance an Igorot village looks like a group of haystacks
nestling among the hills; but viewed more closely, it is found to
consist of houses whose board sides are almost hidden by the overhanging
grass roofs. The upper part of the house is used as a storehouse, while
below, on a ground floor, the family cooks and eats. In one end there is
a tiny boxlike bedroom where the father, mother, and small children
sleep. After they are two or three years old the girls spend the night
in a dormitory, while the boys sleep in the men's council house.

These people have splendid terraced fields on the mountain sides where
water is brought from the streams through troughs and ditches. Here both
men and women are busy early and late cultivating the rice, sweet
potatoes, and small vegetables on which they live. The men are
head-hunters and ardent warriors, each village demanding a head in
payment for any taken by a hostile village.

Watching over the Igorot, controlling the winds and the rains, and
providing good crops and health for the people, is the Great Spirit,
Lumawig, who lives in the sky. He is believed to have created the Igorot
and even to have lived among them on the earth. He no longer visits them
in person, they say, but each month they perform a ceremony at which
they pray to him to protect them and entreat him to favor them with
health and good crops.

The following tales are told by the fathers and mothers to the children
to teach them how things came to be as they are.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Creation](pft27.md)
