[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft28)  [Next](pft30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LUMAWIG ON EARTH

*Igorot*

One day when Lumawig,  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](pft68.htm#fn_99)
the Great Spirit, looked down from his place in the sky he saw two
sisters gathering beans. And he decided to go down to visit them. When
he arrived at the place he asked them what they were doing. The younger,
whose name was Fukan, answered:

"We are gathering beans, but it takes a long time to get enough, for my
sister wants to go bathing all the time."

Then Lumawig said to the older sister:

"Hand me a single pod of the beans."

And when she had given it to him, he shelled it into the basket and
immediately the basket was full.  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](pft68.htm#fn_100) The younger sister laughed at
this, and Lumawig said to her:

"Give me another pod and another basket."

She did so, and when he had shelled the pod, that basket was full also.
Then he said to the younger sister:

"Go home and get three more baskets."

She went home, but when she asked for three more baskets her mother said
that the beans were few and she could not need so many. Then Fukan told
her of the young man who could fill a basket from one pod of beans, and
the father, who heard her story, said:

"Go bring the young man here, for I think he must be a god."

So Fukan took the three baskets back to Lumawig, and when he had filled
them as he did the other two, he helped the girls carry them to the
house. As they reached their home, he stopped outside to cool himself,
but the father called to him and he went up into the house and asked for
some water. The father brought him a cocoanut shell full, and before
drinking Lumawig looked at it and said:

"If I stay here with you, I shall become very strong."

The next morning Lumawig asked to see their chickens, and when they
opened the chicken-coop out came a hen and many little chicks. "Are
these all of your chickens?" asked Lumawig; and the father assured him
that they were all. He then bade them bring rice meal that he might feed
them, and as the chickens ate they all grew rapidly till they were cocks
and hens.

Next Lumawig asked how many pigs they had, and the father replied that
they had one with some little ones. Then Lumawig bade them fill a pail
with sweet potato leaves and he fed the pigs. And as they ate they also
grew to full size.

The father was so pleased with all these things that he offered his
elder daughter to Lumawig for a wife. But the Great Spirit said he
preferred to marry the younger; so that was arranged. Now when his
brother-in-law learned that Lumawig desired a feast at his wedding, he
was very angry and said:

"Where would you get food for your wedding feast? There is no rice, nor
beef, nor pork, nor chicken,"

But Lumawig only answered, "I shall provide our wedding feast."

In the morning they all set out for Lanao, for Lumawig did not care to
stay any longer in the house with his brother-in-law. As soon as they
arrived he sent out for some tree trunks, but the trees that the people
brought in were so small that Lumawig himself went to the forest and cut
two large pine trees which he hurled to Lanao.

When the people had built a fire of the trees he commanded them to bring
ten kettles filled with water. Soon the water was boiling hot and the
brother-in-law laughed and said:

"Where is your rice? You have the boiling water, but you do not seem to
think of the rice."

In answer to this Lumawig took a small basket of rice and passed it over
five kettles and they were full. Then he called "Yishtjau," and some
deer came running out of the forest. These were not what he wanted,
however, so he called again and some pigs came. He told the people that
they were each to catch one and for his brother-in-law he selected the
largest and best.

They all set out in pursuit of the pigs and the others quickly caught
theirs, but though the brother-in-law chased his until he was very tired
and hot he could not catch it Lumawig laughed at him and said:

"You chase that pig until he is thin and still you cannot catch it,
though all the others have theirs."

Thereupon he grasped the hind legs of the pig and lifted it. All the
people laughed and the brother-in-law said:

"Of course you can catch it, because I chased it until it was tired."

Lumawig then handed it to him and said, "Here, you carry it." But no
sooner had the brother-in-law put it over his shoulder than it cut loose
and ran away.

"Why did you let it go?" asked Lumawig. "Do you care nothing for it,
even after I caught it for you? Catch it again and bring it here."

So the brother-in-law started out again, and he chased it up stream and
down, but he could not catch it. Finally Lumawig reached down and picked
up the pig and carried it to the place where the others were cooking.

After they had all eaten and drunk and made their offerings to the
spirits, Lumawig said:

"Come, let us go to the mountain to consult the omen concerning the
northern tribes."

So they consulted the omen, but it was not favorable, and they were
starting home when the brother-in-law asked Lumawig to create some
water, as the people were hot and thirsty.

"Why do you not create water, Lumawig?" he repeated as Lumawig paid no
attention to him. "You care nothing that the people are thirsty and in
need of drink."

Then they quarreled and were very angry and Lumawig said to the people,
"Let us sit down and rest."

While they rested, Lumawig struck the rock with his spear and water came
out.  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](pft68.htm#fn_101) The
brother-in-law jumped up to get a drink first, but Lumawig held him back
and said he must be the last to drink. So they all drank, and when they
had finished, the brother-in-law stepped up, but Lumawig gave him a push
which sent him into the rock and water came from his body.

"You must stay there," said Lumawig, "because you have troubled me a
great deal." And they went home, leaving him in the rock.

Some time after this Lumawig decided to go back to the sky to live, but
before he went he took care that his wife should have a home. He made a
coffin of wood  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](pft68.htm#fn_102) and
placed her in it with a dog at her feet and a cock at her head. And as
he set it floating on the water,  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](pft68.htm#fn_103) he told it not to stop until
it reached Tinglayen. Then, if the foot end struck first, the dog should
bark; and if the head end was the first to strike, the cock should crow.
So it floated away, and on and on, until it came to Tinglayen.

Now a widower was sharpening his ax on the bank of the river, and when
he saw the coffin stop, he went to fish it out of the water. On shore he
started to open it, but Fugan cried out, "Do not drive a wedge, for I am
here," So the widower opened it carefully and took Fugan up to the town,
and then as he had no wife of his own, he married her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the First Head was Taken](pft30)
