[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft44)  [Next](pft46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WIDOW'S SON  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](pft68.htm#fn_136.md)

*Subanun* (*Mindanao*)

In a little house at the edge of a village lived a widow with her only
son, and they were very happy together. The son was kind to his mother,
and they made their living by growing rice in clearings on the mountain
side and by hunting wild pig in the forest.

One evening when their supply of meat was low, the boy said:

"Mother, I am going to hunt pig in the morning, and I wish you would
prepare rice for me before daylight."

So the widow rose early and cooked the rice, and at dawn the boy started
out with his spear and dog.

Some distance from the village, he entered the thick forest. He walked
on and on, ever on the lookout for game, but none appeared. At last when
he had traveled far and the sun was hot, he sat down on a rock to rest
and took out his brass box  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](pft68.htm#fn_137.md) to get a piece of betel-nut.
He prepared the nut and leaf for chewing, and as he did so he wondered
why it was that he had been so unsuccessful that day. But even as he
pondered he heard his dog barking sharply, and cramming the betel-nut
into his mouth he leaped up and ran toward the dog.

As he drew near he could see that the game was a fine large pig, all
black save its four legs which were white. He lifted his spear and took
aim, but before he could throw the pig started to run, and instead of
going toward a water course it ran straight up the mountain. The boy
went on in hot pursuit, and when the pig paused he again took aim, but
before he could throw it ran on.

Six times the pig stopped just long enough for the boy to take aim, and
then started on before he could throw. The seventh time, however, it
halted on the top of a large flat rock and the boy succeeded in killing
it.

He tied its legs together with a piece of rattan and was about to start
for home with the pig on his back, when to his surprise a door in the
large stone swung open and a man stepped out.

"Why have you killed my master's pig?" asked the man.

"I did not know that this pig belonged to anyone," replied the widow's
son. "I was hunting, as I often do, and when my dog found the pig I
helped him to catch it"

"Come in and see my master," said the man, and the boy followed him into
the stone where he found himself in a large room. The ceiling and floor
were covered with peculiar cloth that had seven wide stripes of red
alternating with a like number of yellow stripes. When the master of the
place appeared his trousers were of seven colors,  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](pft68.htm#fn_138.md) as were also his jacket and
the kerchief about his head.

The master ordered betel-nut, and when it was brought they chewed
together. Then he called for wine, and it was brought in a jar so large
that it had to be set on the ground under the house, and even then the
top came so high above the floor that they brought a seat for the
widow's son, and it raised him just high enough to drink from the reed
in the top of the jar. He drank seven cups of wine, and then they ate
rice and fish and talked together.

The master did not blame the boy for killing the pig, and declared that
he wished to make a brother of him. So they became friends, and the boy
remained seven days in the stone. At the end of that time, he said that
he must return to his mother who would be worried about him. In the
early morning he left the strange house and started for home.

At first he walked briskly, but as the morning wore on he went more
slowly, and finally when the sun was high he sat down on a rock to rest.
Suddenly looking up, he saw before him seven men each armed with a
spear, a shield, and a sword. They were dressed in different colors, and
each man had eyes the same color as his clothes. The leader, who was
dressed all in red with red eyes to match, spoke first, asking the boy
where he was going. The boy replied that he was going home to his mother
who would be looking for him, and added:

"Now I ask where you are going, all armed ready for war."

"We are warriors," replied the man in red. "And we go up and down the
world killing whatever we see that has life. Now that we have met you,
we must kill you also."

The boy, startled by this strange speech, was about to answer when he
heard a voice near him say: "Fight, for they will try to kill you," and
upon looking up he saw his spear, shield, and sword which he had left at
home. Then he knew that the command came from a spirit, so he took his
weapons and began to fight. For three days and nights they contended,
and never before had the seven seen one man so brave. On the fourth day
the leader was wounded and fell dead, and then, one by one, the other
six fell.

When they were all killed, the widow's son was so crazed with fighting
that he thought no longer of returning home, but started out to find
more to slay.

In his wanderings he came to the home of a great giant whose house was
already full of the men he had conquered in battle, and he called up
from outside:

"Is the master of the house at home? If he is, let him come out and
fight."

This threw the giant into a rage, and seizing his shield and his spear,
the shaft of which was the trunk of a tree, he sprang to the door and
leaped to the ground, not waiting to go down the notched pole which
served for steps. He looked around for his antagonist, and seeing only
the widow's son he roared:

"Where is the man that wants to fight? That thing? It is only a fly!"

The boy did not stop to answer, but rushed at the giant with his knife;
and for three days and nights they struggled, till the giant fell,
wounded at the waist.

After that the widow's son stopped only long enough to burn the giant's
house, and then rushed on looking for someone else to slay. Suddenly he
again heard the voice which had bade him fight with the seven men, and
this time it said: "Go home now, for your mother is grieved at your
absence." In a rage he sprang forward with his sword, though he could
see no enemy. Then the spirit which had spoken to him made him sleep for
a short time. When he awoke the rage was spent.

Again the spirit appeared, and it said: "The seven men whom you killed
were sent to kill you by the spirit of the great stone, for he looked in
your hand and saw that you were to marry the orphan girl whom he himself
wished to wed. But you have conquered. Your enemies are dead. Go home
now and prepare a great quantity of wine, for I shall bring your enemies
to life again, and you will all live in peace."

So the widow's son went home, and his mother, who had believed him dead,
was filled with joy at his coming, and all the people in the town came
out to welcome him. When he had told them his story, they hastened to
get wine, and all day they bore jarsful to the widow's house.

That night there was a great feast, and the spirit of the great stone,
his seven warriors, the friendly spirit, and the giant all came. The
widow's son married the orphan girl, while another beautiful woman
became the wife of the spirit of the stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](pft46.md)
