[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft47)  [Next](pft49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE STORY OF BANTUGAN

*Moro*

Before the Spaniards occupied the island of Mindanao, there lived in the
valley of the Rio Grande a very strong man, Bantugan, whose father was
the brother of the earthquake and thunder.  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](pft68.htm#fn_145)

Now the Sultan of the Island  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](pft68.htm#fn_146) had a beautiful daughter whom
Bantugan wished to marry, but the home of the Sultan was far off, and
whoever went to carry Bantugan's proposal would have a long and
hazardous journey. All the head men consulted together regarding who
should be sent, and at last it was decided that Bantugan's own son,
Balatama, was the one to go. Balatama was young but he was strong and
brave, and when the arms of his father were given him to wear on the
long journey his heart swelled with pride. More than once on the way,
however, his courage was tried, and only the thought of his brave father
gave him strength to proceed.

Once he came to a wooden fence which surrounded a stone in the form of a
man, and as it was directly in his path he drew his fighting knife to
cut down the fence. Immediately the air became as black as night and
stones rained down as large as houses. This made Balatama cry, but he
protected himself with his father's shield and prayed, calling on the
winds from the homeland until they came and cleared the air again.

Thereupon Balatama encountered a great snake  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](pft68.htm#fn_147) in the road, and it inquired
his errand. When told, the snake said:

"You cannot go on, for I am guard of this road and no one can pass."

The animal made a move to seize him, but with one stroke of his fighting
knife the boy cut the snake into two pieces, one of which he threw into
the sea and the other into the mountains.

After many days the weary lad came to a high rock in the road, which
glistened in the sunlight. From the top he could look down into the city
for which he was bound. It was a splendid place with ten harbors.
Standing out from the other houses was one of crystal and another of
pure gold. Encouraged by this sight he went on, but though it seemed but
a short distance, it was some time before he at last stood at the gate
of the town.

It was not long after this, however, before Balatama had made known his
errand to the Sultan, and that monarch, turning to his courtiers, said:
"You, my friends, decide whether or not I shall give the hand of my
daughter to Bantugan in marriage."

The courtiers slowly shook their heads and began to offer objections.

Said one, "I do not see how Bantugan can marry the Sultan's daughter
because the first gift must be a figure of a man or woman in pure gold."

"Well," said the son of Bantugan, "I am here to learn what you want and
to say whether or not it can be given."

Then a second man spoke: "You must give a great yard with a floor of
gold, which must be three feet thick."

"All this can be given," answered the boy.

And the sister of the Princess said: "The gifts must be as many as the
blades of grass in our city."

"It shall be granted," said Balatama.

"You must give a bridge built of stone to cross the great river," said
one.

And another: "A ship of stone you must give, and you must change into
gold all the cocoanuts and leaves in the Sultan's grove."

"All this can be done," said Balatama. "My uncles will give all save the
statue of gold, and that I shall give myself. But first I must go to my
father's town to secure it."

At this they were angry and declared that he had made sport of them and
unless he produced the statue at once they would kill him.

"If I give you the statue now," said he, "there will come dreadful
storms, rain, and darkness."

But they only laughed at him and insisted on having the statue, so he
reached in his helmet and drew it forth.

Immediately the earth began to quake. A great storm arose, and stones as
large as houses rained until the Sultan called to Balatama to put back
the statue lest they all be killed.

"You would not believe what I told you," said the boy; "and now I am
going to let the storm continue."

But the Sultan begged him and promised that Bantugan might marry his
daughter with no other gifts at all save the statue of gold. Balatama
put back the statue into his helmet, and the air became calm again to
the great relief of the Sultan and his courtiers. Then Balatama prepared
to return home, promising that Bantugan would come in three months for
the wedding.

All went well with the boy on the way home until he came to the fence
surrounding the stone in the form of a man, and there he was detained
and compelled to remain four months.

Now about this time a Spanish general heard that Bantugan was preparing
to marry the Sultan's daughter, whom he determined to wed himself. A
great expedition was prepared, and he with all his brothers embarked on
his large warship which was followed by ten thousand other ships. They
went to the Sultan's city, and their number was so great that they
filled the harbor, frightening the people greatly.

Then the General's brother disembarked and came to the house of the
Sultan. He demanded the Princess for the General, saying that if the
request were refused, the fleet would destroy the city and all its
people. The Sultan and his courtiers were so frightened that they
decided to give his daughter to the General, the next full moon being
the date set for the wedding.

In the meantime Bantugan had been preparing everything for the marriage
which he expected to take place at the appointed time. But as the days
went by and Balatama did not return, they became alarmed, fearing he was
dead. After three months had passed, Bantugan prepared a great
expedition to go in search of his son, and the great warship was
decorated with flags of gold.

As they came in sight of the Sultan's city, they saw the Spanish fleet
in the harbor, and one of his brothers advised Bantugan not to enter
until the Spaniards left They then brought their ship to anchor. But all
were disappointed that they could not go farther, and one said, "Why do
we not go on? Even if the blades of grass turn into Spaniards we need
not fear." Another said: "Why do we fear? Even if the cannon-balls come
like rain, we can always fight." Finally some wanted to return to their
homes and Bantugan said: "No, let us seek my son. Even though we must
enter the harbor where the Spaniards are, let us continue our search."
So at his command the anchors were lifted, and they sailed into the
harbor where the Spanish fleet lay.

Now at this very time the Spanish general and his brother were with the
Sultan, intending to call upon the Princess. As the brother talked with
one of the sisters of the Princess they moved toward the window, and
looking down they saw Bantugan's ships entering the harbor. They could
not tell whose flags the ships bore. Neither could the Sultan when he
was called. Then he sent his brother to bring his father who was a very
old man, to see if he could tell. The father was kept in a little dark
room by himself that he might not get hurt, and the Sultan said to his
brother:

"If he is so bent with age that he cannot see, talk, or walk, tickle him
in the ribs and that will make him young again; and, my Brother, carry
him here yourself lest one of the slaves should let him fall and he
should hurt himself."

So the old man was brought, and when he looked out upon the ships he saw
that the flags were those of the father of Bantugan who had been a great
friend of his in his youth. And he told them that he and Bantugan's
father years ago had made a contract that their children and children's
children should intermarry, and now since the Sultan had promised his
daughter to two people, he foresaw that great trouble would come to the
land. Then the Sultan said to the General:

"Here are two claimants to my daughter's hand. Go aboard your ships and
you and Bantugan make war on each other, and the victor shall have my
daughter."

So the Spaniards opened fire upon Bantugan, and for three days the earth
was so covered with smoke from the battle that neither could see his
enemy. Then the Spanish general said:

"I cannot see Bantugan or the fleet anywhere, so let us go and claim the
Princess."

But the Sultan said: "We must wait until the smoke rises to make sure
that Bantugan is gone."

When the smoke rose, the ships of Bantugan were apparently unharmed and
the Sultan said:

"Bantugan has surely won, for his fleet is uninjured while yours is
badly damaged. You have lost."

"No," said the General, "we will fight it out on dry land."

So they both landed their troops and their cannon, and a great fight
took place, and soon the ground was covered with dead bodies. And the
Sultan commanded them to stop, as the women and children in the city
were being killed by the cannon-balls, but the General said:

"If you give your daughter to Bantugan we shall fight forever or until
we die."

Then the Sultan sent for Bantugan and said:

"We must deceive the Spaniard in order to get him to go away. Let us
tell him that neither of you will marry my daughter, and then after he
has gone, we shall have the wedding."

Bantugan agreed to this, and word was sent to the Spaniards that the
fighting must cease since many women and children were being killed. So
it was agreed between the Spaniard and Bantugan that neither of them
should marry the Princess. Then they both sailed away to their homes.

Bantugan soon returned, however, and married the Princess, and on the
way back to his home they found his son and took him with them. For
about a week the Spanish general sailed toward his home and then he,
too, turned about to go back, planning to take the Princess by force.
When he found that she had already been carried away by Bantugan, his
wrath knew no bounds. He destroyed the Sultan, his city, and all its
people. And then he sailed away to prepare a great expedition with which
he should utterly destroy Bantugan and his country as well.

One morning Bantugan looked out and saw at the mouth of the Rio Grande
the enormous fleet of the Spaniards whose numbers were so great that in
no direction could the horizon be seen. His heart sank within him, for
he knew that he and his country were doomed.

Though he could not hope to win in a fight against such great numbers,
he called his headmen together and said:

"My Brothers, the Christian dogs have come to destroy the land. We
cannot successfully oppose them, but in the defense of the fatherland we
can die."

So the great warship was again prepared, and all the soldiers of Islam
embarked, and then with Bantugan standing at the bow they sailed forth
to meet their fate.

The fighting was fast and furious, but soon the great warship of
Bantugan filled with water until at last it sank, drawing with it
hundreds of the Spanish ships. And then a strange thing happened. At the
very spot where Bantugan's warship sank, there arose from the sea a
great island which you can see today not far from the mouth of the Rio
Grande. It is covered with bongo palms, and deep within its mountains
live Bantugan and his warriors. A Moro sailboat passing this island is
always scanned by Bantugan's watchers, and if it contains women such as
he admires, they are snatched from their seats and carried deep into the
heart of the mountain. For this reason Moro women fear even to sail near
the island of Bongos.

When the wife of Bantugan saw that her husband was no more and that his
warship had been destroyed, she gathered together the remaining warriors
and set forth herself to avenge him. In a few hours her ship was also
sunk, and in the place where it sank there arose the mountain of Timaco.

On this thickly wooded island are found white monkeys, the servants of
the Princess, who still lives in the center of the mountain. On a quiet
day high up on the mountain side one can hear the chanting and singing
of the waiting-girls of the wife of Bantugan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](pft49)
