[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft50)  [Next](pft52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE POOR FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE

*Ilocano*

Many, many years ago a poor fisherman and his wife lived with their
three sons in a village by the sea. One day the old man set his snare in
the water not far from his house, and at night when he went to look at
it, he found that he had caught a great white fish. This startled the
old man very much, for he had never seen a fish like this before, and it
occurred to him that it was the priest of the town.

He ran to his wife as fast as he could and cried:

"My wife, I have caught the priest."

"What?" said the old woman, terrified at the sight of her frightened
husband.

"I have caught the priest," said the old man again.

They hurried together to the river where the snare was set, and when the
old woman saw the fish, she cried:

"Oh, it is not the priest but the governor."

"No, it is the priest," insisted the old man, and they went home
trembling with fear.

That night neither of them was able to sleep for thought of the terrible
thing that had happened and wondering what they should do. Now the next
day was a great holiday in the town. At four o'clock in the morning
cannons were fired and bells rang loudly. The old man and woman, hearing
all the noise and not knowing the reason for it, thought that their
crime had been discovered, and the people were searching for them to
punish them, so they set out as fast as they could to hide in the woods.
On and on they went, stopping only to rest so as to enable them to
resume their flight.

The next morning they reached the woods near Pilar, where there also was
a great holiday, and the sexton was ringing the bells to call the people
to mass. As soon as the old man and woman heard the bells they thought
the people there had been notified of their escape, and that they, too,
were trying to catch them. So they turned and started home again.

As they reached their house, the three sons came home with their one
horse and tied it to the trunk of the caramay tree. Presently the bells
began to ring again, for it was twelve o'clock at noon. Not thinking
what time of day it was, the old man and woman ran out of doors in
terror, and seeing the horse jumped on its back with the intention of
riding to the next town before anyone could catch them. When they had
mounted they began to whip the horse. In their haste, they had forgotten
to untie the rope which was around the trunk of the caramay tree. As the
horse pulled at the rope fruit fell from the tree upon the old man and
woman. Believing they were shot, they were so frightened that they died.
 <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](pft68.htm#fn_149)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Presidente who had Horns](pft52)
