[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTES

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](pft04.htm#fr_0) This incident is strikingly
similar to the story in North American folk-lore of the maiden captured
and carried upward by a vine. Several other points of likeness appear in
the lore of Malaysia, Polynesia, and America.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](pft04.htm#fr_1) See Preface, p. vii.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](pft04.htm#fr_2) This incident is unique so
far as American or European folk-lore is concerned, yet it is common in
Tinguian tales, while similar stories are found among the neighboring
Ilocano and Igorot tribes of the Philippines, as well as in Borneo,
Java, and India.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](pft04.htm#fr_3) The belief that beauty is
capable of radiating great light is not peculiar to Tinguian tales, for
it is also found in the Malay legends and in those of India. It is not
impossible that they had a common origin.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](pft04.htm#fr_4) The betel-nut is the nut of
the areca palm. It is prepared for chewing by being cut into quarters,
each piece being wrapped in betel-leaf spread with lime. It produces a
blood-red spittle which greatly discolors the teeth and lips, and it is
used extensively throughout the Philippines. While it appears to have
been in common use among the Tinguian at the time these stories
originated, it has now been displaced by tobacco, except at ceremonies
when it is prepared for chewing; it is also placed on the animals
offered for sacrifice to the spirits. Throughout the tales great
significance is given to the chewing of betel-nuts before names are told
or introductions given, while from the quids and spittle it appears to
have been possible to foretell events and establish relationships.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](pft04.htm#fr_5) Compare with the story of
Phæton in Bulfinch, *The Age of Fable*, p. 50.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](pft04.htm#fr_6) The Tinguian have no
calendar, but reckon time by the recurrence of the moon.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](pft04.htm#fr_7) It is the present custom of
the Tinguian to make numerous ceremonies for the spirits. These vary in
length from a few hours to seventeen days. During this period animals
are slaughtered, small houses are built, mediums deliver messages from
the spirits, and there is much feasting and dancing.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](pft04.htm#fr_8) When ripe, the betel-nut is
covered with a golden husk, and it is possibly because of this that they
were said to be covered with gold. The present-day Tinguian, in place of
sending the betel-nut, sends a small piece of gold to any relative or
friend whom he specially wishes to induce to attend a ceremony.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](pft04.htm#fr_9) This seems to be peculiar to
Tinguian folk-lore.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](pft04.htm#fr_10) Except when she is in
mourning a Tinguian woman's arms are always covered with beads placed
strand above strand.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](pft04.htm#fr_11) The parents of a boy
choose his bride when the children are very young. A great celebration
is then held, and relatives and friends of both parties decide on the
price to be paid for the girl. Partial payment is made at once, and the
remainder goes over until the marriage proper takes place, when the boy
and girl are about twelve or fourteen years of age. In this instance
Ini-init makes the customary payment for his bride, though the marriage
had already taken place.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](pft04.htm#fr_12) The friends and retainers
pound rice and prepare food for all the guests who attend the ceremony.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](pft04.htm#fr_13) A spirit house is one of
the small houses built during a ceremony.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](pft04.htm#fr_14) reference is probably to
ancient Chinese jars.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](pft05.htm#fr_15) The custom, which still
exists to a certain degree, was to offer food to a guest before any
matter was discussed. In ancient times this was considered very
necessary, as it still is among the Apayao who live north of the
Tinguian. With them to refuse food is to refuse friendship.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](pft05.htm#fr_16) A drink made of fermented
sugar-cane.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](pft05.htm#fr_17) The old jars possessed by
the Tinguian today have notches broken in the rim, one for each
generation through whose hands it has passed.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](pft05.htm#fr_18) When the first
negotiations are made the boy's parents offer some gift, nowadays
usually a small bead. If this is accepted it signifies the willingness
of the girl's parents to consider the match.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](pft05.htm#fr_19) See note 1, p. 15.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](pft05.htm#fr_20) The music for the dances
is made by beating on drums and copper gongs. A man and a woman enter
the circle, each carrying a large square of cloth on outstretched arms.
Keeping time to the music with their hands and feet, they move about,
coming near to each other and then drawing farther apart The woman
follows the movements of the man and finally places her cloth on his
outstretched arms, thus ending the dance; another couple then takes
their place.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](pft05.htm#fr_21) An interesting parallel to
this is found in the Dayak legend of Limbang, where a tree springs from
the head of a dead giant; its flowers are beads; its leaves, cloth; and
the fruit, jars. See Roth, *The Natives of Sarawak and British North
Borneo*, Vol. I, p. 372.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](pft05.htm#fr_22) Throughout the Tinguian
tales the characters are frequently described as changing themselves
into oil, centipedes, birds, and other forms. This power is also found
among the heroes of Dayak and Malay tales. See Roth, op. cit., Vol. I,
p. 312; Perham, *Journal Straits Branch R., Asiatic Society, No. 16*,
1886; Wilkinson, *Malay Beliefs*, pp. 32, 59 (London, 1906).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](pft05.htm#fr_23) The Tinguian place a tame
rooster in an open spot in the forest and surround him with a line to
which slip nooses are attached. The crowing of this bird attracts wild
ones which come to fight him and are caught in the nooses.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](pft05.htm#fr_24) The water buffalo now used
as the beast of burden throughout the Philippines.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](pft05.htm#fr_25) The ordinary dress of the
Tinguian man is a clout and a striped belt, in which he carries his
tobacco and small articles. Some of them also possess striped cotton
coats, which they wear on special occasions.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](pft05.htm#fr_26) See note 2, p. 12.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](pft05.htm#fr_27) See note 1, p. 13.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](pft05.htm#fr_28) This peculiar idea, which
frequently appears in Tinguian tales, is also found in Javanese
literature. See Bezemer, *Volksdichtung aus Indonesien*, p. 47 (Haag,
1904).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](pft06.htm#fr_29) See note 3, p. 15.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](pft06.htm#fr_30) The powerful deeds of
these heroes often resemble the miraculous achievements of biblical and
ancient times.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](pft06.htm#fr_31) See note 2, p. 20.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](pft06.htm#fr_32) The Tinguian of today do
not possess soap, but in its place they use the ashes from rice straw,
or not infrequently they soak the bark from a certain tree in the water
in which they are to wash their hair.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](pft06.htm#fr_33) The lawed vine. In ancient
Egypt and in India it was a common belief that friends or relatives
could tell from the condition of a certain tree or vine whether the
absent one was well or dead: if the vine thrived, they knew that all was
well, but if it wilted they mourned for him as dead. It is interesting
to find the identical belief in the northern Philippines.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](pft06.htm#fr_34) The Tinguian stove
consists of a bed of ashes in which three stones are sunk, and on these
the pots are placed.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](pft06.htm#fr_35) It appears that these
people of ancient times possessed the same weapons as those of today.
The Tinguian ordinarily wears a head-ax thrust into his belt, and when
at work this is his hand tool. When on a hunt or during warfare he also
carries a wooden shield and a steel-pointed spear from eight to ten feet
in length. For attacks at a distance he depends on the spear, but in a
close encounter he uses his head-ax and shield, the latter being oblong
in shape and having two prongs at one end and three at the other. The
two prongs are to be slipped about the neck of the victim while the
head-ax does its work, or the three prongs may be slipped about the legs
in the same way.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](pft06.htm#fr_36) From this and other
incidents it is evident that these people talked with the lightning and
thunder. They still have great regard for the omens derived from these
forces; but it is now believed that thunder is the dog of Kadaklan, the
greatest of all the spirits, and that by the barking of this dog, the
god makes known his desires.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](pft06.htm#fr_37) Stories in which animals
come to the assistance of human beings are found in many lands. One of
those best known to Europeans is where the ants sort the grain for
Cinderella.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](pft06.htm#fr_38) See note 2, p. 21.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](pft06.htm#fr_39) It was the ancient custom
to place the heads of slain enemies at the gate or around the town, and
this practice still prevails with some of the surrounding tribes. More
recently it was the custom to expose the head at the gate of the town
for three days, after which followed a great celebration when the skulls
were broken and pieces were given to the guests.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](pft06.htm#fr_40) In their beliefs of today
the Tinguian recognize many giants, some with more than one head. In a
part of the ritual of one ceremony we read, "A man opens the door to
learn the cause of the barking and he sees a man, fat and tall, with
nine heads."

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](pft07.htm#fr_41) A large bamboo pole, with
all but the end section cut out, serves for a water bucket.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](pft07.htm#fr_42) A long bamboo pole, in one
end of which a hard-wood point is inserted. This is thrust into the
ground, and in the hole thus made the grain or cuttings are planted.
This old method is still in use in some sections of the mountains, but
on the lowlands a primitive plow is used to break the soil.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](pft07.htm#fr_43) In European, Asiatic,
African, and Malaysian lore we find stones of beings with star dresses:
when they wear the dresses they are stars; when they take them off they
are human. See Cox, *An Introduction to Folklore*, p. 121 (London,
1904.).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](pft07.htm#fr_44) note 1, p. 9.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](pft07.htm#fr_45) See note 1, p. 12.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](pft08.htm#fr_46) Preface, p. vii.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](pft08.htm#fr_47) It is the custom to have a
small bamboo house built from fifteen to twenty feet from the ground
near the rice fields, and in this someone watches every day during the
growing season to see that nothing breaks in to destroy the grain. Often
flappers are placed in different parts of the field and a connecting
string leads from these to the little house, so that the watcher by
pulling this string may frighten the birds away from the grain.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](pft08.htm#fr_48) See note 1, p. 18.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](pft08.htm#fr_49) Preface, p. vi.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](pft08.htm#fr_50) The nights in the
mountains are cold, and it is not at all uncommon in the early morning
to see groups of people with blankets wrapped tightly about them,
squatting around small fires in the yards.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](pft08.htm#fr_51) See note 2, p. 12.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](pft08.htm#fr_52) See note 1, p. 13.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](pft08.htm#fr_53) See note 1, p. 17.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](pft08.htm#fr_54) Compare with the biblical
story of the loaves and fishes. For similar incidents among the Igorot
of the Philippines, in Borneo, and in India, see Jenks, *The Bontoc
Igorot*, p. 202; Seidenadel, *The Language of the Bontoc Igorot*, pp.
491, 41 ff. (Chicago, 1909); Roth, *The Natives of Sarawak and British
North Borneo*, Vol. I, p. 319; Tawney, *Katha Sarit Sagara*, Vol. II, p.
3 (Calcutta, 1880); Bezemer, *Volksdichtung aus Indonesien*, p. 49
(Haag, 1904).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](pft08.htm#fr_55) See note 1, p. 15.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](pft08.htm#fr_56) See note 3, p. 15.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](pft08.htm#fr_57) There appear to have been
two classes of spirits, one for whom the people had the utmost respect
and reverence, and another whom they looked upon as being of service to
mortals.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](pft08.htm#fr_58) See note 1, p. 30.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](pft09.htm#fr_59) The word used in the
original is langpadan, meaning mountain rice. This variety requires no
irrigation and is planted to some extent at the present day, but the
great bulk of the grain now used is grown in wonderfully terraced fields
on the mountain sides, where water for irrigating is brought from
distant streams through a system of flume and bamboo tubes. The fact
that only the mountain rice is mentioned in the tales reflects a very
ancient life before irrigated fields were known.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](pft09.htm#fr_60) See note 1, p. 45.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](pft09.htm#fr_61) The labeug is the omen
bird and is believed to be the direct messenger of Kadaklan, the great
spirit, to the people.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](pft09.htm#fr_62) See note 1, p. 34.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](pft09.htm#fr_63) See note 1, p. 8.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](pft10.htm#fr_64) See Preface, p. vii.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](pft10.htm#fr_65) Before the bundles of
ripened rice can be put into the granary a ceremony is made for the
spirits. The blood of a pig is mixed with cooked rice and put in the
granary as an offering for the spirit who multiplies the grain,
otherwise the crop would run out in a short time.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](pft10.htm#fr_66) See note 1, p. 9.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](pft10.htm#fr_67) The spirit who stands next
in importance to Kadaklan, the great spirit. It was he who taught the
people all good things, and finally he married a woman from Manabo in
order to bind himself more closely to them. See "How the Tinguian
Learned to Plant."

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](pft11.htm#fr_68) This story is considered
by the Tinguian to be of rather recent origin. They believe that Sayen
lived not so very long ago, yet the stories woven around him are very
similar to the ancient ones.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](pft11.htm#fr_69) See "The Alan and the
Hunters."

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](pft11.htm#fr_70) The Tinguian now use flint
and steel for making a flame, but it is not at all uncommon for them to
go to a neighbor's house to borrow a burning ember to start their own
fire.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](pft11.htm#fr_71) The neighboring Ilocano, a
Christianized tribe, know the Komow as a fabulous bird which is
invisible, yet steals people and their possessions.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](pft11.htm#fr_72) See note 1, p. 59.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](pft11.htm#fr_73) See note 2, p. 20.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](pft13.htm#fr_74) This tale is of special
importance to the Tinguian since it explains how they learned two of the
most important things of their present life—to plant and to cure the
sick. It also shows how death came into the world.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](pft13.htm#fr_75) See note 1, p. 59.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](pft14.htm#fr_76) It is a common sight in a
Tinguian village early in the morning during the dry season to see a
number of men armed with spears and head-axes leaving for the mountains.
They usually take with them, to assist in the chase, a string of
half-starved dogs. Often a net is stretched across the runway of game,
and then, while some of the hunters conceal themselves near by, others
seek to drive the game into the net, where it is speared to death.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](pft14.htm#fr_77) Ancient Chinese jars are
found throughout the interior of the Philippines and are very closely
associated with the folk-lore of the Tinguian. Some of the jars date
back to the 10th century, while many are from the 12th and 14th
centuries, and evidently entered the Islands through pre-Spanish trade.
They are held in great value and are generally used in part payment for
a bride and for the settlement of feuds. For more details see Cole,
*Chinese Pottery in the Philippines*, Pub. Field Museum of Nat. Hist,
Vol. XII, No. 1.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](pft14.htm#fr_78) This cave is situated in
the mountains midway between Patok and Santa Rosa. In this vicinity are
numerous limestone caves, each of which has its traditions.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](pft14.htm#fr_79) Cabildo of Domayco, the
envied owner of this jar, has refused great sums offered for its
purchase, and though men from other tribes come bringing ten carabao at
one time, they cannot tempt him to sell.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](pft15.htm#fr_80) These beautiful agate
beads are still worn by the Tinguian women, who prize them very highly.
They are rarely sold and each is worth more than a carabao.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](pft17.htm#fr_81) The Alan are supposed to
be deformed spirits who live in the forests. They are as large as
people, but have wings and can fly. Their toes are at the back of their
feet, and their fingers point backward from their wrists.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](pft17.htm#fr_82) The name by which spirits
call human beings.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](pft17.htm#fr_83) This treatment of the Alan
is typical of that accorded to the less powerful of the spirits by the
Tinguian today. At the ceremonies they often make fun of them and cheat
them in the sacrifices.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](pft19.htm#fr_84) Known to the Tinguian as
Banog. This bird occupies much the same place with the Tinguian as does
the garuda in East Indian folk-lore.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](pft19.htm#fr_85) This tale gives to the
Tinguian his idea of the future world. Sogsogot is supposed to have
lived only a short time ago, and his experiences are well known to all
the people.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](pft20.htm#fr_86) See note 1, p. 15.
Practically this same tale is told by the neighboring Ilocano, from whom
it may have been borrowed; but here the Tinguian custom of paying a
marriage price is introduced.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](pft22.htm#fr_87) This type of story is also
found farther to the south, where the cleverness of the small animal
causes him to triumph over the strong.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](pft22.htm#fr_88) The Tinguian house
contains neither tables nor chairs. The people usually squat on the
floor, sitting on their heels; if anything is used as a seat it is a bit
of cocoanut shell or a small block of wood.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](pft23.htm#fr_89) Here we have a proverbial
tale, one in which the Tinguian expresses the idea, "Haste makes waste."

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](pft24.htm#fr_90) Another version of this
tale is found in British North Borneo in the story of the plandok and
the crab, while to European children it is known as the race between the
turtle and the hare.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](pft25.htm#fr_91) The story shows the
influence of the Christianized natives, among whom cock-fighting is a
very popular sport. It is found only among those Tinguian who come into
contact with this class.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](pft27.htm#fr_92) Lumawig is the greatest of
all spirits and now lives in the sky, though for a time his home was in
the Igorot village of Bontoc, He married a Bontoc girl, and the stones
of their house are still to be seen in the village. It was Lumawig who
created the Igorot, and ever since he has taken a great interest in
them, teaching them how to overcome the forces of nature, how to plant,
to reap and, in fact, everything that they know. Once each month a
ceremony is held in his honor in a sacred grove, whose trees are
believed to have sprung from the graves of his children. Here prayers
are offered for health, good crops, and success in battle. A close
resemblance exists between Lumawig of the Igorot and Kaboniyan of the
Tinguian, the former being sometimes called Kambun'yan.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](pft27.htm#fr_93) The Bukidnon of Mindanao
have the following story: During a great drought Mampolompon could grow
nothing on his clearing except one bamboo, and during a high wind this
was broken. From this bamboo came a dog and a woman, who were the
ancestors of the Moro. See "The White Squash," note 1, p. 186.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](pft27.htm#fr_94) At the north end of the
village of Mayinit are a number of brackish hot springs, and from these
the people secure the salt which has made the spot famous for miles
around. Stones are placed in the shallow streams flowing from these
springs, and when they have become encrusted with salt (about once a
month) they are washed and the water is evaporated by boiling. The salt,
which is then a thick paste, is formed into cakes and baked near the
fire for about half an hour, when it is ready for use. It is the only
salt in this section, and is in great demand. Even hostile tribes come
to a hill overlooking the town and call down, then deposit whatever they
have for trade and withdraw, while the Igorot take up the salt and leave
it in place of the trade articles.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](pft27.htm#fr_95) The women of Samoki are
known as excellent potters, and their ware is used over a wide area.
From a pit on a hillside to the north of the village they dig a
reddish-brown clay, which they mix with a bluish mineral gathered on
another hillside. When thoroughly mixed, this clay is placed on a board
on the ground, and the potter, kneeling before it, begins her moulding.
Great patience and skill are required to bring the vessel to the desired
shape. When it is completed it is set in the sun to dry for two or three
days, after which it is ready for the baking. The new pots are piled
tier above tier on the ground and blanketed with grass tied into
bundles. Then pine bark is burned beneath and around the pile for about
an hour, when the ware is sufficiently fired. It is then glazed with
resin and is ready to market.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](pft28.htm#fr_96) The mythology of nearly
all peoples has a flood story. For the Tinguian account see note on page
103. For the Bukidnon story see p. 125.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](pft28.htm#fr_97) A bamboo basket, in which
the heads of victims are kept prior to the head-taking celebration.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](pft28.htm#fr_98) The folk-lore of all
countries has some story accounting for the acquisition of fire. The
Tinguian tale is as follows: Once in the very old times Kaboniyan sent a
flood which covered all the land. Then there was no place for the fire
to stay, so it went into the bamboo, the stones, and iron. That is why
one who knows how can still get fire out of bamboo and stones.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](pft29.htm#fr_99) See note 1, p. 99.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](pft29.htm#fr_100) The magical increase of
food is a popular subject with the Tinguian, appearing in many of their
folk-tales. See note 2, p. 48.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](pft29.htm#fr_101) Note the similarity to
the story of Moses in this account of Lumawig striking the rock and
water coming out. There is a possibility that this incident was added to
the story after the advent of the Catholic missionaries.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](pft29.htm#fr_102) Usually one or more new
coffins can be found in an Igorot village. They are made from a log
split in two lengthwise, each half being hollowed out. Since their
manufacture requires some days, it is necessary to prepare them ahead of
time. After the body is put in, the cover is tied on with rattan and the
chinks sealed with mud and lime.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](pft29.htm#fr_103) A somewhat similar idea
is found among the Kulaman of southern Mindanao. Here when an important
man dies he is placed in a coffin, which resembles a small boat, the
coffin being then fastened on high poles near the sea. See Cole, *Wild
Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao*, Pub. Field Museum of Nat Hist, Vol.
XII, No. 2, 1913.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](pft30.htm#fr_104) This story, first
recorded by Dr. A.E. Jenks, gives the origin of the custom of
head-hunting, which plays such an important part in the life of the
Igorot. The Igorot claim to have taken heads ever since Lumawig lived on
earth and taught them to go to war, and they declare that it makes them
brave and manly. The return of a successful war party is the signal for
a great celebration.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](pft30.htm#fr_105) This is also the common
way of making pottery.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](pft31.htm#fr_106) Here we have a story,
recorded by Dr. A.E. Jenks, with a twofold value: it is told to the
children as a warning against stinginess, and it also explains the
origin of the serpent eagle.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](pft31.htm#fr_107) There is no jungle in
the greater part of the Igorot country, the mountains being covered by
cogon grass with occasional pine trees. At a distance these have a
strange appearance, for only the bushy tops are left, the lower branches
being cut off for fuel.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](pft32.htm#fr_108) First recorded by Dr.
A.E. Jenks.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](pft32.htm#fr_109) Tattooing is a painful
process, but Igorot men, women, and children willingly submit to it for
the sake of beauty. The design is first drawn on the skin with an ink
made of soot and water: then the skin is pricked through the pattern and
the soot is rubbed into the wounds. Various designs appear on the face,
arms, stomach, and other parts of the body, but the most important of
all markings is that on the breast of an Igorot man. This designates him
as the taker of at least one human head, and he is thus shown to be
worthy of the respect of his tribe.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](pft32.htm#fr_110) This story also
accounts for the origin of the crow and the lizard, both of which are
common in the Igorot country.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](pft33.htm#fr_111) This story, first
recorded by Dr. A.E. Jenks, while it explain the origin of the little
rice bird, also points a moral, namely, that there is punishment for the
disobedient child.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](pft34.htm#fr_112) The common way to pound
rice is to place a bundle of the grain on the ground on a dried carabao
hide and pound it with a pestle to loosen the heads from the straw. When
they are free they are poured into a mortar and again pounded with the
pestle until the grain is separated from the chaff, after which it is
winnowed.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](pft34.htm#fr_113) According to the
Klemantin myth (Borneo), the sky was raised when a giant named Usai
accidentally struck it with his mallet while pounding rice. See Hose and
McDougall, *Pagan Tribes of Borneo*, p. 142.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](pft35.htm#fr_114) A somewhat similar
belief that a giant crab is responsible for the tides is widespread
throughout Malaysia. The Batak of Palawan now believe, as also do the
Mandaya of eastern Mindanao, that the tides are caused by a giant crab
going in and out of his hole in the sea.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](pft35.htm#fr_115) The similarity of this
to the biblical story of the Flood leads us to suppose that it has come
from the neighboring Christianized or Mohammedanized people and has been
worked by the Bukidnon into the mould of their own thought. However, the
flood story is sometimes found in such a guise that it cannot be
accounted for by Christian influence. See for example, *The Flood Story*
as told in the folk-lore of the Igorot tribe, on p. 102.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](pft36.htm#fr_116) This celestial myth
accounts for a number of constellations which are of great importance to
the Bukidnon. Magbangal appears in the sky in almost dipper shape, the
handle being formed by his one remaining arm. To the west and nearly
above him is a V-shaped constellation which is believed to be the jaw of
one of the pigs which he killed. Still farther to the west appears the
hill on which he hunted, while three groups of stars which toward dawn
seem to be following him are said to be his hatchet, the bamboo pole in
which he carried water, and his large pet lizard. It is the appearance
and position of these constellations in the sky that show the Bukidnon
when it is the time to clear land for the yearly crops and to plant the
grain; and since this knowledge is of the utmost importance to the
people, they feel that Magbangal does them a lasting service. The hero
Lafaang of a Borneo myth, who is represented by the constellation Orion,
lost his arm while trying to cut down a tree in a manner different from
that prescribed by his celestial wife, the constellation Pegasen. See
Hose and McDougall, *Pagan Tribes of Borneo*, Vol. II, p. 141.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](pft36.htm#fr_117) Long knives.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](pft37.htm#fr_118) Cloth is dyed in
various colors by boiling it in water in which different kinds of leaves
or roots have been steeped. But to produce a bluish-black shade the
fabric is partly buried in mud until the desired color is obtained.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](pft37.htm#fr_119) Monkeys are numerous
throughout the Philippines, and it is doubtless their human appearance
and actions that have caused the different tribes to try to account for
their origin from man. Here we have the most likely way that the
Bukidnon can see for their coming.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](pft38.htm#fr_120) This is one of a series
of tales dealing with mythical heroes of former times whose acts of
prowess are still recounted by Bukidnon warriors.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](pft38.htm#fr_121) A heavy padded hemp
coat with a kilt which is supposed to turn spears. Over the shoulder is
worn a sash in which are a few peculiar stones and charms which are
believed to protect its wearer. Warriors who have taken thirty human
lives are permitted to wear a peculiar crown-shaped headdress with
upstanding points.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](pft38.htm#fr_122) See note 1, p. 23.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](pft39.htm#fr_123) This is a good example
of the way in which people at a certain stage try to account for their
surroundings. Nearly all consider themselves the original people. We
find the Bagobo no exception to this. In this tale, which is evidently
very old, they account for themselves and their neighbors, and then, to
meet present needs, they adapt the story to include the white people
whom they have known for not more than two hundred years.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](pft40.htm#fr_124) These are evil spirits
who have power to injure people. They are ugly to look at and go about
eating anything, even dead persons. A young Bagobo described his idea of
a buso as follows: "He has a long body, long feet and neck, curly hair,
and black face, flat nose, and one big red or yellow eye. He has big
feet and fingers, but small arms, and his two big teeth are long and
pointed. Like a dog, he goes about eating anything, even dead persons."
Cole, *Wild Tribes of Davao District*, Field Museum Nat. Hist., Vol.
XII, No. 2, p. 107.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](pft40.htm#fr_125) This is evidently an
old tale in which the story-teller introduces modern ideas.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](pft40.htm#fr_126) Here, as is often the
case, an origin story has been added to a tale with which it has no
logical connection.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](pft41.htm#fr_127) This story is well
known among the Bilaan, who are one of the tribes least influenced by
the Spaniards, and yet it bears so many incidents similar to biblical
accounts that there is a strong suggestion of Christian influence. It is
possible that these ideas came through the Mohammedan Moro.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](pft41.htm#fr_128) The most powerful of
the spirits and the one to whom the people resort in times of danger.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](pft41.htm#fr_129) A similar story is
found in British North Borneo. See Evans, *Journal of Royal
Anthropological Institute*, 1913, p. 423.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](pft42.htm#fr_130) Melu, Fiuweigh, Diwata,
and Saweigh.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](pft42.htm#fr_131) Buswit.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](pft43.htm#fr_132) An origin story of a
very different type from those of the Bukidnon and Bagobo. While the
others show foreign influence, this appears to be typically primitive.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](pft43.htm#fr_133) The omen bird of the
Mandaya. It is believed to be a messenger from the spirit world which,
by its calls, warns the people of danger or promises them success. If
the coo of this bird comes from the right side, it is a good sign, but
if it is on the left, in back, or in front, it is a bad sign, and the
Mandaya knows that he must change his plans.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](pft44.htm#fr_134) The crab was called
Tambanokano.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](pft44.htm#fr_135) An eclipse of the moon.
This belief in a monster swallowing the moon and the wild efforts to
frighten it away are very widespread. It is found among the Batak of
Palawan and in other parts of Malaysia as well as in the South Sea,
Mongol, Chinese, Siamese, and Hindoo mythology. Even in Peru we find the
belief that an evil spirit in the form of a beast was eating the moon,
and that in order to scare it the people shouted and yelled and beat
their dogs to make them add to the noise. See Karlson, *Journal of
Religious Psychology,* November, 1914, p. 164.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](pft45.htm#fr_136) First recorded by
Emerson B. Christie.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](pft45.htm#fr_137) A brass box having
three compartments, one for lime, one for the nut, and another for the
betel-leaf, which is used in preparing the nut for chewing.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](pft45.htm#fr_138) The Subanun have
adopted the Moro dress, which consists of long trousers and a coat. The
tale shows strong Moro influence throughout. Seven is a mystic and
magical number among the Malay. It is constantly used in divination and
magical practices and repeatedly occurs in their folk-lore. Skeat
explains its importance by referring to the seven souls which each
mortal is supposed to possess. See Skeat, *Malay Magic*, p. 50.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](pft46.htm#fr_139) No tales illustrate to
better advantage the persistence of old stories and beliefs than do
these of the Moro. They are permeated with incidents very similar to
those still found among the pagan tribes of the Archipelago, while
associated with these are the spirits and demons of Hindu mythology.
Finally we find the semi-historical events recorded by the
Mohammedanized Malay, the ancestors of the tellers of the tales.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](pft47.htm#fr_140) First recorded by N.M.
Saleeby.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](pft47.htm#fr_141) Those great birds are
doubtless derived from Indian literature in which the fabulous bird
garuda played such an important part.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](pft47.htm#fr_142) A common name in Malay
and Sumatran tales.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](pft47.htm#fr_143) Probably Solomon of the
Old Testament, who is a great historic figure among the Malay and who
plays an important part in their romances.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](pft47.htm#fr_144) See note 1, p. 28.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](pft48.htm#fr_145) In this case of a
semi-historic being, whose father was said to be the brother of the
earthquake and thunder, we have an interesting blending of mythological
and historical facts.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](pft48.htm#fr_146) Among Malay people the
sultan is the supreme ruler of a district, while petty rulers are known
as datos.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](pft48.htm#fr_147) Here, as in the
Tinguian lore, we find heroes conversing with animals and commanding the
forces of nature to come to their aid.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](pft50.htm#fr_148) This tale told by the
Ilocano is well known among both the Christianized and the wild tribes
of the Philippines, and also in Borneo and Java. However, the Ilocano is
the only version, so far as known, which has the explanatory element:
the reason is given here why monkeys do not eat meat. The turtle is
accredited with extraordinary sagacity and cunning. It is another
example of the type of tale showing the victory of the weak and cunning
over the strong but stupid. See "The Turtle and the Lizard," p. 86.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](pft51.htm#fr_149) All the events here
given represent present-day occurrences, and the story appears to have
been invented purely to amuse.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](pft52.htm#fr_150) The headman of the
town.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](pft52.htm#fr_151) Here we have an
excellent illustration of how a story brought in by the Spaniards has
been worked over into Philippine setting. This is doubtless the
classical story of Midas, but since the ass is practically unknown in
the Philippines, horns (probably carabao horns) have been substituted
for the ass's ears, which grew on Midas' head. Likewise the bamboo,
which grows in abundance, takes the place of the reeds in the original
tale.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](pft54.htm#fr_152) A common fancy in Malay
legends is the supernatural origin of a child in some vegetable, usually
a bamboo. See note 2, p. 99.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](pft55.htm#fr_153) A bird something like a
hawk.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](pft55.htm#fr_154) See note 1, p. 134.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](pft56.htm#fr_155) This is undoubtedly a
worked-over story, probably brought in from Europe. Kings, queens,
palaces, etc., were, of course, unknown to the people before the advent
of the Spaniards.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](pft57.htm#fr_156) A long knife.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](pft57.htm#fr_157) The fermented juice of
the cocoanut.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](pft57.htm#fr_158) This tale bears a
striking resemblance to Grimm's "The Table, the Ass, and the Stick,"
*Fairy Tales*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](pft59.htm#fr_159) These Visayan tales
reflect old beliefs covered with a veneer of European ideas. The Visayan
still holds to many of the old superstitions, not because he has
reasoned them out for himself, but because his ancestors believed them
and transmitted them to him in such stories as these.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](pft59.htm#fr_160) A very old explanatory
tale. In a slightly varying form it is found in other parts of the
Islands.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](pft60.htm#fr_161) Here we have an old
type of tale explaining where monkeys came from. See note 2, p. 130.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](pft61.htm#fr_162) The blow-gun is a
Malayan weapon, which is used extensively in the Philippines. Among
certain wild tribes poisoned darts are blown through it, but among the
Christianized tribes a clay pellet is used.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](pft61.htm#fr_163) See note 1, p. 197.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](pft62.htm#fr_164) A Spanish coin worth
half a cent.
