[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas21)  [Next](ihas23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

#### RULES FOR APPLICANTS

There are certain aphorisms and injunctions which the applicant for
initiation needs to study and obey. There is a great distinction between
the terms "aspirant to the Path" and "applicant for initiation." He who
aspires and strives towards discipleship is in no way pledged to the
same specific attitude and discipline as is the applicant for
initiation, and he can, if he so choose, take as long as he desires in
the treading of the Probationary Path. The man who seeks initiation is
in a different position, and having once made application has to bring
his life under a definite rule, and a strict regime which is only
optional to the disciple.

The rules given here are fourteen in number, and are gathered from a
series of instructions compiled for those who seek to take the first
initiation.

RULES FOR APPLICANTS

*Rule 1*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the disciple search within the heart's deep cave. If there the fire
burns bright, warming his brother yet heating not himself, the hour has
come for making application to stand before the door.

</div>

When love for all beings, irrespective of who they may be, is beginning
to be a realised fact in the heart of a disciple, and yet nevertheless
love for himself exists not, then comes

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

the indication that he is nearing the Portal of Initiation, rand may
make the necessary preliminary pledges. These are necessitated before
his Master hands in his name as a candidate for initiation. If he cares
not for the suffering and pain of the lower self, if it is immaterial to
him whether happiness comes his way or not, if the sole purpose of his
life is to serve and save the world, and if his brother's need is for
him of greater moment than his own, then is the fire of love irradiating
his being, and the world can warm itself at his feet. This love has to
be a practical, tested manifestation, and not just a theory, nor simply
an impractical ideal and a pleasing sentiment. It is something that has
grown in the trials and tests of life, so that the primary impulse of
the life is towards self-sacrifice and the immolation of the lower
nature.

*Rule 2*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

When application has been made in triple form, then let the disciple
withdraw that application, and forget it has been made.

</div>

Herein lies one of the initial tests. The disciple's attitude of mind
must be that he cares not whether he takes initiation or not. Selfish
motive must not enter in. Only those applications which reach the Master
through the energy engendered through pure altruistic motive are
transmitted by Him to the recording angel of the Hierarchy; only those
disciples who seek initiation because of the added power to help and
bless that it confers, will find a response to their plea. Those
careless of initiation receive not the occult accolade, and those
anxious, through selfishness or curiosity, to participate in the
mysteries, enter not the door but remain knocking outside. Those who are
keen to serve, those who are weighed down with a sense of world need,
and the personal

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

responsibility thereby awakened, and who have fulfilled the law, knock
and meet with response, and make application which meets with
recognition. They are the ones who send forth a cry for added power to
aid, which penetrates to the ear of Those Who silently wait.

*Rule 3*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Triple the call must be, and long it takes to sound it forth. Let the
disciple sound the cry across the desert, over the sea, and through the
fires which separate him from the veiled and hidden door.

</div>

Under this symbology comes to the disciple the injunction to make the
desert of the physical plane life to blossom like the rose, so that from
the garden of the lower life may arise those sounds and scents, and a
vibration strong enough to cross the intervening space between it and
the portal; to still the restless waters of the emotional life, so that
in their limpid, still expanse, that portal may be reflected, and the
lower life mirror forth the spiritual life of the indwelling divinity;
to pass through the fiery furnace those motives, words, and thoughts
which are the mainspring of activity, and have their origin upon the
mental plane. When these three aspects of the manifesting Ego, the God
within, are brought under control, co-ordinated, and utilised, then,
even unconsciously to himself, will the voice of the disciple be heard,
demanding the opening of the door. When the lower life upon the physical
plane is fertilised, the emotional stabilised, and the mental
transmuted, then naught can prevent the latch upon that door being
lifted, and the disciple passing through. Only synchronous vibration to
that which lies the other side of the door produces its opening, and
when the key of the disciple's life is attuning itself to that

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

of the hierarchical life, then, one by one, the doors will open, and
nothing can keep them closed.

*Rule 4*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the disciple tend the evolution of the fire; nourish the lesser
lives, and thus keep the wheel revolving.

</div>

Here comes an injunction to the disciple to remember his responsibility
to those many lesser lives which, in their sum-total, compose his triple
body of manifestation. Thus is evolution possible, and thus each life,
in the different kingdoms of nature, consciously or unconsciously,
fulfils its function of rightly energising that which is to it as is the
planet to the sun. Thus will the unfolding of the plan logoic proceed
with greater accuracy. The kingdom of God is within, and the duty of
that inner hidden Ruler is twofold, first, to the lives which form the
bodies, physical, astral, and mental, and then to the macrocosm, the
world of which the microcosm is but an infinitesimal part.

*Rule 5*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the applicant see to it that the solar angel dims the light of the
lunar angels, remaining the sole luminary in the microcosmic sky.

</div>

To fulfil this injunction all applicants need to do two things, first,
to study their origin, to realise their own true psychology occultly
understood, and to become scientifically aware of the real nature of the
Ego, or the Higher Self, functioning in the causal body. Then they have
to assert upon the physical plane, through the medium of the three lower
bodies, their innate divinity, and to demonstrate in ever increasing
degree their essential value. Secondly, to study the constitution of
man, to understand the method

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

of functioning in the lower nature, to realise the interdependence and
interrelation of all living things, and thus bring the lesser lives,
which compose those three bodies of manifestation, under control. Thus
the solar Lord, the inner Reality, the Son of the Father, and the
Thinker on his own plane becomes the intermediary between that which is
of the earth, earthy, and that which finds its home within the sun. Two
verses in the Christian Bible hide something of this idea within
themselves, and students in the occident may find it helpful to meditate
upon them:—"The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our
Lord and of His Christ." "O Lord, our God, other lords beside Thee have
had dominion over us, but by Thee only will we make mention of Thy
name." The last verse is particularly interesting, as it demonstrates
the suppression of the lower sound and creative force by that which is
of higher origin.

*Rule 6*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The purificatory fires burn dim and low when the third is sacrificed to
the fourth. Therefore let the disciple refrain from taking life, and let
him nourish that which is lowest with the produce of the second.

</div>

This rule might be summed up in the trite instruction to each disciple
that he be strictly vegetarian. The lower nature becomes clogged and
heavy, and the inner blaze cannot shine forth when meat is included in
the diet. This is a drastic rule for applicants, and may not be
violated. Aspirants can choose to eat meat or not as they prefer, but at
a certain stage upon the path it is essential that all meat eating of
every kind be stopped, and the strictest attention must be paid to diet.
A disciple must confine himself to vegetables, grains, fruits and nuts.
Only thus can he build the

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

type of physical body which can stand the entry of the real man who has
stood in his subtler bodies before the Initiator. Should he not do this,
and should it be possible for him to take initiation without having thus
prepared himself, the physical body would be shattered by the energy
pouring through the newly stimulated centres, and dire danger to the
brain, the spine, or the heart would eventuate.

It must, of course, here be recognised that no hard or fast rules can
ever be laid down, except the initial one that for all applicants for
initiation meat, fish, and fermented liquors of all kinds, as well as
the use of tobacco, are absolutely forbidden. For those who can stand
it, eggs and cheese are sometimes better eliminated from the diet, but
this is not in any way compulsory. It is advisable always that those who
are in process of developing psychic faculties of any kind should not
permit themselves to eat eggs and very little cheese. Milk and butter
come under a different category, and most initiates and applicants find
it necessary to retain them in the diet. A few exceptional people can
subsist and retain their full physical energies on the diet mentioned in
the preceding paragraph. but there the ideal is embodied, and, as we all
know, the ideal is seldom attainable in the present transitional period.

In this connection two things should be emphasised:—First, the need that
all applicants have for common sense; this factor is very often lacking,
and students do well to remember that unbalanced fanatics are not
desirable members of the Hierarchy. Equilibrium, a just sense of
proportion, a due regard for environing conditions, and a sane common
sense are the marks of the true occultist. When a real sense of humour
exists likewise, many dangers will be avoided. Secondly, a recognition
of *time*, and an ability to move slowly when effecting changes in the
diet and in the habits of a lifetime. Everything in nature progresses

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

slowly, and applicants must learn the occult truth of the words:—"Make
haste slowly." A process of gradual elimination is usually the path of
wisdom, and this eliminating period should—under ideal conditions which
so seldom exist —cover the stage which we call that of the aspirant, so
that when a man becomes an applicant for initiation he will have done
the necessary preparatory purification of the diet.

*Rule 7*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the disciple turn his attention to the enunciating of those sounds
which echo in the halls where walks the Master. Let him not sound the
lesser notes which awaken vibration within the halls of Maya.

</div>

The disciple who seeks to enter within the Portals of Initiation cannot
do so until he has learnt the power of speech and the power of silence.
This has a deeper and a wider significance than perhaps is apparent, for
it holds, if rightly interpreted, the key to manifestation, the clue to
the great cycles, and the revelation of the purpose underlying pralaya.
Until a man comprehends the significance of the spoken word, and until
he utilises the silence of the high places for the bringing about of
desired effects on one plane or another, he cannot be admitted into
those realms wherein every sound and every word spoken produces powerful
results in matter of some kind, being energised by two predominant
factors, (a) a powerful will, scientifically applied, (b) right motive,
purified in the fires.

An adept is a creator in mental matter, an originator of impulses on the
mental plane, thereby producing results in astral or physical
manifestation. These results are powerful and effective, and hence the
necessity for their originator to be pure in thought, accurate in word,
and skilful in

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

action. When these ideas are realised by applicants, the immediate
consequence will be important changes in the life of every day. These
changes might, for the sake of their practical use, be enumerated as
follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. Motives will be closely searched, and a strict check will be kept
upon originating impulses. Hence during the first year in which the
applicant devotes himself to the work of preparation for initiation he
will, three times a day, keep a written account of the investigations he
pursues, which concern his motives, or the mainspring of action.

b\. Speech will be watched, and an endeavour will be made to eliminate
all unkind, unnecessary and wasteful words. The effects of the spoken
word will be studied, and be traced back to those originating impulses
which, in every case, initiate action upon the physical plane.

c\. Silence will be cultivated, and applicants will be careful to
preserve strict silence concerning themselves, their occult work or.
knowledge, the affairs of those associated with them, and the work of
their occult group. Only in group circles or in connection with their
superiors will a wise latitude in speech he permitted. There is a time
to speak. That time comes when the group can be served by wise words, a
careful intimation of conditions, good or bad, and a rare, but necessary
word to some brother concerning the inner life, or to some superior or
group of officials, in cases where a brother may he hindering a group
through error of some kind, or might help the group if put to different
work.

d\. The effect of the Sacred Word will be studied, and conditions for
its use wisely arranged. The sounding <span id="page_200">p. 200</span>
of the Word, and its effect upon a particular esoteric centre (not in
any case whatsoever a physical centre) will be watched, and the life
thereby influenced and regulated.

</div>

The whole question of the study of sound and of words, sacred or
otherwise, has to be taken up by applicants for initiation. This is
something which must be faced more strenuously by all eventuating occult
groups.

*Rule 8*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

When the disciple nears the portal, the Greater Seven must awaken and
bring forth response from the lesser seven upon the double circle.

</div>

This rule is a very difficult one, and one which holds in it the
elements of danger for the man who undertakes too early to tread the
final path. Literally it can be interpreted thus: The would-be initiate
must develop somewhat the vibration of the seven head centres, and thus
sweep into increased vibratory activity the seven centres in the body
upon the etheric plane; affecting also, through reciprocal vibration,
the seven physical centres which are inevitably stimulated when the
etheric centres approach their maximum vibration. It is not necessary to
enlarge upon this point beyond pointing out that as the seven centres
within the head become responsive to the Ego the following seven
centres,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The head, considered as a unit,

2\. The heart,

3\. The throat,

4\. The solar plexus,

5\. The base of the spine, <span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

6\. The spleen,

7\. The organs of generation,

</div>

are also affected, but affected along the line of purification and
control. This will produce results in the definitely physical organs
through which man functions on the physical plane. In illustration:—Man
can then transfer consciously the creative fire and energy from the
organs of generation à to the throat, or, through the conscious control
of the heart, produce suspended animation of the physical body. This is
not achieved through what is called Hatha Yoga practices, or
concentrating the attention upon the physical organs, but through the
development of the control by the inner God, Who works through the head
centre and thus dominates all else.

The applicant, therefore, will bend all his energies towards the
development of the spiritual life, which development will be the outcome
of right thinking, meditation, and service. Through deep study of all
there is to be known concerning energy and its focal points, he will
co-ordinate his life so that the life of the spirit may flow through it.
This study can only be safely undertaken at present in group work and
under guidance from a teacher; the pupils will pledge themselves to
permit no experimentation in their lives, and no careless trifling with
the fires of the body. They will simply apply themselves to a
theoretical comprehension and a life of service.

The centres will then develop normally, whilst the applicant bends his
attention to loving his brother perfectly in truth and in deed, to
serving wholeheartedly, to thinking intelligently, and to keeping a
close watch upon himself. He will also record all that seems to him in
his inner life to be concerned with the evolution of the centres. This
record can be surveyed by the teacher, comment made, deduction

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

sought, and the quota of information thus gained filed for group
reference. In this way much knowledge can be stored up for use.

The applicant who misuses knowledge, who indulges in such practices as
"breathing for development," or concentrating upon the centres, will
inevitably fail in his endeavour to reach the portal, and will pay the
price in his body by the appearance of insanity, of neurasthenic
conditions, and various physical ills.

*Rule 9*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the disciple merge himself within the circle of his other selves.
Let but one colour blend them and their unity appear. Only when the
group is known and sensed can energy be wisely emanated.

</div>

One thing all disciples and applicants for initiation have to do is to
find that particular group of servers to which they belong on the inner
plane, to recognise them upon the physical plane, and to unite with them
in service for the race. This recognition will be based upon:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. Unity of aim.

b\. Oneness of vibration.

c\. Identity in group affiliation.

d\. Karmic links of long standing.

e\. Ability to work in harmonious relation.

</div>

Superficially, this may appear one of the easiest of the rules, but in
practice it is not so. Mistakes are easily made, and the problem of
working harmoniously in group alignment is not so simple as it may
appear. Egoic vibration and relationship may exist, yet the outer
personalities may not harmonise. It is the work, then, of the applicant
to strengthen the grip of his Ego upon his personality, so that

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the esoteric group relation may become possible upon the physical plane.
He will do this by the disciplining of his own personality, and not by
the correction of his brothers.

*Rule 10*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Army of the Voice, the devas in their serried ranks, work
ceaselessly. Let the disciple apply himself to the consideration of
their methods; let him learn the rules whereby that Army works within
the veils of Maya.

</div>

This rule refers to the work of occult investigation, which must be
pursued at some time or another by all who seek initiation. Though it is
not safe for the uninitiated to tamper with the parallel evolution of
the devas, yet it is necessary and safe to investigate the procedure
pursued by the builders, the methods followed by them, in reproducing
from the archetype, via the etheric that which we call physical
manifestation; their groups must be somewhat theoretically cognised, and
the sounds whereby they are swept into activity considered. This
involves, therefore, the organised study, by all applicants, of:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The purpose of sound.

2\. The esoteric meaning of words, of grammar, and of syntax.

3\. The laws of vibration and of electricity, and many other subsidiary
studies which concern themselves with the manifestation of divinity and
consciousness through the medium of deva substance and the activity of
the controlling devas. The laws of the macrocosm will be investigated,
and the correspondence between the activities of the microcosm, and the
active manifestation of the macrocosm will be recognised.

</div>

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

*Rule 11*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the disciple transfer the fire from the lower triangle to the
higher, and preserve that which is created through the fire of the
midway point.

</div>

This means, literally, the control by the initiate of the sex impulse,
as usually understood, and the transference of the fire which now
normally vitalises the generative organs to the throat centre, thus
leading to creation upon the mental plane through the agency of mind.
That which is to be created must then be nourished and sustained by the
love energy of nature issuing from the heart centre.

The lower triangle referred to is:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The solar plexus.

2\. The base of the spine.

3\. The generative organs.

</div>

Whilst the higher one is, as pointed out:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The head.

2\. The throat.

3\. The heart.

</div>

This might be interpreted by the superficial reader as an injunction to
the celibate life, and the pledging of the applicant to abstain from all
physical manifestation of the sex impulse. This is not so. Many
initiates have attained their objective when duly and wisely
participating in the marriage relation. An initiate cultivates a
peculiar attitude of mind, wherein there is a recognition that all forms
of manifestation are divine, and that the physical plane is as much a
form of divine expression as any of the higher planes. He realises that
the lowest manifestation of divinity must be under the conscious control
of that indwelling divinity, and

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

it that all acts of every kind should be regulated by the endeavour to
fulfil every duty and obligation, to control every action and deed, and
to utilise the physical vehicle so that the group may be thereby
benefited and aided in its spiritual progress, and the law perfectly
fulfilled.

That it may be advisable, at certain stages, for a man to perfect
control along any particular line through a temporary abstention is not
to be denied, but that is a means to an end, and will be succeeded by
stages when—the control having been gained—the man demonstrates
perfectly through the medium of the physical body, the attributes of
divinity, and every centre will be normally and wisely used, and thus
race purposes furthered.

Initiates and Masters, in many cases marry, and normally perform their
duties as husbands, wives, and householders, but all is controlled and
regulated by purpose and intention, and none is carried away by passion
or desire. In the perfect man upon the physical plane, all the centres
are under complete control, and their energy is legitimately used; the
spiritual will of the divine inner God is the main factor, and there
will be a unity of effort shown on all the planes through all the
centres for the greatest good o£ the greatest number.

This point has been touched upon because so many students go astray upon
these matters, and cultivate either an attitude of mind which results in
the complete atrophying of the entire normal physical nature, or indulge
in an orgy of license under the specious plea of "stimulating the
centres," and thus furthering astral development. The true initiate
should be known by his wise and sanctified normality, by his steady
conformity to that which is best for the group as emphasised by the
group laws of the land, by his control and his refraining Non, excess of
any kind, and by

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

the example he sets to his environing associates of spiritual living and
moral rectitude, coupled with the discipline of his life.

*Rule 12*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Let the disciple learn the use of the hand in service; let him seek the
mark of the messenger in his feet, and let him learn to see with the eye
that looks out from between the two.

</div>

This rule looks easy of interpretation upon the first reading, and seems
to enjoin upon the applicant the use of the hands in service, of the
feet upon hierarchical errands, and the development of clairvoyance. But
the real meaning is much more esoteric. Occultly understood, the "use of
the hands" is the utilisation of the chakras (or centres) in the palms
of the hands in:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. Healing bodily ills.

b\. Blessing, and thus curing emotional ills.

c\. Raised in prayer, or the use of the centres of the hands during
meditation in the manipulation of mental matter and currents.

</div>

These three points will bear careful consideration, and much may be
learnt by occidental students from the study of the life of Christ, and
a consideration of His methods in using His hands. More cannot be said
here, as the subject is too vast to be enlarged upon in this brief
commentary.

The "mark of the messenger" in the feet, is a reference to that
well-known symbol of the wings on the heels of Mercury. Much upon this
subject will he revealed to students in occult schools who will gather
together all that can be found concerning the Messenger of the Gods, and
who also will study with care information which astrological

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

students have gleaned anent the planet Mercury, and which occult
students have gathered concerning the inner round.

On the surface, the expression "the eye which looks out from between the
two" seems to signify the third eye, which clairvoyants utilise, but the
meaning is very much deeper than that, and lies hidden in the following
facts:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. That the inner vision is that which all self-conscious beings, from
a Logos to a man, are in process of developing.

b\. That the Ego, or Higher Self, is literally to the Monad what the
third eye is to man, and therefore is described as looking out from
between the Monad or spiritual self on the one hand, and the personal
self on the other.

</div>

In the fullest sense, therefore, this rule incites the applicant to
develop self-consciousness, and thus learn to function in the causal
body on the higher levels of the mental plane, controlling from thence
all the lower vehicles and seeing clearly all that can be seen in the
three worlds, in the past and in the future.

*Rule 13*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Four things the disciple must learn and comprehend before he can be
shewn that inmost mystery: first, the laws of that which radiates; the
five meanings of magnetisation make the second; the third is
transmutation, or the secret lost of alchemy; and lastly the first
letter of the Word which has been imparted, or the hidden name egoic.

</div>

This rule cannot be enlarged upon. It concerns mysteries and subjects
too immense to be fully handled here. It is

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

included in these rules so that it may form a subject for meditation,
for study, and for group discussion.

The final rule is very brief and consists of five words.

*Rule 14*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Listen, touch, see, apply, know.

</div>

These words concern what the Christian might aptly call the consecration
of the three major senses, and their utilisation in the evolution of the
inner spiritual life, application then made of that which is learnt and
ascertained, followed by the fruition of realised knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Esoteric Catechism](ihas23)
