[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas09)  [Next](ihas11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### THE PROBATIONARY PATH

*Preparation for Initiation*.

The Probationary Path precedes the Path of Initiation or Holiness, and
marks that period in the life of a man when he definitely sets himself
on the side of the forces of evolution, and works at the building of his
own character. He takes himself in hand, cultivates the qualities that
are lacking in his disposition, and seeks with diligence to bring his
personality under control. He is building the causal body with
deliberate intent, filling any gaps that may exist, and seeking to make
it a fit receptacle for the Christ principle. The analogy between the
prenatal period in the history of the human being and that of the
development of the indwelling spirit is curiously interesting. We might
look at it in this way:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The moment of conception, corresponding to that of
individualisation.

2\. Nine months’ gestation, corresponding to the wheel of life.

3\. The first initiation, corresponding to the birth hour.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Probationary
Path corresponds to the latter period of gestation, to the building in
the heart of the babe in Christ. At the first initiation this babe
starts on the pilgrimage of the Path. The first initiation stands simply
for commencement. A certain structure of right living, thinking, and
conduct has been built up. That form we call character. It has now to he
vivified and indwelt. Thackeray has well described this process of
building, in the words so often quoted:—

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Sow a thought and
reap an action; sow an action and reap a habit; sow a habit and reap
character; sow character and reap destiny."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The immortal
destiny of each and all of us is to attain the consciousness of the
higher self, and subsequently that of the Divine Spirit. When the form
is ready, when Solomon's temple has been built in the quarry of the
personal life, then the Christ-life enters, and the glory of the Lord
overshadows His temple. The form becomes vibrant. Therein lies the
difference between theory and making that theory part of oneself. One
can have a perfect image or picture, but it lacks life. The life can be
modelled on the divine as far as may be; it may be an excellent copy but
lacks the indwelling Christ principle. The germ has been there, but it
has lain dormant. Now it is fostered and brought to the birth and the
first initiation is attained.

Whilst the man is on the Probationary Path he is taught principally to
know himself, to ascertain his weaknesses and to correct them. He is
taught to work as an invisible helper at first and for several lives is
generally kept at this kind of work. Later, as he makes progress, he may
be moved to more selected work. He is taught the rudiments of the Divine
Wisdom and is entered into the final grades in the Hall of Learning. He
is known to a Master, and is in the care (for definite teaching) of one
of the disciples of that Master, or, if of rare promise, of an initiate.

Classes are held by initiates of the first and second degrees, for
accepted disciples and those on probation, between the hours of ten and
five every night in all parts of the world, so that the continuity of
the teaching is complete. They gather in the Hall of Learning and the
method is much the same as in the big Universities,—classes at certain
hours, experimental work, examinations, and a

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

gradual moving up and onward as the tests are passed. A number of the
Egos on the Probationary Path are in the department that is analogous to
the High School; others have matriculated and are in the University
itself. Graduation results when initiation is taken and the initiate
passes into the Hall of Wisdom.

Advanced Egos and the spiritually inclined, who are not yet on the
Probationary Path, attend instructions from disciples, and on occasions
large classes are conducted for their benefit by initiates. Their work
is more rudimentary, though occult from a worldly standpoint, and they
learn under supervision to be invisible helpers. The invisible helpers
are usually recruited from amongst the advanced Egos. The very advanced,
and those on the Probationary Path and nearing initiation, work more
frequently in what might be termed departmental work, forming a group of
assistants to the Members of the Hierarchy.

*Methods of teaching*.

Three departments of instruction watch over three parts of man's
development.

First: Instruction is given tending to the disciplining of the life, the
growth of character, the development of the microcosm along cosmic
lines. The man is taught the meaning of himself; he comes to know
himself as a complex, complete unit, a replica in miniature of the outer
world. In learning the laws of his own being, comes comprehension of the
Self, and a realisation of the basic laws of the system.

Secondly: Instruction is given as to the macrocosm, the amplification of
his intellectual grip of the working of the cosmos. Information as to
the kingdoms of nature, teaching as to the laws of those kingdoms, and
instruction as to the working of those laws in all kingdoms and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

on all planes is given him. He acquires a deep fund of general
knowledge, and when he reaches his own periphery he is met by those who
lead him on to encyclopaedic knowledge. When he has attained the goal,
he may not know every single thing that there is to be known in all the
three worlds, but the way to know, the sources of knowledge and the
reservoirs of information are in his hand. A Master can at any time find
out anything on any possible subject without the slightest difficulty.

Thirdly: Instruction is given in what might be termed *synthesis*. This
information is only possible as the intuitional vehicle co-ordinates. It
is really the occult apprehension of the law of gravitation or
attraction, (the basic law of this, the second solar system) with all
its corollaries. The disciple learns the meaning of occult cohesion, and
of that internal unity which holds the system as a homogeneous unit. The
major part of this instruction is usually given after the third
initiation, but a beginning is made early in the training.

*Masters and disciples*.

Disciples and advanced Egos on the Probationary Path receive instruction
at this particular time for two special purposes:—

\(a\) To test out their fitness for special work lying in the future,
the type of that work being known only to the Guides of the race. They
are tested for aptitude in community living with a view to drafting the
suitable ones into the colony of the sixth sub-race. They are tested for
various lines of work, many incomprehensible to us now, but which will
become ordinary methods of development as time progresses. The Masters
also test for those in whom the intuition has reached a point of
development that indicates a beginning of the co-ordination of the
buddhic

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

vehicle, or—to be exact—has reached a point where molecules of the
seventh sub-plane of the buddhic plane can be discerned in the aura of
the Ego. When this is so They can go ahead with confidence in the work
of instruction, knowing that certain imparted facts will be understood.

\(b\) Instruction is being given at this time to a special group of
people who have come into incarnation at this critical period of the
world's history. They have come in, all at the same time, throughout the
world, to do the work of *linking up the two planes, the physical and
astral, via the etheric*.

This sentence is for serious consideration, for it covers the work that
a number of the newer generation have come to do. In this linking up of
the two planes people are required who are polarised in their mental
bodies (or, if not polarised there, are nevertheless well rounded out
and balanced) and can therefore work safely and with intelligence in
this type of work. It necessitates primarily people in whose vehicles
can be found a certain proportion of atomic sub-plane matter, so that
direct communication can be effected between the higher and the lower
via the atomic cross-section of the causal body. This is not easy to
explain clearly, but a consideration of the diagram in "A Study in
Consciousness," by Mrs. Besant, page 27, may be helpful in explaining
some matters that are apt to puzzle.

We must recognise two things in pondering the subject of the Masters and
Their disciples. First, that in the Hierarchy nothing is lost through
failure to recognise the law of economy. Every expenditure of force on
the part of a Master or Teacher is subjected to wise foresight and
discrimination. just as we do not put university professors to teach the
beginners, so the Masters Themselves work not individually with men
until they have attained a certain stage of evolution and are ready to
profit by Their instruction.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

Secondly, we must remember that each of us is recognised by the
brilliance of his light. This is an occult fact. The finer the grade of
matter built into our bodies, the more brilliantly will shine forth the
indwelling light. Light is vibration, and through the measurement of
vibration is fixed the grading of the scholars. Hence nothing can
prevent a man's progress forward if he but attends to the purification
of his vehicles. The light within will shine forth with ever greater
clarity, as the refining process goes on, until—when atomic matter
predominates—great will be the glory of that inner man. We are all
graded, therefore, if it may be so expressed, according to the magnitude
of the light, according to the rate of vibration, according to the
purity of the tone and the clarity of the colour. Who our Teacher is
depends therefore upon our grading. Similarity of vibration holds the
secret. We are frequently told that when the demand is forceful enough
the Teacher will appear. When we build in the right vibrations and
attune ourselves to the right key, nothing can prevent our finding the
Master.

Groups of Egos are formed:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. According to their ray.

2\. According to their sub-ray.

3\. According to their rate of vibration.

</div>

They are also grouped for purposes of classification:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. As Egos, according to the egoic ray.

2\. As personalities, according to the sub-ray which is governing the
personality.

</div>

All are graded and charted. The Masters have Their Halls of Records,
with a system of tabulation incomprehensible to us owing to its
magnitude and its necessary intricacies, wherein these charts are kept.
They are under

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

the care of a Chohan of a Ray, each ray having its own collection of
charts. These charts, being in many sections (dealing with incarnate,
discarnate, and perfected Egos), are again all under the care of
subordinate guardians. The Lipika Lords, with Their vast band of helpers
are the most frequent users of these charts. Many discarnate egos
awaiting incarnation or having just left the earth, sacrifice their time
in heaven to assist in this work. These Halls of Records are mostly on
the lowest levels of the mental plane and the highest of the astral, as
they can be there most fully utilised and are most easily accessible.

Initiates receive instruction directly from the Masters or from some of
the great devas or angels. These teachings are usually imparted at night
in small classes, or individually (should the occasion warrant it) in
the Master's private study. The above applies to initiates in
incarnation or on the inner planes. If on causal levels, they receive
instruction at any time deemed advisable direct from the Master to the
Ego on causal levels.

Disciples are taught in groups in the Master's ashram, or classroom, at
night, if in incarnation. Apart from these regular gatherings, in order
to receive direct teaching from the Master, a disciple (for some
specific reason) may be called to the Master's study for a private
interview. This occurs when a Master wishes to see a disciple for
commendation, warning, or to decide if initiation is desirable. The
major part of a disciple's tuition is left in the hands of some initiate
or more advanced disciple, who watches over his younger brother, and is
responsible to the Master for his progress, handing in regular reports.
Karma is largely the arbiter of this relation.

Just at present, owing to the great need in the world, a slightly
different policy is being pursued. An intensified training is being
given to some disciples by some Masters

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Who have not
hitherto taken pupils. The press of work on the Masters Who do take
disciples being so great, They have delegated some of Their most
promising pupils to some other Masters, drafting them into small groups
for a brief period. The experiment is being tried of intensifying the
teaching, and of subjecting disciples, not initiates, to the frequent
strong vibration of a Master. It involves risk, but, if the experiment
proves successful, will tend to the greater assisting of the race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Discipleship](ihas11)
