[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas12)  [Next](ihas14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### THE UNIVERSALITY OF INITIATION

It has been emphasised many times in the occult teachings that the
process of initiation, as it is usually understood, is an abnormal and
not a normal one. All progression in the realm of consciousness is
naturally by a graded series of awakenings, but this would proceed much
more gradually and cover a longer period of time than is the case under
our present planetary conditions. This particular mode of developing the
consciousness of the human family was initiated by the Hierarchy during
the Atlantean root-race at the latter end of the fourth sub-race, and
will persist until the middle of the next round. At that time the needed
stimulus will have been imparted, and as three-fifths of the human
family will then have esoterically "set their feet upon the path," and a
large percentage of them will then be in process of becoming the Path
itself, the more normal routine will again be resumed.

*Initiation on the various planets*.

The process of stimulation of the human Egos by means of graded
instructions, and the application of the dynamic electrical force of the
Rod is employed on three of the planets of our system at this time. It
is instituted during every fourth round, and its peculiar interest lies
in the fact that the emphasis for the fourth Creative Hierarchy in every
fourth chain and globe during the fourth round is laid upon the fourth
initiation, that of the Crucifixion. The fourth Creative Hierarchy is
the great expression of the conscious

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

will and sacrifice of the Solar Logos, and the great symbol of the
intelligent union of spirit and matter. Hence the fourth initiation,
with its presentation of these cosmic truths, and its epitomising of the
purpose of this fundamental sacrifice, has a pre-eminent place.

The student needs to remind himself that the other planetary schemes,
though fundamentally the same as our fourth scheme, yet have their
profound differences in manifestation, due to the varying
characteristics and the individual karma of the incarnating Planetary
Logos or Ray. These differences affect:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The initiatory process, both in its ceremonial and altruistic
aspects.

b\. The application of the Rod, for the type of force which it embodies,
when brought into conjunction with the differentiated force of the
planetary type, produces results of varying nature and degree.

c\. The seasons of initiation. The Egos in incarnation on any planet
will—according to ray type—be easily stimulated or not as the case may
be, according to astrological conditions, and this will produce shorter
or more protracted periods of development prior to or between each
initiation.

d\. The electrical phenomena produced on the higher planes, as more and
more the human units esoterically "blaze forth." It must be remembered
that the entire solar system, with all that is included therein, is
expressing itself in terms of light, and that the process of initiation
might therefore be regarded as one in which the different points of
light (or human sparks) are stimulated, their radiance and temperature
increased, and the sphere of influence of each light extended in radius.

</div>

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

The three planetary schemes wherein the great experiment of initiation
is being tried are the Earth, Venus, and one other. Venus was the first
sphere of experiment, and the success of the endeavour and the force
generated was the cause of a similar effort being made on our planet. No
planet increases its store of force, and consequently its sphere of
influence, without incurring obligations and affecting other schemes;
the interchange of force and energy between these two planets, Earth and
Venus, is continuous. A similar process has but lately been instituted
on another planetary scheme, and when, in the next round, our Earth
attains a point in evolution analogous to that of the Venusian scheme at
the time its influence was felt by us, then we shall aid in the
stimulation of still another group of planetary Egos; we shall assist in
the institution of a similar procedure among the sons of men in another
scheme.

In the three great planetary schemes, Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn, the
method of initiation will not be employed. They will be the recipients
of those who are esoterically "saved" from among the other schemes. That
is to say that all those who, in any scheme, achieve the needed
expansions of consciousness (such as will be achieved by the majority of
the human family prior to the middle of the next great cycle, or round),
will be considered "saved," whilst the remainder will be held to be
failures, and will be held over for further development during later
periods, or will be transferred to those planetary schemes which from
the point of view of time are not so far advanced as our Earth scheme.
These three major schemes are the absorbers and synthesisers of the
energy of the others.

*Initiation and the Devas*.

The question may be asked whether the devas undergo initiation, and we
might deal briefly with the point here.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Initiation has to do with the conscious development of the self, and
concerns the wisdom aspect of the One Self. It presupposes the
development of the intelligence principle, and involves the apprehension
by the human unit of purpose and of will, and his intelligent
participation therein through love and service. The devas, with the
exception of those greater devas who have in earlier cycles passed
through the human kingdom and are now co-operating in the evolution of
man, are not as yet self-conscious. They grow and develop through
*feeling* and not through the power of conscious thought. Man, however,
grows through expansions of self-conscious realisation, self-initiated
and self-imposed. It is the line of aspiration and of conscious
endeavour, and is the most difficult line of development in the solar
system, for it follows not along the line of least resistance, but seeks
to initiate and impose a higher rhythm. The devas follow the line of
least resistance, and seek to appropriate and experience in fullest tide
of feeling and sentiency the vibration of *things as they are*.
Therefore the method for them is an ever-increasing intensity of
appreciation for the feeling of the moment, and not, as in man, an
ever-increasing depreciation of things as they are, or of the material
aspect, which leads to an endeavour to reach out and enfold within his
consciousness the subjective reality, or the things of the spirit—this
in contradistinction to the objective unreality, or the things of
matter. The devas seek to feel, whilst man seeks to know. For the
former, then, those expansions of consciousness which we call
[Initiation](errata.htm#1), exist not, except in the cases of those
advanced beings who, having passed through the human stage, both feel
and know, and who, under the evolutionary law, expand their knowledge in
ever-increasing degree.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

*Cosmic influences and solar initiations*.

All that can be done here in dealing with this profound subject is to
enumerate briefly some of the cosmic influences which definitely affect
our earth, and produce results in the consciousness of men everywhere,
and which, during the process of initiation, bring about certain
specific phenomena.

First and foremost is the energy or force emanating from the *sun
Sirius*. If it might be so expressed, the energy of thought, or mind
force, in its totality, reaches the solar system from a distant cosmic
centre via Sirius. Sirius acts as the transmitter, or the focalising
centre, whence emanate those influences which produce self-consciousness
in man. During initiation, by means of the Rod of Initiation (acting as
a subsidiary transmitter and as a powerful magnet) this energy is
momentarily intensified, and applied to the centres of the initiate with
terrific force; were it not that the Hierophant and the two sponsors of
the initiate pass it primarily through their bodies, it would be more
than he could stand. This increase of mind energy results in an
expansion and an apprehension of the truth as it is, and is lasting in
its effects. It is felt primarily in the throat centre, the great organ
of creation through sound.

Another type of energy reaches man from the *Pleiades*, passing through
the Venusian scheme to us, just as the Sirian energy passes through the
Saturnian. It has a definite effect upon the causal body, and serves to
stimulate the heart centre.

A third type of energy is applied to the initiate, and affects his head
centre. It emanates from that one of the seven stars of the *Great Bear*
whose ensouling life holds the same relationship to our Planetary Logos
as the Ego does to a human being. This energy, therefore, is seven-fold,
and differs according to a man's ray or type.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

It is not possible here to state the order of the application of these
varying types of energy, nor to give the initiation during which the man
contacts the different types. These facts involve the secrets of the
mysteries, and no purpose is served by revealing them. Other types of
force from certain of the planetary schemes, as well as from cosmic
centres, are brought into play by the Initiator and transmitted through
the medium of the Rod to the various centres in the initiate's three
vehicles, the mental, the astral, and the etheric centres. At the fourth
initiation a specialised type of force from a centre which must remain
nameless is applied to a man's causal body, and is one of the causes of
its final disintegration.

In thinking of this matter of the attainment of the sons of men, we must
recognise that as mankind completes one unification after another, the
"Heavenly Men" on intuitional levels and on spiritual levels are
completed, and in their turn go to the formation of the centres in the
great "Heavenly Men" of the solar system. These seven Heavenly Men, in
Whose bodies each human Monad and each deva finds his place, form the
seven centres in the body of the Logos. He, in His turn, forms the Heart
centre (for God is Love) of a still greater Entity. The consummation of
all for this solar system will be when the Logos takes His fifth
initiation. When all the sons of men attain the fifth initiation, He
achieves. This is a great mystery and incomprehensible to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Participants in the Mysteries](ihas14)
