[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bsd19)  [Next](bsd21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FU5NUK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Bushido, the Soul of Japan*, by Inazo Nitobe, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

# CHAPTER XV

## THE INFLUENCE OF BUSHIDO

THUS far we have brought into view only a few of the more prominent
peaks which rise above the range of knightly virtues, in themselves so
much more elevated then the general level of our national life. As the
sun in its rising first tips the highest peaks with russet hue, and then
gradually casts its rays on the valley below, so the ethical system
which first enlightened the military order drew in course of time
followers from amongst the masses. Democracy raises up a natural prince
for its leader, and aristocracy infuses a princely spirit among the
people. Virtues are no less contagious than vices. "There needs but one
wise man in a company, and all are wise, so rapid is the contagion,"
says Emerson. No social class or

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

caste can resist the diffusive power of moral influence.

Prate as we may of the triumphant march of Anglo-Saxon liberty, rarely
has it received impetus from the masses. Was it not rather the work of
the squires and *gentlemen*? Very truly does M. Taine say, "These three
syllables, as used across the channel, summarise the history of English
society." Democracy may make self-confident retorts to such a statement
and fling back the question--"When Adam delved and Eve span, where then
was the gentleman?" All the more pity that a gentleman was not present
in Eden! The first parents missed him sorely and paid a high price for
his absence. Had he been there, not only would the garden have been more
tastefully dressed, but they would have learned without painful
experience that disobedience to Jehovah was disloyalty and dishonour,
treason and rebellion.

What Japan was she owed to the samurai. They were not only the flower of
the nation, but its root as well. All the gracious gifts of

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heaven flowed
through them. Though they kept themselves socially aloof from the
populace, they set a moral standard for them and guided them by their
example. I admit Bushido had its esoteric and exoteric teachings; these
were eudemonic, looking after the welfare and happiness of the
commonalty; those were aretaic, emphasising the practice of virtues for
their own sake.

In the most chivalrous days of Europe, knights formed numerically but a
small fraction of the population, but, as Emerson says,--"In English
literature half the drama and all the novels, from Sir Philip Sidney to
Sir Walter Scott, paint this figure (gentleman)." Write in place of
Sidney and Scott, Chikamatsu and Bakin, and you have in a nutshell the
main features of the literary history of Japan.

The innumerable avenues of popular amusement and instruction-the
theatres, the story-tellers' booths, the preacher's dais, the musical
recitations, the novels,--have taken for their chief theme the stories
of the samurai.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The peasants
around the open fire in their huts never tire of repeating the
achievements of Yoshitsuné and his faithful retainer Benkéi, or of the
two brave Soga brothers; the dusky urchins listen with gaping mouths
until the last stick bums out and the fire dies in its embers, still
leaving their hearts aglow with tale that is told. The clerks and the
shop boys, after their day's work is over and the *amado* <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) of the store are closed, gather together
to relate the story of Nobunaga and Hidéyoshi far into the night, until
slumber overtakes their weary eyes and transports them from the drudgery
of the counter to the exploits of the field. The very babe just
beginning to toddle is taught to lisp the adventures of Momotaro, the
daring conqueror of ogreland. Even girls are so imbued with the love of
knightly deeds and virtues that, like Desdemona, they would seriously
incline to devour with greedy ear the romance of the samurai.

The samurai grew to be the *beau ideal* of

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the whole race. "As among flowers the cherry is queen, so among men the
samurai is lord," so sang the populace. Debarred from commercial
pursuits, the military class itself did not aid commerce; but there was
no channel of human activity, no avenue of thought, which did not
receive in some measure an impetus from Bushido. Intellectual and moral
Japan was directly or indirectly the work of Knighthood.

Mr. Mallock, in his exceedingly suggestive book, *Aristocracy and
Evolution*, has eloquently told us that "social evolution, in so far as
it is other than biological, may be defined as the unintended result of
the intentions of great men"; further, that historical progress is
produced by a struggle "not among the community generally, to live, but
a struggle amongst a small section of the community to lead, to direct,
to employ, the majority in the best way." Whatever may be said about the
soundness of his argument, these statements are amply verified in the
part played by bushi in the

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

social progress, so far as it went, of our Empire.

How the spirit of Bushido permeated all social classes is also shown in
the development of a certain order of men, known as *otoko-daté*, the
natural leaders of democracy. Staunch fellows were they, every inch of
them strong with the strength of massive manhood. At once the spokesmen
and the guardians of popular rights, they had each a following of
hundreds and thousands of souls who proffered, in the same fashion that
samurai did to *daimio*, the willing service of "limb and life, of body,
chattels, and earthly honour." Backed by a vast multitude of rash and
impetuous working men, these born "bosses" formed a formidable check to
the rampancy of the two-sworded order.

In manifold ways has Bushido filtered down from the social class where
it originated, and acted as leaven among the masses, furnishing a moral
standard for the whole people. The Precepts of Knighthood, begun at
first as the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

glory of the *élite*, became in time an aspiration and inspiration to
the nation at large; and though the populace could not attain the moral
height of those loftier souls, yet *Yamato Damashii*, the Soul of Japan,
ultimately came to express the *Volksgeist* of the Island Realm. If
religion is no more than "Morality touched by emotion," as Matthew
Arnold defines it, few ethical systems are better entitled to the rank
of religion than Bushido. Motoöri has put the mute utterance of the
nation into words when he sings:

"Isles of blest Japan!  
   Should your Yamato spirit  
Strangers seek to scan,  
   Say--scenting morn's sunlit air,  
   Blows the cherry wild and fair!"

Yes, the *sakura* <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) has for ages been
the favourite of our people and the emblem of our character. Mark
particularly the terms of definition which the poet uses, the words the
*wild cherry flower scenting the morning sun*.

The Yamato spirit is not a tame, tender

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

plant, but a wild--in the sense of natural--growth; it is indigenous to
the soil; its accidental qualities it may share with the flowers of
other lands, but in its essence it remains the original, spontaneous
outgrowth of our clime. But its nativity is not its sole claim to our
affection. The refinement and grace of its beauty appeal to *our*
æsthetic sense as no other flower can. We cannot share the admiration of
the Europeans for their roses, which lack the simplicity of our flower.
Then, too, the thorns that are hidden beneath the sweetness of the rose,
the tenacity with which she clings to life, as though loth or afraid to
die rather than drop untimely, preferring to rot on her stem; her showy
colours and heavy odours--all these are traits so unlike our flower,
which carries no dagger or poison under its beauty, which is ever ready
to depart life at the call of nature, whose colours are never gorgeous,
and whose light fragrance never palls. Beauty of colour and of form is
limited in its showing; it is a fixed quality of existence, whereas
fragrance is

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

volatile, ethereal as the breathing of life. So in all religious
ceremonies frankincense and myrrh play a prominent part. There is
something spirituelle in redolence. When the delicious perfume of the
sakura quickens the morning air, as the sun in its course rises to
illumine first the isles of the Far East, few sensations are more
serenely exhilarating than to inhale, as it were, the very breath of
beauteous day.

When the Creator Himself is pictured as making new resolutions in His
heart upon smelling a sweet savour (Gen. viii. 21), is it any wonder
that the sweet-smelling season of the cherry blossom should call forth
the whole nation from their little habitations? Blame them not, if for a
time their limbs forget their toil and moil and their hearts their pangs
and sorrows. Their brief pleasure ended, they return to their daily task
with new strength and new resolutions. Thus in ways more than one is the
sakura the flower of the nation.

Is, then, this flower, so sweet and evanescent,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

blown whithersoever the wind listeth, and, shedding a puff of perfume,
ready to vanish forever, is this flower the type of the Yamato-spirit?
Is the soul of Japan so frailly mortal?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[161:1](bsd20.htm#fr_28) Outside shutters.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[164:1](bsd20.htm#fr_29) *Cerasus
pseudo-cerasus*, Lindley.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Is Bushido Still Alive?](bsd21)
