[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pey03)  [Next](pey05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803257104/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Peyote Cult*, by Paul Radin, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### J.B.'s ACCOUNT OF THE LEADER OF THE PEYOTE <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

(Pl. 3)

Among the Winnebago there is a man named Little-Red-Bird, and when he
reached middle age he began to travel around the world and learn
different Indian languages. He used to travel inland a good deal. Once
he joined a circus and crossed the ocean. He felt so ill while crossing
that he wanted to die. Suddenly a wind came up and he got very
frightened. He did not know what to do. Then he prayed to Earthmaker.
When he came to the other side of the ocean there he saw a big island
and a big city (London), and in this last place they held their circus.
The chief of that country (the king) he met there.

When he came back to his own people he told them that on the other side
of the ocean the Thunderbirds did not thunder. All they did was to
drizzle. There was no lightning either. As he crossed the ocean on his
return it thundered and lightened.

When he came home he was very glad to see his relatives and he offered
tobacco in thanksgiving.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

Shortly after this he traveled again and came to a band of Indians who
were eating peyote. It was his custom to try everything when he went
visiting. He did not realize what he was doing when he ate this
medicine, but he did it anyhow. After a while he began to think of his
manner of life, and he felt that he was doing wrong. All the evil he had
done he remembered. Then he prayed to God. Suddenly it occurred to him,
"Perhaps I am the only one doing this." Then he looked around and
watched the others, and he saw them praying in the same manner.

Not long after that he came home, taking with him some of this medicine.
He knew it was holy. At home he offered tobacco to it and kept on eating
it. Soon it cured him of a disease he had. He tried to induce some of
the others to try it, but they refused. After a while a few tried it,
and the peyote movement began to spread. All the old customs that they
had been accustomed to observe they abandoned. They gave up the medicine
dance and the ceremonies connected with the clans. For that reason,
therefore; the conservative people hated them; their own brothers and
sisters hated them, for they had abandoned what were considered holy
ceremonies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[348:1](pey04.htm#fr_0) The narrator was a very
lukewarm follower.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Albert Hensley's Account of the Peyote](pey05)
