[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pey01)  [Next](pey03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803257104/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Peyote Cult*, by Paul Radin, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JOHN RAVE'S ACCOUNT OF THE PEYOTE CULT AND OF HIS CONVERSION

During 1893-94 I was in Oklahoma with peyote eaters.

In the middle of the night we were to eat peyote. We ate it and I also
did. It was the middle of the night when I got frightened, for

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

a live thing seemed to have entered me. "Why did I do it?" I thought to
myself. I should not have done it, for right at the beginning I have
harmed myself. Indeed, I should not have done it. I am sure it will
injure me. The best thing will be for me to vomit it up. Well, now, I
will try it. After a few attempts I gave up. I thought to myself, "Well,
now you have done it. You have been going around trying everything and
now you have done something that has harmed you. What is it? It seems to
be alive and moving around in my stomach. If only some of my own people
were here! That would have been better. Now no one will know what has
happened to me. I have killed myself."

Just then the object was about to come out. It seemed almost out and I
put out my hand to feel it, but then it went back again. "O, my, I
should never have done it from the beginning. Never again will I do it.
I am surely going to die."

As we continued it became day and we laughed. Before that I had been
unable to laugh.

The following night we were to eat peyote again. I thought to myself,
"Last night it almost harmed me." "Well, let us do it again," they said.
"All right, I'll do it." So there we ate seven peyote apiece.

Suddenly I saw a big snake. I was very much frightened. Then another one
came crawling over me. "My God! where are these coming from?" There at
my back there seemed to be something. So I looked around and I saw a
snake about to swallow me entirely. It had legs and arms and a long
tail. The end of this tail was like a spear. "O, my God! I am surely
going to die now," I thought. Then I looked again in another direction
and I saw a man with horns and long claws and with a spear in his hand.
He jumped for me and I threw myself on the ground. He missed me. Then I
looked hack and this time he started back, but it seemed to me that he
was directing his spear at me. Again I threw myself on the ground and he
missed me. There seemed to be no possible escape for me. Then suddenly
it occurred to me, "Perhaps it is this peyote that is doing this thing
to me?" "Help me, O medicine, help me! It is you who are doing this and
you are holy! It is not these frightful visions that are causing this. I
should have known that you were doing it. Help me!" Then my suffering
stopped. "As long as the earth shall last, that long will I make use of
you, O medicine!"

This had lasted a night and a day. For a whole night I had not slept at
all.

Then we breakfasted. Then I said, when we were through, "Let us eat
peyote again to-night." That evening I ate eight peyote.

In the middle of the night I saw God. To God living up above, our
Father, I prayed. "Have mercy upon me! Give me knowledge

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

that I may not say and do evil things. To you, O God, I am trying to
pray. Do thou, O Son of God, help me, too. This religion, let me know.
Help me, O medicine, grandfather, help me! Let me know this religion!"
Thus I spoke and sat very quiet. And then I beheld the morning star and
it was good to look upon. The light was good to look upon. I had been
frightened during the night but now I was happy. Now as the light
appeared, it seemed to me that nothing would be invisible to me. I
seemed to see everything clearly. Then I thought of my home and as I
looked around, there I saw the house in which I lived far away among the
Winnebago, quite close to me. There at the window I saw my children
playing. Then I saw a man going to my house carrying a. jug of whisky.
Then he gave them something to drink and the one that had brought the
whisky got drunk and bothered my people. Finally he ran away. "So, that
is what they are doing," I thought to myself. Then I beheld my wife come
and stand outside of the door, wearing a red blanket. She was thinking
of going to the flagpole and was wondering which road she should take.
"If I take this road I am likely to meet some people, but if I take the
other road, I am not likely to meet anyone."

Indeed, it is good. They are all well—my brother, my sister, my father,
my mother. I felt very good indeed. O medicine, grandfather, most
assuredly you are holy! All that is connected with you, that I would
like to know and that I would like to understand. Help me! I give myself
up to you entirely!

For three days and three nights I had been eating medicine, and for
three days and three nights I had not slept. Throughout all the years
that I had lived on earth, I now realized that I had never known
anything holy. Now, for the first time, I knew it. Would that some of
the Winnebagoes might also know it!

Many years ago I had been sick and it looked as if this illness were
going to kill me. I tried all the Indian doctors and then I tried all of
the white man's medicines, but they were of no avail. "I am doomed. I
wonder whether I will be alive next year." Such were the thoughts that
came to me. As soon as I ate the peyote, however, I got over my
sickness. After that I was not sick again. My wife had suffered from the
same disease, and I told her that if she ate this medicine it would
surely cure her. But she was afraid, although she had never seen it
before. She knew that I used it, but nevertheless she was afraid of it.
Her sickness was getting worse and worse and one day I said to her, "You
are sick. It is going to be very difficult, but try this medicine
anyhow. It will ease you." Finally she ate it. I had told her to eat it
and then to wash herself and comb her hair and she would get well, and
now she is well. Then I painted her face and took my gourd and began
singing very much. Then I stopped. "Indeed, you are right,"

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

she said, "for now I am well." From that day on to the present time she
has been well. Now she is very happy.

Black Water-spirit at about that time was having a hemorrhage and I
wanted him to eat the peyote. "Well, I am not going to live anyhow," he
said. "Well, eat this medicine soon then and you will get cured."
Consumptives never were cured before this and now for the first time one
was cured. Black Water-spirit is living to-day and is very well.

There was a man named Walking-Priest and he was very fond of whisky; he
chewed and he smoked and he gambled. He was very fond of women. He did
everything that was bad. Then I gave him some of the peyote and he ate
it and he gave up all the had things he was doing. He had had a very
dangerous disease and had even had murder in his heart. But to-day he is
living a good life. That is his desire.

Whoever has any bad thoughts, if he will eat this peyote he will abandon
all his bad habits. It is a cure for everything bad.

To-day the Indians say that only God is holy. One of the Winnebagoes has
told me, "Really, the life that I led was a very bad one. Never again
will I do it. This medicine is good and I will always use it." John
Harrison and Squeaking-Wings were prominent members of the medicine
dance; they thought much of themselves as did all the members of the
medicine dance. They knew everything connected with this medicine dance.
Both of them were gamblers and were rich because they had won very much
in gambling. Their parents had acquired great possessions by giving
medicines to the people. They were rich and they believed that they had
a right to be selfish with their possessions. Then they ate peyote and
ever since that time they have been followers of this medicine. They
were really very ill and now they have been cured of it. Now if there
are any men that might be taken as examples of the peyote, it is these
three. Even if a man were blind and only heard about them he would
realize that if any medicine were good, it is this medicine. It is a
cure for all evil. Before, I had thought that I knew something but I
really knew nothing. It is only now that I have real knowledge. In my
former life I was like one blind and deaf. My heart ached when I thought
of what I had been doing. Never again will I do it. This medicine alone
is holy and has made me good and has rid me of all evil. The one whom
they call God has given me this. That I know positively. Let them all
come here; men and women; let them bring with them all that they desire;
let them bring with them their diseases. If they come here they will get
well. This is all true; it is all true. Bring whatever desires you
possess along with you and then come and eat or drink this medicine.
This is life, the only life. Then you will learn

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

something about yourself, so come. Even if you are not told anything
about yourself, nevertheless you will learn something of yourself. Come
with your disease, for this medicine will cure it. Whatever you have,
come and eat this medicine and you will have true knowledge once and for
all. Learn of this medicine yourself through actual experience.

If you just hear about it you are not likely to try it. If you desire
real knowledge about it try it yourself, for then you will learn of
things that you had never known before. In no other way will you ever be
happy. I know that all sorts of excuses will run through your mind for
not partaking of it, but if you wish to learn of something good, try
this. Perhaps you will think to yourself that it will be too difficult
and this will seem an excuse to you for not trying it. But why should
you act thus a If you partake of it, even if you feel some uncertainty
about its accomplishing all the good that has been said of it, I know
that you will say to yourself, "Well, this life is good enough." After
you have taken it for the first time, it will seem as if they are
digging a grave for you, that you are about to die; and you will not
want to take it again. "It is bad," you will think to yourself. You will
believe that you are going to die and you will want to know what is
going to happen to you. The coffin will be set before you and then you
will see your body. If you wish to inquire further about where you are
going then you will learn something you have not known. Two roads there
are, one leading to a hole in the earth and the other extending up
above. You will learn something that you had not known before. Of the
two roads, one is dark and the other is light. You must choose one of
these while you are alive and so must you decide whether you wish to
continue in your evil ways or whether you will abandon them. These are
the two roads. The Peyote people see them. They claim that only if you
weep and repent will you be able to obtain knowledge. Do not, as I said
before, listen to others talking about it, but try the medicine
yourself. That is the only way to find out. No other medicine can
accomplish what this has done. If, therefore, you make use of it, you
will live. After they have eaten peyote people throw aside all the
(evil) ceremonies that they were accustomed to perform before. Only by
eating the peyote will you learn what is truly holy. That is what I am
trying to learn myself.

It is now 23 years since I first ate peyote, and I am still doing it
(1912). Before that my heart was filled with murderous thoughts. I
wanted to kill my brother and my sister. It seemed to me that my heart
would not feel good until I killed one of them. All my thoughts were
fixed on the warpath. This is all I thought of. Now

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I know that it was
because the evil spirit possessed me that I felt that way. I was
suffering from a disease. I even desired to kill myself;

I did not care to live. That feeling, too, was caused by this evil
spirit living within me. Then I ate this medicine and everything
changed. The brother and sister I wanted to kill before I became
attached to and I wanted them to live. The medicine had accomplished
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: O.L.'s Description of the Peyote Cult](pey03)
