[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pey08)  [Next](pey10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803257104/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Peyote Cult*, by Paul Radin, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DEVELOPMENT OF THE RITUALISTIC COMPLEX

From the accounts given by various members of the Peyote cult it is
quite clear that Rave became interested in the peyote on one of his many
trips to Oklahoma. According to the verbal account he gave, which
differs in some respects from the account he subsequently dictated on
the particular visit which resulted in his first eating the peyote, he
was in a most distressed and unhappy condition of mind owing to the loss
of his wife and children. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) He went away
from Winnebago with the intention of staying away as long as possible
from the scene of his loss.

Rave's account of his conversion gives a sufficiently dramatic picture
of how he first ate the peyote and its immediate effects. In response to
numerous questions as to how he was first induced to eat the peyote he
always said that it was because he had been so frequently asked. It is,
however, far more likely that he was passing through an emotional crisis
at that particular time, and the requests that he partake of it and the
inducements held out to him, made it easier for him to succumb then than
on his previous visits.

To judge from Rave's remarks, his first belief in the peyote had nothing
of the nature of a conversion to a new religion. It seems to have been
similar to the average Winnebago attitude toward a medicinal plant
obtained either as a gift or through purchase. There is only one new
note—stimulation by a narcotic.

Rave states that the peyote cured him of a disease with which he had
been afflicted for a long time. After repeated requests his wife also
consents to being treated; so he paints her face and, taking the rattle,
sings peyote songs while she eats the peyote. His attitude

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

throughout, both from his own testimony and from that of others, seems
to have been practically the attitude of the Winnebago shaman. He even
offered tobacco to the peyote.

We have, then, at the beginning the introduction of apparently only one
new element—the peyote, with possibly a few Christian teachings.
Everything else seems to be typically Winnebago, and in consonance with
their shamanistic practices. On the whole, the extension of the
Winnebago cultural background seems to have keen so instantaneous that
so far as the specific cultural traits of the Winnebago are concerned
there was hardly anything new at all. This view does not, of course,
interfere in the least with the fact that to the Winnebago themselves
the presence of the peyote represented the introduction of a new
element.

The elaboration of the peyote practices at Rave's hands is the most
difficult problem to trace on account of the lack of data. In the
account that he gives of his conversion there is no evidence whatsoever
of any antagonistic attitude toward the old Winnebago manner of living.
When the author met him, however, for the first time, in 1908, this
passive attitude had changed to one of violent hatred for the old
Winnebago customs. Why and under what circumstances this change took
place we do not know. It probably represented the interaction of many
elements, the hostility of the tribe, the drawing of issues sharply
around certain points, and the gradual assumption on the part of Rave of
the rôle of a prophet who had solved the problem of the adjustment of
the Winnebago to the surrounding white civilization. Offhand, one might
be inclined to believe that Rave's insistence upon breaking with the
past was due entirely to the influence of the Christian elements
incorporated in his new religion. It is, however, extremely doubtful
whether such an assumption is necessary. There seem to have been
comparatively few Christian elements in the religion before Albert
Hensley's influence had made itself felt, yet many of the old war
bundles had been destroyed long before that time, and the peyote eaters
were looked upon with cordial dislike by the conservative members of the
tribe. The admonition that only a complete break with the past could
save the Winnebagoes and enable them to compete successfully with the
white intruders had been given to the Winnebagoes once before by the
famous Shawnee prophet. What the latter claimed, however, was that the
various sacred objects used by the Winnebago had lost their power, and
that that power must now be renewed. This he thought could only be done
by returning to the old manner of living which he claimed the Winnebago
were no longer following. Such a claim was, after all, not
revolutionary. It is not, therefore, the break with the Winnebago
present-day viewpoint that characterizes Rave's attitude, but the fact
that instead of returning to the older, purer

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

life as the Shawnee prophet proposed to do, he substituted an alien
religion. It was because he was introducing an alien religion, not
because he was introducing a new religion, that he was so intensely
hated by the conservative members of the tribe.

When this hostility was at its height a new convert, Albert Hensley,
revolutionized the entire cult by introducing the reading of the Bible,
postulating the dogma that the peyote opened the Bible to the
understanding of the people, and also adding a number of Christian
practices. He, like Rave, had been in Oklahoma. He brought back with him
many peyote songs, generally in other languages, dealing with Christian
ideas, upon which subsequently Winnebago songs were modeled. He also
introduced either baptism itself or an interpretation of baptism, and
induced Rave to attempt a union with the Christian Church. He seems to
have been the only prominent man connected with the peyote who was
subject to epileptic fits. He had the most glorious visions of heaven
and hell while in his trance, and these he expounded afterwards in terms
of Revelation and the mystical portions of the New Testament. Hensley's
additions represent a second stratum of borrowed elements, all of which
are in the nature of accretions as far as the peyote itself is
concerned. The Bible is explained in terms of the peyote. Neither
Hensley nor his followers ever interpreted the peyote in terms of the
Bible, although other elements of the old Winnebago culture were so
interpreted. These elements, however, represented features that even in
the old Winnebago cults exhibited a great variability in interpretation.

Rave's attitude toward the innovations of Hensley seems to have been
that of a benevolent acquiescence. He himself could neither read nor
write. Yet he immediately accepted the Bible and added it to his other
regalia. As such it always seems to have remained. To Rave, after all,
the peyote was the principal element, and if Hensley chose to insist
that the Bible was only intelligible to those who partook of the peyote
why that naturally fell within its magical powers. From the entire
omission in Rave's account of the Peyote cult of the more important
things that Hensley introduced and from the fact that whenever Hensley's
influence was not dominant there seems to have been little Bible
reading, it seems justifiable to say that Rave's attitude toward these
innovations was merely passive.

There never was any rivalry between Rave and Hensley. The latter was,
however, a much younger man, quick-tempered, conceited, dogmatic, and
withal having a strong mixture of Puritan Protestant ideas. A conflict
developed after a while and in a very interesting manner. Rave had
allowed a man with an extremely bad reputation, who had been admitted as
a member of the Peyote cult, to occupy one of the four positions.
Hensley violently pro-

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

tested, on the ground that a man of X.'s character could not properly
perform the rites associated with that position. Rave, however, retorted
that the efficacy of the peyote, of any position connected with its
cult, was in no way connected with the character of the performer, and
that it was inherent in the peyote and in the Peyote ritual. Thereupon,
after much parleying to and fro, Hensley formally seceded, taking with
him a number of followers. The bulk of the peyote eaters, however,
remained with Rave, and within a comparatively short time a number of
Hensley's followers returned to Rave, so that in 1911 Hensley had merely
a handful of people. Since then he has ceased to be a force, although
his innovations have been retained by a number of the younger Peyote
members, especially by those who read English.

In 1911 there was no unification of the ideas of Rave and Hensley. Since
then, strange to say, although Hensley's attempt to set up his own
religion failed utterly, his ideas and [Christian](errata.htm#1.md)
innovations seemed to have triumphed completely. This, however, has gone
hand in hand with a marked dropping off of enthusiasm. It appears now as
if the Peyote cult has run its course. Some of the members have recently
returned— to the old pagan customs, others have practically become
Christians, and many have become indifferent.

Unquestionably the most interesting of recent innovations is that
introduced by Jesse Clay, the account of which has been given before.
This is, of course, the Arapaho manner of conducting the ceremony. At
the present time it has none of the characteristics of the Winnebago
ceremonial. Whether in the next few years it will develop any depends
upon the interest manifested in it by the Peyote worshipers and upon the
vitality of the Peyote movement in general.

It is extremely suggestive to compare what Rave introduced with the
ceremony borrowed by Clay. The former introduced an isolated element,
the peyote and its worship, and clothed it almost immediately in
characteristic Winnebago forms. It can truly be said that although the
peyote is an alien element, from the Winnebago viewpoint, everything
else in the ceremony is and was from the beginning typically Winnebago.
Clay's method of conducting the Peyote ceremonies, on the other hand, is
entirely alien. For it ever to become popular with the large mass of
Winnebago it will have to become thoroughly assimilated with the
Winnebago background.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[371:5](pey09.htm#fr_4.md) In the account Rave
himself gives he speaks of seeing his wife and children. As his verbal
statement was corroborated by other people, we are inclined to believe
that in his dictated account of his conversion he had forgotten the
actual state of affairs. It may, of course, be that in his ardent desire
to show the marvelous effects of the peyote he permitted his memory to
play him false.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dissemination of the Doctrine](pey10.md)
