[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Plains](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pey11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0803257104/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Peyote Cult*, by Paul Radin, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ATTITUDE OF THE CONSERVATIVES

At every phase of the cult's development Rave had to contend with the
hostility of the conservative members of the tribe. It would be
interesting to know in what manner and degree this hostility manifested

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

itself upon the first introduction of the peyote. As we have seen, there
was in the beginning little difference between the beliefs relating to
the peyote and those connected with the old Winnebago medicinal plants.
Nevertheless the author was assured that hostility was exhibited to the
new cult from the very start. Would the same hostility have been
exhibited had this new feature represented some development from within
the tribe? In other words, what it would be interesting to know, is
whether the fact that the peyote was derived from without led to a
hostility different in kind from that exhibited toward an innovation
developing within the culture itself. No evidence could be obtained that
would justify us in explaining the hostility felt by the older
conservative Winnebago as due in any part to the fact that it was alien
in origin. Certain elements that to-day form an integral part of the
most popular of all Winnebago ceremonies were borrowed from the Sauk and
Iowa, and the Winnebago realize this and mention it in the introductory
myths told in connection with the preparatory rites of the medicine
dance. The explanation obtained was always the same—that the hostility
was due to the fact that the teachings of the Peyote people departed
from those of their ancestors and that the Peyote were simply aping the
habits and customs of the whites. What seems to have met with the
greatest opposition from the older shamans was the denial of the
doctrine of reincarnation. The Christian doctrine of the immortality of
the soul does not seem to have been felt as a substitute at all. One old
conservative assured the author that he had long ago prophesied the
appearance of the peyote among the Winnebago. He told the author the
following:

"This medicine is one of the four spirits from below, and for that
reason it is a bad thing. These spirits have always longed for human
beings and now they are getting hold of them. Those who use this
medicine claim that when they die they will only be going on a long
journey. But that is not the truth, for when they eat peyote they
destroy their spirits, and death to them will mean extermination. If I
spit upon the floor, the sputum will soon dry up and nothing will remain
of it. So death will be for them. I might go out and preach against this
doctrine, but it would be of no avail, for I certainly would not be able
to draw more than one or two people away from this spirit. Many will be
taken in by this medicine; they will not be able to help themselves in
any way. The bad spirit will certainly seize them."
