[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abo06)  [Next](abo08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

# CHAPTER III.

MISHNA *A*. Aqabia b. Mahalallel used to say: "Consider three things,
and thou wilt not fall into transgression: know whence thou comest,
whither thou art going, and before whom thou art about to give account
and reckoning; know whence thou comest--from a fetid drop, and whither
thou art going--to worm and maggot; and before whom thou art about to
give account and reckoning: before the King of the kings of kings, the
Holy One, blessed be He."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)"*Said Aqabia b. Mahalallel, whoever
takes to his heart the following four things will never sin*": Whence he
comes; whither he goes; what will become of him; and who is his judge.
Whence he comes? from a dark place! Whither he goes? to a dark place!
What will become of him? dust and worms! And who is his judge? the King
of the kings of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He!

Said R. Simeon: He comes from a dark place and returns thither; he
springs from a fetid drop, from a place which no eye can behold, and
finally becomes dust and worms, as it is written \[Job, xxv. 6\]: "How
much less the mortal, the mere worm? and the son of earth, the mere
maggot?"

Said R. Elazar b. Jacob: He is a worm while living, and a maggot when
dead. What is meant by "a worm while living"? the vermin that infest
him; "and a maggot when dead" applies to those that are bred from him
after his death.

Said R. Simeon b. Elazar: To what can this be compared? To a king who
built a magnificent palace, in which he dwelt, and a tanner's ditch
passed in front of its entrance. Whoever

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

passed by said: "How beautiful and how glorious this palace would have
been, if this tanner's ditch had not passed in front of its entrances."
So is man. If now, when from his entrails issues forth a rancid stream,
he is so proud and haughty, had a stream of sweet-smelling water or oil
issued from him, how much the more proud and haughty would he have been.

When R. Eliezer fell ill, his disciples came to visit him. They sat
before him and said: "Our master, teach us the best of all the things
you taught us." He said: "Be careful of your friend's honor; and when
you pray, know before whom you are standing, and through this you will
be rewarded with life in the world to come."

MISHNA *B*. R. Haninah, the Segan of the high-priest, said: "Pray always
for the welfare of the government; were it not for the fear of it, men
would swallow each other alive." R. Haninah b. Phradyon said: "Two that
sit together and do not discuss any portion of the Law, their sitting is
considered that of scorners, as it is written \[Ps. i. 1\]: 'And sitteth
not in the seat of scorners'; but two that sit together and are
discussing some words of the Law have the Shekhina among them, as it is
written \[Mal. iii. 16\]: 'Then conversed they that feared the Lord one
with the other; and the Lord listened and heard it,' etc."

This is as to two. Whence is it deduced of even one who occupies himself
with the study of the Law, that the Holy One, blessed be He, fixes his
reward? It is written \[Sam. iii. 28\]: "That he sit in solitude and be
silent; because He hath laid it upon him."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)Said R. Hananiah the Segan: Whoever
takes the words of the Torah to his heart, all thoughts of the sword and
hunger, of foolishness and fornication, evil thoughts in general and
thoughts of adultery, thoughts of nonsense and thoughts of human cares,
are destroyed for him, for so it is written in David's Psalms

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[xix. 9\]: "The
precepts of the Lord are upright, rejoicing the heart: the commandment
of the Lord is clear, enlightening the eyes. P, But one that does not
take to heart the words of the Torah, to him the reverse comes, as Moses
wrote in his Deuteronomy \[xxviii. 46-48\]: "And they shall remain on
thee for a sign and for a token, and on thy seed for ever. For the
reason that thou didst not serve the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, while there was an abundance of all things;
therefore, shalt thou serve thy enemies whom the Lord will send out
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of
everything."

Since it says: "In hunger," what is meant by it? At the time when one
has not even a piece of barley-bread, his enemies demand of him wheat
bread and fat meat. And what is meant by the words: "And in thirst"? At
the time when one has not even a drop of vinegar, or beer, his enemies
demand of him the best wine of the land. And what is meant by the words:
"And in nakedness"? When one has not even a woollen or linen shirt, his
enemies demand of him silken ones, the best of all lands. The words,
"And in want of everything," mean that he will be without a light,
knife, and table. Others says: Without vinegar and salt. This
corresponds with the manner in which people curse when they say: "May
there be no vinegar nor salt in thy house!"

He used to say the words: "Look not so at me, because I am somewhat
black, because the sun hath looked fiercely at me" \[Song of Songs, i.
6\], refer to the counsellors of Judah, who relieved themselves of the
yoke of the Holy One, blessed be He, and chose a human king to reign
over them.

"My mother's children were angry with me" \[ibid.\] refers to Moses, who
slew the Egyptian, as it is written \[Ex. ii. 11, 12\]: "And it came to
pass in those days, when Moses was grown up, that he went out unto his
brethren, and looked on their burdensome labors. . . . And he looked
this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no one by." What
is meant by "and when he saw that there was no one by"? Infer from this,
that Moses inquired of the deliberating groups of angels, whether he
should slay him (the Egyptian). They told him. to do so, and he did it,
not with a sword, but by a word, as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 14\]:
"Sayest (intendest) thou to kill me, as thou hast killed the Egyptian?"
From this can be learned that he killed him by the Holy Name.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

Others say that the passage: "My mother's children were angry with me,"
refers to Moses, who fled to Midian, as it is written \[Ex. ii. 15-17\]:
"And Pharaoh heard this thing, and he sought to slay Moses; but Moses
fled from the face of Pharaoh, and tarried in the land of Midian, and he
sat down by a well. . . . And the shepherds came and drove them away,
but Moses arose and helped them and watered their flocks." Moses
constituted himself as judge, and said: "It is usual for the males to
draw the water and for the females to water the flocks, and here I see
the reverse. There is in this place much perversion."

There are others who say that as long as Moses stood by the well, the
water surged and came toward him, but when he left, the water also
receded. At the same time, he said: "Woe to me, that I have left my
people and come to dwell among heathens."

Another explanation of the above passage is, that it refers to the
Israelites who made the golden calf, for although at first they said
\[Ex. xxiv. 7\]: "All that the Lord hath spoken will we do and obey,"
nevertheless they soon afterward exclaimed: "These are thy gods, O
Israel" \[Ex. xxxii. 4\].

Still others say that the above passage refers to the spies who brought
and spread an evil report about the land, and caused that carcasses of
Israelites fell in the desert, as it is written \[Numb. xiv. 29\]: "In
this wilderness shall your carcasses fall."

"They appointed me to be keeper of the vineyards" \[Song of Songs, i.
6\]. Said the Holy One, blessed be He: Who has caused me to shower
kindness upon the heathens, but Israel himself? For when the heathens
live in prosperity they are pushed, cursed, and persecuted.

Others say that the above passage refers to the Israelites who were
exiled in Babylon, and the prophets who were then among them told them
to observe the laws of offerings and tithes. They, however, answered:
"We were exiled because we refused to observe those laws, and you wish
us to observe them now?"

MISHNA *C*. R. Simeon said Three that have eaten at our table, and have
not blessed the Lord for His kindness, are as if they have eaten of the
sacrifices of the dead, as it is written \[Is. xxviii. 8\]: 'For all
tables are full of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

vomit of filthiness, there is no place (clean).' But three that have
blessed the Lord when eating at our table, are as if they had eaten of
the table of the Omnipotent, as it is written \[Ezek. xli. 22\]: And he
spoke unto me: This is the table that is before the Lord.'"

MISHNA *D*. R. Hanina b. 'Hakhinai used to say: "He who awakens by
night, and he who is walking alone on the road and turns aside his heart
to idleness, it is his own fault if he incurs trouble for himself."

MISHNA *E*. R. Nehunia b. Haqanah said: "Whoso receives upon him the
yoke of the Law (*i.e.*, one who devotes himself wholly to study), the
community removes from him the yoke of the government and the yoke of
worldly cares; but a student who breaks from him the yoke of the Law,
the community lays upon him the yoke of the government and the yoke of
worldly cares."

MISHNA *F*. R. 'Halaphtha of the village of Hananiah said: "When ten sit
and are occupied in words of Law the Shekhina is among them, as it is
written \[Ps. lxxxii. 1\]: 'God standeth in the *Congregation* of God.'
And whence is it proved of even five? It is written \[Amos, ix. 6\]:
'And hath founded his *bundle* <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) on
the earth' (and a bundle is at least of five). And whence even three? It
is written \[Ps. lxxxii. 1\]: 'In the midst of judges doth he judge'
(and the number of judges is generally three). And whence even two? It
is written \[Mal. iii. 16\]: 'Then they that favored the Lord spake
often one to another.' (The least number of persons who can speak to
each other is two.) And whence even one? It is written \[Ex. xx. 24
(21)\]: 'In every place where I shall permit my name to be mentioned, I
will come unto *thee* and will bless *thee*.'"

MISHNA *G*. R. Eliezer of Bartota said: "Render unto God what belongs to
Him, for thou and all thou hast are His, as David said \[I Chron. xxix.
14\]: 'For all things come from thee, and of thine own have we given
thee.'"

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

MISHNA *H*. R. Jacob said: "One who walks by the way and learns, and
breaks off his study and says, 'How beautiful is this tree!' and, 'How
fine is this furrow field!' is endangering his own life."

MISHNA *I*. R. Dosithai b. R. Janai said in the name of R. Meir: "When a
scholar of the sages sits and studies, and subsequently forgets what he
studied, Scripture likens him to one who endangers his own life, as it
is written \[Deut. iv. 9\]: 'Only take heed to thyself, and guard thy
soul, diligently, that thou do not forget the things which thy eyes have
seen and that they depart not from thy heart all the days of thy life,'
etc. It might be thought that he is culpable of forgetting even when his
study had grown hard to him, therefore it is written \[Deut. iv. 19\]:
'And they depart not from thy heart all the days of thy life,' from
which it is to be inferred that he is not guilty unless he intentionally
leads such a life as to forget them.

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)R. Hanina b. Dosa said: Whomsoever
fear of sin precedes, his wisdom prevails, as it is written \[Ps. cxi.
10\]: The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord."

"*He also used to say: 'Whosesoever deeds exceed,'*" etc., as it is
written \[Ex. xxiv.\]: "We will do and obey." It was asked of R. Johanan
b. Zakkai: "What praise is to be applied to one who is wise and
sin-fearing? He answered: "A mechanic who has his tools with him." And
what praise is to be applied to the one who is only wise, but not
sin-fearing?" And he answered: "He is a mechanic who has no tools." He
was asked again as to what praise is to be applied to the one who is
sin-fearing but lacks wisdom, and he answered: "No mechanic but has
tools."

"*R. Elazar b. Azariah said: 'If there is no Law,'*" etc. He used to
say: One who is possessed of good deeds and who has studied much law, to
what is he to be compared? unto a tree that is planted by waters, whose
branches; are few but whose roots are many, and which can withstand the
severest storm, as

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

it is written \[Ps. i. 3\]: "And he shall be like a tree planted by
rivulets of water," etc. One who lacks good deeds but who has studied
law, to what is he to be compared? to a tree planted in the desert whose
branches are many and his roots few, which is easily uprooted by any
wind, as it is written \[Jer. xvii. 6\]: "He shall be like a lonely tree
in the desert."

"*R. Gamaliel said: 'Set a teacher,'*" etc. A teacher for wisdom and a
companion to study with, and be quit of doubt and do not tithe much by
estimation.

Simeon his son used to say: All my days I spent among the sages, and I
found silence to be the most advisable thing, and that not discussion
but practice is the principal thing; and if silence is advisable for
intelligent persons, so much the more for fools. Wisdom does not bring
to much talk, nor does much talk bring to wisdom; the main thing is
practice. Whosoever talks much causes sin, as it is written \[Prov. x.
19\]: "In a multitude of words transgression cannot be avoided"; and it
is also written \[ibid. xvii. 28\]: "Even a fool, when he keepeth
silence, is counted wise." R. Simeon b. Eliezer said: "He who studies
the law and is sin-fearing is like a physician who is consulted about a
wound and who has his instruments and drugs with him; but one who
studies the Law and is not sin-fearing is like a physician who, when
consulted about a wound, has the instruments to operate with but has no
drugs to heal the wound up."

MISHNA *J*. R. Hanina b. Dosa said: "He in whom fear of sin precedes his
wisdom, (may be sure that) his wisdom will endure; and he in whom wisdom
precedes his fear of sin, (may be sure that) his wisdom will not
endure."

He also used to say: "He whose works are in excess of his wisdom, (it is
certain that) his wisdom will endure; and he whose wisdom is in excess
of his works, (it is certain that) his wisdom will not endure."

He also said: "He who has earned man's esteem and love, will also
receive the favor of Heaven; but he who is not worthy of such esteem,
cannot expect to find favor with God."

MISHNA *K*. R. Dosa b. Horkhinas said: "Sleeping away the morning,
carousing at noonday, childish trifling,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

and the company of the vulgar waste a man's life away.

MISHNA *L*. R. Elazar the Modai said: "He that profanes things sacred
and contemns the festivals; he who causes his neighbor to blush in
public, and annuls the covenant of Abraham our father, and acts
barefacedly against the Torah, <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) even
though he is possessed of Torah and good deeds, he has no share in the
world to come."

MISHNA *H*. R. Ishmael said: "Be pliant with thy chief (although he is
not deserving) and yielding to the impressment, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) and receive every man with cheerfulness."

MISHNA N. R. Aqiba said: "Mockery and frivolity are the forerunners of
immorality. Tradition is the rampart about the Law; tithes (charity) are
the rampart of wealth; good resolutions are the preservative of
abstinence; and the safeguard of wisdom is--silence."

MISHNA *O*. He used to say: "Beloved is man, that he was created in His
image, and, moreover, that he was notified that he was so created, as it
is written \[Gen. ix. 6\]: 'For in the image of God made he man."'

MISHNA *P*. "Beloved are Israel, that they are called children of God;
moreover, that it was made known to them that they are so called, as it
is written \[Deut. xiv. 1\]: 'Ye are the children of the Lord your
God.'"

MISHNA *Q*. "Beloved are Israel, that there was given to them a precious
article; moreover, that it was made known to them that there was given
to them the precious article" \[as it is stated elsewhere that with this
the world was created, as it is written \[Prov. iv. 2\]: "For good
information do I give you; my teaching must ye not forsake"\].

MISHNA *R*. "Everything is foreseen and free-will is given. And the
world is judged by grace; and every one

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

is judged according to the majority of his deeds" (*i.e.*, if one has
done more good than evil, he is judged more favorably--Rashi).

MISHNA *S*. He (Aqiba) used to say: "All that we possess is merely a
trust, and over all life a net is spread out. The storehouse is open,
the proprietor sells on credit; the ledger lies ready and the
purchaser's hand makes the entry; whoever wishes may come and borrow,
but the collectors are continually going the rounds of the debtors, and
obtain payment from them voluntarily or involuntarily; they know
whereupon they base their claims, and their court is a tribunal of
justice, and everything is prepared for the banquet" (*i.e.*, even the
wicked have a share in the world to come--Rashi).

MISHNA *T*. R. Elazar b. Azariah was wont to say: "Without knowledge of
religion there can be no true culture, and without true culture there is
no knowledge of religion. Where there is no wisdom, there is no fear of
God; and without fear of God there is no wisdom. Without learning there
can be no counsel, and without counsel there will be lack of learning.
Where there is a dearth of bread, culture cannot thrive, and lack of
culture causes dearth of bread."

MISHNA *U*. He also used to say: "With what is he to be compared, who
can boast of more learning than charitable deeds? With a tree of many
branches and but few roots--there comes a storm that uproots and
prostrates it, as it is written \[Jer. xvii. 6\]: 'And he shall be like
a lonely tree in the desert, which feeleth not when the good cometh; but
abideth in the parched places in the wilderness, in a salty land which
cannot be inhabited. 'But what does he resemble, who can show more deeds
than learning? A tree of few branches and many roots: all the storms,
and winds may bear down and rage upon it, they cannot move it from its
place. As it is written \[Jer. xvii. 8\]: 'And he shall be like a tree
that is planted by the waters, and by a stream spreadeth out its roots,
which

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

feeleth not when heat cometh, but its leaf remaineth green, and in a
year of drought it is undisturbed by care, and ceaseth not from yielding
fruit.'"

MISHNA *V*. R. Elazar b. 'Hasma said: "'Qinim' <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) and 'Pitteche Niddah' <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49) are essentials of Torah; canons of
astronomy and geometry are after-courses of wisdom."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_50"></span>[3](#fn_50)"*Sleeping away the morning*." It
means: One shall not wilfully sleep till past the hour of reading the
Shema, for by so doing he neglects the Law, as it is written \[Prov.
xxvi. 13\]: "As a door turneth upon its hinges, so doth the slothful
upon his bed. The slothful saith, There is a leopard in the way: a lion
is between the streets."

"*Carousing at noonday*" means: One should not make a practice of
drinking wine at midday, for by so doing he is prevented from observing
the Law, as it is written \[Eccl. x. 16\]: "Woe to thee, O land! when
thy king is low-minded, and when thy princes eat in the morning." Also:
"Happy art thou, O land, when thy king is noble-spirited, and thy
princes eat in proper time." When is the proper time? Say, then, in the
world to come, as it is written \[Is. ix. 22\]: "I the Lord will hasten
it in its time"; also: "At the proper time shall it be said to Jacob and
to Israel," etc. \[Numb. xxiii. 23\]. Said the Holy One, blessed be He,
to Balaam: "*At* the time, but not *in* the time; not *in* your time,
but *at* the time when I will redeem Israel."

"*Childish trifling*." By this is meant, that one should not make a
practice of talking to his wife, sons, or daughters when he is studying
at home; for by so doing he neglects the Torah, as it is written \[Josh.
i. 8\]: "This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but
thou shalt meditate therein, day and night."

"*The company of the vulgar*" means: One should not lounge with idlers
in the market, lest he neglect the Torah, as it is written \[Ps. i. 1,
2\]: "Happy is the man who walketh not in the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

counsel of the wicked . . . and sitteth not in the way of scorners; but
whose delight is the law of the Lord." Said R. Meir: For what purpose is
it said: "And sitteth not in the way of scorners"? Say, then, it refers
to the assembly halls of the scoffers, as it is written \[ibid. xxvi.
5\]: "I have hated the assemblage of evil-doers; and with the wicked
will I not sit"; and it is also written \[Mal. iii. 19\]: "For, behold,
the day is coming, which shall burn as an oven, and all the
presumptuous, yea, and all who practise wickedness, shall be stubble";
and "presumptuous yea, are scoffers, as it is written \[Prov. xxi. 24\]:
"The presumptuous and proud, scorner is his name."

Once it happened that R. Aqiba, while sitting and teaching his
disciples, was reminded of the way he spent his younger days. He said:
"I thank thee, Lord my God, that thou hast placed me among the studious,
and not among the idlers in the markets."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[71:1](abo07.htm#fr_42) Chapter XIX. of the
original. The phraseology of these sentences is a little different in
the Mishna.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[72:1](abo07.htm#fr_43) Chapter XX. of the
original.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[75:1](abo07.htm#fr_44) Leeser translates it
"vault," but the Talmud translates it literally.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[76:1](abo07.htm#fr_45) Chapter XXII. of the
original.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[73:1](abo07.htm#fr_46) This is according to
Maimonides; Rashi, however, says it means: one who says that Moses wrote
in the Pentateuch ridiculous things, as, for instance, that Thimna was
the concubine of Eliphaz \[Gen. xxxvi. 12\].

<span id="fn_47"></span>[73:2](abo07.htm#fr_47) Maimonides explains it
otherwise.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[80:1](abo07.htm#fr_48) The young doves
sacrificed by a woman after confinement.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[80:2](abo07.htm#fr_49) The three kinds of blood
of menses, which are difficult to be distinguished from each other.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[80:3](abo07.htm#fr_50) Chapter XXI. of the
original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](abo08)
