[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abo03)  [Next](abo05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

#### SECTION NEZIKIN (JURISPRUDENCE).

##### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

# TRACT ABOTH (FATHERS OF THE SYNAGOGUE).

\[Several requests have been received by the translator that an index
should be made to the volumes of the Talmud, as is customary with all
modern works. It would be an utter impossibility to give a complete
index of everything contained in the Talmud. Were it like other
scientific works, which treat each subject separately, this could easily
be done; but with the Talmud it is different. On one page many different
subjects may be discussed, and again a single subject may occupy several
pages. The Talmud, therefore, has never had an index.

After careful examination of the volumes, page by page, it has been
decided to make a synopsis, *i.e.*, to give briefly the heads of the
discussions and conversations upon each Mishna, indicating the page
where the Mishna is to be found, and the Gemara of each one, which
serves as a commentary. By this the reader should be able to refer to
what he desires to know.

A synopsis is therefore given of every Mishna which discusses a single
subject, with its accompanying Gemara--in this volume, the Tosephtha;
but when several short Mishnas cover the same subject, a single synopsis
is given of the whole, including the Gemara of each one; and where a
chapter is short, a synopsis of the whole chapter is made, without
dividing it into Mishnas.

This is the best that can be done, and it is hoped that readers will
find it satisfactory.\]

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNA *A*. The Great Assembly originated three maxims. Be deliberate in
judgment. How so? The books of Proverbs, Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes
were hidden. How was Adam created? Why was Adam created on the last hour
of the sixth day? On the same day on which he was formed, on the very
same day his countenance was created. According to others: "Be
deliberate in judgment" means not to have an irascible manner. Erect
safeguards for the Law. The safeguard of the Lord, of Adam the First.
The legend about Eve and the serpent, etc. The ten curses with which Eve
was cursed at that time. "Shall I and my cattle eat out of the same
trough?" The tradition about the ox of Adam, the steer of Noah, and the
ram sacrificed by Abraham, [1](abo05.htm#page_1)-[11](abo05.htm#page_11)

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

CONTINUATION OF CHAPTER II. OF TOSEPHTHA.--What is the safeguard that
the Torah made to its words? What Elijah the prophet answered the widow
of the scholar who died in the prime of his life. What is the safe guard
that Moses made to his words? The reason why Moses broke the Tables?
What is the safeguard that Job made to his words? The safe guard that
the prophets made to their words. The safeguard that the Hagiographers
made to their words. The safeguard that the sages made to their words,
[11](abo05.htm#page_11)-[19](abo05.htm#page_19)

CONTINUATION OF CHAPTER III. OF TOSEPHTHA.--Whoever takes a coin from
charity when not in need of it, etc. Study the Law in thy old age, even
if thou hast studied it in thy youth. If you gave a coin to a poor man
in the morning, and another one begs of you in the evening, give him
also. What happened to a poor man with R. Aqiba. What happened to
Benjamin the just, [19](abo05.htm#page_19)-[21](abo05.htm#page_21)

MISHNA *B*. The motto of Simeon the Just. Upon the Torah, how so? Upon
service, how so? Upon bestowal of favors, how so? Rabban Johanan b.
Zakkai and Vespasian. In three things mankind differ one from the other,
[22](abo05.htm#page_22)-[26](abo05.htm#page_26)

MISHNAS *C* AND *D*. Be not like slaves who serve their masters for the
sake of compensation. Let the fear of Heaven be upon you. Let your house
be the meeting place of the wise. How did R. Aqiba begin his wonderful
career? Not less astonishing was the literary career of R. Eliezer. How
his father Hyrkanus reached the seats of Ben Zizith Ha Kesseth, Nakdimon
b. Gurion, and Calba Shebua,
[26](abo05.htm#page_26)-[32](abo05.htm#page_32)

MISHNAS *E* AND *F*. Let thy house be wide open for the poor. When the
great affliction came upon Job, he prayed, etc. Teach thy house
humility--the different explanations of this saying. Get thee a wise
teacher. Judge everyone from his favorable side. The legend about a
maiden who was led into captivity and the pious men who went to redeem
her. Not only were the upright of former times themselves very strict
and particular, but also their cattle were so. The ass of R. Hanina b.
Dosa, [32](abo05.htm#page_32)-[38](abo05.htm#page_38)

MISHNA *G*. Keep aloof from a wicked neighbor. Slanderers are punished
with plagues. The legend about Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Do not consider
thyself exempt from God's chastisement,
[38](abo05.htm#page_38)-[41](abo05.htm#page_41)

MISHNAS *H* TO *K*. Make thyself not as those that predispose the
Judges. Love work--how so? Do not care for superiority. See to it that
your name be not known to the Government. Ye wise, be guarded in your
words. Love peace--how so? Moses desired to die the same death Aaron
did--how so? The legend of the death of Moses, at length. Pursue
peace--how so? Love all men too, and bring them nigh unto the Law,
[41](abo05.htm#page_41)-[50](abo05.htm#page_50)

MISHNAS *L* TO *Q*. If I do not look to myself, who will do so? And if
not now, when? He who does not desire to learn from his masters is not
worthy to live. He who increases not, decreases--how so? He who serves
himself with a tiara perishes. Fix a time for study. Promise little and
do much. Receive everyone with friendly countenance. Make a master to
thyself. "I have never found anything better for a man than silence."
Three things support the world. The disciples of Hillel; of R. Johanan
b. Zakkai--what was said about them and what they used to say. The
consolation of R. Johanan b. Zakkai by his disciples when his son died.
Thy

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

fellow's honor must be as dear to thee as thine own. Do not allow
thyself to be easily angered. The two proselytes that came before Hillel
and Shammai. Repent one day before thy death,
[50](abo05.htm#page_50)-[58](abo05.htm#page_58)

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNAS *A* TO *M*. In choosing the right path, see that it is one which
is honorable to thyself and without offence to others. All who occupy
them selves with communal affairs should do it in the name of Heaven. Do
His will as if it were thy own, that He may do thy will as if it were
His. Pass not judgment upon thy neighbor until thou hast put thyself in
his place. The boor can never fear sin, and the ignorant can never be
truly pious. The more feasting the more food for worms. What is the best
thing to cultivate. Which is the evil way a man should shun. Warm
thyself before the light of the wise. An envious eye, evil propensities,
and misanthropy drive a man out of the world. The legend about Joseph
the Just, R. Zadoq, R. Aqiba, R. Eliezer the Great, etc. How difficult
it is for man to avoid the evil propensities. Love everyone except the
infidels, the enticers, the misleaders, and the informers. Thy
neighbor's property must be as sacred as thine own,
[58](abo05.htm#page_58)-[65](abo06.htm#page_65)

MISHNA *N*. Set thyself to learn the Law. Johanan b. Zakkai and the
daughter of Nakdimon b. Gurion. Let noble purpose underlie thy every
action. The sages who were recounted of R. Jehudah the Prince. How they
were named by Issi b. Jehudah,
[65](abo06.htm#page_65)-[70](abo06.htm#page_70)

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNAS *A* TO *V*. Consider three things, and you will not fall into
transgression. Pray always for the welfare of the Government. Whoever
takes the words of the Torah to his heart. Render unto God what belongs
to Him, for thou and all thou hast are His. Whomsoever fear of sin
precedes, his wisdom prevails. He whose works are in excess of his
wisdom, his wisdom will endure. Be pliant with thy chief. Receive every
man with cheerfulness. Mockery and frivolity are the forerunners of
immorality. Everything is foreseen and free will is given. The world is
judged by grace. All that we possess is merely a trust. Without
knowledge of religion there can be no true culture, and without true
culture there is no knowledge of religion. Qinim, canons, astronomy, and
geometry are after-courses of wisdom,
[70](abo06.htm#page_70)-[81](abo07.htm#page_81)

### CHAPTER IV.

MISHNAS *A* TO *P*. Who is a wise man? He who learns from everybody.
Despise no man, and consider nothing as too far removed to come to pass.
Be exceedingly lowly of spirit. Wear not the law of God as a crown to
exalt thyself withal. Judge not alone, for none may judge alone save
One. Whatsoever congregation is for the sake of Heaven will in the end
succeed. Let the honor of thy disciple be as dear unto thee as the honor
of thine associate.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

Be careful in thy study, for error in study counts for an intentional
sin, [81](abo07.htm#page_81)-[86](abo08.htm#page_86)

MISHNA *Q*. Neither the security of the wicked nor the afflictions of
the righteous are within the grasp of our understanding. Be beforehand
in saluting every man. Be the lion's tail rather than the fox's head. Do
not seek to appease thy friend in the hour of his passion. Look not upon
the pitcher, but upon what it contains. Envy, sensuality, and ambition
destroy life. Accept not the assurance of thy passions, that the grave
will be a place of refuge for thee. Without thy consent wert thou
created, born into the world without thy choice. Thou art living without
thine own volition, without thine approval thou wilt have to die. About
the death of Eliezer the Great. Set something apart for charity, before
you are compelled to do so by others. Lower thy seat two or three rows
from the place you intend to occupy. There are three persons whose life
is not worth living. The safeguard for honor is refraining from
laughter. The safeguard for wisdom is silence. Whoever marries a woman
not suitable to him transgresses five negative commandments. Do not be
as the lintel, which no hand can reach, etc.,
[86](abo08.htm#page_86)-[95](abo08.htm#page_95)

MISHNA *Q*. (continued). Those that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. The support of the wise, etc. Do not keep away from a precept
which has no limit. Let the honor of thy disciple, etc. There is grain
in Judea, straw in Galilee, and chaff on the other side of the Jordan.
There is no love such as the love of the Torah. There is no wisdom such
as the wisdom of manners. Whoever maintains peace in his own household,
etc. The words of the Torah are as difficult to acquire as silken
garments and are lost as easily as, etc. All those things which are done
in private shall be done as if they were done publicly. Do not isolate
thyself from the community. The disciples are divided into three
classes, etc. Whoever constitutes the Torah as the chief good, and
considers worldly affairs as a secondary thing, etc. Conciliate not thy
friend in the hour of his anger. The scholars are divided into four
classes . One studies but does not teach others, etc. If one honor his
friend for pecuniary considerations, he will in the end be dismissed in
disgrace, etc. On account of the four different means of forgiveness,
etc. Repentance must be to every one of them. However, one who has
profaned the name of heaven has not the power to repent. Wherefore do
scholars die before their time. Be careful in greeting thy neighbor He
who neglects the words of the Law on account of his riches. There is a
case where one transgresses ignorantly, etc. One who connects himself
with transgressors, etc. The punishment of the liar is that even when he
tells the truth he is not believed,
[95](abo08.htm#page_95)-[103](abo08.htm#page_103)

### CHAPTER V.

MISHNAS *A* TO *G*. By ten sayings the world was created. For what
purpose is this stated? Whence is it deduced that a single person is
equal to the whole creation? The Holy One, blessed be He, showed unto
Adam all succeeding generations, together with their preachers,
directors, leaders, prophets, heroes, criminals, and their pious. Nine
hundred and seventy-four

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

generations before the creation of the world, the Torah was already
written, etc. He created in man all that he created in his world--how
So? Ten generations were there from Adam to Noah. For what purpose was
this stated? The Lord said: I will not equal the evil thoughts to the
good thoughts so long as their fate has not yet been sealed. Ten
generations were there from Noah to Abraham. For what purpose was it
necessary to state this? With ten temptations was Abraham our father
tempted. They are as follows, etc. In contrast with these ten
temptations the Lord performed ten miracles for his descendants in
Egypt. When our fathers stood by the sea, etc. "Arise, and pass through
it," etc. With ten temptations did our ancestors tempt God in the
wilderness. By means of ten trials the Holy One, blessed be He, tested
our forefathers. This sin with which the Israelites were afflicted is
enough for that time, etc. Ten names of praise are applied to the Holy
One, blessed be He. Ten ignominious names are applied to the idols.
There are two sons of the clear oil. This refers to Aaron and Messiah.
In the Torah there is written eleven times the word "she" when it ought
to be "he." Ten times did the Shekhina descend upon the earth. Ten
degrees the Shekhina removed itself from one place to another. A prophet
is called by ten different names. There are ten names for the Holy
Spirit. Ten are called "living." Ten miracles were wrought for our
fathers in Egypt, [103](abo08.htm#page_103)-[115](abo09.htm#page_115)

MISHNAS *H* TO *O*. Ten miracles were performed for our forefathers in
Jerusalem. Jerusalem never was defiled by leprosy. How Kimchith, the
mother of R. Ishmael, saw her two sons as high-priests on the same day.
The men of Sodom have no share in the world to come. About Kora'h and
his company. "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to
the grave, and bringeth up," has reference to them. The generation of
the desert. "Gather together unto me my pious servants, who make a
covenant with me by sacrifice," has reference to them. The ten tribes
have no share in the world to come. R. Aqiba, however, said: "As the day
is first dark and then lightens up, so also their darkness will be
followed by light." The following seven have no share in the world to
come, etc. There are three kings and four commoners who have no share in
the world to come. Absalom has no share in the world to come. Seven
things mark the clod, and seven there are for the sage. There are seven
creations of as many grades of importance. Man possesses six
qualifications, three of which belong also to the beast, and three to
the angels. The evil spirits possess six qualifications, three of which
belong to man. There are seven sorts of hypocrites. That which is hidden
is only so from human beings, but not from Heaven. There are seven
things which, if used moderately, are wholesome to the body, and if in
excess are the reverse. With seven things God created the world. Seven
attributes are serving before the throne of Grace. There are seven
dwelling-places. A wise man does not speak before those who surpass him
in wisdom and years; and does not interrupt another in his speech;
admits the truth, etc. Seven kinds of punishments come on account of
seven cardinal transgressions. About the execution of R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel and R. Ishmael b. Elisha the high-priest. Captivity comes upon
the world, etc. Five are not to be forgiven. Four kinds of views are
held by men concerning property,
[115](abo09.htm#page_115)-[131](abo09.htm#page_131).

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

MISHNAS *P* TO *GG*. There are four kinds of dispositions among men.
There are four kinds of pupils. There are four kinds of charity-givers.
There are four kinds of visitors of the house of learning. There are
four kinds of the disciples of the wise. Love inspired by ulterior
motives, etc. Whatsoever gainsaying is for the sake of Heaven will have
good results. Whosoever causes many to be righteous, sin prevails not
over him. In whomsoever are the following three things, he is a disciple
of Abraham, etc, Be courageous as the panther, light-winged as the
eagle, swift as the deer, and strong as the lion, One five years old
should study Scripture, etc. Turn it and turn it again, for everything
can be found therein,
[131](abo09.htm#page_131)-[133](abo09.htm#page_133)

### CHAPTER VI.

MISHNAS *A* TO *R*. Whosoever is busied in Torah for the love thereof
merits many things. Every day a Heavenly voice goes forth from Mount
Horeb and proclaims as follows, etc. He who learns from his companion
one chapter, etc., is bound to do him honor. The path of Torah, etc.
Seek not greatness for thyself, and desire not honor. Greater is Torah
than the priesthood, and than the kingdom. There are four things which
bear good fruit in this world. A meritorious act has both principal and
benefit. One who causes many to be righteous, no sin prevails upon him.
Regarding dreams, there are four sages, three scholars, three books of
the prophets, and three books of the Hagiographa. Every assembly that is
for the sake of performing a religious duty remains everlasting.
Comeliness, strength, wealth, honor, wisdom, age, hoariness, and sons
are becoming to the righteous, etc. If thou shouldst give me all the
silver, gold, and goodly stones and pearls that are in the world, I
would not dwell but in a place of Torah. Five possessions had the Holy
One in this world. Whatsoever the Lord created in this world He created
only for His glory. There are three crowns: the crown of Torah,
priesthood, and kingdom. Three things were said of charitable men. There
are three different kinds among scholars. There are three different
kinds of sweat that are beneficial to the body. There are six kinds of
tears. There are three advantages in an earthen vessel. There are three
advantages in a glass vessel. The money that the Israelites carried away
from Egypt returned to Egypt. If you do the least wrong to your
companion, it shall be considered by you the greatest wrong, etc. The
following articles were hidden, etc.,
[133](abo09.htm#page_133)-[143](abo10.htm#page_143)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](abo05)
