[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abo04)  [Next](abo06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# TRACT ABOTH.

(*Fathers of the Synagogue--Ethics*.)

## CHAPTER I.

MISHNA *A*. Moses received the Law on Sinai and delivered it to Joshua;
Joshua in turn handed it down to the Elders (not to the seventy Elders
of Moses' time but to the later Elders who have ruled Israel, and each
of them delivered it to his successor); from the Elders it descended to
the prophets (beginning with Eli and Samuel), and each of them delivered
it to his successors until it reached the men of the Great Assembly. The
last, named originated three maxims: "Be not hasty in judgment; Bring up
many disciples; and, Erect safe guards for the Law."

Tosephhta--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)Moses was sanctified in the cloud, and
received the Torah from Sinai, as it is written \[Ex. xxiv. 16\]: "And
the glory of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai," which means on *Moses*
(for what purpose?), to purify him; this occurred after the ten
commandments had been given. So says R. Jose the Galilean; R. Aqiba,
however, says: It is written \[ibid.\]: "And the cloud covered it six
days." This refers to the *mountain*, before the ten commandments had
been given, and this is what is written further on \[ibid.\]: "And he
called unto Moses the seventh day out of the cloud" (for what
purpose?--only) to confer honor upon him.

Said R. Nathan: Why did Moses stay the entire six days

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

without communication from the Shekhina? To cleanse his body of all the
food and drink it contained, that he might be like angels at the time of
his consecration.

Said R. Mathia b. Heresh to him: Rabbi, all this stated above was done
only to overawe him, that he might receive the words of the Torah with
awe, terror, fear and trembling, as it is written \[Ps. ii. "Serve the
Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling."

It happened that R. Josiah and R. Mathia b. Heresh were both sitting and
studying the Law. R. Josiah then departed to attend to worldly affairs.
Said R. Mathia to him: "Rabbi, what dost thou gain by forsaking the
words of the living God, and devoting thyself to worldly affairs? Even
though thou art my master, and I thy disciple, yet I dare say that it is
not right to do so." (Lest one say that R. Josiah did so from jealousy,)
it was said: While sitting and studying the Torah they were jealous of
each other, but when they parted they were like friends from youth.

Through Moses the Torah was given on Sinai, as it is written \[Deut. v.
19\]: "And he wrote them on two tables of stone, and he gave them unto
me." And also \[Lev. xxvi. 46\]: "These are the statutes and ordinances
and laws, which the Lord made between him and the children of Israel on
Mount Sinai, by the hand of Moses." The Law which the Holy One, blessed
be He, has given to Israel, was given only in the hand of Moses, as it
is written \[Ex. xxxi. 17\]: "Between me and the children of Israel." So
Moses (because of his purification and sanctification) was privileged to
be the representative of Israel before the Lord.

Moses offered the ram of consecration and prepared the oil of
anointment, and anointed therewith Aaron and his sons during all the
seven days of consecration. With the same oil high-priests and kings
were afterward anointed, and Elazar burned the (first) red-cow, with the
ashes of which the unclean were purified in later generations. Said R.
Eliezer: "The oil of anointment was of such importance that it remained
even for the later generations, for Aaron and his sons were consecrated
with the oil of anointment, as it is written \[Ex. xxx. 30\]: 'And Aaron
and his *sons* shalt thou anoint, and consecrate them to be priests.'"
(Hence we see that although Aaron was a high-priest, his sons,
nevertheless, stood in need of anointment.)

Joshua received it (the Law) from Moses, as it is written

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[Numb. xxvii.
20\]: "And thou shalt put some of thy greatness upon him, in order that
all the congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient." The
elders (who lived after Moses) received it from Joshua, as it is written
\[Judges ii. 7\]: "And the people served the Lord all the days of
Joshua, and all the days of the elders that lived many days after
Joshua, who had seen all the great deeds of the Lord, which he had done
for Israel." The judges received it from the elders, as it is written
\[Ruth, i. 1\]: "And it came to pass in the days when the judges
judged." <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) The prophets received it from
the judges (beginning with Samuel the prophet, who was also a judge), as
it is written \[Jerem. vii. 25\]: "And I sent unto you *all* my servants
the prophets, sending them daily in the morning early." Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi received it from the prophets. The men of the
Great Assembly received it from. Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, and
they said the following three things mentioned in the Mishna:

"*Be deliberate in judgement*." How so? It means a man shall be slow in
his judgment, for he who is slow is deliberate, as it is written \[Prov.
xxv. 1\]: "Also these are the proverbs of Solomon, which the men of
Hezekiah the king of Judah have collected." They have not collected
them,, but they were deliberating upon them before (making them public).
Abba Saul, however, said: "Not only were they deliberating over them,
but they also explained them."

Formerly it was said: The books of Proverbs, Song of Songs, and
Ecclesiastes were hidden, because they are only parables, and do not
belong to the Hagiographa; the men of the Great Assembly, however, came
and explained them, as it is written \[Prov. vii. 7-20\]: "And I beheld
among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a lad void of
sense, etc. and, behold, a woman came to meet him with the attire of a
harlot and obdurate of heart; she is noisy and ungovernable; in her
house her feet never rest; at one time she is in the street, at another
in the open places, and near every corner doth she lurk, and she caught
hold of him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face she said to him,
'I had bound myself to bring peace-offerings; this day have I paid my
vows; therefore I am come forth to meet thee, to seek thy presence
diligently, and I have found

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

thee. With tapestry coverings have I decked my bed, with embroidered
coverlids of the fine linen of Egypt. I have sprinkled my couch with
myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. Come, let us indulge in love until the
morning: let us delight ourselves with dalliances. For the man is not in
his house, he is gone on a journey a great way off; the bag of money
hath he taken with him; by the day of the new-moon festival only will he
come home.'" And it is written also in Song of Songs \[vii. 12, 13\]:
"Come, my friend, let us go into the field; let us spend the night in
the villages; let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the
wine have blossomed, whether the young grape have opened (to the view),
whether the pomegranate have budded: there will I give my caresses unto
thee." And it is written again in Ecclesiastes \[xi. 9\]: "Rejoice, O
young man, in thy childhood; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youthful vigor, and walk firmly in the ways of thy heart, and in
(the direction which) thy eyes see; but know thou, that concerning all
these things God will bring thee into judgment." And again in Song of
Songs \[vii. 10\]: "I am my friend's, and toward me is his desire." So
we see that the last-mentioned passage of the Song of Songs explains all
that was mentioned above; under the term "my friend's" the Lord is
understood. Hence (it is sure) that they were not only deliberating, but
also explaining them.

According to others the statement "Be deliberate in judgment means to
teach that one shall be careful with his words, and also not to have an
irascible manner against those who have received his words, for one who
is easily provoked by those who have received his words often forgets
his (original) words; for so we find with Moses, our master, who had
forgotten his (original) words. (See Pesachim, p. 129: "Resh Lakish
said," etc.)

And where do we find that Moses was irascible with his hearers? It is
written \[Numb. xxxi. 14\]: "And Moses was wroth. . . . Have you allowed
all the females to live?" And it is written \[ibid., ibid. 16\]: "Behold
. . . through the counsel of Bil'am." How so? Infer from this that this
was the advice of Bil'am given to Balak: "These people, your enemies,
are hungry for food and are thirsty for drink, as they have nothing but
manna. Go and put up tents for them, place in them food and drink, and
seat in them beautiful women, daughters of nobles, so that the people
may turn to Baal Peor." (This will be given in Sanhedrin in detail.)

Now from this we may draw an *a fortiori* conclusion. If

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Moses our master, the wisest of the wise and the father of the prophets,
at the time he became angry at his listeners forgot his original words,
so much the more would we commoners. From this we should learn how
necessary it is to be careful and not irascible.

Ben Azai says: Be careful in thy words, that thy hearers shall not err
through them.

"*And erect safeguards for the Law*." That means that one shall make a
safeguard to his words as the Holy One, blessed be He, has done. Adam
the First made one to his; the Torah made one to its words; Moses and
job likewise made safeguards to their words, and so also the Prophets
and Hagiographers have all made safeguards to their words.

The safeguard that the Holy One, blessed be He, made is this \[Deut.
xxix. 23\]: "Even all the nations will say, wherefore hath the Lord done
thus unto this land?" Infer from this that it was known beforehand to
Him, by whose one word the universe was created, that the future
generations will ask this; therefore he said to Moses: Write the answer
for the future generations \[ibid., ibid. 24, 25\]: "Then shall men say,
because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord, etc., and they went
and served other gods and bowed down to them--gods which they knew not,
and which he had not assigned unto them."

We see, then, that the Holy One, blessed be He, made these answers, to
prevent His people from incurring His wrath by their questions, and that
they might live in peace.

Adam the First's safeguard to his words was thus \[Gen. ii. 16, 17\]:
"And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden
thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for on the day that thou eatest thereof
thou shalt surely die."

We see, then, that Adam did not want to give Eve the exact words he
received, but he added \[ibid. iii. 3\]: "Ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die," in order that they should take
care even not to touch the tree. At that time the wicked serpent said to
himself: "As it is impossible for me to make Adam stumble (for he
himself received the words from the Lord), I will make Eve stumble." He
sat by her and had a long conversation with her. He said to her: "As
thou sayest that the Holy One, blessed be He, has forbidden thee to
touch it, see that I am touching it and will not die, and the same will

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

be with thee." And so he did: he arose and shook the tree with his hands
and feet till the fruit fell down. \[According to others the serpent did
not actually touch the tree at all, because as soon as the tree saw the
serpent it stopped him and said: "Thou wicked one, do not touch me," as
it is written \[Ps. xxxvi. 12\]: "Let not come against me the foot of
pride, and let not the hand of the wicked chase me off." Another
explanation of the above passage is, that it has referred to Titus, who
beckoned with his hand, and struck the altar, saying: "λυχος! λυχος!
(wolf!) thou art a king, and I am a king, come and engage with me in
battle. How many oxen were slaughtered upon thee; how many heads of
birds were pinched off on thee; how many measures of wine were poured
upon thee; how much incense of *spices* was burned upon thee, thou art
the one who destroys the whole world," as it is written \[Is. xxix. 1\]:
"Woe to Ariël, to Ariël, the town where David dwelt! Add ye year to
year; let the festivals come round in order."\]

The serpent said again to her (Eve): "If thou sayest that the Holy One,
blessed be He, forbade to eat it, see I eat of it, and do not die, and
thou mayest do the same and thou wilt not die." So Eve said to herself,
the injunctions of my master are unfounded. \[(There is a tradition
that) at first Eve called Adam nothing but master.\] She then herself
ate of the fruit and gave it to Adam, and he too ate, as it is written
\[Gen. iii. 6\]: "And when the woman saw that the tree was good for
food, and that, it was pleasant to the eyes," etc.

With ten curses was Eve cursed at that time, as it is written \[ibid.,
ibid. 16\]: "Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy pain
and (the suffering of) thy conception; in pain shalt thou bring forth
(children), and for thy husband shall be thy desire, but he shall rule
over thee." "I will greatly multiply"--those are the two afflictions of
blood that a woman has to suffer: that of her menstruation and that
*primæ noctis*. "And thy suffering" means the rearing of children; "and
thy conception" means the pain of pregnancy. "In pain shalt thou bring
forth children" is to be taken in its literal sense. "And for thy
husband shall be thy desire"; infer from this that the woman is longing
for her husband during his absence on a journey. She is wrapped like a
mourner, separated from all men as if she were in prison and as if she
were excommunicated from all mankind. And who caused all this? The words
that Adam added: "Ye shall not touch it." From this they deduced the
maxims that

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

if one makes a safeguard to his words (without stating that it is such)
he cannot stand by it. Consequently they said that one must not add to
what he has heard. Said R. Jose (this is what people say): "It is better
to have a wall of ten spans which is solid, than one of a hundred ells
which is tottering."

What were the thoughts of the wicked serpent at that time? "I will slay
Adam and marry his wife, and I will be king of the whole world, I will
walk erect, and will banquet on the best of the land." Then the Holy
One, blessed be He, said to him: "Thou hast thought to slay Adam and
marry his wife, therefore I will put enmity (between thee and the
woman); thou hast thought to be king of the world, therefore be thou
cursed among all the cattle; thou hast thought to walk erect, therefore
upon thy belly shalt thou go; thou hast thought to banquet on the best
of the land, therefore dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life."

R. Simeon b. Menassia says: "Woe that a great servant was lost to the
world, for if the serpent had not been accursed, every one would have
had two serpents in his house. He would send one to the West, and the
other to the East, and they would bring him diamonds, precious stones
and pearls, and all the valuable things of the world, and no creature
could stand against them, and furthermore they could be used instead of
a camel, ass, and mule in the field, garden," etc.

R. Jehudah b. Bathyra says: "Adam was sitting in the Garden of Eden and
the angels served him with roasted meat and chilled wine." When the
serpent saw this and observed this honor, he became jealous.

How was Adam created? The first hour his dust was gathered, the second
the form was created, the third he became a body, the fourth his members
were joined, the fifth the openings were developed, the sixth the soul
was put unto him, the seventh he rose to his feet, the eighth Eve was
mated to him, the ninth he was brought into the Garden of Eden, the
tenth the command was given to him, the eleventh he sinned, the twelfth
he was driven out and went away; this is what is written \[Ps. xlix.
21\]: "*Ve Adam bikor bal yolin*." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)
(Adam, "Bal Yolin"--he shall not stay over night.) \[We have learned in
Tract Rosh Hashana, p. 55: On the first day which psalm did

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

they say? "Unto the Lord belongeth the earth with what filleth it" \[Ps.
xxi. 17\]; this was because He created and is still continuing to
create, and He is judging the world. On the second day they said: "Great
is the Lord and highly praised, in the city of our God" \[ibid. xlviii.
2\]; it is because He divided all His creatures and became the one ruler
of the universe. On the third they said: "God standeth in the
congregation of God, in the midst of judges doth He judge" \[ibid.
lxxxii. 1\]; it is because He then created the sea, the land, and the
earth was rolled to its right place, and room was made for His
congregation. On the fourth day they said: "O God of vengeance, Lord! O
God of vengeance, shine forth" \[Ps. xciv. 1\]; because then He created
the sun, the moon, the stars, and the planets which give light to the
world, and the Lord will punish those who worship them. On the fifth
they said: "Sing aloud unto God our strength; shout joyfully unto the
God of Jacob" \[Ps. lxxxi. 2\]; because He then created the birds, the
fishes, and the great sea monsters, who (the birds) fill the world with
song. On the sixth they said: "The Lord reigneth, He is clothed with
excellency; the Lord is clothed, He had girded Himself with strength:
(therefore) also the world is firmly established, that it cannot be
moved." Because then He finished all His work He became exalted and
placed Himself on the loftiest point of the world. On the seventh they
said: "A psalm or song for the Sabbath day" \[ibid. xcii. 1\]. A day of
entire rest, when there is no eating nor no drinking and no traffick,
but the upright sit with their crowns on their heads and are nourished
from the glory of the Shekhina, as it is written \[Ex. xxiv. 11\]: "And
they saw (the glory of) God, and did eat and drink," just like the
angels.\]

Why was Adam created on the last hour of the sixth day? In order that he
might immediately partake of the sabbatical meal.

R. Simeon b. Elazar said: Adam can be likened to an Israelite who
married a proselyte woman, and he constantly sought to impress upon her
mind the following regulations: "My daughter, eat not bread when thy
hands are unclean, eat not of fruits which were not tithed, do not
violate the Sabbath, do not get into the habit of making vows, and walk
not with another man. If thou shouldst violate any of the commands, thou
wilt die." Another one, who wished to mislead her, did those very things
before her that she had been told were sinful: he ate

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

bread when his hands were unclean, partook of fruits which were not
tithed, violated the Sabbath, etc., and thereby caused this proselyte to
think that everything that her husband told her was entirely false, so
she violated all his commandments.

R. Simeon b. Johai said: The case of Adam can be likened to one who,
when intending to leave his house, took a barrel and put therein a
certain number of dates and nuts; then he caught a scorpion and put it
in the top of the barrel, be covered it well and put it in a corner, and
said to his wife: "My daughter, everything I have in this house is
placed at thy disposal, except this barrel, which thou must touch not at
all." As soon as her husband went away, she, however, opened the barrel,
put her hand into it, and the scorpion bit her. She took sick and went
to her bed. When her husband returned, he asked her what the trouble
was. She said: "I put my hand in the barrel, and the scorpion bit me,
and I am dying." He said to her: "Did I not tell thee before that thou
must not touch the barrel?" He became angry, and drove her out of his
house. The same happened to Adam when the Holy One, blessed be He, told
him: "Of every tree in the garden thou mayest freely eat; but of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for on
the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die"; but as soon as
he did eat he was driven out of the Garden of Eden, and this is what the
passage said \[Ps. xlix.\] (see above).

On the same day on which he was formed, on the very same day his
countenance was created; on the very same day he was made a body, and
his members were joined and his openings developed, and on the very same
day the soul was put unto him. On the same day he stood upon his feet,
and Eve was mated to him. On the same day he pronounced the names of all
the creatures, and on the very same day he was placed in the Garden of
Eden and received the command (not to eat, etc.), and on the very same
day he violated it and was driven out, to comply with what is written
\[Ps. xlix.\] (see above). On the same day they went to bed two, and
descended from the bed four. R. Jehudah b. Bathyra, however, says that
they descended six (two sons and two daughters). On that day three
sentences were pronounced over Adam, as it is written \[Gen. iii. 17,
18\]: "And unto Adam he said, because thou hast hearkened unto the voice
of thy wife, etc., cursed be the ground for thy sake, in pain shalt thou
eat of it, etc., and thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee,
and thou shalt eat the herbs of the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

field." As soon as Adam the First heard that the Holy One, blessed be
He, said: "And thou shalt eat the herbs of the field," he trembled in
his whole body. He said before Him: "Lord of the Universe, shalt I and
my cattle eat out of the same trough?" Said the Holy One, blessed be He:
"As thou hast trembled, therefore in the sweat of thy face shalt thou
eat *bread*" \[ibid., ibid. 19\].

As Adam was laid under three sentences, likewise was it with Eve. As it
is written \[ibid., ibid. 16\]: "I will greatly multiply thy pain and
(the suffering of) thy conception; in pain shalt thou bring forth
children." The first few days of menstruation are painful. So also are
the first few moments of her sexual intercourse with a man. Also when
the woman becomes pregnant, her face loses its beauty and becomes yellow
the first three months.

When evening drew near, and Adam, looking toward the west, saw that it
was becoming darker and darker, he said: "Woe to me is this, because I
have sinned, that the Lord darkens the world upon me!" He did not know
that it was the course of nature. In the morning, when he saw it lighted
up and the sun risen in the east, he rejoiced greatly. He built an altar
and sacrificed on it as a burnt-offering an ox, the horns of which were
formed before his hoofs. (Rashi explains this elsewhere as follows: All
the creatures of the first days of creation were created in their
full-grown sizes, and as the head was formed first the horns thereon
preceded the hoofs in point of time. This means to say that Adam
sacrificed an ox of the first creation.) As it is written \[Ps. lxix.
32\]: "And this will please the Lord better than an ox or bullock having
horns and cloven hoofs."

(There is a tradition) that the ox of Adam, the steer of Noah, the ram
sacrificed by Abraham in place of his son, were all of the first
creation, as it is written \[Gen. xxii. 13\]: "And Abraham lifted up his
eyes and saw, and behold, there was a ram *Achar*" (another one, which
signifies that it was one differing from the usual ones). At that time
(of the sacrifice of the ox, the Holy One, blessed be He, became
merciful to him and) three divisions of angels came down with harps, and
psalteries, and all musical instruments, and they sang with Adam, as it
is written \[Ps. xcii. 1-3\]: "A psalm song for the Sabbath day. It is a
good thing to give thanks to the Lord, etc. To tell in the morning of
thy kindness, and of thy faithfulness in the nights." "To tell in the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

morning of thy kindness," this means the world to come, which is likened
to the morning, as it is written \[Lam. iii. 23\]: "They are new every
morning, great is thy faithfulness"; and \[Ps. xcii.\] "And of thy
faithfulness in the night" means this world, which is likened to night,
as it is written \[Is. xxi. 11\]: "The doom of Dumah. Unto me one
calleth out of Se'ir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the
night?"

The Holy One, blessed be He, said then: "If I will not punish the
serpent, that would be as if I Myself were destroying the world, because
it would be said that the one that I set up as king over the entire
world has disobeyed My command and ate of the forbidden fruit";
therefore immediately He turned to the serpent and cursed him, as it is
written \[Gen. iii. 14\]: "And the Lord God said unto the serpent," etc.
R. Jose said: "If the serpent had not been cursed, the world would have
been destroyed immediately afterward."

When God created Adam, He formed him with two countenances, front and
back, as it is written \[Ps. cxxxix. 5\]: "Behind and before hast thou
hedged me in, and thou placest upon me thy hand." And the angels came
down to serve him, and the Holy One, blessed be He, took him under His
wings, as it is written: "And thou placest upon me thy hand."

According to others, from this passage is to be inferred that Adam and
the Temple were both created with both hands. This view is supported by
the following passages \[Ps. cxix. 73\]: "Thy *hands* have made me and
established me"; and it is also written about the Temple \[Ex. xv. 17\]:
"The sanctuary, O Lord, which thy *hands* have established."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)What is the safeguard that the Torah
made to its words? It is written \[Lev. xviii. 19\]: "And a woman in the
separation of her uncleanness shalt thou not approach." One might say it
is allowed to embrace and kiss her, and converse with her, therefore it
is written: "Shalt thou not approach"; test one say it is allowed to
sleep with her on one bed when they are both dressed, therefore it is
written \[Lev. xv. 33\]: "And of her that is suffering in her
separation," that means during all the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

days of her separation she shall be as if under a ban; <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) from this it may be said that a woman who
makes herself homely during her separation does it in accordance with
the will of the sages, and one that adorns herself during that time
incurs the dissatisfaction of the sages.

It happened that a man, although faithfully studying (the Bible),
learning (the Mishna), and serving (in the colleges) of the sages, died
in the prime of life. His wife used to take his phylacteries <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) and go around and visit all the synagogues
and colleges, weeping and crying: "My masters, in the Law it is written
\[Deut. xxx. 20\]: 'For he is thy life and the length of thy days'; now
there is my husband, who read and learned much and served the sages, why
did he die in the prime of life?" And there was no one that gave her a
satisfactory answer. Once she met Elijah the prophet, of blessed memory,
and he said to her: "My daughter, wherefore criest thou?" and she made
to him the same complaint. He then said to her: "What was his wont with
thee in the first days of thy separation?" She answered: "Rabbi, he did
not even touch me with his little finger; furthermore, he told me, 'Do
not touch anything, that thou mayest not bring it into suspicion.'" "And
what was his habit with thee in the last days of thy separation?" he
said again. She answered: "Rabbi, I used to eat and drink with him, and
to sleep with him fully dressed on the bed, and his body touched mine,
but with no intention of anything else." Elijah then said: "Blessed be
the Omnipotent that killed him, because it is written \[Lev. xviii.
19\]: 'Shalt thou not approach.'"

It is written \[ibid., ibid. 6\]: "None of you shall approach to any
that are near of kin to him." From this it was said one must not stay in
a separate room with any woman in a hostelry, though she be his sister
or daughter, because of public opinion. For the same reason one must not
converse with a woman in the market, not even with his wife. For the
same reason a man shall not walk behind a woman, even though she be his
wife. This was deduced from the following analogy of expression: It is
written in the passage of illegal unions, "Ye shall not approach,"

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

and here is also written, "Thou shalt not approach," from which it is to
be inferred that one shall not approach such things as can cause him to
sin (or cause people to talk about him).

There is an ancient saying: Keep thyself apart from the abominable, and
from things which are equal to it; and the sages explained it thus: Keep
thyself from trivial sin, that it may not lead thee to a grave one. Run
to perform a slight meritorious deed, for it will lead thee to the
performance of a great one.

It is written \[Song of Songs, vii. 3\]: "Thy body is like a heap of
wheat fenced about with lilies." "Thy body is like a heap of wheat"
refers to the assembly of Israel, and "fenced about with lilies" refers
to the seventy elders. Another explanation of the words, "Thy body is
like a heap of wheat," is that they refer to the lenient religious
duties which seem to be of no consequence; "fenced about with lilies,"
nevertheless when the Israelites perform them they bring them to the
world to come. How so? When one is with his wife in his house he can do
with her what he pleases even during the separation, as there is nobody
to control him or reprove him; but when he refrains from having
intercourse with her until she submerge herself, he is doing so only
because he is afraid of him who commanded the submerging (in the legal
bath); and the same is the case with the first dough, the first wool of
shearing (no control can be exercised). Hence such duties, which are as
light as lilies, bring the Israelites who perform them to the world to
come.

Which is the safeguard that Moses made to his words? It is written \[Ex.
xix. 10\]: "And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people and
sanctify them to-day and to-morrow." As Moses the upright regarded it
inexpedient to speak to the people in the manner God spake to him, he
added one day of his own volition, and said to them \[Ex. xix. 15\]:
"Prepare yourselves for three days." <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)
Why did he do so? Because he thought it might happen that one could have
seminal intercourse with his wife that day, and so they will receive the
Torah when they are unclean; "therefore I will add a third day, that in
all the three days they shall refrain from intercourse, in order that

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

they may be clean when receiving the Torah from Mount Sinai.

This is one of the things that Moses did of his own accord by drawing an
*a fortiori* conclusion (as will be explained farther on), and his act
was afterward sanctioned by the Omnipotent. The same was the case with
the breaking of the tables, with his leaving the Tabernacle, and with
his separation from a woman. How so? He said: "Since relative to the
Israelites who were to be sanctified for the time being only, for the
purpose of receiving the ten commandments from Mount Sinai, the Holy
One, blessed be He, said unto me, 'Go unto the people and sanctify them
to-day and to-morrow,' how much more incumbent is it on me to be
particular about the cleanliness of my person, as I must be ready for
such a divine call every day and every hour, and do not know when He
would speak to me by day or by night." And this was exactly in
accordance with the will of God. R. Jehudah b. Bathyra, however, said:
Moses did not leave his wife before he was told to do so by the Mighty
One, as it is written \[Numb. xii. 8\]: "Mouth to mouth do I speak with
him." It means, mouth to mouth have I told him to separate himself from
a woman. According to others, it is from the following passage: It is
written \[Deut. v. 27\]: "Go say to them, return ye unto your tents";
and immediately after \[ibid., ibid. v. 28\]: "But as for thee, remain
thou here by me." Therefore he returned and separated himself. This was
exactly the meaning of this passage.

The *a fortiori* in the case of the Tabernacle was thus: He said: As for
my brother Aaron, who is anointed with the oil of anointment, and
clothed in holy garments for service, the Holy One, blessed be He,
regarding him said \[Lev. xvi. 2\]: "Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that
he come not at all times into the holy place." Now I who am not chosen
for such service, as I am not a priest, how much more reason is there
for me to leave the Tabernacle? He did so, and it was in accordance with
the will of the Omnipotent.

The *a fortiori* in the case of the tables was thus: It is said when
Moses ascended on high to receive the tables \[which were written and
preserved since the creation of the world, as it is written \[Ex. xxxii.
16\]: "And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the
writing of God, engraved upon the tables," do not read "Charuth"
(engraved), but Cheiruth (free), for every one who is studying the Law
is a free man\].

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The angels
conspired against Moses, saying: "Lord of the Universe, what is the
mortal, that thou rememberest him?" etc. \[Ps. viii. 5-9\]. They
murmured against Moses and said: What is the distinction of one born of
woman, that he should come into the council on high? As it is written
\[Ps. 1xviii. 19\]: "Thou didst ascend on high, lead away captives,
receive gifts." He nevertheless took the tables and descended with great
rejoicing. When he saw the contamination with which they had stained
themselves in worshipping the golden calf, he said: If I should give
them the tables, I impose upon them a responsibility which might result
in capital punishment by divine power, for on the tables is written:
"Thou shalt have no other gods before me" \[Ex. xx. 3\]. He started to
return, but the seventy elders saw him and ran after him, and grasped
the tables on one end, the other end being still in Moses' hand, and he
overpowered them all, as it is written \[Deut. xxxiv. 12\]: "And in
respect to all that mighty hand, and in all the great, terrific deeds
which Moses displayed before the eyes of all Israel." He looked at the
tables, and saw that they were without writing upon thern. He then said:
How shall I give Israel the tables, now that they have no value? I will
rather break them. As it is written \[Deut. ix. 17\]: "And I took hold
of the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and I broke them."
Said R. Jose the Galilean: I will explain this with a parable. A king
said to his ambassador: "Go, betroth to me a maiden who is beautiful,
chaste, and of pleasing manners." The ambassador went and betrothed such
to him. Soon he found that she acted the harlot. The ambassador was in a
predicament. "What is to be done? If I grive her the marriage contract
now, I may subject her to capital punishment. No," he said, "I will tear
the marriage contract and thereby release her from my master and save
her." So Moses the upright said, as stated above: "Rather will I seize
and break them (the tables) and save the Israelites by enabling them, in
case they should be charged with idolatry, to say: 'Where are the
tables? They did not exist at all.'"

R. Jehudah b. Bathyra said: Moses would not have broken the tables had
he not been told by the Mighty One to do so, as it is written: "Mouth to
mouth do I speak with him"; that means, I told him to break the tables.
According to others, that thought is expressed in the following passage
\[Deut. ix. 16\]: "And I looked, and behold, ye had sinned against the
Lord." He would not say "I looked," unless he saw the writing of the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

tables flying away. Anonymous teachers find the same in the following
passage \[Deut. x. 5\]: "And they have remained there, as the Lord hath
commanded me." He would not have said he was commanded unless he had
been told to break them. R. Elazar b. Azariah infers it from the
following passage \[ibid. xxxiv. 12\]: "Which Moses displayed before the
eye of all Israel"; or, "All that Moses did was by the command of the
Lord," as in other cases Moses acted according to the command of God.
\[R. Aqiba infers it from the following passage: "And I took hold of the
two tables." What can a man take hold of? Only what he can destroy
(*i.e.*, if he had not been commanded to do so he could not have been
able to destroy a thing given by God). R. Meir infers it from the
following passage: "Which thou hast broken"; it really means, "which
thou didst break rightfully" (see Sabbath, p. 165).\]

Also Hezekiah, King of Judah, did four things of his own volition which
were in accordance with the will of the Lord (see Pesachim, p. 99 in the
Mishna): "And Hezekiah prospered in all his works" \[II Chron. xxxii.
30\].

What is the safeguard that Job made to his words? (Let us see), it is
written \[Job i. 1\]: "And this man was perfect and upright, and fearing
God, and eschewing evil." We learn therefrom that job kept aloof from
anything that led to sin, from abomination and from what is equal to it.
It may be asked \[if it is so, are not the terms "perfect" and "upright"
superfluous? (the words "fearing God" and "eschewing evil," are they not
sufficient)? Infer from this that the term "perfect" means that he was
born circumcised. Adam the first man also came forth circumcised, as it
is written \[Gen. i. 27\]: "And God created man in his image." Also Seth
was so born, as it is written \[ibid. v. 3\]: "And begat a son in his
likeness, after his image." Noah, too, was born circumcised, as \[ibid.
vi. 9\] the term "perfect" was used in reference to Noah. Shem was also
so born, as it is written \[ibid. xiv. 19\]: "And Malkizedek, king of
Salem." <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) Jacob the patriarch was also
so born, as the appellation "perfect" was also applied to him \[ibid.
xxv. 27\]. And Joseph was also so born, as it is written \[ibid. xxxvii.
2\]: "These are the generations of Jacob: Joseph." It ought to be the
generation of Jacob: Reuben (as he was the first-born).

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Why is it Joseph?
Infer from this, that as Jacob was born circumcised, so also was Joseph.
And Moses was born circumcised, as it is written \[Ex. ii. 2\]: "And
when she saw him, that he was a goodly child." What good could his
mother see in him? Was he then more beautiful than all mankind? Say,
then, he was born circumcised. Also Balaam the wicked was born
circumcised, as it is written \[Numb. xxiv. 4\]: "Thus saith he who
heareth the sayings of God." (According to the tradition of the
Talmudists, one who is not circumcised could not hear the words of God,
and as Balaam was a Gentile, and not circumcised by his parents, and yet
he heard the words of God, consequently he must have been born
circumcised.) Samuel was also born so, as he is also graced with the
appellation *good* \[I Sam. ii. 26\]. David was also born so,
traditionally, as (the support from Ps. xvi. 1 does not imply anything).
Also Jeremiah was born circumcised, as it is written \[Jer. i. 5\]:
"Before yet I had formed thee in thy mother's body I knew thee, and
before thou wast yet come forth out of the womb I *sanctified* thee."
Also Zerubabel was born so, as it is written \[Haggai, ii. 23\]: "On
that day, saith the Lord of hosts, *will I take thee*, O Zerubabel, the
son of Shealtiel, *my servant*."\] And he (Job) said \[Job xxxi. 1\]: "A
covenant have I made with my eyes: how then should I fix my looks on a
virgin?" Infer from this that job was so scrupulous with himself that he
did not even look at a virgin. This is to be made an *a fortiori*
conclusion--namely, if a virgin whom he could marry himself, or to his
son, brother, or relatives was not looked upon by him because he was so
rigorous with himself, so much the more did he refrain from looking at a
married woman. But what was the reason that Job was so rigorous with
himself as regards looking at a virgin? Because he thought, if I look at
her to-day (and like her) and to-morrow she marries some one else, I
will have looked on (and liked) a married woman.

What safeguard have the prophets made to their words? It is written
\[Is. xlii. 13\]: "The Lord--as a mighty one will he go forth, like a
man of war will he arouse his vengeance: he will shout, yea, raise the
war-cry." Is then the Lord as one mighty one? Is He not stronger than
all the mighty ones of the world put together? The same is in Amos
\[iii. 8\]: "The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord Eternal
hath spoken, who will not prophesy?" Is then the voice of the Lord equal
to one lion--is it not as of all the lions of the whole world put

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

together? The same meaning is conveyed by the following passage \[Ezek.
xliii. 2\]: "Behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of
the east; and his voice was like a noise of many waters; and the earth
gave light from his glory." (Now let us see. We know from a tradition
that the words) "like a noise of many waters" mean the angel Gabriel;
and by "the earth gave light," etc., is meant the appearance of the
Shekhina. Is not here an *a fortiori* conclusion to be drawn? Gabriel,
who is only one of the thousands of millions of servants who minister
before the Lord, if *his* voice reached from one end of the world to the
other, so much the more would that of the King of kings, the Holy One,
blessed be He, who has created the universe, who has created the higher
and the lower; but the reason why the prophets spake so is, that only
such things are mentioned that the eye of a human being can see, and
only such things are written that the car of a human being can hear.

What was the safeguard that the Hagiographers made to their words? It is
written \[Prov. v. 8\]: "Remove far from her thy way and come not nigh
to the door of her house." "Remove far from her thy way" means heresy
against which one is warned. Lest one say, I have confidence in myself
and I am sure that it would not influence me, therefore it is written
\[Ps. ii. 19\]: "All that come unto her return not again, and they will
not reach the paths of life." \[It is written \[ibid. ix. 2\]: "She hath
killed her cattle, she hath mingled her wine; she hath also set in order
her table." This refers to the: wicked. When one goes away with them,
they give him food and drink, they clothe and cover him, and give him
plenty of money; but as soon as he becomes one of them, each one
recognizes what belonged to him and takes it away from him. Concerning
them it is written \[ibid. vii. 23\]: "Till an arrow cleaveth through
his liver, as a bird hasteneth into the snare, and knoweth not that it
is done to take his life."\]

Another explanation to the above passage is this: "Remove far from her
thy way" refers to a harlot. When one is warned not to go in this
market, and not to enter into that alley, as there is a celebrated and
much-spoken-of harlot, and he says, I have confidence in myself even
though I go there I would not be seduced by her; nevertheless they must
say to him, Go not, for after all thou canst be seduced by her. Did not
our sages say: "A man shall not be in the habit of passing by the door
of a harlot, for it is written \[ibid. vii. 26\]: 'For many deadly

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

wounded hath she caused to fall: yea, very numerous are all those slain
by her'"?

What is the safeguard that the sages made to their words? *e.g.*, the
reading of Shema (see Berachoth), and so also have the latter sages made
a safeguard to their words; and they have multiplied disciples who did
the same thing. As to this, however, the schools of Shammai and Hillel
differ. The School of Shammai maintain that one shall teach only those
who are wise, modest, rich, and come from a good family; the School of
Hillel, however, hold that one may teach every one, as there were many
transgressors in Israel, and after they had become upright, pious, and
righteous men, engaged in the study of the Law, they had the good
fortune that from them descended men of uprightness, piety, and
righteousness.

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)R. Aqiba said: "Whoever takes a coin
from the fund intended for charity to the poor when he is not in need of
it, will not die before he will really be in need of assistance." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9) He used to say: One that bandages his eyes
or his shoulders, and says: "Give charity to the blind or to the leper,"
will in the end speak the truth-that is, he will be such. He also said:
One that throws his bread on the ground, or scatters his money in his
anger, will not die before he will be in actual need of assistance. He
said again: One that tears his garments or breaks his vessels in his
wrath, will eventually worship idols, for this is the way of the evil
thoughts: to-day they urge him to tear his garments, and to-morrow they
will advise him to worship idols. And again: One that is desirous that
his wife shall die in order to inherit her property, or to marry her
sister, or one who is desirous that his brother shall die in order to
marry his wife, in the end will be buried by them. Regarding such it is
written \[Eccl. x. 8\]: "He that diggeth a pit will fall into it; and
him who breaketh down a fence, a serpent will bite him."

(Here follows a repetition of a Mishna in Baba Kama, which, according to
our method, we have omitted.)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Dostai b. Janai
said: Though thou hast chosen and sown in the first quarter, sow also in
the second: perhaps a hail might destroy the first, but the second will
be preserved; for thou knowest not which will succeed, whether this or
that, or both may be preserved, and both of them will be alike good, as
it is written \[Eccl. xi. 6\]: "In the morning sow thy seed, and in the
evening let not thy hand rest." And even though thou hast sown in the
first and second quarters, do not neglect to do so also in the third, as
it may happen that a blast might destroy the first, but the latter will
be preserved, as is said in the passage just mentioned.

R. Ishmael b. R. Jose said: The above passage refers to study, thus:
Study the Law in thy old age, even if thou hast studied it in thy youth.
Do not say: "I do not want to study when I am aged"; but study it
always, because thou knowest not which will succeed. If thou hast
studied the Law in years of plenty, do not count it for the years of
famine. The study during times of ease does not count for those of
distress, because one thing done in distress is better than a hundred in
ease, as it is written \[ibid.\]: "In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening let not thy hand rest." R. Aqiba also said the same.

R. Meir said: When thou hast studied under one master, say not: "It is
enough," but go and study under another; yet do not go to all of them,
but only to those who were near to the Law from the start (meaning a
scholar from a scholarly house), as it is written \[Ps. v. 15\]: "Drink
water out of thy own cistern, and running water out of thy own well."

It is a duty to study under three masters, such as R. Eliezer, R.
Joshua, and R. Aqiba, as it is written \[Ps. viii. 34\]: "Happy is the
man that hearkeneth unto me, waiting day by day at my gates, waiting at
the posts of my doors." <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) Because thou
canst not know which master's teaching will remain with thee, or perhaps
all are good, as may be learned from the above-mentioned passage.

R. Joshua said: "The same passage applies also to this: Marry a woman in
thy youth; marry one also (if need be) when you are old; beget children
in thy youth, and do so also in thy old age. Do not say, I will not
marry again as I have children, but marry and beget more children, as
you do not know which of them will be the good."

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

He used also to say: "If thou hast given a coin to a poor man in the
morning, and another one begs of you in the evening, give him also, as
thou knowest not whether both will be benefited by thy donation, and
whether both are alike deserving, as it is written: "In the morning sow
thy seed." <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)

It happened that a pious man who used to spend much in charity, while
aboard a ship encountered a great storm, and the ship foundered. R.
Aqiba saw him go down, and came to testify before the court in order
that his wife might marry again. Before the court adjourned, the man
came and stood before them. Said R. Aqiba to him: "Did you not sink into
the sea?" He answered: "Yea." "And who brought thee out of the sea?" R.
Aqiba asked again. He answered: "The charities that I have given have
saved me from the sea." "Whence dost thou know this?" He said: "When I
went down in the deep, I heard the noise of the waves. It seemed to me
that they said to each other: This man has done charity all his days
(and they actually threw me on land)." R. Aqiba then arose and said:
Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, who has chosen the words of the
Torah and the words of the sages, for they are preserved everlastingly.
As it is written \[Eccl. xi. 1\]: "Cast thy bread upon the face of the
waters; for after many days wilt thou find it again." It is written
again \[Prov. x. 2\]: "And charity will deliver from death."

It happened that to Benjamin the upright, who was the treasurer of
charities, there came a woman and asked for food. He said: "I assure you
that the treasury is empty.'' She said: "Rabbi, if thou wilt not help
me, thou wilt kill a widow and her seven children." He then fed them at
his own expense. Years afterward Benjamin the upright fell ill, and he
suffered very much on his sick-bed. Said the angels before the Holy One,
blessed be He: "Lord of the Universe, Thou hast said: He who preserves
one soul of Israel is regarded (by Scripture) as if he preserved an
entire world. Benjamin the upright, who has preserved a widow and seven
children, (is entitled) so much more to such consideration, yet he is
pining on the couch. of a painful disease." They implored the mercy of
God in his behalf, and His decree was annulled, and twenty-two years
were added to his life.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

MISHNA *B*. Simeon the just was one of the remnants of the Great
Assembly. His motto was: "The order of the world rests upon three
things: on law, on worship, and on bestowal of favors."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)"*Upon the Torah*." How so? It is
written \[Hosea, vi. 6\]: For piety I desired, and not sacrifice; and
the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings." Infer from this that
the burnt-offering is more favored than ordinary sacrifices, because it
is all burnt up in the fire, as it is written \[Lev. i. 9\]: "And the
priest shall burn the whole on the altar," and elsewhere \[I Sam. vii.
9\]: "And Samuel took the sucking lamb and offered it for an entire
burnt-offering unto the Lord." Yet the study of the Law is more
acceptable in the sight of the Lord than burnt-offerings, because he who
is studying the Torah knows the will of the Lord, as it is written
\[Prov. ii. 5\]: "Then wilt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and
the knowledge of God wilt thou find." From this it may be inferred that
when a sage lectures to the public it is accounted to him in Scripture
as if sacrificing fat and blood upon the altar.

Two scholars studying together, when a bride or a bier carrying a corpse
passes before them, must observe the following rule: If the bride has
all she needs to feel that she is such, and if the dead has all that is
needed for decent burial, the students shall not interrupt themselves;
but if such be not the case, let them suspend their study and go to add
to the joy of the bride and to do honor to the dead. \[It happened that
a wedding procession passed by while R. Tarphon was studying with his
disciples, and he directed that the bride be brought up to his house,
and he told his mother and his wife to wash, anoint, and ornament her,
and to dance for her until she should reach her groom. According to
Elias Wilna.\]

It also happened that, while R. Judah b. Ilai was teaching his
disciples, a wedding procession, which had not sufficient followers,
passed by, and he with his disciples took part in the procession until
the bride passed.

It happened again that while the same was engaged in teaching his
disciples, a bridal party passed by. He asked: "What is

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

that and they answered: "A bridal party." He then said: "My sons, arise,
evince your interest in the bride." So we find that the Holy One,
blessed be He, bestowed His favor upon a bride, as it is written \[Gen.
ii. 22\]: "And the Lord God *formed* the rib." And in the cities by the
sea a bride is called *Beniatha*, "the *formed* one." If He has done so,
how much more reason is there for us so to do? Infer from this that the
Lord formed Eve and ornamented her like a bride, and brought her to
Adam, as it is written \[ibid.\]: "And brought her unto Adam." Only once
has the Lord become a mediator to Adam; henceforward man must procure a
mediator for himself, as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 23\]: "Bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh." Once only was Eve formed out of Adam;
henceforward man betroths the daughter of his fellowman.

"*On service*." How so? As long as the service of the Temple existed,
the world was blessed for the sake of its inhabitants, and the rain came
down in due season, as it is written \[Deut. xi. 13, 14\]: "I love the
Lord your God, and to serve him . . . that I will send rain for your
land in due season." But when the service of the Temple ceased, the
inhabitants were not blessed, and the rain did not come down in due
time, as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 16\]: "Take heed to yourselves
that your heart be not deceived . . . and he will shut up the heavens
that there be no rain." Also Haggai said \[ii. 15, 16\]: "Direct, I pray
you, your heart from this day and upward, before the time that a stone
was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord: since those days were,
when one came to a heap of sheaves of twenty (in number), and there were
but ten; when he came to the wine-press to draw off fifty measures out
of the vat, and there were but twenty." \[Why was it not said of the
wine-press also "twenty, and there were but ten," the same as of the
wheat? Because the wine-press is a better sign than the wheat. There is
a tradition that when the vine is spoiled it is a bad sign for the
current year.\]

Said the Israelites before the Holy One, blessed be He: "Lord of the
Universe, why hast Thou done thus to us?" The Holy Spirit answered: "Ye
looked for much, and, lo, it came to be little, . . . because of my
house that lieth in ruins, while ye ran every man unto his own house"
\[Haggai, i. 9\]. "If ye will employ yourselves with the service of the
Temple, I will bless ye as heretofore," as it is written \[ibid. ii. 18,
19\]: "Direct, I pray, your heart . . . from the four and

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation
of the Lord's temple was laid. . . . Is the seed yet in the barn? Yea,
as yet the wine, and the fig-tree, and the pomegranate, and the
olive-tree have not brought forth; (but) from this day will I bless
you." Infer from this that there is no service which is favored by the
Lord more than the Temple service.

"*Upon bestowal of favors*." How so? It is written \[Hosea, vi. 6\]:
"For kindness I desired, and not sacrifice." Moreover, at the beginning
the world was created with kindness, as it is written \[Ps. lxxxix. 3\]:
"To eternity will kindness be built up (*e.g.*, the world is built up
with kindness), the heavens--yea, in these wilt thou establish thy
faithfulness."

R. Johanan b. Zakkai once went out of Jerusalem, followed by R. Joshua,
and seeing the destroyed Temple, R. Joshua said: "Woe to us, that this
is destroyed, the only place where the sins of the Israelites were
atoned!" R. Johanan corrected him, saying: "My son, do not grieve over
it. We have other means of atonement as effective--namely, bestowal of
favors, as it is written \[Hosea, vi. 6\]: 'For kindness I desired, and
not sacrifice.' As we find with Daniel, who was occupied in doing good.
And what good did he do? He certainly did not sacrifice burnt-offerings
and voluntary offerings, as he was in Babylon, and with regard to the
place of sacrifice, it is written \[Deut. xii. 13, 14\]: 'Take heed to
thyself that thou offer not thy burnt-offering in every place which thou
mayest see; but in the place which the Lord will choose in one of thy
tribes, there shalt thou offer thy burnt-offerings.' What good, then,
did he do? He rejoiced with people in their joy, he wept with them in
their sorrow, he helped and cheered poor brides, he honored the dead by
following them to the last resting-place, he gave material aid to the
needy, and prayed three times every day, and his prayers were received
with favor, as it is written \[Dan. vi. 11\]: 'And three times every day
he kneeled upon his knees, and prayed, and offered thanks before his
God,' etc."

When Vespasian came to destroy Jerusalem, he said to the inhabitants:
"Fools, wherefore do ye seek to destroy this city and to burn the
Temple? All I want of you is to send me a bow or an arrow--*i.e.*, to
acknowledge my dominion over you. I will leave you in peace." They,
however, said: "just as we killed the two who came before thee, so will
it be with thee." When R. Johanan b. Zakkai heard this, he invited the
leaders of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jerusalem to a
conference, and said unto them: "My sons, why should you occasion the
destruction of the city and insist upon it, as it were, that the Temple
be burnt? All the enemy wants is that you send to him a bow or an arrow,
and is willing on that condition to depart." But they answered him in
the manner they answered Vespasian. The latter had spies within the
walls of Jerusalem, and whatever they heard they wrote upon an arrow and
threw it outside the wall. In this manner Vespasian learned that R.
Johanan b. Zakkai was friendly to Cæsar (and so he really was, and
confessed it frankly to the leaders of Jerusalem). When R. Johanan b.
Zakkai saw that his efforts during several days in succession to win the
leaders for peace proved futile, for the leaders did not listen to him,
he sent for his disciples, R. Eliezer and R. Joshua, and said: "My sons,
try to take me out of here. Make me a coffin, and I will sleep in it."
They did so, and R. Eliezer held the coffin by one end, and R. Joshua
held it by the other, and thus carried him at sunset to the gates of
Jerusalem. When the gate-keepers asked them whom they had there, they
answered: "A corpse; and you know that a corpse cannot remain in
Jerusalem over night." They were allowed to go, and they carried him
till they came to Vespasian. There they opened the coffin, and he arose
and introduced himself to Vespasian, who said: "Since thou art the
Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai, I give thee the privilege to ask a favor of
me." He answered: "I request nothing but that the city of Jamnia shall
be free to me to instruct there my disciples. I will build there a
prayer-house, and will perform all the commandments of the Lord."
Hereupon Vespasian said: "It is well. Thou mayest go thither, and
undisturbed carry out the object of thy desire." R. Johanan b. Zakkai
then asked permission to say something to Vespasian. This having been
granted, he said: "I can assure you that you will become a king." "How
dost thou know it?" He answered: "We have a tradition that the Temple
will not be delivered to a common man (in the name of the king), but to
the king himself." As it is written \[Is. x. 34\]: "And he will cut down
the thickets of the forest with iron, and the Lebanon shall fall by
(means of) a mighty one." <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) It was
said that scarcely had a few days elapsed when a messenger came from the
city of Rome with the tidings that Cæsar was dead, and the resolution
was adopted that Vespasian be his successor.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

At the time when Jerusalem was taken, R. Johanan b. Zakkai, with a
trembling heart, was sitting and watching as Eli did, as it is written
\[I Sam. iv, 13\]: "Lo, Eli was sitting upon a chair by the wayside,
watching; for his heart was anxious for the ark of God." When he heard
that Jerusalem was destroyed and the Temple burnt, he and his disciples
tore their garments, wept, cried, lamented, and said: "Open thy doors, O
Lebanon!" \[Zech. xi. 1\]--that is, the Temple; "and the fire shall eat
on thy cedars"--that is, the priests of the Temple, who took the keys
and threw them up high and said, before the Holy One, blessed be He:
"Lord of the Universe, here are the keys which thou hast intrusted us
with, as we were no faithful treasurers and we are no longer worthy to
do the work of the King and to eat at his table."

Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the twelve tribes all wept, cried,
lamented, and said \[ibid. 2, 3\]: "Wail, fir-tree, for fallen is the
cedar; those that were mighty are despoiled," etc. "Wail, fir-tree, for
fallen is the cedar"--that is, the Temple; "those that were mighty are
despoiled," applies to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and his twelve sons. "Wail,
O ye oaks of Bashan"--that is, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam; "for the
impervious forest is come down"--that is, the Holy of Holies; "the noise
of the wailing of the shepherds, for wasted is their glory"--that is,
David and Solomon his son; "the noise of the roaring of young lions, for
wasted is the pride of the Jordan"--that is, Elijah and Elisha.

In three things has the Holy One, blessed be he, made mankind differ one
from the other: in voice, behavior, and features. "In voice": for what
purpose?, The Holy One, blessed be He, has varied the voices of mankind
one from the other, to prevent the generations from adultery; because if
it would not be so, when a man would leave his house, some one else
might come in (in the night time) and do violence to his wife; but as
the voices are different, she could recognize that of her husband.

"In behavior": for what purpose? The Holy One, blessed be He, has varied
the behavior of mankind one from another, to prevent jealousy; if not
so, mankind would be jealous of each other; therefore the behavior of
one is different from that of another. "In features": for what purpose?
The Holy One, blessed be He, has varied the features of mankind that the
women might recognize their husbands, and the men their wives, otherwise
all would be mixed up.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

MISHNA *C*. Antigonus of Socho, who received it from Simeon the just,
was in the habit of saying: "Be not like slaves who serve their master
for the sake of the compensation; be like such servants as labor for
their master without reward; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) "*The fear of God shall be upon
you, that your reward may be double in the world to come*." Antigonus
from Socho had two disciples, who were studying his words. They
communicated them to their disciples, and they in turn to theirs, who
sought the reason which prompted the sage to make such an utterance.
"Wherefore," they asked, "have our ancestors said such a thing? Is it
possible that a laborer will work all day, and not expect to be rewarded
in the evening?" What if they had known that there is a hereafter, and
that there will be a resurrection? They would in that case not have
expressed themselves in that manner. The result was, that these
disciples deviated from the path of the Torah, and formed two new
schools with exclusively worldly tendencies, that of the Sadducees and
that of the Baitusees: Sadducces--because the name of the founder of
their school was Zadok; and Baitusees--because the name of the founder
of their school was Baitus. They surrounded themselves with pomp and the
brilliancy of shining metals, gold and silver, not so much for the
delight and pleasure which they derived from those things as to spite
the Pharisees, who deprived themselves of enjoyment here, in order to
inherit the world to come, which in their opinion was a mere delusion.

MISHNA D. Jose b. Joezer of Zereda and Jose b. Johanan of Jerusalem
received from them. Jose b. Joezer used to say: "Let thy house be the
meeting place of the wise; sit gladly at their feet, and drink in their
words with avidity."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15)"*Thy house shall be the
meeting-place for the wise*." What does this mean? That the house should
be for the use of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

scholars, their disciples and their disciples, in the sense that one man
says to the other: "I shall wait for you at that place." Another
explanation of that phrase is this: If a scholar comes to thee for the
purpose of being instructed by thee, and thou art able to comply with
his wish, do so; if thou art not able to teach him, dismiss him at once.
Neither shall he sit before thee on the bed, chair, or bench, but on the
floor; and every word that thou utterest he shall receive with awe,
terror, fear, and trembling.

"*Sit gladly at their feet*." It means that when a renowned scholar
comes to the city you shall not say: "I need him not," but go to him;
and do not sit before him on the bed, chair, or bench, but con the
floor; and every word that comes from his lips, receive with awe,
terror, fear, and trembling, for so our ancestors received the Torah
from Mount Sinai. According to another explanation the words: "Sit
gladly at their feet," are referred to Rabbi Eliezer, and the words:
"Drink their words as a thirsty man drinks water," are referred to Rabbi
Aqiba.

For how did R. Aqiba begin his wonderful career? (Was it not in the
manner hinted in the above words?) It has been said that when he was
forty years old he had not learned yet anything. (At that age, however,
he conceived the idea of applying himself to study.) It once happened
that, standing at a well, he asked: "Who has made that hollow in the
stone?" The people whom he asked answered: "The water which
continuously, day after day, falls upon it." They also said (by way of
reproach): "O Aqiba, it is strange that thou knowest not the passage in
Scripture which reads: 'Water weareth out stones'", \[Job, xiv. 19\].
Aqiba then drew an *a fortiori* conclusion. He said: "If the soft has so
much power over the hard as to bore it (water over stone), how much more
power will the Torah, the words of which are as hard as iron, have over
my heart, which is flesh and blood?" He at once turned to the study of
the Law. He and his son <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) went to a
school where children were instructed, and addressed one of the
teachers: "Master, teach me Torah." Aqiba and his son took hold of the
slate, and the teacher wrote upon it the alphabet, and he quickly
learned it; and then wrote it in the reversed order, and learned as
fast; then he learned the Book of Leviticus, and proceeded from one book
to the other,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

until he finished the study of the Bible. He then sat down at the feet
of R. Eliezer and R. Joshua, and said: "Masters, I beg of you to open to
me the underlying principal Mishnayoth." As soon as they recited one
Halakha to him, he went away; and, contemplating what they had told him,
a new realm of thought was open to him. He saw that there must be a
reason why this thing was written here; why this thing was written
there, and why this thing has been said so and not otherwise, and why it
has been said at all. He went back to his masters questioning, and made
them rise and deliberate.

Rabbi Simeon b. Elazar said: I shall illustrate this point with the
following parable: A stone-cutter who was doing his work in the
mountains was once seen standing upon a rocky height, knocking off small
pieces thereof. "What art thou doing?" people asked him. His answer was:
"I am trying to uproot this mountain and throw it into the Jordan." They
laughed at him. He, however, continued his work; knocked off piece after
piece, and when he had reduced the mountain to a big rock, he planted
himself against it, and pushed and pushed until he had uprooted the
rock, and then threw it into the Jordan, saying: "This is not thy place,
that one is." So has R. Aqiba done too, with R. Eliezer and R. Joshua
(he compelled them to improve and to rectify their method).

Said R. Tarphon to him: Aqiba, to thee applies the following passage
\[Job, xxviii. 11\]: "The various droppings of water he uniteth into
streams, and what is hidden he bringeth forth to light." Things which
were hidden from mankind, R. Aqiba brought forth to light.

Every day during the entire time of his learning he used to cut a bundle
of straw, half of which he would sell for his needs and the other half
he used for light. His neighbors murmured, saying: "Aqiba, thou greatly
dost annoy us with the smoke; rather sell it to us, and buy oil with the
money and study by its light." He answered them: "The straw supplies me
with many things: first, it gives me light for studying; secondly, I
warm myself by its flame; and, thirdly, I make my bed on it when I go to
sleep."

In the world to come, R. Aqiba will be a menace to the poor who have
neglected study. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) When they will be
questioned why

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

they had not studied the Law, and they shall answer because they were
poor and had to work for a livelihood, then R. Aqiba will be held up to
them as one who was also poor and wearied, and yet did study; and if
they should say because of their little children, again R. Aqiba a will
be pointed to, who had many sons and daughters, and yet supported them
and his wife Rachel. At the age of forty Rabbi Aqiba began his studies,
and at the end of thirteen years he lectured in public. It was said that
he did not leave this world until he had tables of gold and silver, and
also golden step-ladders to ascend to his bed. His wife went out with an
ornament of gold which represented Jerusalem "on her head; and when his
disciples said to him: Rabbi, thou hast put us to shame by the profuse
jewelry thy wife is wearing," he answered: "She has undergone much
suffering, great troubles and privations, for the sake of my study."

Not less astonishing is the beginning of the literary career of Rabbi
Eliezer. He was twenty-two years old when, for the first time, he felt a
desire for study; and when he intimated to his father that his intention
was to sit at the feet of R. Johanan b. Zakkai, his father Hyrcanus told
him to plough a full Maanah (a piece of land) without eating anything.
R. Eliezer got up early in the morning and did the will of his father,
but then left him. It is said that that day was Friday, and that he went
in the evening to his father-in-law to eat. Others say that he did not
eat at all, that he fasted from the sixth hour of the eve of Sabbath to
the sixth hour from the expiration of Sabbath. On the road he saw
something which looked to him like food--it is said that it was
cow-dung--he picked it up and put it to his mouth. He continued his
journey, and finally came to the place where R. Johanan b. Zakkai had
his residence and his school. R. Eliezer remained over night at an
hostelry in the neighborhood. In the morning he sat at the feet of the
great sage, and whose attention he attracted by the offensive odor that
came from his mouth. R. Johanan, attributing the bad smell to an empty
stomach, said to him: "Hast thou eaten anything today?" R. Eliezer made
no answer. Again the master put the same question to him, and again he
was silent. His host was sent for, of whom the sage inquired whether
Rabbi Eliezer partook of any food at his place. "No, he did not," the
host said. "I did not offer him any food, thinking that he might eat
with the Rabbi." "And I," the Rabbi said, "did not offer him any food,
assuming that he had eaten at your place. But while

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

we are conversing Eliezer is starving." (Food was given to Eliezer, and
then) Rabbi Johanan blessed Eliezer, and said unto him: "As thy
offensive odor is the result of privation for the sake of study, may thy
name shine forth with the glory of scholarship."

Hyrcanus was angry at his son for the course he had taken, and made up
his mind to disgrace and disinherit him. But it came to the ears of R.
Johanan what Hyrcanus resolved upon to do. It was the day when R.
Johanan was lecturing to the great men in Israel that Hyrcanus meant to
punish his disobedient son. And the Rabbi appointed watchmen, and
advised them: "Should Hyrcanus come, do not allow him to enter the
auditorium." They tried to carry out his instruction. But Hyrcanus
managed to push himself through and to reach the seats of Ben Zizith Ha
Kesseth, Nakdimon b. Gurion, and Calba Shebua, where he sat down with
trembling. It is said that on that occasion R. Johanan threw glances of
affection at Eliezer, and requested him to open an argument. Modestly
did R. Eliezer attempt to decline the honor, saying that he did not know
how to begin. But the master and his disciples prevailed, and Eliezer
rose and discussed things in an astounding manner, and every subject he
touched upon and elucidated pleased Rabbi Johanan to such an extent that
he got up and kissed him on the forehead. But Rabbi Eliezer remarked:
"Master, everything I said I have learned from thee." Before adjournment
Hyrcanus, Eliezer's father, got up and said: "Masters, I had come here
with the intention to disgrace my son Eliezer by disinheriting him; but
now, however (after I have seen this), I say that all my properties
shall be given to him, and his brother shall get none of them."

(It is mentioned that Hyrcanus took his seat by Zizith Ha Kesseth, etc.,
and is explained why he was so called; but as it is not completed here,
the full explanation is given in Tract Gittin.)

Concerning Nakdimon b. Gurion, it was said that the bedding of his
daughter was of the value of twelve thousand golden dinars from the city
of Tyre, and a golden dinar of Tyre she used to spend for spicing the
cookery for every week. She was a childless widow, and was waiting for
her brother-in-law to marry her.

And why was he named Nakdimon? Because the sun hastened for his sake.
(See Vol. VIII. of Section Moed, Tract Taanith, pp. 51, 52.)

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Why was he called Calba Shebua? Because whoever entered, his house
hungry as a dog, left satiated. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) When
Vespasian came to destroy Jerusalem, the zealous fanatics were going to
burn all his wealth. Said he to them: "Wherefore are ye, destroying this
city, and are going to burn my wealth? Wait until I find out what I have
in my house." He found that he had food for twenty-two years, of which
at least one meal a day could be had by each inhabitant of Jerusalem. He
at once gave orders to thresh, to sift and to grind, to knead and to
bake, and prepared food for twenty-two years for every one in Jerusalem,
but they paid no attention to him. What did the Jerusalemites do? They
brought the wagons, sawed them, and smeared them with clay. They also
did more than this: they boiled straw and ate it, and every Israelite
who took part in the war was placed on the city walls. Said one: If any
one give me five dates, I will go down and bring back five heads of the
enemy. He received five dates, and he went down and took five heads of
Vespasian's men. When Vespasian observed their excrement, and found
there was nothing cereal in it, he said to his army: "If those who eat
nothing but straw are still slaughtering so many of you, if they would
eat and drink as you do, how many more of you would they have killed?

MISHNA *E*. Jose b. Johanan of Jerusalem was in the habit of saying:
"Let thy house be so wide open that the poor may enter it as were they
inmates there; and do not hold too much discourse with woman." The sages
have cautioned against talking too much with one's own wife. An
inference can then be made with regard to talking with the wife of a
neighbor. Hence the wise man said The man who does talk overmuch with
woman causes evil unto himself, makes himself insusceptive of the words
of the Thora, and in the end will be an heir to Gehenna."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19) "*Thy house should be wide open*."
This means that one's house should be wide open south, east, west, and
north, as was

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the house of Job, which had four entrances made, so that the poor should
not have the trouble of walking around the house looking for the
entrance, but should find it whichever way they came without any
difficulty.

"*As were they inmates there*" \[literally: "The poor shall be of thy
household"\]. It is not meant that the people of thy house shall be
poor, but that the poor shall speak of what they ate and what they drank
in thy house as they used to tell what they ate and drank in the house
of Job. And when they met one another on the road, and asked, "Whence do
you come?" the answer was: "From the house of Job." "Whereto are you
going?" "To the house of Job." Job's house was in a measure the house of
the poor.

When the great afflictions came upon job, he prayed before the Holy One,
blessed be He: "Lord of the Universe, have I not fed the hungry and have
I not given drink to the thirsty?" as it is written \[Job, xxxi. 17 \]:
"Or if ever I ate my bread alone and the fatherless did not eat
thereof." "And have I not clothed the naked?" as it is written \[ibid.,
ibid. 20\]: "And if be have not been warmed with the fleece of my
sheep." (Nevertheless I am so punished.) The Holy One, blessed be He,
answered him: job, as yet thou hast not reached one-half of the
performances of Abraham. Thou sittest and waitest in thy house, and
wayfarers enter. The one who is used to wheat-bread gets wheat-bread,
one who is used to meat gets meat, one who is used to drink wine gets
wine. Not so Abraham. He was in the habit of going out of his house to
hunt up wayfarers, whom he brought under his roof, and entertained them
in a better manner than they had been accustomed to. He offered
wheat-bread, meat, and wine to those who at home lived on coarser food.
Moreover, he built booths on the road and supplied them with
refreshments, and those who entered ate and drank, and blessed God for
it. He was favored by heaven, and all that the heart desired and the
mouth asked for was to be found in Abraham's house, as it is written
\[Gen. xxi. 33\]: "And Abraham planted an ‏אשּל‎ (orchard) in
Beer-Sheba. "(The letters of the word ‏אשל‎ are the initial letters of
the words ‏אכילה‎,‏שּתיה‎, ‏לויה‎, eating, drinking, and accompanying.
Hence the above statement.)

"*Teach thy household humility*." For if he is humble, the members of
his household are also humble, and the consequence then is that if a
poor man comes to the door and asks: "Is your

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

father at home?" they answer: "Yes, sir. Please walk in." As soon as he
enters he finds a set table, and eats and drinks, and blesses heaven for
the enjoyment afforded him." When, however, one is not humble, and the
members of his household are irascible, the outcome then is that if a
poor man asks: "Is your father at home?" they answer harshly: "No," and
assail the poor man with angry and menacing words.

Others take the words: "Teach the members of thy household humility," to
mean this: When a man is humble and the members of his household are
also so, the result is that when he has to go away to countries on the
other side of the sea, he says: "I thank thee, Lord my God, that my wife
is at peace with her neighbors"; and so his mind is tranquil when he is
away from home. But when one is not humble and the members of his
household are irascible, it follows that when he has to go away to
countries on the other side of the sea he has to pray: "May it be Thy
will, Lord my God, that my wife shall not quarrel with her neighbors,
and my children shall not quarrel among themselves"; his heart is always
trembling and his mind is restless until he returns. It has been said:
"And prolong not converse with a woman." It means not even with his own
wife, much less with the wife of his neighbor; for he who holds much
discourse with a woman causes evil to himself, neglects the teaching of
the Law, and finally he is doomed to Gehenna.

Another explanation of the above saying is, that when one enters the
house of learning and is not treated with the honor due to him, or has a
quarrel with his neighbor, he should not inform his wife of what took
place, for in informing her he disgraces himself, and so also his
neighbor; and his wife, who has heretofore respected him, will now laugh
at him. When his neighbor hears of this, he says: Woe to me, words which
were strictly between him and me, he revealed to his wife. The
consequence of this is that he degrades himself, his wife, and his
neighbor.

MISHNA *F*. Joshua b. Pera'hia and Nithai the Arbelite received from
them. The former used to say: "Get thee a wise teacher, acquire a
comrade, and judge every one by his good qualities (*i.e.*, from his
favorable side)."

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)"Get thee a wise teacher." This
means that one should procure a constant teacher of whom he should learn
the Scripture, Mishna, Midrash, Halakhoth, and Agadoth. What he has left
unexplained in the Scripture, he will finally explain in the Mishna,
what is unexplained in the Mishna will be explained in the Halakha, and
what is unexplained in the latter will be explained in the Agadah. The
consequence of all this is, that one acquires all he desires in his own
place and is full of blessings.

R. Meir used to say: One that learns the Torah of one teacher, may be
compared to one who has one field, part of which he sowed with wheat and
part with barley; in one part he planted olives, and in another
fruit-trees. And so this man acquires wealth and blessings. The one,
however, who studies under two or three masters is to be compared to one
who has many fields: in one he sows wheat, in another barley; in one he
plants olives, and in the other fruit-trees. And so this man has to go
from place to place in many countries, and has no enjoyment of his
wealth.

It is said: "Win a friend." How is a friend won? This is to teach us
that a man has to acquire an associate with whom he should eat, drink,
read, learn, and sleep; to whom he should reveal his secrets, the
secrets of the Torah, and the secrets of every-day life. The good to
accrue from such an intimacy is that, if one of them should blunder in
the recital of a traditional law or in the division of chapters, or one
should declare anything which is unclean as clean, and *vice versa*, and
anything which is prohibited as permissible, and *vice versa*, his
associate will correct him. How do we know that, if the associate really
turns his attention to the mistake and sets him right, both will be
rewarded greatly for their good endeavor? We learn it from the biblical
passage which reads \[Eccl. iv. 9\]: "Two are better than one"; that is
to say, the efforts of both will be crowned with success.

When three are sitting and studying the Law together, the Holy One,
blessed be His name, accounts it to them as if they had formed a league
for His praise, as it is written: "He that buildeth in the heavens his
palace and established on earth his

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

tabernacle." From this passage thou art to learn that if three sit and
study together it is accounted to them as if they constituted a league
to glorify the Holy One, blessed be He.

When two persons are studying the Law together their reward will be
received above, as it is written \[Mal. iii. 16\]: "Then conversed they
that fear the Lord one with the other: and the Lord listened and heard
it," etc. But what is meant by the words: "They that fear the Lord? That
when they have made up their mind to redeem the captives and release the
prisoners, and the Holy One, blessed be He, has given them the
opportunity to do so, they embrace it at once. What is meant by the
words: "And for those who think after his name"? <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) They whose thought of doing the
above-mentioned great things never ripens into firm resolution, but are
doubtful in the Lord whether they will succeed, and therefore the Lord
gives them not the opportunity, and they are lost before doing anything
they thought of doing. Also an individual who engages in the study of
the Law, his reward is marked in Heaven, as it is written \[Lam. iii.
28\]: "That he sit in solitude because he hath laid it upon him." This
is illustrated by the following anecdote: A man had a little son whom he
left alone when he went to attend to some business. The boy, instead of
spending his time in play, took a scroll and spread it upon his knees,
and thus he sat and studied. When his father returned and found his son
in that commendable position, he joyfully said: "See what my little son
has done! Left alone, he took to study of his own accord . Even so the
Almighty regards an individual who is absorbed in holy thought. His
reward is marked in Heaven.

"*Judge everyone from his favorable side*." It happened that a girl was
led in captivity, and two pious men went to redeem her. One of them
entered into a house of harlots. When he came out again, he said to his
companion: "What were thy suspicions of me (when you saw me enter this
house)?" He said: "I thought you went to investigate what sum her ransom
would be." He answered: "I assure you that so it was. As thou hast
judged me from my favorable side, so may the Lord judge thee in the same
manner."

It happened, again, that a maiden was led into captivity, and two pious
men went to redeem her. One of them was suspected

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

as a robber, and was confined in prison, and his wife brought him food
and water every day. One day he asked her: "Go to my companion and tell
him that I am in prison because I went to redeem the maiden in question,
and he who intended to take part in it is doing nothing and pays no
attention to her." She rejoined: "Thou art in prison, and thou think
about foolish things?" She therefore did not listen to him. He again
requested her to go and to notify his companion, and finally she did so.
What did this man do? He took gold and silver, and, accompanied by other
people, came and released them both. When he was released he said: "Let
this maiden sleep with me <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) in bed
with her clothes on." In the morning he said: "Let me go and dip (in a
legal bath), and let her do the same." They did so. He then said to
them: "Of what did ye suspect me when I went to dip myself?" They
answered: "We thought that in all the days thou wast in prison thou wert
hungry and thirsty, and now, when thou hast seen fresh air, thou hast
grown hot and perhaps thou hast become *Keri*." "And what did ye suspect
when she was dipped?" They answered: "We thought that in all the time
that she was in prison among the idolaters, she was compelled to eat and
drink with them, and you therefore ordered her to dip for the purpose of
purification." He then rejoined: "I assure you such was the case, and as
you have judged me favorably, so may the Lord judge you."

Not only were the upright people of former times themselves very strict
and particular, but also their cattle were so. There is a tradition that
the camels of Abraham our father never entered a place where there were
idols, as it is written \[Gen. xxiv. 31\]: "While I have cleaned the
house, and room for the camels." The first part of this passage relates
that he cleared the house from Teraphim; but what is meant by the second
part, which seems to be superfluous? Infer from this, that the camels
did not enter the abode of Laban the Aramite until all the idols were
cleared away.

It happened that the ass of R. Hanina b. Dosa was stolen by robbers.
They tied him in the yard, and put straw, barley, and water before him;
but he neither ate nor drank. They said then: "If we leave him here, he
will die and infect the yard." Therefore they opened the gate and let
him out, and he went on rejoicing until he reached the place of R.
Hanina b. Dosa.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

When the latter's son heard his voice, he said to his father: "Is not
the voice of this ass similar to that of ours?" He rejoined: "My son,
hasten to open the gate for him, or else he will die of hunger." He did
so; he put food and water before him, and he fed and drank. Hence the
above saying: "In former times the upright men were pious, so were their
cattle."

MISHNA *G*. Nithai the Arbelite was accustomed to say: "Keep aloof from
a wicked neighbor, associate not with a sinner, and never consider
thyself exempt from God's chastisement."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)"*Keep aloof from a wicked
neighbor*." This means any bad neighbor in the house, or outside, or in
the field. "In the house," because plagues come only in the house of the
wicked, as it is written \[Prov. v. 22\]: "His own iniquities will truly
catch the wicked." Infer from this, that the plagues come only for the
sins of the wicked. The sins of the wicked have caused the demolition of
the wall of the upright. For instance, if leprosy breaks out on the wall
of the house of the wicked, which is also the wall of the adjoining
house of the upright, the entire wall must be demolished. Hence the wall
of the upright is demolished for the sins of the wicked. That is what R.
Ishmael, son of R. Johanan b. Brokah, said: "Woe to the wicked, and woe
to his neighbors."

With ten trials have our ancestors tried the Holy One, blessed be He,
but they were punished only for one of them, which is calumny. They are
as follows: One at the sea, one at, the beginning of the manna period
and one at the termination of it, one at the first and last appearance
of quails, and at Marah, at Rephidim, one at Horeb, one on the occasion
of the golden calf, and one when they sent spies. That of the spies was
the hardest of all, as it is written \[Numb. xiv. 22\]: "And (they) have
tempted me these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice." It is
also written \[ibid., ibid. 37\]: "Even those men that had brought up
the evil report of the land died by the, plague before the Lord." From
this is drawn an *a fortiori* conclusion:

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If on account of
the land, which has no mouth to talk with, no countenance and no shame,
the Holy One, blessed be He, punished the spies who made it suffer, how
much the more reason is there for the Holy One, blessed be He, to avenge
the suffering of one who has been slandered and put to shame by his
neighbor.

R. Simeon said: Slanderers are punished with plagues, for we find that
Aaron and Miriam, who slandered Moses, were stricken with plagues, as it
is written \[ibid. xii. 1\]: "And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses."
Why is Miriam mentioned before Aaron? Infer from this, that Miriam made
the beginning. (How so?) What she had heard from Zipporah \[the wife of
Moses\] she told to Aaron, and they both spoke against this upright man;
therefore plagues came upon them, as it is written \[ibid. xii. 9\]:
"And the anger of the Lord was kindled against *them*, and he went
away." For what purpose is it written: "and *he* went away"? To intimate
that the anger was removed from Aaron, and placed upon Miriam, because
Aaron did not go into such details of the matter as did Miriam;
therefore she was punished more. Miriam said: "Although I have not
separated myself from my husband, still the Lord has spoken to me."
Aaron said: "The word of the Lord came to me, although I have not
separated myself from my wife; and also to our ancestors came the word
of the Lord, although they were not separated from their wives; but he
(Moses) who is too proud in his mind separated himself from his wife."
Furthermore, they judged him not in his presence but in his absence, and
by a mere supposition. From this draw an *a fortiori* conclusion: If
Miriam, who had spoken against her brother (secretly), and not in his
presence, was so severely punished, how much severer must be the
punishment of a common person who speaks against his neighbor in his
presence and shames him.

\[At that time Aaron said to Moses: "Moses, my brother, dost thou think
that the leprosy is placed on Miriam's flesh only, it is also on the
flesh of our father Amram." This is to be compared to one who takes a
live coal in his hand, and even if he keeps on turning it from one place
to another, still every place it touches is blistered (and as Miriam is
the flesh and blood of our father, the leprosy afflicts also his flesh),
as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 12\]: "Let her not be as a dead-born
child." At the same time, Aaron began to appease Moses, saying: "Moses,
my brother, have we ever injured anybody in the world?" He

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

said: "No, you have not." "Now then," he said, "if we have,, not injured
anybody else, how could we intend to do an injury to our own brother?
But what can we do? Shall, through this error, our brotherly covenant be
abolished, and our own sister be lost?" Then Moses made a circle,
entered in it, and prayed for his sister and said: "I will not stir from
here till she be healed," as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 13\]: "O God,
do thou heal her, I beseech thee." The Holy One, blessed be He, then
said to Moses: "If a human king would rebuke her, or her own father
would do this to her, would she not be ashamed seven days? Now if I, who
am the King of the kings of kings, rebuke her, were it not proper that
she should be ashamed fourteen days? Yet for thy sake I will forgive
her," as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 14\]: "If her father had spit in
her face," etc.

"But the man Moses was very meek" \[ibid., ibid. 3\]. Shall we assume
that he was meek, but not beautiful and praised? Is it not written \[Ex.
xl. 19\]: "And he spread the tent over the tabernacle"? As the
Tabernacle was ten ells in height, so was Moses. Shall we assume that he
was as meek as the angels, since it is written \[Numb. xii. 3\]: "More
so than any man"? Consider that man is said, but not angels. Perhaps you
think that he would have been considered meek in the former generation.
Mark that it is written \[ibid.\]: "Upon the face of the earth,"
implying only his own generation. \[But what is meant by "he was meek"?
. . . There are three kinds of leprous people: moist, dry, and
*polypous* (ulcer in the nose), yet Moses was humbler than the
afflicted.\]

R. Simeon b. Elazar said: Leprosy comes also for the sin of slander, as
we find in the case of Gehazi, who slandered his master, and was so
punished, as it is written \[II Kings, V. 27\]: "May then the leprosy of
Naaman cleave unto thee . . . and he went out from his presence a leper,
(white) as snow."

He also used to say that leprosy came upon those who were haughty, for
so we find in the case of Uzziyahu, as it is written \[II Chron. xxvi.
16-19\]: "His heart was lifted up to his destruction, unfaithful against
the Lord his God, and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense
upon the altar of incense. And there went in after him . . . the leprosy
even broke out on his forehead." At this time the Temple was split for a
distance of twelve square miles, and the priests hurried out. "And he
also made haste to go out, because the Lord had afflicted him. And he
was a leper until the day of his death, and dwelt

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

in the leper-house as such; for he was excluded from the house of the
Lord, and Jotham his son was over the king's house, (and) judged the
people of the land" \[ibid. 20, 21\].

"*And thou shalt not associate with a sinner*." By this is meant, that
one should not attach himself to a bad or wicked man, as we find with
King Jehoshaphat, who became attached to Ahab and went up with him to
Ramoth-Gilead, and there was a wrath over him from before the Lord. The
same was the case when be became a party to King Ahazyahu, with whom he
made ships in 'Ezyon-geber, which the Lord broke down, as it is written
\[II Chron. xx. 37\]: "Because thou hast connected thyself with
Ahazyahu, the Lord hath broken down thy work. And the ships were
wrecked." And so we find with Amnon, who associated with Jonadab, and
received from him wicked advice, as it is written \[II Sam. xiii. 3\]:
"But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shim'ah,
David's brother; and Jonadab was a very sensible man--sensible in
wickedness, as it is written \[Jer. iv. 22\]: "Wise are they to do
evil." According to others, it is meant that one shall not associate
with the wicked, even to study the Torah.

"*Do not consider thyself exempt from God's chastisement*." How so? One
should always fear in his heart every day lest affliction come on him
to-day or to-morrow, for thus it is written about Job \[Job, iii. 25\]:
"What I greatly dreaded," etc. Another explanation of it is: If one sees
that he is successful in all that he undertakes, he should not say: "I
deserve it all; the Lord gives me food and drink (as interest), and the
principal remains for the world to come"; but he shall be afraid and
think: "Perhaps I possess but one desert and all the reward for it is
given to me in this world, so that I have no claim in the world to
come."

MISHNA *H*. Jehudah b. Tobai and Simeon b. Shata'h received from them.
The former was wont to say: "Make not thyself as those that predispose
the judges, <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) and while the litigants
stand before thee let them be in thine eyes as guilty; and when
dismissed from before thee let them

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

be in thine eyes as righteous, because that they have received the
verdict upon them."

Simeon b. Shata'h used to say: "Interrogate the witnesses very closely,
and be careful with thy words, lest they be put by them on the track of
falsehood."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)"*Make thyself not as those that
predispose the judges*." Learn from this, that when entering a college
and hearing there a saying or a Halakha, thou shalt not be hasty in
answering, but sit and think over the reason why they have said so \[and
from what sources they derived such judgment; also investigate about
which Halakha they were questioned, and also consider the time when it
happened\]. When two litigants come before thee for judgment, one of
whom is poor and the other rich, say not: "How shall I declare the poor
innocent, and the rich guilty, or *vice versa*? If I declare one of them
guilty, he will become my enemy"; neither say: How shall I take away
one's money and give it to the other? for the Torah said \[Deut. i.
17\]: "Ye shall not respect persons in judgment."

According to others, for what purpose is the following passage written:
"The small as well as the great shall ye hear" \[ibid.\]? That means
that both litigants shall receive the same treatment: one shall not be
allowed to sit down while the other is standing, or one shall not be
allowed to plead at length while the other shall be directed to be short
in his pleading.

Said R. Jehudah: "I have heard say that it is not forbidden to have
*both* litigants sit down (at the hearing), but what *is* forbidden is,
to allow *one* to sit down while the other *one* is directed to be
standing," etc. From the above passage is to be inferred that the
treatment must be alike, even if one of the litigants is a great man.
The case of a common man shall be as carefully considered as that of a
great man. The lawsuit of a very small amount shall receive the
attention of a lawsuit of a great sum of money.

He also used to say: Whoever would have told me before I had entered
this great position, "Enter," I would have challenged him, and now that
I am the incumbent hereof, should anybody dare to tell me to abandon it,
I would be of a mind to

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

throw at his head a kettle of boiling water, for there is a difficulty
in the ascent, but when one has reached the top, it is as hard for him
to descend. So we find it was with Saul, that when he was told to ascend
the throne he hid himself, as it is written \[I Sam. X. 22\]: "And the
Lord said, Behold, be hath hidden himself among the vessels"; but when
told to give up the crown, he followed David even to take his life.

Simeon b. Shata'h said: Examine the witnesses very closely, but while
thou art so doing, be careful with thy words on account of the
deceivers. Thy words may give them the clue to lying.

MISHNA *I*. Shemayah and Abtalion received from them. The former was in
the habit of saying: "Love work and hate to attain superiority, and see
to it that your name be not known to the government." <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27)"*Love work*." How so? That is, one
should love work; at all events, he ought not to hate it, for as the
Torah was given in a covenant, so was labor, as it is written \[Ex. xx.
9, 10\]: "Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy work, but the
seventh day is the Sabbath in honor of the Lord thy God."

Said R. Aqiba: There comes a time when one does his work, and thereby
escapes death; and on the other band there comes a time when one does no
work, and incurs the penalty of death by heaven. How so? One who is idle
the whole week and has nothing to eat on the eve of Sabbath, but having
in his possession consecrated money misappropriates it for his own use,
incurs the penalty of death by heaven; but if he was making repairs in
the Temple, and is paid with consecrated money and uses it, he escapes
the death penalty.

R. Dostai said: "How can it happen that one who did no work all the six
days shall finally be compelled to labor all seven days? Strange as this
appears, yet it may happen. For instance, a man who did no work during
the week, Friday comes

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and he has nothing to eat. He starts to look for work, but is seized by
conscription officers, who, holding him by an iron chain, compel him to
make up on Sabbath for what he neglected during the six days."

R. Simeon b. Elazar said: Even Adam the First tasted nothing before he
performed some work, as it is written \[Gen. ii. 15\]: "And put him into
the garden of Eden, to, till it and to keep it"; and afterward he was
commanded: "Of every tree in the garden thou mayest freely eat" \[ibid.,
ibid. 16\].

R. Tarphon said: Even the Holy One, blessed be He, rested not His
Shekhina in the midst of Israel before some work was performed by them,
as them is; written \[Ex. xxv. 9\]: "And they shall *make* me a
sanctuary; and I will dwell in the midst of them."

Rabbi Jehudah b. Bathyra said: What shall one do who is without work?
(Let him seek it, and he will find it.) Let him see whether there is no
demolition in his Yard or field, and employ himself in that manner, as
it is written \[ibid. xx. 9\]: "Six days shalt thou labor, and do all
thy work." Wherefore is it said, "And do all thy work"? R. Tarphon said:
One is doomed to death only through idleness. R. Jose the Galilean
explained (the saying of R.. Tarphon) thus: If one through idleness
stood upon the edge of a roof, castle, or building, or upon the edge of
a river and fell down and died, his death was caused through idleness.

R. Nathan said: Moses worked at the Tabernacle without consulting the
princes of Israel, who right along thought that at any moment he might
solicit their coöperation. When they heard the voice which went
throughout the camp proclaiming that the material prepared was
sufficient for all the work, they cried: "Woe to us, that we have not
participated in the work of the holy Tabernacle." They, therefore, rose
and added a great thing of their own accord, as it is written \[Ex.
xxxv. 27\]: And the princes brought the onyx stones."

"*Do not care for superiority*." It means that one must not place the
crown merited by him upon his own head, but should let others do it, as
it is written \[Prov. xxvii. 2\]: "Let another man praise thee, and not
thy own mouth; a. stranger, and not thy own lips."

R. Aqiba said: One that makes himself superior to the Law is compared to
a putrefied carcass which lies in the road, so that every passer-by puts
his hand to his; nose and hastens away, as it is written \[Prov. xxx.
32\]: "If thou hast become

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

degraded by lifting up thyself, or if thou hast devised evil, put thy
hand to thy mouth." Said Ben Azai to him: The sense of this passage
seems to be thus: One who degrades himself for the sake of the Law, and
eats decayed dates, and dresses in worn-out clothes, and is watching at
the door of the sages, the passers-by call him an idiot, but be sure
that in the end it will be found that he is full of knowledge. This is
what people say: One who makes himself superior to the Law will finally
be put down, and one who lowers himself for the sake of the Law will
finally be greatly elevated.

"*And see to it that your name be not known to the government*." One
should not have the ambition to be prominent among government officials,
otherwise they will become jealous of him, slay him, and confiscate his
property. Neither shall one proclaim his neighbor's name to the
government; that is, one shall not say: "May the Lord protect so and so,
from whose house to-day went out a hundred oxen, a hundred ewes, and a
hundred goats," etc., as it may happen that just at that time the
officer passes by and hears this and reports it to his chief, and the
latter surrounds his house and takes away all he has. As to this, the
following passage applies \[Prov. xxvii. 14\]: "When one saluteth his
friend with a loud voice . . . it will be counted a curse to him."
According to others, the word Rashuth means not the government but
publicity, and the passage is to be construed thus: If one's friends say
publicly in the market: "May God protect so and so; to-day he brought
into his house many measures of wheat and barley," etc., etc., robbers
may hear of it and come in the night, surround the house, and take away
all he possesses, and in the morning he has nothing left. Of him it is
said in Scripture: "When one saluteth his friend with a loud voice,"
etc.

Others, again, say that it means the government, and the expression "he
shall not announce," etc., means one shall not endeavor to be a
solicitor for the governor of the city or his vice, for they rob the
money of Israel.

Still another explanation is: One shall not seek any governing power,
for although in the beginning it appears very pleasing, in the end he
will find it very burdensome.

MISHNA *I*. Abtalion was wont to say: "Ye wise, be guarded in your
words; lest you load upon yourselves

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

the penalty of exile and be exiled to the place of evil waters; and the
disciples that come after you may drink and die, and the name of Heaven
be profaned."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

"*Ye wise men, be guarded in your words*." Perhaps they will decide
something in your name which will not be according to the teachings of
Law, and ye will become liable to the punishment of exile, and be
banished to a place where the water is bad. What is meant by "bad
water"? It is permissible to say that it has reference to the vices of
that place, as it is written \[Ps. xvi. 35\]: "And they will mingle with
the nations and will learn their doings." Some think that it is to be
taken literally. Others, however, think that it refers to hard labor.

MISHNA K. Hillel and Shammai received from them. Hillel said: "Be a
disciple of Aaron, love peace, pursue peace, love all men too, and bring
them nigh unto the Law."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)"*Love peace*." How so? One should
love to see peace in Israel and peace everywhere, as Aaron loved peace,
about whom it is written \[Mal. ii. 6\]: "The love of truth was in his
mouth, and falsehood was not found on his lips; in peace and equity he
walked with me, and many did he turn away from iniquity." When Aaron
went on the highway and met a wicked man, he bade him peace in the
customary form of salutation. The result was that that man reformed. For
when he was about to commit a sin, he remembered that Aaron the
high-priest saluted him, and would say: "Woe, if I sin, how will I dare
to raise my eyes and look Aaron in the face, who was so friendly to me?"
and thus he is prevented from sin.

Likewise, when two men quarrelled with each other (and it came to the
ears of Aaron), he went to one of them and said: "My son, see what thy
neighbor does. He beats his breast, tears his clothes and cries, saying:
'Woe is me! How will I dare to lift up my eyes to look my neighbor in
the face? I am

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

ashamed of myself, for it is I who wronged him.'" Thus Aaron allayed the
bitterness of that man's feeling. Then Aaron went to the other man and
addressed him in the same style, and likewise pacified his heart. When
those two men met, they no longer eyed one another as enemies, but
embraced and kissed each other, as friends do. Because of Aaron's
peace-making, it is written about him \[Numb. xx. 29\]: "They wept for
Aaron thirty days."

The passages about the mourning of Moses and Aaron are differently
written. About Aaron it is written "even *all* the house of Israel,"
which includes also women; about Moses, however, it is written only,
"and the children of Israel," which excludes women. To explain this,
there are different opinions. Some say because Moses, who was a true
judge and judged justly without favoritism, used to rebuke the sinner
and say to him: Thou hast sinned in so and so. Aaron, however, when
judging them, judged them truly, but at the same time he did not rebuke
them, even when the sinners were males, much less when, they were
females. And, secondly, many thousands were named Aaron, after the
high-priest. For were it not for Aaron they, would not have been brought
to the world at all, as Aaron's special efforts were directed toward
making peace between man and Wife, so that if, after that, a child was
born to them they named him after their peace-maker.

According to others, the reason why even all the house of Israel wept is
because they had seen Moses our master sitting and weeping, and who then
would not weep? And they also saw Elazar and Pinechas, who were
high-priests, weeping, and who would not weep with them?

Then Moses desired to die the same death that Aaron died. Why so?
Because it was said that Moses saw his bier decked out with great pomp
and many divisions of angels lamenting over him. And although Moses
never expressed that wish, but only thought so in his heart, the Holy
One, blessed be He, granted him his desire, as it is written \[Deut.
xxxii. 50\]: "And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be
gathered unto thy people; *as Aaron thy brother died* on Mount Hor."
From this is to be inferred that Moses had a desire to die the death of
Aaron.

At the time (when Moses was about to die), God said to the angel of
death: "Go and bring unto me the soul of Moses." Coming to Moses, he
demanded his soul. But Moses censured

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the angel of death. He said to him: "Thou art not entitled to be where I
am, and thou art asking of me my soul?" and Moses drove him away with
degradation. At length the Lord said unto Moses: "Moses, Moses, thou
hast lived long enough in this world, as thy share in the world to come
has awaited thee ever since creation," as it is written \[Ex. xxxiii.
21\]: "And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt
stand upon the rock." Thereupon the Lord Himself took the soul of Moses
and placed it under His throne, as it is written \[I Sam. xxv. 29\]:
"Yet will the soul of my Lord be bound in the bond of life." And He took
his soul with a kiss, as it is written \[Deut. xxxiv. 5\]: "Through the
mouth of God." <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)

\[Not merely the soul of Moses is placed under His throne, but all the
souls of the righteous, as it is written: "Yet will the soul of my Lord
be bound in the bond of life." Should one assume that the souls of the
wicked are also hidden there, therefore it is written \[I Sam. xxv.
29\]: "And the soul of thy enemies will he hurl away, as out of the
middle of the sling."

For the better understanding of this, let us think of who puts a stone
in his sling: although he hurls it from one place to another, he knows
not where it will finally land. So are the souls of the wicked: they are
wandering and hovering in the world without rest.

After the death of Moses the Lord again commanded the angel of death to
bring Him the soul of Moses. He went to the place where he used to be
found when alive, but did not find him. He then went to the ocean, and
asked whether Moses was there. It answered: Since the day when the
Israelites passed through me, I have not seen him. He went to the
mountains and hills, and put to them the same question, and they said:
Since the day when the Israelites received the Law from Mount Sinai, we
have not seen him. So he went to the nether world and place of
perdition, and asked them the same question, and they said: We have
heard of his name, but have never seen him. Finally, he inquired of the
angels, and they said: "God (alone) understandeth her way, and he
knoweth her place" \[Job, xxviii. 23\]. The Lord preserved him for a
life in the world to come, and no creature knows where he is, as it is
written \[Job, xxviii. 20-22\]: "But wisdom . . . a report of her." At
the same time Joshua was sitting and grieving

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

because he did not know where his master was, till the Holy One, blessed
be He, said to him: Joshua, do not grieve. My servant Moses is dead.\]

"*Pursue peace*." How so? One shall be a pursuer of peace in Israel
among all kinds of people. If a man remains in his place silent, he
cannot be a pursuer of peace. But what shall he do? He should leave his
place in search of peace, as it is written \[ibid.\]: "Seek peace, and
pursue it." Which means, seek it in thy place, and if thou canst not
find it, pursue it in another.

The Holy One, blessed be He, also made peace in heaven, in that he did
not name ten angels Gabriel, Michael, Uriel, or Raphael, as, for
instance, many people bear the same name; otherwise, when He would
summon one of them, they would all respond, and be jealous of one
another. Therefore He gave each one a separate name. When He summons
one, only that one comes, and He sends him wherever He desires. They
reverence and respect one another, and are meeker than human beings, for
when they begin to sing the praises of the Lord, one says to another:
"Begin thou, as thou art greater than I am"; and the other says: "Thou
art greater than I am, and therefore begin thou." With human beings,
however, it is the reverse. Every one says: "I am greater than thou
art." Some say that not individual angels, but divisions of angels, say
to each other: "Begin ye, ye are greater than we are," as it is written
\[Is. vi. 3\]: And one called unto the other and said."

"*Love all men too*." That is to say, that one should love all men, and
not hate them; for so we find with the men of the "generation of the
division," because they loved each other, the Lord was reluctant to
destroy them, but only scattered them to all four corners of the world.
The men of Sodom, however, because they hated each other, were
annihilated by the Lord, both in this and the world to come, as it is
written \[Gen. xiii. 13\]: "But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners
before the Lord exceedingly. "And sinners" implies that they were guilty
of illegal unions; "before the Lord" implies that they were guilty of
desecration of the Holy name; "and exceedingly," that they sinned
wilfully.

"*And bring them nigh unto the Law*." How so? One should try to
uplift <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) people and bring them under
the wings of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the Shekhina, as our father Abraham did; and not only Abraham, but also
Sarah, as it is written \[Gen. xii. 5\]: "And Abraham took Sarah his
wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had
acquired, and the persons that they *made* <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) in Charan." Is it possible? Even all
mankind combined could not create even a small insect. We must,
therefore, say that the Lord considered the people that they brought
under the wings of the Shekhina as if they had made them.

As one cannot divide his life with his neighbor in this world, so he
cannot divide with him his deserved reward in the world to come, as it
is written \[Eccl. iv. 1\]: "And, behold, there are the tears of the
oppressed, and they have no comforter; and from the hand of their
oppressors they suffer violence, and they have no comforter." Why is it
written "and they have no comforter" twice? To infer that, although
there are men who eat (plentily), drink, and are successful with their
sons and daughters in this world, they may have nothing in the world to
come, and they will have no comforter there. In this world, when
something is stolen from one, or a death occurs in one's family, his
son, brother, and other relatives come and console him, but this cannot
be done in the world to come, as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 8\]: "Yea,
he hath neither son nor brother."

The same is the case with one who has begotten an illegitimate son; for
the latter may say to him: "Scoundrel, thou hast lost thyself as well as
me." For the bastard may have a thirst for knowledge, and therefore
desire to study the Law in Jerusalem together with the other disciples,
but cannot do so because, being a bastard, he is prohibited from
entering Jerusalem. It happened once that a bastard was not allowed to
pass Ashdad, as it is written \[Zech. ix. 6\]: "And bastards shall dwell
in Ashdad, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines."

MISHNA *L*. He also used to say: "A name made great is a name destroyed;
he who increases not, decreases; and he who will not learn from his
masters is not worthy to live; and he who uses his knowledge as a tiara
perishes."

MISHNA *M*. He also used to say: "If I do not look

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

to myself, who will do so? But if I look only to myself, what am I? And
if not now, when?"

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

"*He used to say: 'If I do not look to myself, who will do so?'*" (That
is), if I cannot reach any reward while I am alive, who can reach it for
me after my death?

"*And if not now, when*?" (That is), if I can do nothing for myself
while I am alive, who can do it for me after my death? So also said
Ecclesiastes \[ix. 4\]: "For a living dog fareth better than a dead
lion." By "a living dog" is meant a wicked person who exists in this
world, and "than a dead lion" refers to all the righteous, who are
highly received in the world to come, including even the patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The living dog, that is, a wicked man who is
still alive, fareth better is accepted by the Holy One, blessed be He,
when he repents and becomes virtuous and receives a share in the world
to come, while a dead lion cannot add aught to his good deeds after he
is dead. The same, used to say: "If thou wilt come to my house," etc.
(See Section Moed, Vol. vii.; Succah, pp. 83, 84.)

It happened that Hillel the First, while on a journey, met men carrying
wheat. He inquired how much was a saah, and was told two dinars.
Afterward he met others, who gave him the price of the same as three
dinars. He said: "Did not the first men say it was only two dinars?"
They rejoined: "Thou foolish Babylonian, dost thou not know that the
reward is according to the trouble?" (They came from a farther
distance.) But he said: "Is that your answer to my civil question?"
Finally he succeeded in making them gentle and accommodating.

He also used to say four things in the Babylonian dialect:

"*A name made great is a name destroyed*." It means, a man shall not
desire to have his name proclaimed to the government, for the reason
stated above, p. 45.

"*And he who does not desire to learn from his masters*." It was said
that it happened to an inhabitant of Beth Ramah who adopted the customs
of the pious, and Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai sent one of his disciples to
examine him. He found him occupied in heating oil on a range and then
pouring it into peeled grain. On being questioned what he was doing, he
answered, I am careful with the heave-offering, to eat it in its

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

purity, just as if I were a high-priest. Then he asked again: Is this
range clean or unclean? He rejoined: Do we then find anywhere in the
Torah that a range can be unclean? An oven only is mentioned, as it is
written \[Lev. xi. 33\]: "Whatsoever is in it shall be unclean." Then
the disciple again rejoined: The law of the oven applies also to the
range, as it is written \[ibid., ibid. 35\]: "An oven or range shall be
broken down, they are unclean." The same added: If such was thy habit,
thou hast never in thy life eaten clean heave-offerings.

"*He who increases not, decreases*." How so? If one has learned one,
two, or even three treatises, and has not added anything thereto, he
will finally forget even that.

"*And he who serves himself with the tiara perishes*." Any one that uses
the name of the Lord, as it is written, which is prohibited, has no
share in the world to come.

MISHNA *N*. Shammai was in the habit of saying: "Fix a time for study;
promise little, and do much receive every one with friendly
countenance."

MISHNA *O*. Rabban Gamaliel said: "Make to thyself a master, and free
thyself of doubt, and tithe not much by estimation."

MISHNA *P*. Simeon his son was wont to say: "All the days of my life
have been passed among the sages, and I have never found anything better
for a man than silence; and the discussion of the law is not of such
import as is the practice thereof. He who talks much, cannot avoid sin."

MISHNA *Q*. He also said: "Three things support the world--law, truth,
and peace--as it is written \[Zechariah, viii. 16\]: 'Truth and the
judgment of peace, judge ye in your gates.'"

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)"*Fix a time for study*," etc. It
means, when one has heard something from a sage in the college, he shall
not treat it as something unessential, but as a standard saying to be
studied

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

diligently, and what he learns from the wise he shall teach it to
others, as it is written \[Deut. v. 1\]: "That ye may learn them, and
that ye may observe to do them." And also of Ezra it is first written
\[vii. 10\]: "For Ezra had directed his heart to inquire in the law of
the Lord, and to do it." And immediately after it is written \[ibid.\]:
"And to teach in Israel statutes and ordinances."

"*Promise little, and do much*." As such is the custom of the righteous,
who promise little but do much; the custom of the wicked, however, is to
promise much and do nothing. Whence do we know that the upright promise
little, and do much? From Abraham our father, who said to the angels:
"Ye will eat with me a morsel of bread," as it is written \[Gen. xviii.
5\]: "And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your heart."
But what did he in reality do? He prepared for them three oxen and nine
saah of fine meal. And whence do we know that he baked for them nine
measures of fine meal? From \[ibid. 6\]: "And Abraham hastened into the
tent unto Sarah and said: Make ready quickly three measures of fine
meal." "Three" is literal, "meal" is six, and "fine meal" is nine. And
whence is it derived that he roasted for them three oxen? From the
following \[ibid., ibid. 7\]: "And Abraham ran unto the herd," etc. "The
herd" means one, "a calf" one, "tender" one. According to others it was
four, because the word "good," which is added, is also counted as one.
"And gave it unto a young man" \[ibid.\]. This means Ishmael his son, to
accustom him to religious practice.

Also the Holy One, blessed be He, promised little and did much, as it is
written \[ibid. xv. 13, 14\]: "And he said unto Abram, know of a surety
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land which is not theirs, and
they will make them serve, and they will afflict them four hundred
years. And also that nation whom they shall serve, will I judge; and
afterward shall they go out with great substance." He promised him with
‏ד‎ and ‏ן‎ the numerical value of which is 54. But when the Lord at
last avenged Himself on Israel's enemies, He did so with seventy-two
letters (contained in verse 34, Deut. xxxiv.): <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) "Or hath a

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

god essayed to go to take to himself a nation from the midst of a
nation, by proofs, by signs, and by wonders . . . and by great terrors."

Whence is it derived that the wicked promise much and do nothing? From
Ephron, who said to Abraham \[Gen. xxiii. 15\]: "A piece of land worth
four hundred shekels of silver, what is that between me and thee?"
Nevertheless, in the end he accepted the whole sum of the money, as it
is written \[ibid., ibid. 16\]: "And Abraham understood the meaning of
Ephron; and Abraham weighed out to Ephron the silver."

"*Receive every one with friendly countenance*." How so? That means,
that even if one presents to his neighbor the most precious things with
bad grace, it is accounted to him in Scripture as if he had given
nothing; but if one receives his neighbor with a friendly countenance,
although he give him nothing, it is accounted to him in Scripture as if
he had conferred upon him great favors.

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai received
from Hillel and Shammai. Hillel the First had eighty disciples, thirty
of whom were worthy that the Shekhina rest upon them as on Moses, but
their generation was not deserving of it. Thirty others were worthy to
institute the intercalary years, etc., etc. (Continued in Succah, pp.
36, 37.)

"*He used to say: 'If thou hast accumulated much knowledge, do not boast
of it, for it is for that that thou wast created.'*"

There are five disciples of Rabbi Johanan b. Zakkai whom he
characterized in the following manner: Eliezer b. Hyrcanus as "a
plastered cistern which loseth not a drop"; Joshua b. Hananiah as "a
threefold cord that cannot quickly be torn asunder"; Jose the priest as
"the most pious in his generation"; Ishmael b. Hananiah as "a garden-bed
in the desert which absorbs water"; and Elazar b. Arach he named "as a
flowing brook and swelling spring whose waters rise and overflow
abroad," as it is written \[ibid. v. 16\]: "So will thy springs overflow
abroad; and in the open streets will be thy rivulets of water.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

"*I consider the judgment of R. Elazar b. Arach*," etc. Happy is the
disciple who receives from his master such a testimonial of praise and
acknowledgment. When the son of Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai died, his
disciples came to console him. R. Eliezer entered first, sat down before
him, and asked his permission to say something. The request having been
granted, he said: "Adam the First accepted consolation when his son
died. And whence do we find it so? It is written \[Gen. iv. 25\]: 'And
Adam knew his wife *again*' ('again' means after this consolation). Thou
also shouldst accept consolation." He rejoined: "Is not my own grief
sufficient, that thou must remind me of that of Adam the First?"

Next entered R. Joshua, and also asked for permission to say something,
which was granted, who then said: "Job, who had many sons and daughters,
all of whom died in one day, yet he accepted consolation. As it is
written \[Job, i. 21\]: 'The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away; may
the name of the Lord be blessed.'" He rejoined: "Is not my own grief
sufficient, that thou remindest me of that of Job?"

Next entered R. Jose. He sat down before him and said: "Be it thy wish
that I say something." And being encouraged by the sage, he continued:
"Aaron had two full-grown sons, and both died on one day, yet he
accepted consolation, as it is written \[Lev. x. 3\]: 'And Aaron held
his peace,' which means that he was consoled. Would it not be right that
thou shouldst do likewise?" The sage rejoined: "Have I not enough of my
own grief? Why do you remind me of the grief of Aaron?"

Then entered R. Simeon, and said: "Rabbi, may I be favored by thee to
say a word in thy august presence?" And the sage answered: "Proceed."
Then the former said: King David had a son who died, and he received
condolence. It well becomes thee to persuade thyself into comfort. As to
King David, it is written \[II Sam. xii. 24\]: 'And David comforted
Bathsheba his wife, and he went in unto her, and lay with her; and she
bore a son, and called his name Solomon.'" He rejoined: "Is not my own
grief sufficient, that you all remind me of the grief of others?"

Finally R. Elazar b. Arach entered, and when the master saw him he said
to his servant: "Take a vessel and follow me to the bath-house; the man
who is entering now is a great man, and I am sure that I could not
withstand his arguments." He entered, sat down before him, and said: "I
will entertain thee

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

by telling a parable: A king had intrusted one of his subjects with a
precious article. The man used to exclaim, weeping: 'Woe is me! When
will I be relieved of this responsibility?' This, O Rabbi, is thy case.
Thy son, who spent his time in sacred study, departed from the world
sinless. What a comfort it ought to be to thee that thou hast returned
the article intrusted to thy care intact!" Hereupon the sage said:
"Elazar, my son, thou hast consoled me as people should console each
other."

When they left him, Elazar said: "I will go to Damsith, which is a fine
place with excellent waters"; and the other disciples said: "We will go
to Jamnia, where there are many scholars, and love the study of Law." He
that went to Damsith lost a good deal of his authority, but the names of
those who went to Jamnia, the seat of great scholarship, became legion
in learned circles.

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)"*Thy fellow's honor must be as dear
to thee as thine own*." How so? As one watches over his own honor, so
should he guard the honor of his neighbor, and as one is loath to see
his own honor assailed, he should be so in regard to the honor of his
neighbor.

Another explanation of the above is: When one is possessed of an hundred
thousand, and all is taken away from him, he should keep his conscience
clear even of the value of a small coin.

"*Do not allow thyself to be easily angered*." That is, one should be as
meek as Hillel the Elder, and not as irritable as Shammai the Elder. It
is said about Hillel that two men once wagered the sum of four hundred
zuz upon his patience; the one who could succeed to provoke his anger
was to receive the amount. (See Sabbath, p. 50; the whole legend ending
with): "Take care of thy temper. A Hillel is, worthy that twice that
amount be lost through him; a Hillel must not get excited."

 <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36)What was the irascibility of Shammai
the Elder? It was

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

related that once a man came to Shammai and said: "Rabbi, how many Laws
have you?" "Two Laws: the written and the oral Law." He answered: "I
believe in the written, but not in the oral Law," said the man. But
Shammai rebuked him, and drove him away.

The same man came to Hillel and said: "Rabbi, how many Laws were given?"
And he told him two--the written and the oral. The man said: "I believe
in the written, but not in the oral Law." And Hillel said: "Sit down, my
son, and write for me the Aleph-Beth. After he did so, he asked him what
the first letter was. "An Aleph," said the man. "It is not an Aleph, but
a Beth," said Hillel. And be again asked him: "What is this?" And the
man said: "A Beth." "It is not a Beth, but a Gimel," said Hillel.
"Whence knowest thou that this is Aleph, the other a Beth, and the third
a Gimel? Because it is a tradition of our forefathers, and whereas thou
believest in one tradition, believe also in the other."

It happened that a Gentile passing by a synagogue heard a child reading:
"And these are the garments which they shall make: a breastplate, and an
ephod, and a robe" \[Ex. xxviii. 4\]. He came to Shammai and said:
"Rabbi, to whom belongeth all that honor?" "To the high-priest who
serves at the altar," was the answer. The Gentile then said: "Convert
me, on the condition that I be made a high-priest." Said Shammai: "Are
there no priests in Israel, or have we no high-priests, but that we
should raise to this dignity this lowly stranger, who came to us but
with his staff and knapsack?" He rebuked him, and drove him away.

He then came to Hillel with the same request, and the latter said: "Sit
down, and I will tell thee something. If one is to appear before a human
king, is it not demanded of him that he learn how to make his entrance
and exit?" "It is so," said the Gentile. Then continued Hillel: "Thou,
who art desirous of appearing before the King of kings of kings, how
much more necessary for thee to learn how to enter the Holy of Holies,
how to trim the lamps, how to approach the altar, how to order the
table, and how to prepare the fire on the altar." The man then replied:
"What seems right to thee?" So Hillel wrote for him the Aleph-Beth, and
he learned it; then he instructed him in Leviticus, and he went on
learning till he came to the passage: And the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death \[Numb. i. 51\]. Then he of himself made the
following

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

deduction: If the people of Israel, who are called the children of the
Lord, and of whom the Shekhina said \[Ex. xix. 6\]: "And ye shall be
unto me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation," were so warned by
Scripture, should not I, an insignificant stranger who has come merely
with his knapsack, take the hint? Thus the stranger became reconciled of
his own accord.

He came to Hillel the Elder and said: "All the blessings that are
contained in the Torah shall rest upon thy head, for hadst thou been as
Shammai the Elder, I would not have become as one of Israel. His
irascibility came near causing me to be lost both in this world and the
one to come; but the patience of Hillel has brought me to a life in this
world and the one to come." It was said that to this proselyte were born
two sons: he named one Hillel and the other Gamaliel, and they were
called Hillel's proselytes.

"*Repent one day before thy death*." The disciples of R. Eliezer asked
him: "How can one know the day of his death, that he may then repent?"
He answered: "For that very reason he should make every to-day a day of
repentance"; that is, he should be repenting all his life.

R. Jose bar Jehudah said in the name of his father R. Jehudah bar Ilai,
who said it in the name of Ilai, quoting R. Eliezer the Great: "Repent
one day before thy death, and warm thyself before the light of the wise,
but beware of their embers, perchance thou mayest be singed; for their
bite is the bite of a fox, and their sting is the sting of a scorpion
and *also* their words are as coals of fire."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](abo05.htm#fr_0) Chapter I. of the original.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](abo05.htm#fr_1) The Talmud infers this from
the two words *shephot hashophtim*, which literally mean that the judges
were judged. Hence, who have judged the judges? The elders.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[7:1](abo05.htm#fr_2) The translation of this
passage is entirely different. The Talmud, however, interprets this to
mean Adam the First, and takes it literally.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:1](abo05.htm#fr_3) Chapter II. of the
original.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[12:1](abo05.htm#fr_4) In the ancient times, and
even now in some places of the Orient, a woman in her separation must be
separated and avoid all communication with anybody during the whole
time.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[12:2](abo05.htm#fr_5) We have explained it in
our "Philac. Ritus," that at that time only great men were allowed to
bear phylacteries, and therefore she took them to prove that her husband
was one of them.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[13:1](abo05.htm#fr_6) Leeser translates
"against" the third day, but the Talmud translates it as we give it.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[16:1](abo05.htm#fr_7) There is a tradition in
the Talmud that Malkizedek is identical with Shem. Salem in Hebrew means
also "perfect." Hence the analogy.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[19:1](abo05.htm#fr_8) Chapter III. of the
original.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[19:2](abo05.htm#fr_9) In a Mishna at the end of
Tract Pëah it is stated the reverse, viz.: That one who needs charity
and refuses to take it will not depart from this world until he will bc
in a position to give charity.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[20:1](abo05.htm#fr_10) This is inferred from
the superfluous letter ‏ו‎ and ‏ת‎; as gates ‏דלתי‎," is also plural,
not less than two, from the added ‏ו‎ and ‏ת‎ they deduce one more.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[21:1](abo05.htm#fr_11) We omitted the narrative
of a pious man who was compelled too stay over night in a cemetery, as
its proper place is in Berachoth.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[22:1](abo05.htm#fr_12) Chapter IV. of the
original.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[25:1](abo05.htm#fr_13) Elsewhere the Talmud
explains that Lebanon means the Temple, and "mighty one" a king.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[27:1](abo05.htm#fr_14) Chapter V. of the
original.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[27:2](abo05.htm#fr_15) Chapter VI. of the
original.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[28:1](abo05.htm#fr_16) According to this
legend, R. Aqiba had a son before he married the daughter, of Calba
Shebua, and thus can be explained the question of Tossaphat in Sabbath,
old edition 106*b*, beginning with the paragraph, "R. Joshua b. Karcha."

<span id="fn_17"></span>[29:1](abo05.htm#fr_17) See Section Moed, Vol.
VI., Tract Yomah, p. 49, that it is Hillel who will be a menace to the
poor.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[32:1](abo05.htm#fr_18) *Calba*, means "dog";
*Shebua*, "satiated."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[32:2](abo05.htm#fr_19) Chapter VII. of the
original.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[35:1](abo05.htm#fr_20) Chapter VIII. of the
original.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[36:1](abo05.htm#fr_21) The Talmud translates
‏חושב‎ "think after" (doubt), but Leeser translates it "respect."

<span id="fn_22"></span>[37:1](abo05.htm#fr_22) He did so in order to
prevent others from doing her violence.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[38:1](abo05.htm#fr_23) Chapter IX. of the
original.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[41:1](abo05.htm#fr_24) The Hebrew term is
*Kehorkhe Hadaionin*. This translation is according to Rashi. Maimonides
explains it as follows: "Do not make thyself as those who instruct the
litigants what to plead." The explanation, however, of the ancient sages
will be found in the Gemara.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[42:1](abo05.htm#fr_25) Chapter X. of the
original.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[43:1](abo05.htm#fr_26) *I.e.*, do not get into
such affairs as will cause the government to investigate about you. The
commentators, however, interpret this otherwise.--See Gemara.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[43:2](abo05.htm#fr_27) Chapter XI. of the
original.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[46:1](abo05.htm#fr_28) Chapter XII. of the
original.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[48:1](abo05.htm#fr_29) ‏פה‎ in Hebrew means
"mouth," and the Talmud takes it literally.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[49:1](abo05.htm#fr_30) The Hebrew term for this
is "Mekapeah," derived from "K'apah," *high* (Bechoroth, 45*b*).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[50:1](abo05.htm#fr_31) According to the
interpretation of the Talmud, but Leeser translates "obtained."

<span id="fn_32"></span>[52:1](abo05.htm#fr_32) Chapter XIII. of the
original.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[53:1](abo05.htm#fr_33) There are seventy-five
letters in the Hebrew text beginning with the word ‏לבוא‎ and ending
with ‏גדלים‎, the translation of which is "go to take to himself a
nation from the midst of a nation, by proofs, by signs, and by wonders,
and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an outstretched arm, and by
great terrors." And in Midrash it is explained that one word, ‏גוי‎ of
three letters is not counted, for it has reference to <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> Egypt. Of the many commentaries upon this
difficult and complicated passage this seems to us to be the best, which
is according to Isaiah Berlin (Pick).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[54:1](abo05.htm#fr_34) Chapter XIV. of the
original.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[56:1](abo05.htm#fr_35) Chapter XV. of the
original.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[56:2](abo05.htm#fr_36) This is also stated in
Sabbath, p. 51; but because it is here more in detail, we give it again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](abo06)
