[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abo05)  [Next](abo07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

# CHAPTER II.

MISHNA *A*. Rabbi (Jehudah the Prince) was in the habit of saying: "In
choosing the right path, see that it is one which is honorable to
thyself and without offence to others. Be as scrupulous about the
lightest command as about the weightiest, for no man knoweth the result
of his actions. Weigh the present temporal disadvantages of a dutiful
course against the reward of the future, and the present desirable
fruits of a sinful deed against the injury to thine immortal soul. In
general, consider three things and thou wilt never fall into sin:
remember that there is above thee an all-seeing eye, an all-hearing ear,
and a record of all thine actions."

MISHNA *B*. Rabban Gamaliel, the son of R. Jehudah the Prince, was wont
to say: "Beautiful is the study of the Law when conjoined with a worldly
avocation, for the efforts demanded by both stifle all inclination to
sin. But study which is not associated with some worldly pursuit must
eventually cease, and may lead to iniquity. All who occupy themselves
with communal affairs should do it in the name of Heaven, for the merit
of their fathers sustains them and their righteousness stands forever.
And ye yourselves shall have reward reckoned unto you, as if ye had
wrought it."

MISHNA *C*. \["Be cautious with those in authority, for they let not a
man approach them but for their own purposes; and they appear like
friends when it is to their advantage, and stand not by a man in the
time of his need.\]

MISHNA *D*. He also used to say: "Do His will as if it were thy own,
that He may do thy will as if it were His.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Annul thy will before His, that He may annul the will of others before
thy will."

MISHNA *E*. Hillel was in the habit of saying: "Do not isolate thyself
from the community and its interest. Do not rely upon thy spiritual
strength until the day of thy death. Pass not judgment upon thy neighbor
until thou hast put thyself in his place. Say not a thing which must not
be heard, because eventually it will be heard, Say never, 'Sometime or
other, when I enjoy leisure, I will attend to my spiritual advancement';
perhaps thou wilt then never have the leisure."

MISHNA *F*. He also said: "The boor can never fear sin, the ignorant can
never be truly pious. Whoso is ashamed to ask will never learn; no
irritable man can be a teacher. He whose mind is given to worldly gain
will not acquire wisdom. Where a man is needed, endeavor that thou be
the man."

MISHNA *G*. Moreover, he saw a skull which floated on the face of the
water, and he said to it: "Because thou drownedst they drowned thee, and
in the end they that drowned thee will be drowned." <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

MISHNA *H*. He furthermore said: "The more feasting the more food for
worms; the more wealth the more cares; more women, more witchcraft; more
maid-servants, more lewdness; more men-servants, more theft. But the
more knowledge the more food for life; the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

more study the more wisdom; the more reflection the better the counsel;
the more charity the more peace. He who earns a good name gains
something that can never be taken away. He who has gotten to himself
words of Law has gotten to himself the life of the world to come."

MISHNA *I*. Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai received it from Hillel and
Shammai. He was wont to say: "If thou hast learned much, do not boast of
it, for it is for that that thou wast created."

MISHNA *J*. The above had the following five disciples: R. Eliezer b.
Hyrkanos, R. Joshua b. Hananiah, R. Jose the priest, R. Simeon b.
Nathaniel, and R. Elazar b. Arach. He used to recount their praises:
"Eliezer b. Hyrkanos is a plastered cistern, which loseth not a drop;
Joshua b. Hananiah--happy is she that bare him; Jose is pious; Simeon b.
Nathaniel is a sin-fearer; Elazar b. Arach is a welling spring."

He used to say: "If all the wise of Israel were in a scale of the
balance, and Eliezer b. Hyrkanos in the other scale, he would outweigh
them all." Abba Saul, however, said in his name: "If all the wise of
Israel were in a scale of the balance and Eliezer b. Hyrkanos with them,
and Elazar b. Arach in the other scale, he would outweigh them all."

MISHNA *K*. He (Johanan b. Zakkai) said to their. once: "Go out and find
what is the best thing to cultivate." R. Eliezer said: A generous eye;
R. Joshua said: A loyal friend; R. Jose said: A good neighbor; R. Simeon
thought: Prudence and foresight; R. Elazar said: A good heart. Thereupon
the Master said: "I consider R. Elazar b. Arach's judgment the best, for
in his all of yours are included."

He said to them again: "Go and find out which is the evil way a man
should shun." R. Eliezer said: An evil eye; R. Joshua said: An evil
companion; R. Jose said: An evil neighbor; and R. Simeon said; He that
borrowed and repayeth not; he that borrows from a man is

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the same as if he borroweth from the Omnipotent, as it is written \[Ps.
xxxvii. 2 1\]: "The wicked borroweth and repayeth not, but the righteous
is beneficent and giveth.", R. Elazar said: An evil heart. Thereupon the
Master said: "I consider R. Elazar b. Arach's judgment the best, for in
his all of yours are included."

MISHNA *L*. Each of these disciples had three maxims. R. Eliezer: "Thy
fellowman's honor must be as dear to thee as thine own. Do not allow
thyself to be easily angered. Repent one day before thy death." (He also
said:) "Warm thyself before the light of the wise, but beware of their
embers, perchance thou mayest be singed; for their bite is the bite of a
fox, and their sting the sting of a scorpion, and their hiss is that of
a fiery-serpent; and all their words are as coals of fire."

MISHNA *M*. R. Joshua: "An envious eye, sinful propensities, and
misanthropy drive a man out of the world."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)"*An envious eye*," etc. How so? It
means one shall look upon the house of his neighbor with the same eye as
he looks upon his own; and as one is anxious that there be no bad repute
against his wife and children, so should he be anxious in regard to his
neighbor's or his children's.

Another explanation of this passage is: One shall not be envious of the
erudition of his neighbor. It happened to one who was envious, that his
days were shortened, and he departed prematurely from this world in
consequence thereof.

"*Sinful propensities*." How so? It is said that the evil propensities
are thirteen years older than the good propensities, as they begin to
grow with the child in the mother's womb, so that he defiles the Sabbath
and commits other transgressions, and there is nothing in his mind to
remonstrate with him. But when he is thirteen years old, the good
thoughts are born. If he defiles the Sabbath, they tell him: Scoundrel,
is it not written \[Ex. xxxi. 14\]: "Every one that defileth it shall
surely be put to death." If he is about to commit adultery, they say to
him:

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Scoundrel, is it
not written \[Lev. xx. 16\]: "Then shall the adulterer be put to death,
together with the adulteress." When one becomes excited and is about to
commit incest, all the members of his body are willing, for the evil
thoughts reign over all the two hundred and forty-eight members; but
when he is about to perform a meritorious deed, all his members begin to
pain him, for the evil thoughts within him reign over all the two
hundred and forty-eight members of his body; and the good thoughts are
compared to one who is imprisoned, as it is written \[Eccl. iv. 14\]:
"For out of the prison cometh the one to reign," which refers to the
good thoughts.

\[There are others who say that it refers to Joseph the upright. This
wicked woman (his mistress) used to persecute him with her words. She
said: "I will imprison thee." He answered: "The Lord looseneth the
prisoners." She said: "I will dig out thy eyes." He answered: "The Lord
causeth the blind to see." She said: "I will bend thy stature." He
answered: The Lord raiseth up those who are bowed down."

And in reality there is no wonder that Joseph the upright refused to
listen to her, as the same happened to R. Zadoq, as it was said: To R.
Zadoq, who was great in his generation, while he was in captivity, a
certain matron sent a beautiful female slave; but as soon as he noticed
her he turned around to the wall, so as not to see her, and absorbed
himself with the Torah all night. In the morning she went to complain to
her mistress, and said: "Death is preferable to me than to be with this
man." The matron sent for him and asked: "Why hast thou not treated this
woman as men usually treat women?" He answered: "I could not do
otherwise. I belong to a great family of priests. I have entirely
ignored her, so as not to be tempted to have intercourse with her, and
add bastards to Israel." When she heard this, she gave orders concerning
him, and then dismissed him with great honor. Neither is there any
wonder for the refusal of R. Zadoq, as R. Aqiba was greater in his act;
and to him happened the following:

R. Aqiba, while at one time in a certain country, was calumniated before
the Sultan (and was imprisoned). He sent to him two beautiful women, who
were washed, anointed, and adorned as brides. They were hugging him all
night, each one inviting him to herself. He, however, repulsed them.
They complained before the Sultan, and said: "Death is preferable to us
than to be with that man." He sent for him and asked;

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Why hast thou not
treated these women as men treat even homely women--are they not human
beings as thyself? Hath not thy Creator also created them?" He answered:
"I could not do otherwise: their odor seemed to me to be that of
putrefied carcasses."

And even R. Aqiba is not to be admired for his act, for R. Eliezer the
Great exceeded him by the following act: He brought up his own sister's
daughter, and for thirteen years slept with her in one bed. When she
became of marriageable age, he told her to get married. She, however,
replied: "Am I not thy servant? Use me as a slave to wash thy disciples'
feet." He again told her: "I am too old. Get married to one suitable to
thy age." She answered: "Have I not already told thee I am thy servant,
and to use me as a slave to wash thy disciples' feet?" When he heard
this, he proposed to her and married her.\]

Said R. Reuben b. Aztrobli: How difficult it is for one to avoid the
evil propensities which are within him from the minute of his birth! As
it is written \[Gen. iv. 7\]: "Sin lieth at the door." So we see that a
young animal is always careful not to approach harmful things, as fire
or a well, because it has no evil propensities, while a human child must
always be guarded against putting his hand into fire, and other harmful
things, because he has a desire to do those things, and this is due to
the evil propensities born with him.

Said R. Simeon b. Elazar: "What are the evil thoughts to

be compared to? To a piece of iron which is placed in the fire;

so long as it is there, various vessels can be formed out of it.

The same is the case with evil thoughts: there is no other preventive
but the Torah, which is likened to fire. As it is written \[Prov. xxv.
21, 22\]: "If thy enemy be hungry, give him bread

to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink; for though thou
gatherest coals of fire upon his head, yet will the Lord repay it unto
thee." Do not read ‏יְשלֵמ לךְ‎ (repay unto thee), but ‏יַשְלִים
לךְ‎(make thee at peace).

Said R. Jehudah the Prince: To the following parable the evil thoughts
can be compared: Two men entered a hostelry, and one of them was
arrested for robbery. When asked for an accomplice he said he had one,
although he could easily have denied it, yet he said so in order to
implicate also his companion and make him share his own fate. The same
applies to

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

evil thoughts: they are not satisfied with their destruction of the
soul, they also destroy the body.

Said R. Simeon b. Johai: From the following is to be deduced that the
Israelites will never see Gehenna. The following parable can be applied
to this: A king who had a barren field rented it to some persons at a
yearly rental of ten measures of wheat. The land was manured, watered,
and surrounded with ditches, and generally properly cared for. Still, at
the end of the year the lessees paid the king only one measure of wheat
instead of ten. When the king asked them for an explanation, they said:
"Our lord and king, thou knowest well that the land was barren, and
brought thee no revenue at all; now even after so much of our labor
invested, it did not produce more than this measure." A similar plea
will the Israelites make in the future before the Holy One, blessed be
He: "Lord of the Universe! thou knowest how the evil thoughts allure
us." As it is written \[Ps. ciii. 14\]: "For he knoweth our frame" (and
on that consideration will be forgiven).

"*And misanthropy*." This means: One should not say: Love the sages, but
hate the disciples; or, Love the disciples, and hate the common people;
but, Love every one except the infidels, the enticers, the misleaders,
and the informers. So also says David \[Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22\]: "Behold,
those that hate thee I ever hate, O Lord! and for those that rise up
against thee do I feel loathing. With the utmost hatred do I hate them:
enemies are they become unto me."

It is also written \[Lev. xix. 18\]: "But thou shalt love thy neighbor
as thyself: I am the Lord." Because I have created him; and if he
practiseth what thy people do thou shalt love him, but not otherwise.

R. Simeon b. Elazar said: The above passage was said as a strict
admonition: If thou wilt love him, thou art assured of a good reward;
otherwise (remember), I am the judge and I will see to it that thou art
punished.

MISHNA *N*. R. Jose: "Thy neighbor's property must be as sacred as thine
own. Set thyself to learn the Law, for it is not an heirloom unto thee.
Let noble purpose underlie thine every action."

MISHNA O. R. Simeon: "Be careful in reading the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shema, and, in
prayer; do not look upon the prayer as an obligatory task, but as a
privilege granted by mercy and grace before God, for it is written
\[Joel, ii. 13\]: 'For gracious and merciful is he, long-suffering and
of great kindness, and he bethinketh himself of the evil.' Never think
thyself too great a sinner to approach Him."

MISHNA *P*. R. Elazar: <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) "Be most
zealous in the pursuit of study; be prepared always to answer a scoffer;
remember in whose service thou laborest." (He also added:) "Know who is
thy Master, that he may be trusted to recompense thee for thy work."

MISHNA *Q*. R. Tarphon was in the habit of saying: "The day is short,
the work is great, the workmen are slothful, the reward is rich, and the
Master is urgent."

MISHNA *R*. He also said: "It is not incumbent on thee to complete the
whole task, but thou art not at liberty therefore to neglect it
entirely. If thou hast learned much Law thou wilt be given much reward;
and faithful is the Master of thy work, who will pay thee the reward of
thy work; and know also that the gift of the recompense of the righteous
is for the world to come."

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40)"*Thy neighbor's property must be as
sacred as thine*." It means that one should be as careful of his
friend's property as he is of his own; and as he is desirous that there
shall be no slur cast on his belongings, so shall he desire that there
should be none on those of his friend.

Others explain the above thus: When a disciple comes to thee with the
request to teach him, if thou art able comply with his request;
otherwise, dismiss him at once, and do not accept his money, as it is
written \[Prov. iii. 28\]: "Say not unto thy neighbor, Go, and return,
and to-morrow will I give, when thou hast it by thee."

"*Set thyself to learn the Law*." How so? When Moses

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

our master saw that his sons knew not enough of the Law to be able to
succeed him, he wrapped himself up and prayed: Lord of the Universe!
designate to me the one who should be at the head of the people, as it
is written \[Numb. xxvii. 15-17\]: "And Moses spake unto the Lord,
saying, Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man
over the congregation, who may go out before them, and who may come in
before them." Said the Holy One, blessed be He: "Moses, take Joshua,
appoint an interpreter for him, and at the head of the great men in
Israel let him lecture in thy presence." Thereupon Moses said to Joshua:
Joshua! these people which I deliver in your care are not to be regarded
as he-goats or sheep, but as kids and lambs; for they have not as yet
had experience in the commandments, and therefore cannot be considered
as such. As it is written \[Songs, i. 8\]: "If thou knowest this not, O
thou fairest of women! go but forth in the footsteps of the flock, and
feed thy kids around the shepherds' dwellings."

Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai once went in the market,, and he noticed a girl
picking up barley from under the feet of the cattle of the Arabians. "My
daughter, who art thou?" he asked her, but she made no reply. Again he
put the same question to her, but again she was silent. Finally she
said: "Wait a little." She enveloped herself with her hair, stepped up
to him, and said: "Rabbi, I am the daughter of Nakdimon b. Gurion." "And
what has become of thy father's money?" he asked her; and she answered.
"Rabbi, on him was verified the saying which was proverbial in
Jerusalem: 'One who desires to preserve his wealth, should lessen it
(spending it in charities; but as my father did not sufficiently spend
in charities, it all vanished).'" "And what has become of that of thy
father-in-law?" he again interrogated her; and she answered: "Rabbi,
through my father also his was lost.'' Thereupon said Rabban Johanan b.
Zakkai to his disciples: "Whenever I used to read the passage: 'If thou
knowest this not, O thou fairest of women! go but forth in the footsteps
of the flocks,' I could not make out what punishment was contained
therein; but after what I have seen today, I can safely say that the
punishment is meant that Israel must be under the domination of the
lowest nation of the heathens; and not merely that, but also must lie
among the manure of their cattle."

The same girl then asked him: "Rabbi, dost thou recall that thou hast
signed thy name to my marriage contract?" He

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

answered: "I do"; and turning to his disciples, he continued: "Verily, I
signed my name to the marriage contract of this girl, which was for a
million Tyrian dinars. Her father's family never left their house to
enter the Temple, until a woollen cloth was spread for them."

It happened that a girl and her ten maids were captured, and a heathen
brought her up in his house. One day he gave her a pitcher and told her
to bring him some water. One of her maids got up and took it from her.
"Why hast thou done this?" he inquired of her; and she answered:
"Master, I swear by thy life that I am one of five hundred maids
belonging to her mother." When he heard this, he liberated the girl and
her ten maids.

The following happened to another young girl who was captured and
brought up in the house of a heathen. One night he had a dream, in which
he was commanded to send her away. His wife, however, prevented him from
doing so. Again he had a dream, in which he was told that if he would
not send away the girl he would die. He did so, but desiring to know
what became of her, be followed her. She kept on walking until she
became thirsty. She went down to a spring to drink, and placing her hand
upon the wall, she was bitten by a snake and died. She floated upon the
water until he went down, took her out, and buried her. When he returned
home, be said to his wife: "The people to which this girl belonged is
punished by no other but their Father in heaven."

"*Let noble purpose underlie their every action*." It means, for the
sake of the Torah, as it is written \[Prov. iii. 6\]: "In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he will make level thy paths."

Said R. Simeon: Be punctual in the reading of Shema, and in prayer; and
when thou prayest, let it not be as a conversation, but supplication
before the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is written \[Jonah, iv. 2\]:
"That thou art a gracious God, and merciful, long-suffering, and
abundant in kindness, and repentant of the evil."

Said R. Elazar (see Mishna, and in addition he said): "Nothing of the
Torah shall be forgotten by thee. Know for whom thy exertion is and with
whom thou hast made a covenant; and who is thy master, who is surely to
be trusted that he will recompense thee for thy work."

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Tosephtha--Aboth of R. Nathan.

 <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) (As Rabban Johanan b. Zakkai used
to recount the praise of his disciples), so was R. Jehudah the Nassi
recounted of the following sages: R. Tarphon, R. Aqiba, R. Elazar b.
Azariah, R. Johanan b. Nuri, and R. Jose the Galilean.

He called R. Tarphon "a pile of stones"; others say, "a pile of nuts,"
which, should one be taken away, the whole pile is stirred and there is
a rolling of nuts one upon the other. So it was with R. Tarphon, when a
disciple came to him and said. "Teach me," he taught him the Scriptures,
Mishna, Midrash, Halakhoth, and Agadoth; and when he left him, he was
full of the blessing of the Torah.

He called R. Aqiba "a sealed treasure," and compared him to a workman
who, taking his basket, goes outside, and whatever he may chance to find
he puts into it. However, when he returns home, he assorts every
article. So has R. Aqiba done (when he was studying), and made rules to
the Torah to be easily comprehended, as rings are made to vessels to
make it easy to take a hold of them.

He called R. Elazar b. Azariah "a huckster's basket," and compared him
to a huckster who, taking his basket, goes about the country, and the
people come flocking around him inquiring for various articles, and find
that he has everything. So it was with R. Elazar b. Azariah, when a
disciple came to him, he taught him everything that he desired; and when
he left him, he was full of the blessings of the Torah.

He called R. Jose the Galilean "a gatherer of good things with no pride
about him," who collected the good manners of all the sages and the
Mishnaioth that all the sages have taught.

When R. Jehoshua became of old age, etc. (See Section Moed, Vol. VI.,
Tract Hagiga, pp. 3 and 4: "It happened that Johanan b. Broka," etc.,
till paragraph beginning with "It happened once.")

Issi b. Jehudah gave the sages names. To R. Meir he gave the name of
"sage and scribe"; to R. Jehudah, "a sage when he desires to be"; to R.
Elazar b. Jacob, "a small vessel (not of much knowledge), but very
clear"; to R. Jose, "a man of good reasoning in the science of the Law";
to R. Johanan b. Nuri, "a basket of a peddler containing a variety of
everything";

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

to R. Jose the Galilean, "a gatherer of the very best things, with no
pride about him"; to R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, "a vault full of the best
purple dye"; to R. Simeon, "learns much and forgets little."

When, later on, R. Simeon met Issi b. Jehudah, he asked him: "Why hast
thou attacked me before the scholars?" And he answered: "I have said
only that thou learnest much and forgettest little, and even that little
is of no importance."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[60:1](abo06.htm#fr_37) All commentators concur
in the opinion that the above Mishna teaches us nothing else but a
lesson of retaliation; namely, that "the Almighty pays measure for
measure," or, in other words, that the punishment fits the crime. I am,
however, inclined to believe that if the author of the above Mishna had
intended to teach us only the said lesson, he could find better and more
striking illustrations than "the skull," etc. I am, therefore, of the
opinion that a historical fact is underlying the above Mishna. Hillel
lived during the time of Herod and witnessed all the atrocities which
that tyrant perpetrated on the people, and more especially on the
Rabbis. Hillel was also an eye-witness of the foul murder which Herod
had committed by having drowned in a bath his brother-in-law, the
high-priest Aristobule III. (See Grätz's History, Vol. III., page 203.)
The ‏גלגולת‎(skull) of the Mishna does therefore refer to Aristobule,
and since Hillel could not openly express his indignation, for fear of
the tyrant, he made an indirect allusion to the occurrence.--From the
American Israelite, by Rev. Dr. Falk Vedaver.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[62:1](abo06.htm#fr_38) Chapter XVI. of the
original.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[66:1](abo06.htm#fr_39) The text reads
"Eliezer," but this must be a misprint, as Elazar was the fifth all the
disciples, each of whom had three maxims.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[66:2](abo06.htm#fr_40) Chapter XVII. of the
original.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[69:1](abo06.htm#fr_41) Chapter XVIII. of the
original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](abo07)
