[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ere05)  [Next](ere07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

WHEN two are sitting at the table, the elder one commences to eat first
and the younger one after him; and if the younger commences first, he is
a glutton. It happened that R. Aqiba prepared a meal for his disciples
consisting of two dishes of meat, one half-roasted and the other one
well cooked. The half-roasted was served first; the most sensible of
them took the whole piece into his one hand and with his other hand he
tried to break off some part of it, but could not, and he placed it back
and ate bread alone. One of them, who was less sensible, took the whole
piece and bit off a piece. Said R. Aqiba to him: "Not so, my son. Put
thy foot on it in the dish, and then you will probably succeed better."
Finally, the

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

well-cooked meat was served, and they ate and were satisfied. Then said
R. Aqiba to them: "My children, I did all that to see whether you had
refined manners."

One shall not eat before the fourth hour, neither shall he take a bath
prior to that hour. Hot water in large quantities is injurious to one's
body, but in small ones is beneficial. The same is the case with wine.
Three things are equal one to the other: wisdom, fear of God, and
modesty. One shall not rejoice among those who are weeping, neither
shall he weep among those who rejoice; he shall not be awake among those
who are asleep, nor shall he sleep among those who are awake; he shall
not be standing among those who are seated, nor shall he be seated among
those who are standing. This is the rule: One shall not have different
manners from those of his friends and of people in general among whom he
is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](ere07)
