[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ere01)  [Next](ere03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

BEN AZAI said: One who bears in mind the following four things, and
never loses sight of them, will never sin namely, whence he came, and
whither he goes, who is his judge, and what will become of him. Whence
he came?,--from a place of darkness; and whither he goes?--to darkness.
Whence he came?--from a dirty place; whither he goes?--to make unclean
every one who will touch him. Whence he came?--from a fetid secretion,
and from a place which is invisible to a human being; whither he
goes?---to sheol and Gehenna, to be, burned in fire. And who is his
Judge? Remember that his Judge is not of flesh and blood, but the Lord
of all the creation, blessed be He, before whom there is no, iniquity,
no oblivion, no consideration of person, no, bribery. And what will
become of him?--worms and

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

maggot, as it is written \[Job, xxv. 6\]: "How much less the mortal, the
mere worm? and the son of earth, the mere maggot?" R. Simeon said: A
human being has worms in his body when alive--*i.e.*, lice, and he is
converted into a maggot after his death.

R. Eliezer b. Jacob said: Think of a big palace in the centre of which
the vat of a tanner is placed: so is a handsome and respected man who
lets an unbecoming word pass his lips. If a human being would issue from
his body perfume (instead of excrement), how would he pride himself
against all other creatures? (So, if this man allows his lips to pass
only respectable words, he can pride himself.) When R. Eliezer was about
to depart, his disciples paid him a visit and requested him to teach
them only one more thing. And he said unto them: Go, and be careful,
each of you, in honoring your neighbor; and when you are praying,
remember before whom you stand and pray, and for the observation of
these you will have a share in the world to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](ere03.md)
