[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ere04)  [Next](ere06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

ONE who enters his neighbor's house shall do what he is told by the host
(provided it is legitimate). And it happened that guests came to the
house of Simeon b. Antiptaris, and he invited them to eat and drink, and
they vowed by the Torah that they would not do so. Nevertheless, they
afterwards ate and drank; but when they were about to depart, he
punished them with stripes. When this came to the ears of R. Johanan b.
Zakkai and the sages, they became angry, and said, "Who will go and
inform him of our displeasure?" Said R. Jehoshua: "I will go and
investigate." When he came there he found him on the threshold of his
house, and he greeted him, saying: "Peace to you, master"; and he
answered, "Peace to you, my master and teacher." Then Rabbi Jehoshua
said: "I need shelter." And he answered: "Take it here in peace." They
then occupied themselves with the study of the Law until evening. In the
morning he told him: "Rabbi, I would like to take a bath." And he
rejoined: "Do as you please." R. Jehoshua, however, was afraid that he
would beat him. When he returned from the bath, they ate and drank. When
he desired to leave, he said: "Who will accompany me?" And the host
said: "I will." R. Jehoshua then thought

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

to himself: "What information can I give to the sages who sent me here?"
He then looked backward, and when he asked him: "Rabbi, what are you
looking for?" he answered: "I would like to question you about one
thing. Why did you beat others who came to your house with stripes, and
you did not do so to me?" He rejoined: "You are my master. You are a
great sage, and of course your manners are refined. The other men,
however, that came to me, I told to eat and drink, and they vowed by the
Torah that they would not, and afterwards they disregarded their vow;
and I have heard from the sages that one who vows by the Torah and
disregards his vows is to be punished with forty stripes." He then
answered: "Be thou blessed by Heaven, that thou hast done so. I swear by
thy life that he who thus conducts himself deserves that thou give him
forty stripes in thy name, and another forty in the name of the sages
who sent me to investigate thy method." R. Jehoshua then came back and
informed the sages of what he had discovered in Simeon Antiptaris.

A man shall never be angry at his meals. It happened with Hillel the
First that he invited a man to a meal. In the meantime a poor man came
and stood at his door, and said to his wife: "I am to marry to-day, and
I have nothing in my house." His wife then took the meal she had
prepared for the house, and gave it to him. She then kneaded a new
dough, and cooked other dishes, and served them before her husband and
the guest. Hillel said then to her: "My child, what is the reason of the
delay?" And she related to him what happened. He then remarked: "My
daughter, I have also judged you from the favorable side, because it is
known to me that all that you do is for the sake of Heaven."

Corner-tithe for the poor is not set aside in the cooking-pot, but in
the dish. It happened with R. Jehoshua, etc. (See Erubin, pp. 120, 121,
for the whole legend repeated here.)

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Always shall a man try to agree with the majority of the people (this is
explained in Khethuboth, p. 16*b*, and will be translated there). For
the first meal-benediction, the hard part and not the soft part of the
bread is to be used. Never shall a man hold a slice of bread of the size
of an egg and bite from it, and one who does so is called a glutton; and
one shall not drain his cup of wine at a draught (see Pesachim, p. 171),
and if he does so he is considered a glutton. But how shall he do? If he
does it in two draughts, it is respectable; if in three. it is
considered putting on airs.

One shall not begin to eat the heads, but the leaves of garlic or
onions. If he does so, he also is called a glutton. One shall not drink
two cups of wine before the after-meal benediction (and subsequently
pronounce the benediction without a goblet, but he shall leave one
goblet for the benediction. The commentaries explained this otherwise,
the reason being that there should be no "pairs"--see Betzah, p. 49--but
we cannot agree with them); if he do so, he can be taken for a glutton.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](ere06.md)
