[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ere03)  [Next](ere05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER V.

NEVER shall a man enter the house of his neighbor without permission,
and this conduct may be learned,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

from the Holy One, blessed be He, who stood at the gate of the garden,
and called to Adam \[Gen. iii. 9\]: "And the Lord God called unto the
man, and said unto him, Where art thou?" It happened with the four
elders Rabban Gamaliel, R. Jehoshua, R. Elazar b. Azariah, and R. Aqiba,
who went to the interior cities of Rome, in one of which there lived a
friend of theirs, a philosopher--R. Jehoshua asked Rabban Gamaliel if he
would like to go and see their friend the philosopher, and he answered
he would not. On the next morning, however, he asked him again, and he
said he would. They then went, and R. Jehoshua knocked at the door of
the philosopher, and at once the [philosopher](errata.htm#13.md) concluded
that this must be the manner of a wise man. When he knocked again, the
philosopher arose and washed his face, hands, and feet. When he knocked
the third time, the philosopher opened the door, and saw that the sages
of Israel were coming from both sides of the street; namely, Rabban
Gamaliel being in. the centre, R. Jehoshua and R. Elazar b. Azariah to
his right, and R. Aqiba to his left, and the philosopher was somewhat
puzzled as to the manner of saluting them. He said within himself: "Whom
of the sages shall I greet first? If I should greet R. Gamaliel first, I
might thereby offend the other sages; and if I should address my
greeting to all of them (without naming the head of them), I will offend
R. Gamaliel." He therefore concluded to address them thus: "Peace to
you, sages of Israel, and to R. Gamaliel first."

Always consider strangers as burglars, and at the same time honor them
as if each of them were R. Gamaliel himself. It happened to R. Jehoshua
that a man called at his house, and he gave him to eat and drink, and
took him up to the roof to sleep there, and then removed the step-ladder
leading to the roof. The man was a thief, and arose by night, and took
things of value that Rabbi Jehoshua had on the roof and packed them up
in his garment, and in the attempt to descend and carry off

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the booty he fell down and almost broke his neck. When R. Jehoshua came
in the morning and found him in that condition, he said to him: "You
ignoramus, is this the way people like you do?" He answered: "Rabbi, I
did not suspect that persons of your station would remove the ladder."
And he rejoined: "Did you not notice yesterday that I was cautious about
you?" From that time on R. Jehoshua proclaimed that always should
strangers be considered as burglars, and still one should honor them as
he would R. Gamaliel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.](ere05.md)
