[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ere06)  [Next](ere08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII.

ONE who enters a house shall not ask for food, but shall wait until
invited. When the goblet is filled, he shall drink it slowly. What is
meant by slowly? If it is a cold beverage--in four draughts; if a warm
beverage--in three. Said R. Jehudah: This applies to the goblets of
Galilee, but as regards the goblets of Judah, which were larger, he may
drink it as slow as he pleases. One must not say to his friend: "Come
and eat with me, as I did with you," for it gives the impression that he
wants to repay with interest. In Jerusalem, however, they invited each
other in turn. One shall not send to his friend a barrel of wine with
oil on the top thereof, because a serious accident may result from it.
It actually happened that one invited his friends to his son's wedding,
and when going down to his cellar to get wine, he noticed that the
barrel had oil (on the top, and thinking that it

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

was all filled with oil) he hanged himself for shame, and died. Hence
the above warning is given.

One should not say to his neighbor, "Take oil from that jug and anoint
thyself," knowing that it is empty (even when knowing that the man has
no habit of anointing himself), because he puts the man under obligation
to him for nothing. The same holds good of food: one should not ask his
neighbor to take a meal with him when he knows that he would not do so.
One should also not offer presents to his neighbor, knowing that he
would not accept them, for the same reason. One should not serve his
neighbor with new wine, telling him that it is old wine, because it is
equivalent to robbery (if he takes money from him, and even if he does
not take money from him he deceives him). For the same reason, when one
serves wine to ass-drivers, he shall not say: "Take it away from this
one (whom he does not like), and give it to the other one." When one is
in the grain-market and has no intention of buying, he should not ask
for the prices, for he misleads the sellers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.](ere08)
