[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kam05)  [Next](kam07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

# CHAPTER III.

RULES CONCERNING PLACING VESSELS ON PUBLIC GROUND. INJURIES CAUSED BY
PEDESTRIANS TO EACH OTHER WITH THEIR LOADS. THE VICIOUS AND NON-VICIOUS
OXEN--IF THEY HAVE DONE INJURY TO EACH OTHER OR TO HUMAN BEINGS, ETC.

MISHNA *I*.: If one places a jug on a public ground and another person
stumbles over it and breaks it, the latter is not liable; if he is
injured, the owner of the barrel is liable for the damage.

GEMARA: The Mishna starts out with "jug" and ends with "barrel," and it
is the same way in several subsequent Mishnas. Said R. Papa: Jug and
barrel are one and the same thing (as to the cases cited). (If so) for
what purpose did the Mishna change the terms? For business transactions
(*e.g.*, if one sells barrels he may deliver jugs, and *vice versa*).
How is the case? Shall we assume in the case of a certain locality where
these terms are decidedly distinct, then jug is one thing and barrel
another? It is only in the case where most of the people use those terms
distinctly and separately, but there is also a small portion who use
them interchangeably, in which case I would say that the majority is to
be followed; hence the statement that in money matters the majority is
not to be followed (but the burden of proof is on the plaintiff).

"*And another person*," etc. Why is he not liable--must he then not look
out? Said the disciples of Rabh in his name: The Mishna speaks of a case
where he filled up the whole thoroughfare with barrels. Samuel said:
When it is done in darkness. R. Johanan, however, said: The Mishna may
be explained in that he placed the jug in a corner (where it could not
be noticed). Said R. Papi: Our Mishna cannot be explained unless
according to Samuel's or R. Johanan's interpretation, but not according
to Rabh, because if it should be according to Rabh's interpretation he
would not be liable if even he should break the barrel intentionally, as
he had no passage way. (The Gemara, however, says that it can be
explained also according

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to Rabh's interpretation, as R. Zbid in the name of Rabha explains it
further on.) Said R. Aba to R. Ashi: In the West it was said in the name
of Ula that the reason for the statement of the Mishna is that
pedestrians are not in the habit of looking around.

Such a case happened in Nahardea, and Samuel held him liable. In
Pumbeditha--and Rabba held him liable. It is correct of Samuel, for he
follows his theory; but Rabba, shall we assume that he concurs with
Samuel? Said R. Papa: It was in a corner of an oil-mill (and it was
customary with those who came to the mill to place their vessels outside
when waiting for their turn to enter the mill), and because it was
customary to place there the vessels the pedestrian had to take care not
to break them. R. Hisda sent the following message to R. Na'hman: "It
was said (it is the custom of the judges to fine) one who kicks the
other with his knees three (selas); one who kicks the other with the
foot, five; one who strikes the other with his fist, thirteen--what is
the fine if one strikes his neighbor with the handle of a hoe or with
the iron of the hoe?" He returned the following answer: "Hisda, Hisda,
you are collecting fines in Babylon; state to me the facts in the case."
He then sent him the following facts: There was a partnership
water-basin out of which each of the partners irrigated his land every
second day. Once one was irrigating his land from the basin when it was
not his turn, and when the other one asked him why he did so and the
former did not heed him, he struck him with the handle of the hoe. Said
he (R. Na'hman) to him (R. Hisda): He would have been justified if he
had even struck him a hundred blows, for even according to the one who
holds that a man ought not to take the law into his own hands, in cases
of loss one may do so, for when one is in the right he need not trouble
himself (to go to court). And R. Na'hman says this, according to his
theory which was taught elsewhere, that a man may take the law into his
own hands even not in case of loss. According to R. Jehudah, however,
this is permitted only in case of loss. R. Kahana objected: There is a
Tosephtha: "Ben Bag Bag says: Do not enter the courtyard of thy neighbor
secretly to take what belongs to you, for fear that he may look upon you
as upon a thief, but do so publicly, and tell him that you take your own
(in contradiction to R. Jehudah, who holds that one must not take the
law into his own hands)." R. Jehudah rejoined: Your support, Ben
Bag Bag, is an individual,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and the majority differ with him. R. Janai, however, explained that
"take it publicly" means to do so with the *aid of the law*.

Come and hear: If an ox mount another to kill him, and the owner of the
latter come along and pull out his own ox, and the former drop on the
ground and is killed, he is not liable. Shall we not assume that this is
in the case of a vicious ox, in which case there is no loss (for if he
had not acted thus, and his ox should have been killed, he would have
been paid in full; hence even where there is no loss one may take the
law into his own hands)? Nay, it is in case of a non-vicious ox where
there is loss (for if he should have waited to be paid by law, he would
have received only one half). If so, how is the latter part of the
Boraitha: "If, however, he pushed down the ox that mounted, and the ox
was killed, he is liable." Now, if it is in case of a non-vicious ox,
why should he be liable (there is loss, and he acted according to law)?
Because he should have pulled out his own ox and not pushed the other so
as to kill him.

Come and hear: "For one who obstructs the court of another by placing
there jugs of wine and oil, the owner of the court may break the jugs
while going in and out of the court." (Hence we see that one may do so
although there is no loss?) Said R. Na'hman bar Itzhak: It means that he
may break them while going out to go to court and also when coming in to
get his documentary evidence (in case such is necessary; *e.g.*, when
there is a dispute as to the ownership of the courtyard).

Come and hear the statement of our Mishna: "One who places a jug," etc.,
"he is not liable." The reason being that he stumbled over it, but if he
broke it without stumbling over he is liable. (Hence we see that even
when there is loss \[for Rabh explained, above, this to be when the
whole thoroughfare has been filled with jugs\] no person is allowed to
take the law into his own hand.) Said R. Zbid, in the name of Rabha:
Nay, the same is the case even if he broke it intentionally, but the
reason why he mentioned stumbling is because he had to state in the
latter part that if he was injured the owner of the barrel is liable, in
which case stumbling is essential, for if otherwise he himself caused
his own injury; he mentioned that also in the first part.

Come and hear: "It is written \[Deut. xxv. 12\]: 'Then shalt thou cut
off her hand'; this means that a fine of money shall be imposed upon
her." May we not assume that this is only when she could not save
herself otherwise? (Hence one may

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

take the law into his own hands?) Nay, that means when she could do
otherwise. Then how is the case when she could not--is she free? If so,
instead of the Boraitha stating in the latter part: It is written
\[ibid. 11\]: "If she putteth forth *her* hand," this signifies to
exclude the messenger of the court, if he has done a similar thing he is
free (from paying for disgrace), let the Boraitha teach that there is a
difference also in *her* own act; viz., the case is when she could save
herself otherwise, but if she could not she is free? The Boraitha
maintains thus: The case is when she could save herself otherwise, but
if she could not, her hand is to be considered as a messenger of the
court and she is free.

Come and hear: "One who set aside the due corner-tithe at one corner of
his field and the poor came and took their due share at another corner,
both are considered corner-tithe." Now if you should say that one may
take the law into his own hands, let the owner prevent them from taking
at another corner by force? Said Rabha: The expression that "both are
corner-tithe" means only that both are free from tithe (given to the
Levites), as we have learned in the following Boraitha: "One who
renounced his ownership to his vineyard and then hastened in the morning
and plucked the fruit himself, he must observe *peret* \[Lev. xix. 10\],
*gleanings* \[Deut. xxiv. 21\], *peah* \[Lev. xix. 9\], and *forgotten
heaves* \[Deut. xxiv. 19\], but he is free, however, from the Levites'
tithe.

MISHNA *II*.: A jug (filled with water) that broke on public ground and
its contents cause a person to slip and fall, or one is injured by its
fragments, he (the carrier of the jug) is liable. R. Jehudah, however,
says, if he break it intentionally he is, otherwise he is not.

GEMARA: Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: It was taught only if he
soil his clothes with the contents of the jug, but if he damage his
person there is no liability, for the public ground (which has no
particular owner) causes his damage. When I stated this before Samuel he
said to me: Let us see; as to the liability for damage caused by one's
stone, knife, or load (placed on public ground), we deduced it from the
"pit" on, public ground, as explained *post*, page
[111](kam08.htm#page_111) (in which the Scripture reads "ox" and "ass".md),
and in all of them I read "an *ox*, but not a human being"; "an *ass*,
but not vessels," and only as far as death is concerned (as the
Scripture in this case speaks of death); as to damage, however, if to
person there is, but if to

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

property there is no liability on the part of the one who placed them
there. (Hence Samuel's theory is the reverse of that of Rabh.) What has
Rabh to say to this? This (that we deduce all that from "pit") is only
where he had renounced his ownership from them (as such is the case with
the pit on public ground), but if he had not it is still his property
(and we deduce his liability from the "ox"). R. Oshyiah objected: (There
is a Boraitha:) It is written \[Ex. xxi. 33\]: "And an ox or an ass fall
therein," and we say an *ox*, but not a human being; an *ass*, but not
vessels; and from this it was said that if an ox or an ass laden with
vessels fell into the pit and they were broken, he is liable only for
the injuries to the animal, but not for the damage to the vessels.
Similar to this is his stone, knife, and load placed on public ground
that cause damage. Therefore if one break his glass vessels by striking
them against the stone so placed, he is liable. Now the first part of
the Boraitha would be in contradiction to Rabh, who holds him liable for
the vessels also, and the latter part (which treats of breaking glass
vessels by striking them against the stone) would contradict Samuel?
\[Why would this be a contradiction only to those two? Do, then, those
two parts of the Boraitha itself not contradict each other? Say, then,
that Rabh would explain the Boraitha in accordance with his theory that
he renounce ownership, and Samuel according to his theory stated
above.\]

Now, when we come to the conclusion that one's stone, knife, or load is
equal to one's "pit," according to R. Jehudah, who holds that there is a
liability for damages done to vessels by falling into a pit, if one
strike his bottle against a stone he is liable. Said R. Elazar: Thou
shouldst not think that he is liable only when both the stumbling and
the breaking were caused by the stone, and not if only the breaking was
caused by the stone, as in reality he is liable even in such case, as we
concur with R. Nathan's theory (which is explained on page
[120](kam08.htm#page_120).md).

"*If intentionally*," etc. What means intentionally? Said Rabba, when he
intended to lower them down from his shoulders (and while doing so they
struck against the wall, he is liable, for his carelessness is
considered a deliberate act). Said Abayi to him: Should we infer from
this that R. Meir (who is very rigorous) holds that one is liable even
if the jug dissolve of itself (although it is an accident)? He answered:
Yea, R. Meir holds one liable if even only the handle remained in his
hand. Why so? Is this not an accident, and being such, the Scripture
frees

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

him from liability, as it is written \[Deut. xxii. 26\]: "But unto the
damsel shalt thou not do anything"? And if you should say that this is
only as regards capital punishment, but as regards damages one is
liable, have we not learned in a Boraitha: "If his jug break and he fail
to remove the fragments, or if his camel fall and he fail to raise it,
R. Meir holds him liable for the damage they cause; the sages, however,
hold that he is free from human justice and is liable only to heavenly
justice; and the sages concede to R. Meir, where one places his stone,
knife, or load on the top of a roof, and they are blown down by an
ordinary wind and do damage, that he is liable; on the other hand, R.
Meir concedes to the rabbis that, where one places jugs on the roof in
order that they should dry, and they are blown down by an extraordinary
wind and do damage, he is free" (because it is an accident; hence even
according to R. Meir damages by an accidental act are excusable)?
Therefore said Abayi: They differ (in our Mishna) in two cases: during
the falling and after the vessels rested upon the ground; one holds that
for stumbling while falling he is liable for carelessness, and the other
one holds that it is an accident. And they also differ after the resting
of the vessels, in case he renounce his ownership to the articles which
caused the damage; one holds him liable even in such a case, and the
other one holds him free. And wherefrom is such a theory? From the fact
that the Mishna mentions two cases, viz.: "If he slipped on account of
the water, *or* he was injured by the fragments," which is practically
one and the same thing, we must say then that it means either when he
slipped on account of the water while falling or that he stumbled over
the fragments after they rested. But how is it with the above Boraitha,
can you apply also to it the same interpretation? This would be correct
regarding the jug containing water, but how can we find the above two
cases in regard to the camel, as you cannot hold one liable for the
stumbling of his animal, even in a case where one is held liable for his
own stumbling; and if there should be a liability it should be only in
one case, namely, if he renounced his ownership to the carcass? Said R.
A'ha: It can be explained that the camel stumbled by reason of the
overflow of a river. How is the case? If there was another way, then he
is surely liable; if there was no other way, is it not accident?
Therefore it must be explained thus: that he himself stumble first and
the camel stumble over him, in which case his stumbling is considered

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

carelessness. But (according to R. Jehudah, who requires intention in
our Mishna in case one renounce ownership from his articles which caused
damage) what intention can there be so that he should be held liable?
Said R. Joseph, and so also said R. Ashi: If his intention was that he
should regain ownership of the fragments. R. Elazar also holds that they
differ even during the falling and concurs with Abayi's theory stated
above.

R. Johanan, however, said that they differ only as to after they rested,
and he comes to teach us that only in this particular case the rabbis
freed him from liability if he renounced his ownership to the articles
which caused the damage because it was accidental (but where there is no
accident he is liable for renouncing his ownership).

It was taught: "One who renounces ownership to his articles that cause
damage, R. Johanan and R. Elazar: one holds him liable and the other
holds him free." Shall we assume that the one who holds him liable is in
accordance with R. Meir and the other one is in accordance with the
rabbis? Nay, as to R. Meir, all agree (that he is liable); they only
differ as to the rabbis: the one who holds him free concurs with the
rabbis, while the one who holds him liable may say: I say that even the
rabbis who held him free do so only in the case of an accident, as
stated above, but in other cases they also held him liable. There is
ground for the supposition that it is R. Elazar who holds one liable.
(See Pesachim, page 8, line 22, "Two things," etc.) Have we not heard
from him concerning the following Mishna (above, page 30, end): "One who
stirs up manure," etc., that it is so only in case he had an intention
to claim it is his own, but otherwise he is not; hence we see that
Elazar holds that if one renounce ownership to his articles which caused
damage he is exempt. Said R. Adda bar Ahba: The case here is that he
restored it to its original position. Said Rabbina: The case as
explained by R. Adda bar Ahba is similar to one who finds an uncovered
pit and he covers it and then again removes the cover (in which case he
is not liable, for it is considered as if he never had anything to do
with it). Said Mar Zutra, the son of R. Mari, to Rabbina: I fail to see
any similarity. In the case of the pit the former act (the uncovered
pit) is still as it was, while in the case of manure the act of the
first one is no more in existence (because the place it first occupied
is now vacant). If it has any similarity to a pit it is in case one find

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

an uncovered pit and stuff it up, and then again dig it out, in which
case the former act disappears entirely and is wholly his work (and
therefore he is liable). Therefore said R. Ashi that the case of manure
was that he stirred it up less than three spans (and therefore it is
considered no stirring up at all \[because of *Lavud*; see Sabbath, page
12\], and whereas he had no intention of exercising any act of
ownership, it cannot be considered his property, and if we cannot hold
him liable as being his property, we can also not hold him liable for
digging a pit). And why does R. Elazar force himself to explain it where
he stirred it up below three, and the reason is only because he intended
it as an act of claiming ownership, but not otherwise; let him explain
it that it was above three, and although there was no intention of
claiming ownership he is nevertheless liable? (Because he holds that one
who renounces ownership to the articles which cause damage is liable.)
Said Rabha: He did so because of the phraseology of the Mishna, viz.;
Why "stirred" up--why not "lifted" up? Hence that "stirring" means below
three spans.

Now when we come to the conclusion that it is R. Elazar who holds him
liable, then it is R. Johanan who holds him free. Does then R. Johanan
really hold so? Did he not say elsewhere that the Halakha prevails as an
anonymous Mishna, and there is such a Mishna: "One who digs a pit on
public ground and an ox or an ass falls into it and is killed, he is
liable"? We must, therefore, say that R. Johanan holds that he is
liable. Now, on the other hand, if R. Johanan holds that he is liable,
then R. Elazar holds that he is not; but has not R. Elazar said in the
name of R. Ishmael (Pesachim, page 8, "Two Things," etc., hence, that he
holds that he is liable? These present no difficulty. What is stated
here is his own, and that in Pesachim, is his teacher's opinion.

MISHNA *III*: One who empties water into public ground and causes
injuries thereby, he is liable for the injuries. One who hides away a
thorn or glass, or one who builds his fence of thorns, or a fence that
falls in into public ground and some persons were injured thereby, he is
liable for the damage.

GEMARA: Said Rabh: It was taught only if his vessels were soiled, etc.
(see page [60](#page_60).md). Said R. Huna to Rabh: If this should be
considered even his mud (he ought to be liable)? Rejoined Rabh: Do you
understand that the water was not absorbed? I mean when it *was*
absorbed, and yet he injured himself

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

by the collected earth, and therefore there is no liability, for he
should have been careful.

\[Why did Rabh repeat his statement here? He said that already in
connection with the preceding Mishna.\] This was necessary: Once as to
the sunny season and once as to the rainy season, and it is in
accordance with the following Boraitha: "Although it is permitted during
the rainy season to empty refuse-pipes and clean excavations, still it
is not permitted to do so during the sunny season; and even in the rainy
season, although they do it with permission, they are liable for the
damage they cause."

"*One who hides away*," etc. Said R. Johanan: It was taught only in case
it is jutting out, but if it is pressed in he is free. Why is he not
liable even when it is pressed in? Said R. A'ha, the son of R. Ika: For
the reason that it is not the custom of man to rub against the wall. The
rabbis taught: One who hides away his thorns or glass in the wall of his
neighbor, and the owner of the wall comes along and pulls down the wall
and the thorns or glass falls into the public ground and does damage,
the one who hid them away is responsible. Said R. Johanan: This is the
case where the wall was in bad condition, but where the wall was in good
condition the owner of the wall only is liable. Said Rabhina: It is to
be inferred from this that if one covers his well with the pail of
another, and the owner of the latter comes along and carries away his
pail, the former is liable (if some accident occurs). Is this not
self-evident? Lest one say that because the owner of the wall did not
know who hid the thorns and could not inform him to remove them,
therefore he is free; but in case of the well, as the owner of the pail
knows him, he should have informed him that he took away the pail, and
therefore the owner of the well should be free--he comes to teach us
that there is no difference.

The rabbis taught: The former pious men used to bury their thorns and
broken glass in their fields three spans below the surface in order that
they should not interfere with the plough. R. Shesheth used to burn
them. Rabha used to throw them into the (river) Chiddekel. Said R.
Jehudah: One who wishes to be pious should observe the laws of damages.
Rabhina said: He should observe the teachings of the fathers (which were
enumerated in the first tract of this section).

MISHNA *IV*.: One who places straw or hay on public ground in order to
convert them into manure, and some pedestrian

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

sustains injury through them, he is liable; and the one who takes
possession of them first is entitled to them. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel
says: All those who obstruct a public thoroughfare by placing chattels
therein and cause damage are liable; and the one who takes possession of
them first is entitled to them. One who stirs up manure on public ground
and a pedestrian sustains injury thereby is liable.

GEMARA: Shall we assume that our Mishna is not according to R. Jehudah
of the following Boraitha: "R. Jehudah says: During the season of
conveying manure one may remove his manure to the public highway and
collect it there for thirty days in order that it should be trodden by
man and animal, for on this condition did Joshua distribute the land"?
It can be explained that R. Jehudah concedes that nevertheless he is
liable for the damage.

(There is an objection.) Come and hear: "All those of whom it was said
that they may obstruct the public highway, if they do damage they are
liable; according to R. Jehudah, however, they are not." Said R.
Na'hman: Our Mishna treats of the season when the manure is not
conveyed, and it is according to R. Jehudah. R. Ashi, however, says: Our
Mishna states "straw" and "hay" (which means before they were converted
into manure, and the reason is) because they are slippery.

"*The one who takes possession of them*," etc. Rabh said: This applies
to both the original substance as well as to its improvement. Zëira,
however, holds that it applies to the improvement only. What is the
point of their difference? Rabh holds that the original substance is
also to be confiscated (as a fine) because of the improvement, and Zëira
holds that only the improvement is to be confiscated. There is an
objection from the clause of our Mishna: "One who stirs up manure,"
etc., and does not mention that the one who takes possession of it first
is entitled to it. (Hence it contradicts Rabh.) Said R. Na'hman bar
Itzhak: You quote a contradiction (to Rabh) from the subject of manure.
In cases where there can be an improvement (*e.g.*, straw) the original
substance was also subjected to the rule as a fine, but where there can
be no improvement (*e.g.*, manure) there is no fine at all.

The Schoolmen propounded a question: According to the one who holds that
the original substance is to be fined because of the improvement, is it
to be fined at once or only after the improvement has taken place? This
can be inferred from the fact

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

that it was attempted to contradict Rabh from "manure(which does not
improve; hence that he is to be fined at once). What answer is this "Did
not the Schoolmen propound their question after they heard of R.
Na'hman's answer, and nevertheless they were doubtful? Shall we assume
that in this case the Tanaim of the following Boraitha differ? "One who
removes his straw and hay to a public highway to convert it into manure,
and a pedestrian sustains injuries, he is liable, and the one who takes
possession of them first acquires title to them, and if one takes them
it is considered robbery. Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel, however, holds that
all those who obstruct a public highway and cause damage thereby are
liable to pay the damage, and the one who lays his hand upon the
articles of obstruction first acquires title to them, and it is not
considered robbery." Let us see. How is this Boraitha to be understood?
It reads that the one who lays his hand on the articles of obstruction
first acquires title to them, and immediately thereafter it states that
the one who takes them is guilty of robbery. It must, therefore, be
explained thus: "One who lays," etc., acquires title to the improvement,
but the original substance is prohibited as robbery, and R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel, however, says the same is the case also with the original
substance. According to Zëira surely the Tanaim differ in this case, but
according to Rabh do they also differ? Rabh may say that all agree that
the fine applies to the original substance on account of the
improvement, but in what they differ here is, whether this Halakha
should be put into practice or not. As it was taught: "R. Huna said in
the name of Rabh: The Halakha is so, but it is not applied in actual
practice. R. Adda bar Ahbah, however, holds that it is applied in
practice." But this is not so, for R. Huna once declared peeled baley
(placed by one on public ground to dry it) ownerless, R. Adda bar Ahbah
did the same with date-husk. It was correct for R. Adda bar Ahbah, as he
followed his theory (stated above), but shall we assume that R. Huna
retracted from his statement above? Nay, in this case the owners were
warned (several times).

MISHNA *V*.: Two potters (each carrying pottery) that walked, one
following the other, and the first stumbled and fell, and the second
stumbled over the first and also fell, the first one is liable for the
damages of the second.

GEMARA: Said R. Johanan: It is not to be said that our Mishna is only
according to R. Meir, who holds that stumbling

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

is considered wilful and therefore he is liable, but even according to
the Rabbis who hold that it is an accident and he is free. Here,
however, the case is different for he had to get up (at once) and he had
not done so. R. Na'hman bar Itzhak, however, holds that if he even could
not get up he is liable, because he had at least to give warning to the
other, which he had not done. R. Johanan, however, denies this theory,
for if he could not get up he could also not give warning (because of
his excitement).

There is an objection from the following Mishna: "If one carrying a
barrel followed one carrying a beam, and the barrel was broken by the
beam, he is free, but if it broke because the carriers of the beam
stopped, he *is* liable." Is it not to be assumed that he stopped in
order to place the beam on the other shoulder, which is usually done,
and still it is said that he is liable, because he should give warning?
Nay, he stopped to rest. But how is it in the former case, is he free?
Then the Boraitha should state that it is only when he stopped to rest,
but if to place it on the other shoulder he is free. Why then does it
state in the latter part that he is free only if he told him to stop
with the barrel? With this he comes to teach us that, although he
stopped to rest, if he called to him to stop he is free.

Come and hear: "Potters and glaziers that walked, one following the
other, and the first one stumbled and fell, and the second one stumbled
over him and the third over the second one, then the first is liable for
the damage of the second and the second is responsible to the third. If,
however, they all fell on account of the first one, he is responsible
for the damage of all; but if they warned each other they are not
responsible." Is this not so even if they could not get up? Nay, they
could get up, and it comes to teach us that even in such a case when
they warned each other they are free.

Said Rabha (in explanation of the above Boraitha): "The first one is
liable to the second one for both injuries to the person and to
property. The second, however, is liable to the third one for personal
injuries only." \[How is this to be understood?\] If stumbling is
considered a wilful act, let the second one also be liable; if, on the
other hand, stumbling is considered an accident, then let the first one
also be free. The first one is considered wilful as it is equal to a
"pit on public ground," in which case the digger is liable for both
injuries to the person

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

and to property; the second, however, who is considered as if he himself
has fallen into the pit (because of the stumbling of the first) can be
liable only for personal injuries because he did not get up in time, but
not for damages to property, as he can say that he did not dig the pit.

The Master said: If they all fell because of the first one, the first is
liable for the damage of all of them. How was the case? R. Papa said: He
obstructed the way (crosswise) like a carcass (which obstructs the whole
way). R. Zbid, however, said: If such should be the case the first one
would not be liable for the damages of the third, who should be careful,
seeing that the second one stumbled over the obstruction of the whole
thoroughfare; therefore he maintains that the first one fell diagonally
and did not obstruct the whole thoroughfare, and the third one in his
intention to walk on the unobstructed portion of the thoroughfare did
not see the stumbling of the second and stumbled over him. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md)

MISHNA *VI*.: If one was coming from one side of the street carrying a
barrel, and the other one was coming from the other side carrying a
beam, and the barrel was broken by the beam, there is no liability, as
both had the right to go each his way (and the carrier of the barrel
should be careful not to collide with the beam). The same is the case
when the carrier of the barrel followed the carrier of the beam. If,
however, the carrier of the beam stopped (without any reason), and the
carrier of the barrel while walking broke it by striking against the
beam, he is liable; if the carrier of the barrel was told to stop by the
carrier of the beam he is free. If the carrier of the barrel was
preceding, and the carrier of the beam was behind him and broke his
barrel by colliding with the beam (although unintentionally), he is
liable (because of carelessness); if the barrel carrier stopped, he is
free; but if he told him to stop and the beam carrier did not heed him,
he is liable. The same is the case with one carrying fire and the other
hemp.

GEMARA: Rabba bar Nathan questioned R. Huna: When one injures his wife
by having intercourse with her, how is the law: is he free because he
has done it with permission, or is he

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

nevertheless liable because he had to look out for her health? And he
answered: This we have learned in our Mishna: "He is free, as both had
the right to go each his way." Said Rabha to the latter: Is there not to
be drawn an *a fortiori* conclusion from a wood \[Deut. xix. 5\] in
which case both had permission to enter, and nevertheless when one was
injured or killed, it is considered that the defendant entered the
plaintiff's premises, and he is responsible or guilty; so much the more
here it must be considered that he entered upon her premises and injured
her? \[But did not the Mishna state that each of them had permission to
go his way? There is no similarity. In the case of the Mishna both had
equal permission, and each of them did the same thing the other did, but
here only he acted but she did nothing. Is that so? Did not the
Scripture say plainly \[Lev. xviii. 29\]: "Even the souls that *commit*
them shall be cut off"? Hence we see that the Scripture considers the
female also as acting. There both of them derive pleasure and therefore
are punished, but here the act is only his.\] Resh Lakish said: If there
were two cows on public ground, one of which was lying and the other one
walking, and the latter kicked the former, she is not liable; if,
however, the reverse was the case she is liable. (This was explained
above, page [50](kam05.htm#page_50)..md)

MISHNA *VII*.: Two that were on public ground, one running and the other
one walking (ordinarily), or both of them running, and they injured each
other, both are free.

GEMARA: Our Mishna is not according to Issi b. Jehudah of the following
Boraitha: "Issi b. Jehudah says: The one who was running is liable, for
it is uncommon. He, however, con. cedes that if it was on the eve of
Sabbath in twilight, that he is not liable, for he is permitted at that
time to run (and therefore it is considered common)." Said R. Johanan:
So the Halakha prevails. But has not R. Johanan said elsewhere that the
Halakha prevails according to an anonymous Mishna, and our Mishna (which
is anonymous) states not so? The case in our Mishna is to be explained
in that it speaks of the twilight on the eve of Sabbath, from the fact
that it states, "or they were both running they are free." Then without
the above explanation it would be superfluous after the statement that
if even only one was running, etc., for it is self-evident that if both
were running that so much the more they ought to be free; therefore the
Mishna must be considered as incomplete, and should read thus: If one
was running and the other one was walking, there is no

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

liability, when the case was in the twilight of the eve of Sabbath; on a
week day, however, the one running is liable; if both were running they
are free, even on a week day.

The Master said: "And Issi concedes that if it was in the twilight of
the eve of Sabbath he is free, for he did so with permission." What is
the permission? It is according to R. Hanina, who used to say: Come with
us to meet the bridal queen. And according to others, "to meet the
Sabbath bridal queen." R. Janai used to get up, enwrap himself and say:
Come bride, come bride! (Hence it is a merit to run at twilight on the
eve of Sabbath to meet the Sabbath.)

MISHNA *VIII*.: One who chopped wood on public ground and caused damage
on private ground, or *vice versa*; or on his own private ground, and
has done damage on another's private ground, he is in either of those
cases liable.

GEMARA: And all the three cases were necessary to be mentioned, for if
the Mishna should state the case of one who chopped wood on his own
private ground, and did damage on public ground only, one might say that
the liability is because on a public thoroughfare there are usually many
passers-by; but if *vice versa* there is no liability because on private
premises there are not many people. And if it should state the case of
public to private ground only, one might say that the liability is
because he had no right to chop wood there, and as he did that without
permission he is liable, but from private to public ground, where he had
a right to do so, there is no liability even if it caused damage on
public ground. And if it should state these two cases only, still one
might say that in one case he is liable, for he has done it without
permission, and in the other case because there are many persons, but
from one private ground to another, where usually not many people are,
and each owner is permitted to do such a thing on his own premises,
there is no liability, therefore it was necessary to mention all. The
rabbis taught: "One who enters a carpenter's shop without permission,
and was struck on his face by a flying splinter and died, there is no
liability. But if he entered with permission the carpenter is guilty."
Guilty of what? Said R. Jose b. Hanina: It means the liability to pay
the four certain things, but he is free from banishment, for it is not
equal to the case of a forest, which is considered the ground of every
one who enters it, but in this case he entered his neighbor's estate.
Said Rabha: Is not the following *a fortiori* conclusion to be drawn
here: A

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

forest, where each one enters by his own will (without the permission of
the other), still it is considered as if he entered by the request of
the other, and he is to be banished in case he kills one
unintentionally); in the case at bar, where he decidedly enters by the
request of the other, shall he not so much the more be banished?
Therefore we must explain the Boraitha thus: He is free from banishment
means that this alone would not be sufficient, and the reason of R. Jose
b. Hanina is that it is such an act of negligence that almost amounts to
an intentional act (for he should look out).

An objection was raised from the following: "One who throws a stone into
a public ground and kills some one, he is to be banished." Is *this* not
such a negligent act as almost amounts to an intentional act, for he had
to have in mind that on public ground people come and go, and still it
says that he must be banished. Said R. Samuel bar Itzhak. The case is
that he was tearing down his wall and threw the material into rubbish in
the daytime. What was the nature of this rubbish? Was it such rubbish as
people are likely to be about, then it is intentional? If not, then is
it an accident? Said R. Papa: The case is that it was rubbish that
people do their necessities thereon in the night-time, but not in the
daytime, but still it may happen that some might do so in the daytime;
it cannot be considered an intentional act, for it is uncommon to do so
in the daytime, and, on the other hand, it is also not an accident, for
it may happen.

R. Papa in the name of Rabha explained that R. Jose b. Hanina's
statement has reference to the first part only, viz.: "One who enters a
carpenter's shop without permission, and was struck in the face by a
flying splinter and died, the carpenter is free." Said R. Jose b.
Hanina: He is liable to pay the four things, but he is free from
banishment (and the difference is thus): That he who explains that it
refers to the latter part of the above Boraitha, so much the more as to
the first part; but according to R. Papa, he who explains that it refers
only to the first part, in the latter part where be entered by request
he is to be banished. Is that so? Have we not learned in the following
Boraitha: "One who enters a blacksmith's shop and was struck by an
escaping spark and died, there is no liability, even if he entered with
permission"? The case here is that it was the blacksmith's apprentice.
Assuming that it is so, may he be killed? It was that his employer
insisted that he

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

should leave the shop, and he did not do so. Supposing it so, may he be
killed? The employer thought that he did leave. If so, then any person
would come under the same rule. In the former case the apprentice
usually obeys his employer (and therefore the blacksmith assumed that he
left when being told to do so), but in the case of a stranger the
blacksmith should look around and see whether the stranger did leave or
not.

R. Zbid in the name of Rabha supported the above statement by the
expression of the verse, viz. \[Deut. xix. 5\]: "It (the iron)
found," <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) but not when be *makes*
himself found to the iron. From this R. Eliezer b. Jacob said: One who
drops out of his hand a stone, and another one puts out his head and is
injured by it, he is free. Said R. Jose b. Hanina: He is not to be
banished, but he must pay the four things.

He who applies the explanation of R. Jose to the last case
self-evidently holds that it also applies to the former case, and he who
applies the explanation to the former case, in the last case may say
that he is wholly free.

The Rabbis taught: Employees who came to demand their wages from their
employer, and were gored by his ox or bitten by his dog, to death, he is
free. Anonymous teachers, however, hold that employees have the right to
demand their wages from their employer (and therefore he is guilty). How
is the case? If the employer usually comes to town, what reason have the
anonymous teachers for their assertion? If, on the other hand, he can be
found only in the house, what is the reason of the first Tana? It is in
a case where he is not certain, and the [employee](errata.htm#19.md) when
knocking on the door or gate is told "In"; one holds that "in" means
"come in" (and therefore they had the right to enter), and the other one
holds that "in" means "stay where you are (and I will come out to you)."
There is a support to the latter construction of "in" from the following
Boraitha: "An employee that entered to demand his wages from his
employer, and he was gored by his ox or was bitten by his dog, he is not
guilty although he entered with permission." Why so? We must say that it
means that when knocking on the door or gate he was told "in," and he
meant that he had permission to enter, but in reality "in" meant only
"stay where you are (and I will come out to you)."

MISHNA *IX*.: Two non-vicious oxen that wounded each

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

other: the one who is hurt the most is to be paid one-half of the amount
of the value of difference of the injuries. If both are vicious the
*full* amount of difference of the injuries is to be paid. If one is
non-vicious and the other vicious: if the vicious one injured the
non-vicious more than he himself was injured he pays the full amount of
the difference, if the reverse is the case only one-half is paid. So
also if two men wound each other, the one who hurt the most must pay the
full amount of the difference.

A man who hurt a vicious ox and was also hurt by the ox, or when the
reverse was the case, the full amount of difference is to be paid. If
the case was with a non-vicious ox the man pays the full amount and the
ox pays the half. R. Aqiba, however, says: Even if the ox was
non-vicious, the full amount is to be paid.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: It is written \[Ex. xxi. 31\]: "According to
this judgment shall be done unto him." That means that as the judgment
when two oxen gore each other, so also shall it be when an ox gores a
man. As in the former case a non-vicious ox pays one-half and a vicious
one the full amount; the same is the case if it gored a human being. R.
Aqiba, however, says: "According to *this* judgment" means that the
judgment just mentioned applies to man, but not to the preceding case.
Shall we assume that it must be paid from the best estates? Therefore it
is written \[ibid., ibid.\]: "Shall be done unto *him*," which means
that he pays only from the body of the ox, but not from the best
estates.

MISHNA *X*.: An ox of the value of one hundred selas that gored another
one of the value of two hundred, and the carcass was worthless, the
plaintiff takes the ox (*i.e.*, one-half of the damage).

GEMARA: Our Mishna is in accordance with R. Aqiba of the following
Boraitha (which treats of the same case, and teaches): "The ox shall be
appraised in court, and if he is worth one-half of the killed one the
plaintiff may take him." Such is the dictum of R. Ishmael; R. Aqiba,
however, holds that the plaintiff takes the ox without any appraisement.
On what point do they differ? R. Ishmael holds that the plaintiff
becomes a creditor, and his demand is money, and it must be assessed by
the court, and R. Aqiba holds that the plaintiff becomes a partner to
the defendant, and they differ as to the explanation of the following
passage \[Ex. xxi. 35\]: "Then they shall sell the live ox and divide
his money, and the dead ox also

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

they shall divide." R. Ishmael explains that it means that this shall be
done by the court, and R. Aqiba maintains that the passage makes the
parties partners, if both oxen were of equal value; if, however, the
goring ox was worth half he belongs -it once to the plaintiff. What is
still the difference? When the plaintiff has consecrated him (according
to R. Aqiba he is sacred, and according to R. Ishmael he is not until
awarded to the plaintiff by the court). Rabha questioned R. Na'hman: If
the defendant sold the ox, how is it, according to R. Ishmael, who holds
him to be a creditor, is the sale valid? Or perhaps because the ox
becomes subject to the appraisement of the court it is not valid? He
answered: The sale is not valid. But have we not learned in a Boraitha
that it *is* valid? He may recover him. If it is so, what is the
validity of the sale? In case the vendee used him in the meantime in
ploughing he need not pay for it. Then infer from this that if a
borrower sells his personal property the Beth Din can recover it for the
benefit of the lender. Nay, from this case in which the Scripture made
the ox hypothecary nothing can be inferred.

R. Ta'hlipha, of Palestine, taught in the presence of R. Abuhu: If he
sold him it is invalid, but if he consecrated him it is valid. Who sold
him? The defendant, and all agree that the sale is not valid, because
even according to R. Ishmael be is still subject to the appraisement in
court, and if he consecrated him all agree that he is sacred, because
even according to R. Aqiba, who holds that he belongs to the plaintiff
without any appraisement, a sacred thing is different by reason of the
statement of R. Abuhu, who said that it was so decreed for fear that it
might be said that consecrated things become ordinary without being
redeemed.

The rabbis taught: "A non-vicious ox that has done damage, if he was
sold, consecrated, slaughtered, or presented to somebody, the act is
valid if it was done before the rendition of judgment; if, however,
either of these things were done after rendition of judgment, it is null
and void. If the creditors levied upon the ox, whether the damage was
done before or after the recognition of the court of the debt the levy
is void, for the damages in case of a non-vicious ox are paid from his
body only. In case of a vicious ox all the above acts of his owner are
valid without regard whether it was done before or after rendition of
judgment, and even the levy of creditors is valid regardless of whether
the damage was done before or after

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

recognition, for the reason that damages in case of a vicious ox are
paid from the best estates only.

The Master said: "If sold it is valid, as far as the non-payment for the
ploughing he has done; if it was consecrated it is valid for the reason
stated by R. Abuhu; and if slaughtered or presented to somebody the act
is valid." It would be correct as to presenting, because it means as far
as the value of ploughing is concerned, but in case he was slaughtered,
why should not the damage be collected from the value of his meat? Have
we not learned in a Boraitha: "It is written: 'The *live*.'" Whence do
we know that if even it was slaughtered? Therefore it is written: "And
they shall sell the ox," which means in whatever state he is? Said R.
Shizbi: This (that the act is valid) was necessary only as to the
reduction in value on account of being slaughtered (*i.e.*, the owner of
the ox need not pay the amount of such reduction).

The rabbis taught: "An ox of the value of two hundred zuz that gored
another ox of the same value, and injured him to the extent of fifty,
and the injured ox then improved and became of the value of four
hundred, although it is possible that if not for the injury he would
have improved still more, and would have become of the value of eight
hundred, still he pays him only as at the time of the injury (one-half
of fifty zuz); if, however, the injured ox became lean and decreased in
value, he pays him according to the value at the time of the trial. If
the ox who caused the injury improved, he pays him as at the time of the
injury; if he decreased in value, as at the time of the trial. On
account of what was that leanness of the plaintiff's ox? If it was on
account of work done with him by the plaintiff, let the defendant say,
Why should I suffer for the decrease in value caused by you? Said R.
Ashi: The case is that the leanness was caused by the blow, in which
case the plaintiff can say the horn of your ox is still impressed (in my
ox) and this caused leanness.

MISHNA *XI*.: An ox of the value of two hundred that gored another ox of
equal value and the carcass was of no value whatever. R. Meir holds that
of such a case it is written \[Ex. xxi. 35\]: "Then shall they sell the
live ox and divide his money." Said R. Jehudah to him: So the Halakha
prevails in reference to the passage cited by you, but how is the last
part of this passage \[ibid., ibid.\]: "And the dead one shall they also
divide"? This can apply to a case where the carcass of the ox

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

(which ox was of the same value as the goring ox) is still worth fifty
Zuz, in which case each takes one-half of the live and one-half of the
dead ox.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: "An ox of the value of two hundred zuz that
gored an ox of equal value and the carcass was worth fifty, each one
takes one-half of the live and one-half of the dead ox, and this is the
case of the ox intended by the Scripture." Such is the dictum of R.
Jehudah. R. Meir, however, holds this is not the ox intended by the
Scripture, but it is where it is as stated in the beginning of the
Mishna, and the provision of the passage that "also the dead ox shall
they divide" is carried out by appraising how much the carcass is worth
less than when the ox was alive, and one-half of that difference
(seventy-five zuz) is paid to the plaintiff from the live ox together
with the carcass. If it is so, then, according to both, if the carcass
is worth fifty each of them gets one hundred and twenty-five, as even
according to R. Jehudah, who divides both oxen between them, the share
is only one hundred and twenty-five, what is the difference between
them? Said R. Johanan: The difference is as to the increase in value of
the carcass (since the time of the injury). R. Meir holds that it
belongs wholly to the plaintiff, and R. Jehudah holds that they are
considered partners, and each takes one-half. And this was because there
presented itself a difficulty to R. Jehudah: If you say that the
Scripture sympathized with the defendant and meant that he should share
in the improvement (of the carcass), would you say in case of an ox
worth five selas (twenty zuz) that gored an ox worth one hundred and the
carcass is worth fifty zuz, that they also must divide equally the live
and the dead ox (and so the defendant will still profit in that, because
the one-half carcass is worth twenty-five zuz, and half of the live is
worth ten zuz, which makes thirty-five zuz, while the value of the
defendant's ox was only twenty zuz), and where do we find such a case
wherein the defendant should still profit? And furthermore, is it not
written plainly \[ibid. 36\]: "He shall surely pay," which signifies
that the defendant *pays*, but should not profit. \[For what purpose is
this additional passage adduced? Lest one say that he pays only where
the plaintiff does actually suffer damages, but where he does not, as,
for instance, an ox worth five selas that gored an ox of equal value,
and the carcass was worth six selas (by increase in price, in which case
the plaintiff profits), in such a case the defendant may profit,
therefore this

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

passage is adduced to show that the defendant should always pay but
never profit.\] Said R. A'ha bar Ta'hlipha to Rabh: If it is so, then
according to R. Jehudah, who insists upon the division of both, we find
instances according to him that a non-vicious ox pays more than
one-half, and the Scripture provides expressly \[ibid. 351: "Then shall
they sell the live ox and divide his money" (*e.g.*, when an ox worth
fifty gored one worth forty, and the carcass was worth twenty, then the
damage amounts to twenty, and if the plaintiff take one-half of the live
ox which is twenty-five, and one-half of the carcass which is ten, he
would receive altogether thirty-five, which is more than one-half of the
damage). Nay, R. Jehudah also holds of the rule that the difference
should be divided and deducted from the live one. Whence does he deduce
it? From \[ibid., ibid.\]: "And the dead ox also they shall divide." But
does not R. Jehudah deduce from this passage that each takes one-half of
the dead and one-half of the live one? The passage could read: "And the
dead ox they shall divide." Why "and the dead ox *also*"? To infer both.

MISHNA *XII*.: There are cases when one is liable for the acts of his ox
and is free if they are his own acts, and *vice versa*. How so? If one's
ox cause disgrace the owner is free, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md)
but if he himself did so he is liable. If his ox blinded the eye of his
slave or knocked out his teeth the owner is not liable (*i.e.*, the
slave is not to be manumitted), but if he himself did it he is. If his
ox wounded one of his parents he is liable, but if he himself had done
so he is free; and the same is the case when his ox set fire to a barn
on Sabbath he is liable, while if he himself did so he is free, for in
both last cases he is guilty of a capital crime.

GEMARA: R. Abbuhu taught in the presence of R. Johanan: All those whose
acts are of a destructive nature are not liable (as regards the
observation of the Sabbath), except those who wound and set fire. Said
R. Johanan to him: Go and teach this outside of the college (*i.e.*,
such a statement is not to be respected by the college), as those two
mentioned are no exceptions (and are also of destructive nature); they
can only constitute exceptions in case of the wounding (of an animal
when he needed the blood) for his dog, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md) and in case of fire when he needed

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the ashes (*i.e.*, when the act was done with an intention to derive
benefit from the things acted upon).

There is an objection from our Mishna: "An ox that set fire to a barn,"
etc. And as the Mishna equals the owner to his ox, is it not to assume
that as the ox had no need of the fire so also had the owner none, and
still it is stated that he is free (civilly) because he is guilty of a
capital crime (hence we see that setting fire on Sabbath is an
exception)? Nay, the equality is in the reverse; that is, as the owner
did it with some purpose, so also did the ox. How is this possible of an
ox? Said R. Avia: It may be explained that it was an intelligent ox that
had an itch on his back, and he started the fire in order to roll in the
ashes. But whence do we know that this was his intention? From the fact
that he really did roll in the ashes. Are there such intelligent oxen?
Yea, there are, as there was an ox that belonged to R. Papa, who when he
once suffered from toothache removed the cover from the beer barrel and
drank from the beer to be cured.

Said the rabbis to R. Papa: How can you say that the equality is that
the ox imitated the owner? Does not the Mishna state that if his ox
cause disgrace he is free, but not if he himself: now can an ox have
such intelligence as to intend to disgrace? Yea, for instance, when he
intended to do damage (but caused only disgrace), in which case the
Master said elsewhere, if he intended to do damage but caused only
disgrace, he is liable.

MISHNA *XIII*.: An ox that ran after another ox, and the latter was
injured, the plaintiff claims that the ox injured him while the
defendant claims that it was not so, but that the injury was caused by
rubbing against a stone: the rule is that the burden of proof is upon
the plaintiff. If two oxen having different owners were running after a
third, each of the defendants claiming that the other one's ox caused
the injury, both of them are free; if the two oxen belonged to one
person both are liable (as explained further on); if one ox was a big
one and the other a small one, the plaintiff claims that the big one
caused the injury while the defendant claims that the small one caused
it (the difference being that the big one is of sufficient value to pay
the half damage while the small one is not); or if one was non-vicious
and the other vicious, the plaintiff claiming that the vicious one did
the injury, and the defendant claiming that the non-vicious did it, the
burden of proof is upon the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

plaintiff. If the defendant's oxen were two, one a big one and the other
a small one, and so also were the plaintiff's oxen, the plaintiff claims
that the big one injured his big ox and the small one injured the small
ox, and the defendant claims that the reverse was the case (so as to
reduce his payments); or when one was a non-vicious and the other one a
vicious one, the plaintiff claims that the vicious one injured the big
one and the non-vicious the small one, while the defendant claims that
it was not so, but that the non-vicious injured the big one and the
vicious the small one, the burden of proof is upon the plaintiff.

GEMARA: Said R. Hyya bar Abba: This statement (in the Mishna, that the
plaintiff has the burden of proof) shows that Summachus' companions
differ with him, for Summachus holds (*post*, page
[106](kam08.htm#page_106).md) that money, the ownership of which is
doubtful, must be divided among its claimants. Said R. Abba bar Mamel to
R. Hyya bar Abba: Does then Summachus hold so even if both of them claim
to be positive in their statements? He answered: Yea. And whence do we
know that our Mishna also speaks that both claim to be positive in their
statements? Because it teaches plainly: One party says: *Your* ox; and
the other party says (positively): *Not so*. R. Papa opposed: According
to your explanation that both claim to be positive in their statements,
the last part must naturally also treat of such a case; then how is it
to be understood: If one was a big one and one was a small one, etc.,
the plaintiff has the burden of proof; how would be the law if he does
not prove: he takes according to the statement of the defendant? Would
this not be in contradiction to Rabba bar Nathan, who says that where
one party claims to have sold another party wheat, and the other party
admits to have bought of him barley, that the latter is free (and
according to the above rule the seller would be entitled to recover for
barley)? We must, therefore, say that the case is when one claims that
he is positive, while the other one is not positive. Let us see who
claims that he is positive. Shall we assume that the plaintiff claims
that he is positive and the defendant does not, then there will still be
a contradiction to Rabba bar Nathan. We must, therefore, say that the
plaintiff does not claim that he is positive while the defendant does so
(and therefore he claims his damages from both, and if he does not prove
his assertion he recovers only according to the defendant's statement).
Now as the latter part speaks of a case where the plaintiff was
uncertain and the defendant was certain, the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

same must be the case in the first part of the Mishna, and even
Summachus holds to his theory, because if not it was not necessary for
the Mishna to teach this case. Nay, in the latter part of the Mishna the
plaintiff is not positive and the defendant is positive, and in the
first part the reverse is the case.

But after this explanation the first part and last part treat of
different cases; then could you not explain that the first part speaks
where both were positive (and only then Summachus says that the money
should be divided), and the last part treats where one is positive and
the other is not (in which case Summachus does not oppose). It can be
said: Certainty and uncertainty in the first part, and uncertainty and
certainty in the other part is still one and the same case, but if both
assert certainty in one case and certainty and uncertainty in the other
case, there are two different things, and if the Mishna should mean so
it would state so plainly.

"*Both are liable*." Said Rabha, of Pharsika, to R. Ashi: Infer from
this that if non-vicious oxen cause damage the plaintiff may collect his
damages from any one of them. Nay, the case in the Mishna is that both
oxen were vicious. Said R. A'ha the elder to R. Ashi: If the case were
that they were vicious, why is it stated that *both* are liable? It
ought to be "*he*" (the man) is liable, meaning the owner (as the damage
is paid from the best estates). We must, therefore, say that the case is
that they were non-vicious, and it is according to R. Aqiba, who holds
that they (the parties) are considered partners, and the reason here is
that both oxen are on hand, in which case he cannot shift the
responsibility upon the missing ox, but where one of them is missing the
defendant may say to the plaintiff: Prove that *this* ox has done the
injury, and I will pay you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[69:1](kam06.htm#fr_17.md) The text reads, "as the
cane of a blind one," and Rashi explains it, that when feeling the way
with his cane, the blind man places it wherever it happens, longwise or
crosswise. The above explanation, however, which is more lucid, is
according to Tosphath.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[73:1](kam06.htm#fr_18.md) The Hebrew term \[Deutr.
xix. 5\] being ‏ומצא‎, literally "it found."

<span id="fn_19"></span>[78:1](kam06.htm#fr_19.md) As explained above, p.
53, from the verse Levit. xxiv. 19.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[78:2](kam06.htm#fr_20.md) According to the
commentary of R. Hananel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](kam07.md)
