[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kam06)  [Next](kam08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

RULES IN REGARD TO OXEN REPEATEDLY GORING OTHER OXEN AND HUMAN BEINGS.
OXEN OF ORPHANS AND GUARDIANS AND WHAT IS CONSIDERED "GUARDED."

MISHNA *I*.: An ox that gores four or five oxen one after another, the
last of them must be paid from the body of the goring ox (if he was yet
considered non-vicious., *e.g.*, when the goring was not in
succession <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)), and from the balance of
the half body the last but one must be paid, and if there was still a
balance left the last but two must be paid, so that the later the more
privileged. Such is the dictum of R. Meir. R. Simeon, however, says that
if an ox of the value of two hundred zuz gores an ox of the same value,
and the carcass is worth nothing, each one takes one hundred; if he
again gores another of the value of two hundred, the last one takes one
hundred zuz, and the former takes fifty, and fifty zuz remain for the
owner of the goring ox; if he again gores a third one of the same value,
the last one takes one hundred, the last but one takes fifty zuz, and
the first as well as the owner takes each a golden dinar (twenty-five
silver dinars).

GEMARA: According to whom is our Mishna? It is certainly not according
to R. Ishmael, who holds that the plaintiffs are considered creditors,
for if it be so, then not the last, but the first would be more
privileged, for he was prior to the last one in point of time. Neither
can it be in accordance with R. Aqiba, who holds that in case of a
non-vicious ox the plaintiff and the defendant are considered
copartners, for then if there is a balance left from the body of the ox
after the goring of the last one, the same would have to be divided
equally among all the plaintiffs previous to the last one, and the
decree of the Mishna is that the last but one must be paid, etc. Said
Rabha:

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Mishna can be
explained in accordance with R. Ishmael, and the difficulty that it is
stated that *the later*, the more privileged, which ought to be *the
first* (according to R. Ishmael), is to be explained thus: that the
plaintiff levied upon the ox, and in such a case the plaintiff becomes
responsible for the damage done by the ox while under his control, as he
is then considered a bailee for hire as regards damages (and so was the
case with all others). But if such was the case, then why is it stated
that if there is a balance left it goes to the last but one? It ought to
go to the owner of the ox (for all the gorings subsequent to the first
one were made while the ox was not under his control). Said Rabhina: The
statement in question means that if after the last one was paid from the
body of the ox, there still remained a balance, the same must be paid
over to the preceding one. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) And so
when Rabhin came from Palestine he said in the name of R. Johanan that
the Mishna is to be explained in the same sense that Rabha did; that is,
that the Mishna treats only about the negligence of the plaintiffs who
took the ox under their control and neglected to sufficiently guard him
as was their duty to do.

Now, when the Mishna is explained to be in accordance with R. Ishmael,
how is it about the last part: "R. Simeon said, etc., . . . the first as
well as the owner take each a golden dinar"? This is certainly in
accordance with R. Aqiba's opinion that the goring ox becomes the common
property of a copartnership. Then the Mishna would be in accordance with

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

two different opinions, viz., the first part according to R. Ishmael and
the last part in accordance with R. Aqiba. The Schoolmen said: Yea, so
it is, for Samuel said to R. Jehudah (concerning this Mishna): "Genius,
leave alone the explanation of the Mishna and agree with me that the
first part is according to R. Ishmael and the last part according to R.
Aqiba." <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

MISHNA *II*.: An ox that is vicious towards his own species, but not
towards other species, or towards human beings but not towards animals,
or towards young cattle, but not towards full-grown cattle, the whole
damage is to be paid to those towards which he is vicious and half to
those towards which he is not vicious. The disciples asked R. Jehudah
what the law was when an ox was vicious on Sabbath days, but was
non-vicious on week days. He answered: The same is the case also here.
He pays the whole for damage done on the Sabbath days, and half for that
done on week days. When is such an ox restored to non-viciousness? If he
refrained from doing damage for three Sabbath days in succession.

GEMARA: It was taught: R. Zbid said: The Mishna teaches "*and not
vicious*," which means that as to other species it was certain that he
was not vicious, but if it is not certain he is to be considered vicious
towards all. R. Papa, however, said: The Mishna teaches "he is not
vicious," which means that an ox that is vicious towards his species is
not considered vicious towards others. The reason for their difference
of opinion is the following: The former lays more stress on the last
part of the Mishna, which teaches that when he is vicious towards young
cattle he is not considered vicious towards full-grown cattle, and this
could be correct only in accordance with his interpretation that it is
*certain* that he was not vicious, but according to the explanation that
he is considered non-vicious this statement is entirely superfluous, as
it was already stated that he is not considered vicious even to young
cattle if it is not certain, and it is self-evident that so much the
less towards full-grown cattle. The latter attaches more importance to
the first part of the Mishna, which teaches that if vicious towards
human beings he is not considered so towards cattle, and this could be
correct only if it is explained that if it is uncertain that he is
vicious to cattle he is also considered non-vicious; then the

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

statement of the Mishna is necessary to teach us that, although he is
vicious towards human beings, he is still not considered so towards
cattle, but if you should explain that he is considered vicious, even
when it is uncertain, then this statement is entirely superfluous, as it
was already stated that he is considered vicious even from cattle to
cattle, and it is self-evident that so much the more so when he is
vicious toward human beings.

Said R. Ashi: The last part of the Mishna could support R. Zbid only.
Come and hear: "The disciples questioned R. Jehudah what the law was,
etc., . . . and he answered, etc. . . ." Now, if the Mishna is to be
explained according to R. Zbid, that when not certain he is considered
vicious, both the question and the answer are correct (*i.e.*, they
questioned him, when he was certain for Sabbath days and not certain for
week days, how was the law); but if you will explain the Mishna
otherwise (*i.e.*, as R. Papa) what was their question? The Mishna
states plainly that he is not vicious. Did they intend to teach R.
Jehudah and not to question him? And, secondly, was it then an answer of
the latter? He only repeated what they said? Said R. Janai: R. Zbid's
opinion is supported even from the first part of the Mishna, which
states: "The whole is paid to those toward whom he is vicious, and half
is paid to those toward whom he is not." This statement can be correct
only when he is certain to be non-vicious; then it is correct that the
Mishna explains its former statement: To those toward whom he is vicious
he must pay so much, and to those, etc., but if the Mishna means to
state that one vicious toward human beings *is not* vicious toward
cattle, to what purpose is the latter statement? Is it, then, not known
how much a vicious ox and how much a non-vicious pays? If, however, an
ox gored another ox, an ass, and a camel, he must be considered vicious
toward all species of cattle even according to the theory of R. Papa (as
these three species make it certain that he is vicious).

The Rabbis taught: There is a case where an ox may become vicious "in
alternate order," namely, if he meets an ox and gores him, and
subsequently he meets another ox and does not, the third however he
meets he again gores, when meeting the fourth one, though, he does not,
but when meeting the fifth one he does; and again the sixth he does not.
There is another case where an ox may become vicious "in alternate
order" towards all species, namely, if he meets an ox and gores him, and
subsequently

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

an ass and does not, a horse and does, a camel and does not, a mule and
does, a wild-ass and does not gore him.

The Schoolmen propounded a question: How is it if he gores three oxen in
succession and subsequently one ass and one camel: shall we count the
third ox together with the former two, and should he be considered
vicious toward oxen only but not toward other species of cattle, or
shall we count the last ox with the ass and camel, so that he gored
three times in succession three different species of cattle, and he is
then considered vicious toward all species of cattle? This question
remains unanswered. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)

Rabha said: "If an ox gored three times, each time upon hearing the
blowing of a horn, he is considered vicious when hearing the sound of a
horn." Is this not self-evident? Lest one assume that the first time is
not to be counted because he became frightened, he comes to teach us
that it is counted.

MISHNA *III*.: An ox belonging to an Israelite that gored an ox
belonging to the sanctuary, or of the sanctuary that gored one of a
commoner, there is no liability, for it is written \[Ex. xxi. 31\]: "The
ox of *another*" (man), but not of sanctuary. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25)

GEMARA: This Mishna is not in accordance with R. Simeon b. Menassia of
the following Boraitha: "An ox of a commoner that gored an ox of the
sanctuary, or *vice versa*, is free, for it is written: 'The ox of
*another*,' but not of the sanctuary. R. Simeon b. Menassia, however,
says that an ox of the sanctuary that gored an ox of a commoner is free,
but an ox of a commoner that gored an ox of the sanctuary, whether
vicious or not, the whole damage must be paid." Let us see what the
reason is of R. Simeon's opinion. If R. Simeon interpreted the word
"*another man*" literally, why, then, should the commoner's ox be liable
when he gores an ox of the sanctuary (the sanctuary cannot be called
another man)? And if he interpreted the word not literally, why should
an ox of the sanctuary be free when be gored a commoner's ox? And if one
might say that although be interpreted the word literally, he
nevertheless makes the

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

commoner pay on the ground of the following *a fortiori* conclusion:
When one commoner's ox gores a similar ox he must pay; so much the more
if a commoner's ox gores one belonging to the sanctuary, and then his
statement that even if he was non-vicious the whole damage must be paid
would not be correct, as there is a rule that it is sufficient that an
inference should be equal to the law from which it is derived (and under
no circumstances more rigorous); why then must he pay the whole damage
if it is based only on this *a fortiori* conclusion? Said Resh Lakish:
In reality in all cases the whole damage must be paid; the verse,
however, making an exception of goring and stating that half only is to
be paid, added at the same time the word

‏רעהו‎(which means, literally, "his comrade"), with the intention to
exclude all those cases where it cannot be considered of his comrade,
*e.g.*, of the sanctuary; and the correctness of this statement may be
proved from the fact that when the verse speaks of a vicious ox the
above word "Re-ehu" is not mentioned.

When the daughter of R. Samuel bar Jehudah died, one of the Rabbis said
to Ula: Let us go and console him. He said to them: What have I to do
with the consolation of a Babylonian, for it may turn into a blasphemy,
as they are in the habit of saying in such cases, "What can be done?"
(against the will of God), which means that if something could be done
against His will they would, and this is certainly a blasphemy. He then
went alone, and his consolation was as follows: It is written \[Deut.
ii. 9\]: "And the Lord said unto me, Do not attack the Moabites, nor
contend with them in battle." Could it, then, ever enter Moses' mind to
engage in war without the consent of the Lord? But Moses drew an *a
fortiori* conclusion for himself, thus: If of the Midianites who only
came to help the Moabites the Scripture reads \[Numb. xxv. 17\]: "Attack
the Midianites, and smite them," the Moabites themselves so much the
more? The Holy One, blessed be He, then said: "Thy conclusion was so
because thou couldst not imagine what I bear in my mind. Two good doves
I have to bring forth from them; namely, Ruth the Moabite and Naomi the
Amonite." Now is there not an *a fortiori* conclusion to be drawn? If
for two good doves the Holy One, blessed be He, has saved two great
nations and has not destroyed them, so much the more would He have saved
the life of the master's daughter if she would be righteous and
something good would have to come forth from her.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

MISHNA *IV*.: An ox of a sound person that gored an ox belonging to a
deaf mute, idiot, or minor, there is a liability. If the reverse was the
case, there is none. An ox of the three last-named persons that gores,
the court should appoint a guardian and the witnesses should testify in
the presence of the guardian. If in the meantime the deaf mute is cured,
the idiot becomes of sound mind, or the minor becomes of age, the ox is
restored to his non-viciousness. Such is the dictum of R. Meir. R. Jose,
however, says that he remains in the same position. An ox of the stadium
(*i.e.*, the place where oxen are trained for fighting) is not liable to
be killed when killing even a human being, for it is written: "If an ox
*gore*," which means of his own inclination, but not when he is trained
to do so.

GEMARA: Does, then, the Mishna not contradict itself? First it states
that if an ox of the three named persons that gores an ox of a sound
person, there is no liability, from which it may be inferred that no
guardian is to be appointed when the ox is non-vicious to enable the
plaintiffs to collect from his body, and immediately after it states
that an ox of those three persons that gores, the court should appoint a
guardian and witnesses should testify before him, from which it may be
inferred that a guardian is appointed for the purpose of enabling to
collect from his body? Says Rabha: This is to be interpreted thus: If
they were known to be goring oxen the court appoints a guardian, and the
witnesses are examined in the presence of the guardian and the ox is
declared vicious, so that if he subsequently gores again the damage is
collected from the best estates. From whose best estates? R. Johanan
said: From those of the orphans. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) R.
Jose b. Hanina said: From those of the guardian.

Did R. Johanan, indeed, say so? Did not R. Jehudah say in the name of R.
Assi that the estate of orphans must not be touched (until the orphans
reach majority, even when there is a written obligation of their
deceased father to be paid), unless interest would grow on the
obligation (*e.g.*, when the deceased borrowed money from a Gentile). R.
Johanan, however, says also when the widow's marriage contract is to be
paid, because she must be paid out of the estate a sum of money for her
subsistence so long as her marriage contract remains uncollected. Hence
we see that only for the purpose of supporting the widow, or where there
is interest growing, R. Johanan permits to collect

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

from orphans' estates, but not otherwise. Reverse the statement in our
case, that R. Johanan holds from the estate of the guardian, and R. Jose
b. Hanina said from those of the orphans. Said Rabha: Because there is a
contradiction between the statements in the name of R. Johanan, you make
R. Jose err. R. Jose b. Hanina was a judge, and he always dived to the
bottom of the law. Therefore the statement in our case is not to be
reversed, but the reason why R. Johanan states in our case that it shall
be collected from the estates of the orphans, is because there is no
other way, as if it should be collected from the estates of the guardian
nobody would consent to become one. And the reason for Jose b. Hanina's
statement that it shall be collected from the guardian's estates is
because the guardian will be able to collect what he has paid from the
orphans' estates when they reach majority.

There is a difference of opinion of the Tanaim as to whether a guardian
is appointed in order to collect from the body of the ox in the
following Boraitha: "An ox who has gored and his owner subsequently
became a deaf mute, an idiot, or went to the sea countries, Jehudah b.
Nekussa in the name of Summachus holds that he must be considered
non-vicious until the evidence of viciousness was given in the presence
of his owner; the sages, however, hold that a guardian is appointed and
the evidence is given in his presence. Should it happen that the deaf
mute became cured, the idiot of sound mind, or the owner has returned
home, Jehudah b. Nekussa in the name of Summachus says that the ox is
restored to his non-viciousness, and remains so until the evidence is
given in presence of the owner, and R. Jose says that he remains in the
same position he was in." Now let us see what Summachus does mean by his
first statement that he must be considered non-vicious, etc. Shall we
assume that the ox was still non-vicious; *i.e.*, he had not gored
thrice? Then how shall his second statement be explained, that he is
*restored* to his non-viciousness, which means that he was already
vicious? We must then say that the statement that he is considered
non-vicious means that it is considered that he had not gored at all,
hence no guardian is to be appointed to collect from his body, and the
sages say that there is one appointed. This is the explanation of the
first part of the above Boraitha. In the last part of the Boraitha they
differ on another point; that is, if the change of control also changes
his state (*i.e.*, whether the change from the control of the guardian
to

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

that of the owners changes also his viciousness to non-viciousness)?
Summachus holds that it does, and R. Jose holds that it does not.

The rabbis taught: "An ox of a deaf mute, idiot, or minor that gored,
according to R. Jacob, the half damages must be paid." How was the case?
If it was a non-vicious ox it is self-evident that only half is to be
paid, as the same is the case with an ox of a sound man, and if R. Jacob
means that only half is paid even if he was vicious, let us see under
what circumstances it may be said so. If the necessary care was taken of
him then even the half should not be paid (for it is plainly written
\[Ex. xxi. 29\], "and he hath *not* kept him in," but here in this case
he had kept him in), and if the necessary care was not taken of him why
should not the whole damage be paid (as according to R. Jacob there is
no difference who owns the ox)? Said Rabha: This can be explained that
it was a vicious ox, and care was taken of him, but not so much as was
necessary to prevent him from coming into contact with other oxen; and
the reason of R. Jacob's opinion is because he holds in accordance with
R. Jehudah, who says that the state of non-viciousness continues until
he is declared vicious, and he also agrees with him in that imperfect
care is sufficient also for a vicious one, and he agrees also with the
Rabbis that a guardian is to be appointed to collect from the body of
the ox. Said Abayi to Rabha: But do not R. Jacob and R. Jehudah differ
from each other in their opinions? Have we not learned in the following
Boraitha that the ox in question R. Jehudah holds him liable, and R.
Jacob holds that he must pay half? Said Rabbah b. Ula: R. Jacob only
explains the liability to which R. Jehudah holds him, but does not
differ with him. Rabhina, however, says that they do differ, but the
case was that there was a change of control; that is, that the deaf mute
was cured, etc. R. Jehudah holds that he remains in the same position he
was in (and therefore he pays the whole), and R. Jacob says that the
change of control changes also his status.

The rabbis taught: "Guardians pay from the best estates, but do not pay
the atonement money" (see Ex. xxi. 30). Who is the Tana who holds that
the money (which is to be paid according to the verse mentioned) is in
atonement, and orphans need not have atonement, for they are not of age?
Said R. Hisda: It is R. Ishmael, the son of R. Johanan b. Broka, of the
following Boraitha: "It is written \[ibid., ibid., ibid.\]: 'And he

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

shall give the ransom of his life'; that is, the value of the deceased.
R. Ishmael, the son of R. Johanan b. Broka, however, says it means the
value of the defendant." Shall we not assume that the point of
difference is, that the Rabbis hold that the beginning of that verse
means the value of the deceased in money as damages, but not in
atonement, and R. Ishmael holds that it is in atonement? Said R. Papa:
Nay, all agree that it is in atonement, but their point of difference
is: The Rabbis hold that the appraisement must be of the person who was
killed (because his value is to be paid), and R. Ishmael holds that the
appraisement must be of the person of the defendant, because it is
written \[ibid.\]: "And he shall pay the ransom of *his* life." And the
Rabbis? Yea, it is true that it states "*his* life," which means that
his life is atoned for, but the amount to be paid for such atonement is
the value of the deceased.

Rabha once declared before R. Na'hman that R. A'ha b. Jacob was a great
man, and R. Na'hman said to him: When he comes to visit you bring him to
me. When he had done so, said R. Na'hman to R. A'ha: Question something
of me; and he put him the following question: "An ox belonging to two
copartners (who has killed a man), how shall the atonement money be
paid? If each copartner should pay the full amount then there would be
two atonements, and the verse reads one; and if we should say that each
of them shall give only half, then each pays only *half*, while the
verse states that 'there shall be laid on *him* a sum of money,' which
means the whole sum, and not the half." While R. Na'hman was sitting and
deliberating over the case, he put to him another question, as to
whether the property of the one who has to Pay atonement is levied upon,
as such is the case with one who owes sin and trespass-offerings (this
will be explained in Tract Eruchin). And R. Na'hman said to him: Leave
alone this question. I am still sorrowful that I could not answer the
first question at once.

The rabbis taught: "One who borrows an ox with the understanding that he
was non-vicious, and it was found out that he was vicious (and while
being under the control of the borrower he gored again), the owner pays
one-half and the borrower the other half. When, however, he became
vicious while being under the control of the borrower, and he has
returned him to the owner (and he gored once more), the owner must pay
half and the borrower is free." Let us see: The Master said that in case
he was borrowed with the, understanding of

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

being non-vicious, and was found vicious, each pays one-half. Why shall
the borrower pay anything? Let him say to the owner, I have borrowed an
ox, but not a lion. Said Rabh: The case was that it was known to the
borrower that he was a goring ox. But still, he can say that he was
understood to be non-vicious, and he turned out to be vicious, why shall
I pay half? Because the owner may answer him: What difference does it
make to you in this case, if even he would be non-vicious? As soon as he
has gored while being under your control you would have to pay half; the
same is now, you pay only half. But still there is a difference, for a
non-vicious ox pays from his body, while a vicious one from the best
estates. The owner may say: Even in this case there is no difference to
you, for you would have to pay for the other half of the ox to me in
money. Now let us see (the second part of the Boraitha): "When he became
vicious while under the control of the borrower, etc., the borrower is
free;" hence we see that the change of control changes his status, and
from the first part it is to be inferred that it does not change the
status, as the whole damage is to be paid if he gored while under the
control of the borrower. Said R. Johanan: Break <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) this Boraitha: the Tana who taught the
first part did not teach the last one. Rabba, however, says: The
Boraitha cannot be broken, as in the first part it is declared that
change of control does not change the status, the same must be the case
with the second part. The reason, however, for its decision is because
the owner can say as regards the viciousness of the ox, which occurred
while under the control of the borrower: The latter did not take care of
him as he was not his, and therefore I do not consider him vicious at
all. R. Papa, however, says: As in the last part of the Boraitha the
control does change the status, so also is it in the first part, but the
reason why there the whole amount is to be paid is because the ox always
bears the name of his owner, even while under the control of the
borrower, and therefore the change of control is not to be considered.

"*The ox of the stadium*," etc. The Schoolmen propounded a question: Is
the ox in question fit for the altar or not? Rabh said he is, for he was
goring by compulsion, and Samuel said he is not, for at any rate a
transgression was committed with him. There is a Boraitha supporting
Rabh, which states

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

plainly that the ox of a stadium is not guilty of death, and is fit for
the altar.

MISHNA *V*.: An ox that killed a man by goring him, if it was a vicious
one, the atonement money is to be paid, but not when he was a
non-vicious one. Both of them, however, must be killed. The same is the
case when he gored a minor male or female. If he gored a male or a
female slave he must pay thirty selas, without regard whether their
value was one thousand zuz or only one dinar.

GEMARA: If a non-vicious ox killing a man must be killed, how can there
be found a vicious ox in regard to man? Said Rabba: The case was that he
was running after three men, two of whom escaped, and the court
determined from the circumstances that if he would have caught those two
he would have killed them. R. Ashi, however, holds that such
determination is of no value, but the case was that he gored two,
injuring but not killing them at once, and then gored a third one to
death, when the first two also died, and therefore he is considered
vicious as to the third to pay the atonement money. R. Zbid, however,
says: By "vicious one" is meant simply that he has killed three animals,
and an ox that is considered vicious as to animals is considered so also
as to human beings. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)

"*Both of them*," etc. The rabbis taught: "From \[Ex. xxi. 28\]: 'Then
shall the ox be surely stoned'; is it not self-evident that he became a
carcass, and a carcass must not be eaten, why then does the verse add
'and his flesh shall not be eaten'?" The verse comes to teach that if he
was slaughtered after judgment was rendered the flesh must not be eaten.
This is the prohibition of eating it, but whence is it deduced that no
benefit must be derived from it? Therefore it is written \[ibid.,
ibid.\]: "But the owner of the ox shall be quit," which means he shall
be quit from any benefit. Such is the explanation of Simeon b. Zoma. But
whence do we know that the words, "his flesh shall not be eaten," mean
when he was slaughtered after judgment was rendered; perhaps it means
after he was stoned, and the words "shall not be eaten" are to be
explained that he shall not derive any benefit, but if he was
slaughtered the flesh may be eaten also? The prohibition to eat it is
inferred from

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "surely stoned,"
and if the verse "his flesh shall not be eaten" would mean to prohibit
any benefit, it should have stated "shall not be derived any benefit,"
or "he shall not be eaten." Why the addition "his flesh" to indicate
that if he was turned by slaughtering into food, as other meat, it is
also prohibited?

The rabbis taught: It is written \[ibid. 28\]: "But the owner of the ox
shall be quit." Said R. Eliezer: He is quit from paying the half of
atonement money. (One might say as a non-vicious pays half damage in
case of goring an animal, the same is the case when he first gores a
man.) Said R. Aqiba to him: Is this not self-evident? The half payment
is collected from his body, and here when the ox is stoned its owner may
certainly say: "Bring it into court and collect from it." Said R.
Eliezer to him: Do you consider me as common as not to know such a case?
I speak of an ox that is not guilty of death; for instance, if he killed
a man in the presence of one witness, or in the presence of his owner
only (in which case the ox cannot be killed, but one might say that
nevertheless the half atonement money must be paid). \[You say in the
presence of his owner, which means that the owner admits that it was so,
then it would be equal to one who confesses of being liable to pay a
fine, and the law is that he who confesses of being liable to fine is
free? R. Eliezer holds that this money is in atonement and not a fine.\]

In another Boraitha we have learned: Said R. Eliezer: "Aqiba, do you
consider me so common as to speak of an ox which is to be killed? I
speak about an ox who intended to kill an animal but killed a human
being, or who intended to kill a non-viable child and killed a viable
one." Which of these two statements has R. Eliezer made to R. Aqiba
first? R. Kahana in the name of Rabha said the one just mentioned was
made first. R. Tibiumi in the name of the same authority said that the
first statement was made first. The statement of the former is to be
compared to a fisher who catches fishes in the sea; if he finds big fish
he takes them, and if afterward he finds small ones he takes them also
(although the second statement is much straighter evidence than the
first one, he nevertheless made also the other statement), and R.
Tibiumi's statement is to be compared to a fisher who keeps the small
fish if he catch them first, but catching afterward big fish he abandons
the small ones and keeps the big ones. (So was the case with R. Eliezer.
He tried to give him evidence from the first statement, but as this

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

was easily objectionable he tried to find stronger evidence and gave it
to him.)

We have learned in another Boraitha: "But the owner of the ox shall be
quit." R. Jose the Galilean said that means that be is quit from paying
the value of *children* (if she was pregnant). Said R. Aqiba to him (Is
it necessary to have a separate verse for this)? Is it not written \[Ex.
xxi. 22\]: "If men strike, and hurt a woman with child," etc., from
which is to be inferred that only in case of human beings there is a
liability for hurting children, but not in case of oxen? (Says the
Gemara): Is not R. Aqiba correct? Said R. Ula, the son of R. Idi:
Another verse is necessary for the following reason: From the verse just
mentioned one might say men, but not oxen that are equal to men. That
means, as men are considered always vicious, so vicious oxen are free
from liability for hurting children, but non-vicious oxen should be
liable. Therefore comes the other verse, "The owner of the ox shall be
quit," to teach that even in such a case there is no liability. Said
Rabha: Shall the native remain on earth and the stranger be lifted up to
the highest heaven? <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) (*i.e.*, how can
it enter the mind that a vicious ox shall be free and a non-vicious
shall be liable?) Therefore said R. Ada b. A'hba: (This verse alone
would not be sufficient, for) in case of men they are liable for the
children only when they intended to strike each other and struck the
woman, but if they intended to strike the woman herself there is no
money liability because they are guilty of a capital crime; but in case
of oxen one might say that even when they intended to strike the woman
herself their owner shall be punished also to pay for the children,
therefore the expression "shall be quit" indicates that it is not so.
And so was it taught plainly in a Boraitha which R. Hagi brought when he
came from the south, as R. Ada b. A'hba explained it.

We learned in still another Boraitha: R. Aqiba said: "But the owner of
the ox shall be quit," means from the payment for a slave (in case he
was killed by the ox). But why should not R. Aqiba say to himself, as he
said above to R. Eliezer, page 143: "Bring it into court and collect
from it," as the ox must be stoned? Said Rabha: The verse is
nevertheless needed for the following reason: One might say: Because
there is more rigorousness; about a bondman than about a freeman, as for
a bondman thirty shekels are paid even if he was worth only one

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

shekel, and in case of a freeman his actual value only is paid,
therefore it might be said that the payment for the bondman must be from
the best estates; hence the verse to make him quit.

There is a Boraitha in support of Rabha, as follows: "The owner of the
ox shall be quit." Said R. Aqiba: Quit from payment for the bondman: but
why is a verse needed for that, is it not common sense? He is liable for
a bondman and is liable for a freeman: as in the liability for a freeman
you made a distinction between a non-vicious ox and a vicious one, is it
not common sense that there shall also be made the same distinction in
the liability for a bondman. And in addition to that we may draw the
following *a fortiori* conclusion: A freeman for whom there is a
liability for his full value, and nevertheless there is a distinction
between a vicious and non-vicious ox, a bondman for whom only thirty
selas are paid (although he may have been worth one hundred or more), so
much the more that there ought to be a distinction between a vicious and
non-vicious one (why, then, is the verse needed)? There is more
rigorousness about a bondman than about a freeman, for in case of the
latter, if he was worth one sela he pays that much--that is, only the
actual value--but in case of a bondman thirty selas are paid if even he
was worth one sela, and therefore one might say that whether vicious or
non-vicious the full amount must be paid, hence the verse that he shall
be quit.

The rabbis taught: It is written \[ibid., ibid. 29\]: "And he killeth a
man or a woman." Said R. Aqiba: What does the verse mean to teach us by
the expression "a man or a woman," if it is only to teach that a woman
is equal to a man? This was already stated in the preceding verse: "If
an ox gore a man or a woman." This verse is to make a woman equal to a
man in this respect, that as the damages for the killed man must be paid
to his heirs, so also in the case of a woman it is paid to her heirs.
But does R. Aqiba hold that her husband does not inherit from her? Have
we not learned in the following Boraitha: "It is written \[Numb. xxvii.
11\]: 'And he shall inherit it'? From this is to be inferred that the
husband inherits from his wife." So said R. Aqiba. Said Resh Lakish: R.
Aqiba meant the atonement money, which payment is made only after her
death, and thus it is only considered inchoate and the husband does not
inherit such a share in her inchoate as he does in her existing estates.
But what is the reason that it is collected only after

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

her death? Perhaps it is to be collected as soon as the court came to
the conviction that she must die from the injuries. Therefore it reads
\[ibid., ibid. 29, 30\]: "And he killeth a man or a woman, the ox shall
be stoned, and his owner also should of right be put to death. But there
shall be laid on him a sum of money in atonement." From which is to be
inferred that the money is paid only when "his owner shall of right be
put to death," which cannot be when she is still alive. But did not R.
Aqiba say that even in cases of damage her husband does not inherit from
her? Have we not learned in a Boraitha: "If one struck a woman and
caused her to abort he must pay for the damage and pain to herself, and
the value of the children to the husband; if her husband is dead he pays
to *his* heirs; if the woman is dead he pays to *her* heirs. If she was
a bondwoman and became free, or she was a proselyte, the one who has to
make the payment need not pay, for he himself acquires title to the
payment, as these classes of persons have no legal heirs." Hence we see
that even for the damage and pain the payment must be made to her heirs
and not to the husband. Said Rabba: The case was that she was a divorced
woman; and so also said R. Na'hman: If the case was with a divorced
woman, why should she not take a share of the money paid for the
children? Said R. Papa: The Scripture has awarded the money for the
children to their father, even if they were begotten illegally, as it is
written \[Ex. xxi. 22\]: "As the husband of the woman lay upon him."

Resh Lakish said: An ox that killed a bondman unintentionally is free
from the payment of the thirty shekels, as it is written \[ibid., ibid.
32\]: "Thirty shekels shall be given to his master, and the ox shall be
stoned," from which it is to infer that only when the ox is to be stoned
the money is to be paid, but not otherwise. Said Rabba: The same is the
case as regards atonement money in case the ox killed a freeman
unintentionally, for it is written \[ibid.\]: "The ox shall be stoned,
and his owner also should of right be put to death, but there shall be
laid on him a sum of money in atonement," from which is to be inferred
that only when the ox is stoned, etc., the atonement money is to be
paid, but not otherwise. Abayi objected: We have learned: "(If one
confess, saying) my ox has killed a certain person, or his ox, he has to
pay on his own testimony." Does it not mean atonement money also? Nay,
it means the money for damages. If it is so, why does the latter part
state.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

"My ox has killed the slave of a certain man; be is not compelled to pay
on his own testimony"? Now if this is not the fine but damages, why
should he not pay? Said Rabba to him: I could answer you that the first
part treats of damages and the latter of fine, but I do not like to give
you a *far-fetched* answer. Both parts treat of damages, but in the
first instance the atonement money is paid upon his own testimony under
the following circumstances: That witnesses came and testified that his
ox killed a man, but were unable to testify whether he was vicious or
non-vicious, and the owner admits that he was vicious, in such a case he
has to pay the atonement money on his own testimony, but where there are
no witnesses he pays only the damage, but not the atonement money. And
in the case of a slave, if witnesses come and testify that the ox killed
the slave, but they are unable to testify whether he was vicious or not,
and the owner admits that he was vicious, he has not to pay the fine
upon his own testimony, and where there are no witnesses he need not pay
even the damages. R. Samuel b. Itzhak objected: We have learned: "The
same liability one has for a freeman he also has for a bondman, either
as to atonement money or as to the death penalty." Is there then any
atonement money in case of a bondman? We must therefore say that it
means damages; hence we see that one pays damages even on his own
testimony. Some say that he himself answered this objection, and others
say that Rabba said to him: This Boraitha is to be explained thus: In
every case where one is liable to pay atonement money--for instance, a
freeman--when done with intention and there is testimony of witnesses,
he is liable under the same circumstances to pay a fine of thirty
shekels in the case of a slave, and in case he is liable for damages
only--as, for instance, when witnesses testify that he has done it
without intention--in case of a slave under the same circumstances he
pays only damages, but no fine; but if he himself admits, although in
case of a freeman he has to pay damages, in case of a slave under such
circumstances he is free. Rabha questioned Rabba: If one's fire has done
damage without intention is there a liability or not? Shall we assume
that it is only in case of an ox where, when intentionally he pays
atonement money, when unintentionally he pays damage, but in the case of
fire, where there is no atonement money at all (as, if intentionally, he
is guilty of a capital crime), if it was unintentionally he shall not
pay damages, or the atonement money is not to be taken into
consideration, and the damages

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

must be paid at any rate; as we do not know of any reason why fire
should be distinguished from an ox when done unintentionally, as both
are his property? This remains unanswered. When R. Dimi came from
Palestine he said in the name of R. Johanan thus: It could be written:
"Shall be laid on him a sum of money in atonement." Why is the word
"if" <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) added? To teach that the
atonement money shall be paid when done unintentionally as well as if
done intentionally. Said Abayi to him: According to your theory, why
should we not say the same of a bondman, where it is also written
\[ibid. 31\] "if," even when done unintentionally; and if you should say
that so it really is, why then said Resh Lakish that if an ox killed a
slave unintentionally he is free from the thirty shekels? He answered:
What contradiction do you adduce? They are two different persons, and
differ in their opinions. When Rabhin came from Palestine he said that
R. Johanan has declared plainly that the same is the case with a slave
when killed, even unintentionally, and that he deduced it from the word
"if," as explained above.

"*A male or female minor*." The rabbis taught: It is written \[ibid. 3
1\]: "If he gore a son or gore a daughter;" that is, to make one liable
for little children as for grown persons. But is this not common-sense?
There is a liability of a human being for a human being, and the same
liability is of an ox for a human being; as in the former there is no
difference as to whether young or old, so also in the latter case, and
this can be inferred also by the following *a fortiori* conclusion: In
the case of human beings, in which the murderer is guilty only when he
is a grown-up person, but not a child, for it is written plainly "*man*"
(and a child is not called "man"); in the case of an ox, in which there
is no difference as to whether it is old or young (as the Scripture
calls him ox from the very same day he was born, Lev. xxii. 27), so much
the more that he shall be guilty for children as well as for grown
persons. Why, then, is a verse needed? Nay (as to all that was said
above could be objected thus): In the case of human beings there is a
liability for the four certain things, which is not the case with an ox,
and one might say, as in the case of an ox, there is no liability for
the four things; so also should there be a distinction between children

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

and grown persons; hence the above passage. From this passage we deduce
only as to a vicious ox; whence do we know that as to a non-vicious one?
This is common-sense: As there is a liability for a grown man or woman,
and the same liability is for children, and as to grown persons no
distinction is made between a vicious and non-vicious ox, the same is
the case with children. This can also be inferred by *a fortiori*
conclusion: Grown persons, who are responsible for their acts, if they
were killed by an ox there is no distinction made between a vicious and
non-vicious one; so much the less in case of children, who are not
responsible for their acts, that no distinction is to be made whether
the ox was vicious or not. Is it not against the rule to draw an *a
fortiori* conclusion from a rigorous one to a lenient one to make the
lenient rigorous? (It is deduced that no distinction is made between a
vicious and non-vicious ox in regard to grown persons from the case of
the children, and the verse, "If he gore a son," etc., speaks of a
vicious ox; now you compare again the case of children to the case of
grown persons, to say that as there is no distinction, so is none here,
consequently you draw from the rigorous one, *i.e.*, grown persons,
which is based only upon common-sense, to the case of children, where
the Scripture says plainly that the ox must be vicious, and consequently
lenient, as it can be said that only a vicious and not a non-vicious is
meant, to make a non-vicious also liable.) And still we can say that the
case of children is more lenient, for children are free from observance
of the Law, which is not the case with grown man; therefore it is
written: "If he gore a son, or gore a daughter," the repetition of
"gore" being superfluous, to teach us that there is no distinction
between a vicious and non-vicious ox, between injured and killed, and in
all cases it must be paid.

MISHNA *VI*.: An ox that was rubbing against a wall whereby the wall
fell upon a human being and killed him; if the ox intended to kill an
animal and killed a man, or a non-viable child and killed a viable one,
he is free.

GEMARA: Said Samuel: He is free from death, but he is liable to pay the
atonement money. Rabh, however, says that he is free from both. But why
shall atonement money be paid? Is he then not non-vicious? (Is it not
said that he was rubbing against the wall, in which case he is surely
non-vicious, at least in this case?) As Rabha explained this (*post*,
page [112](kam08.htm#page_112)), that it was vicious in this respect as
to fall into pits, so also here that

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

it was vicious in rubbing against the wall. But if so, then he must be
put to death. It would be correct in the case of Rabha's explanation
cited concerning a pit, because he noticed therein vegetables, and
intending to eat of them he fell in, but in this case here what can be
said? He was rubbing against the wall to derive benefit. How do we know
that? From the fact that he continued rubbing even after the falling of
the wall. But then is this the proximate cause? Is it not the remote
cause, as digging up gravel? Said R. Mari, the son of R. Kahana: The
case was that the wall was little by little removed by his rubbing until
the very moment it fell, and therefore it was the proximate cause, but
still there was no intention to kill.

There is a Boraitha which is a support to Samuel and an objection to
Rabh, namely: "There are cases in which the ox is put to death and the
owner pays atonement money, and there are other cases in which atonement
money is paid, but the ox is not put to death, and still others in which
the ox is put to death, but no atonement money is paid, and finally such
cases in which there is no liability to either. How so? If there are
both viciousness and intention, both atonement money is paid and the ox
is killed. If viciousness without intention is present, atonement money
only; non-viciousness but intentional, the ox is put to death, but no
atonement money. Non-viciousness without intention, no liability at all.
But if, however, he has done damage unintentionally R. Jehudah holds him
liable and R. Simeon holds him free." What is the reason of R. Jehudah's
decision? He compares it to atonement money: as the latter is to be paid
if unintentional, so also in damages; and R. Simeon compares it to the
killing of the ox: as the ox is not to be killed if it was
unintentional, so also is the case with damages.

"*If the ox intended to kill an animal*," etc. But how is the case if it
intended to kill one man and killed another, is there a liability? If
so, then this Mishna will not be in accordance with R. Simeon of the
following Boraitha, in which he says "that even if he intended to kill
one man and killed another he is also free." And his reason is because
it is written \[Ex. xxi. 29\]: "The ox shall be stoned, and its owner,"
etc. The killing of the ox is equal to the death of its owner: as the
owner cannot be put to death unless he killed *this* man intentionally,
so also the ox is not killed unless it killed *this* man intentionally.
But whence do we deduce that it is so in case of murder? Because

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

it is plainly written \[Deut. xix. 11\]: "And he lie in *wait for him*,
and rise up against him," etc., which indicates that he must have the
intention for the man he killed.

MISHNA *VII*.: An ox belonging to a woman, to orphans, or their
guardian, or an ownerless ox, or an ox belonging to the sanctuary, or
the ox of a proselyte who died without heirs, all those (if they kill a
man) are put to death. R. Jehudah, however, holds that an ownerless ox,
or that belonging to the sanctuary or to the proselyte in question are
not put to death, for the reason that they have no owners.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: "The word 'ox' is repeated seven times in the
chapter of the Scripture treating of the goring of a man by an ox, which
repetition means to include all those kinds of oxen stated in the
Mishna. R. Jehudah, however, says that notwithstanding these
repetitions, an ownerless ox, or one belonging to the sanctuary or to a
proselyte are not put to death, because they have no owners. Said R.
Huna: R. Jehudah makes him free even if he was consecrated or declared
ownerless after the goring. Whence this theory? Because it is repeated
in R. Jehudah's statement, "an ox that is ownerless *or* one belonging
to a proselyte," etc., are they not both equally ownerless? Hence for
the purpose stated. And so it is plainly stated in the following
Boraitha: Furthermore, R. Jehudah said: Even if it was consecrated or
made ownerless after goring, they are also free, as it is written \[Ex.
xxi. 29\]: "And warning had been given to his owner," etc., which means
that it is put to death then only when during the bringing to the court,
the judgment, and its execution its owner is still in existence.

MISHNA *VIII*.: An ox that was sentenced to be put to death and his
owner consecrated him, he is not consecrated. If his owner slaughtered
him, his meat is prohibited. If, however, this was done before the
completion of the sentence, he is consecrated, and if slaughtered his
meat may be used.

If one delivered his ox to a gratuitous bailee or borrower, to a bailee
for hire, to a hirer, all those substitute the owner as to
responsibility for damage: a vicious one pays the whole, and a
non-vicious one the half.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: "An ox that killed a man; if before sentence
he was sold or consecrated the act is valid, if slaughtered his meat may
be used. If the bailee returned him to his owner the act is valid. If,
however, all those enumerated

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

were done after sentence, neither of those acts is valid. R. Jacob,
however, said that as regards the bailee the act is valid even if after
sentence, and the point of their difference is thus: Whether the ox may
be sentenced in its absence from before the court. The rabbis hold that
the sentence must be pronounced in the presence of the ox. Now the owner
may say to the bailee: If you would have returned him to me before
sentence, I would have driven him away into the swamp (so that he could
not be brought before the court), and R. Jacob, however, holds that as
the sentence may be pronounced in his absence, there is no difference.
What is the reason for the rabbis' theory? The verse quoted above, "The
ox shall be stoned, and his owner," etc., from which is to infer that
the ox is in this respect equal to his owner, as his owner could not be
sentenced to death in his absence, the same is the case with the ox. R.
Jacob, however, objected and said: The owner is different, because he
could argue before the court, but for what purpose is the presence of
the ox necessary in the court?

"*If he delivered him to a bailee*," etc. The rabbis taught: The
following four substitute the owner: The gratuitous bailee, the
borrower, the bailee for hire, and the hirer. If the ox under the
control of the above killed a man while being non-vicious, .he must be
put to death, and no atonement money is paid; if while being vicious,
also atonement money is paid; and all of them with the exception of
gratuitous bailee must pay the value of the ox to its owner. Let us see
how was the case. If they guarded him as required, let all of them be
free; if they have not guarded him as required, let even the gratuitous
bailee also pay? The case was that they have not sufficiently guarded
him. For the gratuitous bailee it is considered sufficient, and
therefore he is free, but for all others it is not sufficient (because a
greater degree of care is required of them). Let us see, according to
whom is this Boraitha? If according to R. Meir, who says that a hirer is
equal to a gratuitous bailee: "Why did not the Boraitha add to the
gratuitous bailee also the hirer? And if it is according to R. Jehudah,
who says that a hirer is equal to a bailee for hire, why did not the
Boraitha add to the gratuitous bailee also that all of them in the case
of a vicious ox are free from atonement money" (as R. Jehudah holds that
even slight care is sufficient for the above substitutes)? Said R. Huna
b. Hinua: The Boraitha is in accordance with R. Eliezer, who says that
there is no guard for a vicious ox unless the knife, and he

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

also holds according to R. Jehudah, who says that the hirer is equal to
a bailee for hire. Abayi, however, says that the Boraitha is in
accordance with R. Meir, and it is as Rabbah b. Abuhu changed the
statement of the rabbis as follows: One who hires an ox, how shall he
pay? R. Meir says, as a bailee for hire, and R. Jehudah says, as a
gratuitous bailee.

R. Elazar said: One who delivered his ox to a gratuitous bailee, and the
ox did damage, the bailee is liable, but if he was injured he is free.
Let us see how the case was. If the bailee agreed to guard him against
injury, then let him be responsible if even he was *injured*, and even
he did not let him be free even if he *did* damage. Said Rabha: The case
was that he *did* take the responsibility, but he knew at the time that
he was a goring ox, and common-sense dictates that his intention was to
guard him against goring as it was his habit, but it could not enter his
mind that he will be gored by others.

MISHNA *IX*.: If its owner properly tied him and locked him up, and
still he broke out and did damage, be it a vicious or a non-vicious one
there is a liability. Such is the dictum of R. Meir. R. Jehudah,
however, holds that a non-vicious is liable, and a vicious is not, for
it is written \[Ex. xxi. 29\]: "And he hath not kept him in," but here
he had. R. Eliezer, however, says there is no guard for a vicious ox
except the knife.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Eliezer b. Jacob said:
"Whether vicious or non-vicious, if they were slightly guarded (from
negligence) he is free from the *whole* damage." The reason for this is
because he is in accordance with R. Jehudah, who said above that slight
care is sufficient for a vicious ox, and he holds that even a
non-vicious ox must also be guarded from the analogy of expression
"gore." As in the case of a vicious one it is plainly written, "He hath
not kept him in," so also it is in case of a non-vicious.

R. Ada b. A'hba said: R. Jehudah made him free (in our Mishna) from
viciousness, but not from *non*-viciousness (*i.e.*, he must still pay
half).

Rabh said: If he was vicious to gore with the right horn he is not
considered vicious as to the left horn. According to whom is Rabh's
saying? (The saying of Rabh is certainly not regarding the payment, as
it is certain that even when he was vicious toward human beings he is
not considered vicious toward an animal, and it is therefore
self-evident that if it was known to be vicious with his right horn, no
claim can be made that the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

whole must be paid if he gored the first time with the left horn. Rabh's
saying therefore must be interpreted to have reference to "taking
care.") If it is in accordance with R. Meir even a non-vicious one must
be taken good care of? And if according to R. Jehudah, who holds that
only slight care is sufficient, then why is it necessary to make the
distinction between viciousness and non-viciousness, as to goring with
left and right horns: there is a distinction also in the very case of
the right horn, viz., if no care at all was taken of him then the
viciousness prevails, but if any care at all was taken of him, only the
non-viciousness prevails and the viciousness is gone? It can be said
that he is in accordance with R. Jehudah, but he does not hold of the
theory of R. Ada b. A'hba. And Rabh's saying is to be explained thus: To
find in one and the same ox both viciousness and non-viciousness, it can
be only when he was vicious to gore with the right and not with the left
horn; but if he was vicious as to both horns, then the element of
non-viciousness can no more be found in him (*i.e.*, if no care at all
was taken of him he is vicious in all respects, but if any care at all
was taken the viciousness is gone and the non-viciousness remains).

"*R. Eliezer says for a vicious ox*," etc. Said Abayi: The reason for R.
Eliezer's saying is as we have learned in the following Boraitha: R.
Nathan said: Whence do we deduce that one must not raise a noxious dog
in his house, nor maintain a defective ladder? For it is written \[Deut.
xxii. 8\]: "That thou bring not blood upon thy house."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[82:1](kam07.htm#fr_21) Rashi explains this as
follows: After the first goring he saw another ox and did not gore and
after the second goring he saw two or three other oxen and did not gore
them, and so after the third and fourth gorings in which case he is not
considered vicious even in alternate order, as explained further on in
the text.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[83:1](kam07.htm#fr_22) This is very
complicated, and the commentaries differ as to the explanation and
illustration thereof. Rashi maintains that if the value of the fifth one
was only fifty zuz, the carcass being of no value, he collects from the
body of the goring ox his full half of twenty-five zuz, and turns over
the balance to the fourth one, whose ox was of the value of one hundred
zuz, who collects nevertheless only twenty-five zuz, for the reason that
the twenty-five zuz collected by the fifth one are deducted from his
half damage, because the ox was then under his control, and the balance
is turned over to the third one, applying the same rule; one full half
value of the ox, however, belongs to the owner, as the ox was not under
his control since the first goring. Hananel's illustration of this rule,
however, is in reverse order: The first one whose ox was of the same
value of the goring ox, who had to collect one hundred zuz out of the
body of the goring ox, loses fifty if the goring ox gores another of the
value of one hundred while under his control, and so the second pays to
the third the one half of the damage done to him, so that only the last
one takes his full half damage, as the ox was not under his control.
Tosphath remarks that in such cases it can happen that the third and
fourth should collect nothing, and even the filth one may not be able to
collect his full half. See the objection of Samuel Eidlis (Marsha) to
these remarks of Tosphath and the answer of Sabbati Kohen in his
commentary on the Schulchan Aruch, §401, and their illustrations.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[84:1](kam07.htm#fr_23) Here is an omission
which will be supplied in the eighth chapter of this tract, as there is
the proper place for it.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[86:1](kam07.htm#fr_24) Here follow several
similar questions, all remaining unanswered, and they are of no
importance.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[86:2](kam07.htm#fr_25) For the first time in
our translation we omit here a statement of the Mishna regarding the
goring of an ox belonging to an idolater, for it seems to us that it was
inserted here not by the editors of the Mishna; the evidence for this we
have set forth in a long article in Hebrew in the monthly "Ner
Hamarabi." We will probably explain this to our English readers in an
appendix to the "third gate" of this section.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[88:1](kam07.htm#fr_26) *I.e.*, those three
named in the Mishna.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[92:1](kam07.htm#fr_27) This form of expression
is often used in the Talmud.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[93:1](kam07.htm#fr_28) In the Gemara this last
sentence is put as a question, and there are many answers to it which we
deem of no importance to be translated. The law, however, prevails as we
have translated in our text.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[91:1](kam07.htm#fr_29) See explanation of this
expression in Tract Erubin, p. 16, footnote.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[90:1](kam07.htm#fr_30) The text reads "Im,"
which literally means "if"; Leeser, however, translates it "but,"
according to the sense of the verse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](kam08)
