[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kam07)  [Next](kam09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

# CHAPTER V.

RULES CONCERNING A GORING OX; EXCAVATIONS ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
PREMISES; EXCAVATIONS MADE BY PARTNERS, ETC.

MISHNA *I*.: Should an ox gore a cow and the new-born calf be found dead
at her side, and it be not known whether she gave birth to it before the
goring or by reason of the goring, the owner of the ox pays half the
damage for the cow and one-fourth for the calf. So also should a cow
gore an ox and her new-born calf be found alive at her side, and it be
not known whether she gave birth before the goring or by reason of the
goring, the owner of the cow pays half the damage from the body of the
cow and one-fourth from that of the calf.

GEMARA: Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: This is the dictum of
Summachus, who holds that money about which there is a doubt as to whom
it rightly belongs, must be divided. But the sages said: There is a
principal rule--the burden of proof is upon the plaintiff. \[For what
purpose is the statement that there is a principal rule? It was
necessary that, even when the plaintiff claimed positively while the
defendant only said that he was doubtful about it (in which case one
might say that there need be no proof at all), this rule apply.\] The
same we have also learned in the following Boraitha (the exact statement
of the Mishna with the addition): This is the dictum of Summachus, but
the sages say that the burden of proof is upon the plaintiff.

Said R. Samuel b. Na'hmani: Whence is this rule deduced? From \[Ex.
xxiv. 14\]: "Whoever may have any cause to be decided, let him come unto
them." That means, he shall produce proof before them. R. Ashi opposed:
Why is a verse necessary? Is it not common-sense that one who feels pain
goes to a physician? We must therefore say that this verse applies to
the saying of R. Na'hman in the name of Rabba b. Abbuhu: Whence is it
deduced that in case of a claim and counterclaim the claim must first be
passed upon and judgment awarded and executed, and then the counterclaim
must be proved (as at this

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

stage the former defendant is now the plaintiff)? From the above-quoted
passage, which means that the plaintiff who has the cause to be decided
shall be heard first. The sages of Nahardea, however, said that in some
cases it might happen that the counterclaim must be passed upon first,
and that is in case the judgment, if awarded against the defendant,
would have to be collected from the latter's real estate; for if the
judgment were allowed to be collected before the counterclaim was
proved, the estate would sell much cheaper than if he should prove his
counterclaim and sell his estate at a proper price.

"*So also should a cow gore an ox*," etc. Half *and* a quarter of the
damage! Why three-quarters--he has to pay only half? Said Rabha: The
Mishna meant to say thus, If the cow is there, one-half of the damage is
collected from the body of the cow; but if she cannot be found,
one-quarter is collected from the body of the calf, and the reason is
because it is doubtful whether the calf was with its mother at the time
of the goring or not; but if we should be certain that it was, half
would be collected from the body of the calf.

This decision of Rabha is in accordance with his theory elsewhere as to
a cow that has done damage--the same may be collected from its
offspring, because the latter is considered a part of her own body. A
hen that has done damage--the latter cannot be collected from her eggs,
for the reason that they are completely separated from the hen and it
does not care any more for them.

Rabha said again (in the first instance, when the ox gored the cow): The
cow and her offspring are not separately appraised, but both of them
together (*i.e.*, the value of the cow before giving birth and that
after she gave birth, and not the value of the cow separately and that
of the calf separately); for otherwise it would work too much harm to
the defendant. The same is the case if one cut off the hand of his
neighbor's slave or if one damage his neighbor's field (that is, in each
of those cases the value prior to doing the damage and that after doing
the damage is ascertained, and thus the damage is appraised, and not by
appraising separately the damaged part and the main body). Said R. A'ha
the son of Rabha to R. Ashi: If in reality the law is so, what do we
care for the defendant? let him suffer. Why, then, did Rabha protect
him? Because the defendant might say: "I caused injury to a gravid cow,
and therefore the appraisement must also be made of such a cow."

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

it is certain, if the cow belonged to one person and the calf to
another, that for the reduction of the fatness it must be paid to the
owner of the cow; but for the depreciation on account of the reduction
in fulness, to whom is this to be paid? (*I.e.*, if while the cow was
gravid the owner of the cow sold the calf to be born to another person,
and through the injury the cow miscarried, and by reason thereof the cow
became reduced both in fatness and in fulness (figure), both of which
are elements making up the value of a cow; now, for the reduction in
fatness the owner of the cow must be paid, for the calf has not
contributed to it; but for the depreciation on account of the decrease
in the fulness, shall the owner of the calf be paid? for the calf gave
her that fulness, or both the cow and the calf contributed to it, and
the value of this damage must be divided.) R. Papa says it is paid to
the owner of the cow only. R. A'ha the son of R. Iki says that it must
be divided, and so the Halakha prevails.

MISHNA *II*.: A potter that placed his pottery in the court of another
without his permission, and the court-owner's cattle broke them, there
is no liability. If the cattle were injured thereby, the potter is
liable. If, however, he placed them there with permission, the
court-owner is liable. The same is the case with one who placed his
fruit in another's courtyard and it was consumed by an animal of the
court-owner. Should one lead his ox into the court of another without
permission and it be gored by the ox of the court-owner, or be bitten by
his dog, there is no liability. If, however, the ox in question gored
the court-owner's ox, or it fell into the well and spoiled the water, he
is liable. If the court-owner's father or son was in the well (at the
time, and was killed), he must pay atonement money. If, however, he led
it there with permission, the court-owner is liable. Rabbi, however,
says that in all these cases the court-owner is not liable unless he
expressly undertook to take care of the ox.

GEMARA: Is the reason for the statement in the first part of the Mishna
only because he placed them without permission, but if with permission
the potter would not be liable for injuries to the animals of the
court-owner, and we do not say that it is implied that the potter has
assumed the care of the animals, and this can be only in accordance with
Rabbi, who holds that wherever it is not expressly assumed there is no
implied assumption to take care? Now, the latter part, which states: "If
he placed them there with permission the court-owner is liable,'' is

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

certainly in accordance with the rabbis, who hold that there is an
implied assumption even when nothing was expressly mentioned; and in the
last part Rabbi declared that in all cases he is not liable unless the
court-owner expressly assumed the care; hence the first and last parts
will be in accordance with Rabbi, and the middle part in accordance with
the rabbis? Said R. Zera: Separate the clauses, and say that the one who
taught this part did not teach the other. Rabha, however, says: The
whole Mishna can be explained to be in accordance with the rabbis, and
that the case was that he entered with permission and the court-owner
assured the safety of the pottery (and the potter assumed nothing), in
which case he is responsible if even the wind should break them.

"*If he placed his fruit*," etc. Said Rabh: The case is only if she
slipped on account of them; but if she consumed them (and by reason
thereof died) there is no liability, for she was not compelled to eat
them.

Come and hear: "One who led his ox into another's courtyard, and it
consumed wheat which caused it diarrhœa and it died, there is no
liability. If, however, he led it in with permission, the court-owner is
liable." Why not argue here the same way, and say that it was not
compelled to eat? Said Rabh: "You wish to contradict a case *with*
permission by a case *without* permission? In the former event he
assured the safety of the ox, and therefore he is liable if even the ox
should choke himself."

The schoolmen propounded the following question: "When he assured the
safety of the ox, did it only extend to himself (*i.e.*, to protect the
ox against the injury by his own animals), or also to all cattle?" Come
and hear: "R. Jehudah b. Simeon taught in Section Damages, of the school
of Qarna: If one placed his fruit in the courtyard of another without
permission and an ox came from some other place and consumed it, he is
free; if, however, *with* permission, he is liable. Who is liable and
who is free--is it not the court-owner?" (Hence we see that he must
guard him also against injury by others?) Nay, it may be said that it
has reference to the owner of the ox. If so, what difference is there
whether it was with or without permission? There is: If with permission,
it is to be considered the premises of the plaintiff, in which case the
tooth is liable (for as soon as the court-owner allowed him to enter he
thereby assigned him room in his court); but without permission,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

it cannot be considered that he consumed it "in *another* man's field,"
which is required in the case of the tooth, and therefore there can be
no liability.

Come and hear: "If one lead his ox into a courtyard without permission
and an ox come from another place and gore it, he is free; if, however,
*with* permission, he is liable." Who is free and who is liable--is it
not the court-owner? Nay, it is the owner of the ox. If so, what
difference is there whether with or without permission? The Boraitha is
in accordance with R. Tarphon, who says that there is an extra rule as
to the horn if on the premises of the plaintiff, in which case he pays
the whole. Now, if with permission, it is considered the premises of the
plaintiff (for the reason stated above) and he pays the whole damage;
but if without permission, it is equal to the case of the horn on public
ground, in which case only half is paid.

It happened that a woman entered a house to bake, and the house-owner's
goat having consumed the dough, became feverish and died. Rabha then
made the woman pay for the goat. Shall we assume that he differs with
Rabh, who said that it was not compelled to consume it? What comparison
is this? There it was without permission, and therefore the safety was
not assured; but here it was with permission, and therefore the safety
of the goat was assured by the woman (for the reason stated further on,
that in baking by a woman modesty is required, as she has to bare her
arms and the owner of the house cannot stay in the room; it is therefore
considered that he has assigned the whole room to the woman, and
therefore she is responsible for the damage done to the house-owner).
And why is this different from the following case: If a woman enter
another's premises to grind her wheat without permission and the
house-owner's animal consume the wheat, there is no liability. If,
however, the animal was injured thereby, the woman is liable. The reason
then is because it was without permission, but if with permission she
would be free? There is a difference: In case of grinding wheat, where
no modesty is required and the owner could be present, the care of the
animal devolves upon him; but in case of baking modesty is required (as
stated above).

"*If one lead his ox into a courtyard*," etc. Rabha said: One who leads
his ox into a courtyard without permission, and the ox digs an
excavation in the courtyard, the owner of the ox is liable for the
damage caused to the court, and the court-owner

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

is liable for the damages caused by the excavation (if he renounced
ownership), although the Master said elsewhere, on the strength of the
passage \[Ex. xxi. 33\]: "If a *man* dig a pit," a *man*, and not an
*ox*; for here in this case he had to fill up the pit (before renouncing
ownership), and by not so doing it is considered as if he dug it.

Rabha said again: "One who leads his ox into a court without the
permission of its owner, and it injures the owner, or the latter is
injured through it, he is liable. If, however, it lie down (and by doing
so breaks vessels, or while being in such a position the court-owner
stumbles over it and is injured), there is none." Does, then, the lying
down relieve him from liability? Said R. Papa: Rabha means, not that the
ox itself lay down, but that it lay down (voided) excrement and thereby
soiled the vessels of the court-owner, in which case the excrement is
considered a pit; and we do not find that there is a liability for
damage to vessels by a pit. This would be correct according to Samuel,
who holds that any obstacle is considered a pit; but as to Rabh, who
holds that it is not considered a pit, unless ownership is renounced,
what can be said? Generally from dung ownership is renounced.

Rabha said again: If one enter a court without permission and injure the
court-owner, or the latter be injured through him (by jostling against
him), he is liable; if the court-owner injure him, he is free. Said R.
Papa: "This was said only in case the court-owner has not noticed him;
but if he has, he is liable." What is the reason? Because he can say to
him: "You have the right only to drive him out, but not to injure him."
And each follows his own theory, for Rabha, and according to others R.
Papa, said: If both of them were there with permission (*e.g.*, on a
public highway), or both of them without permission, if one injure the
other (by striking with the hand, although unintentionally), both are
liable (for as to damages there is no difference whether with or without
intention); but if one was injured through the other (as by jostling),
they are free. The reason, then, is because both of them were either
with or without permission; but if one was with and the other one
without permission, the one who was with permission is free and the
other is liable.

"If he fall into the pit and spoil the water," etc. Said Rabha: This was
taught only when it was spoiled through the body (*e.g.*, when the body
was soiled); but if it was so because

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

of the (putrefied) smell, he is free. And the reason is, because the
carcass is only the *germon* (origin) of the smell, and for *germon*
there is no liability.

"*If his father, his son*," etc. Why so? Is he not a non-vicious one?
Said Ula: It is in accordance with R. Jose the Galilean, who holds, with
R. Tarphon, that the horn on the premises of the plaintiff pays the
whole damage, so also here he pays the whole sum of atonement money, and
for that reason he teaches, "if his father," etc., to indicate that it
was the premises of the plaintiff.

"*If he lead him in with permission*," etc. It was taught: "Rabh said:
The Halakha prevails according to the first Tana, while Samuel holds
that the Halakha prevails according to Rabbi."

The rabbis taught: "If he said: 'Lead in your ox and take care of him,'
if he did damage, he is liable; if he was injured, there is no
liability. If he, however, said: 'Lead in your ox and I will take care
of him,' the reverse is the case." Is there not a difficulty in the
explanation of the Boraitha? First it states, if he told him to lead in
the ox and to take care of him he is liable if he did damage, etc.--then
the reason is because he told him expressly to take care of him; but if
nothing was said as to care, the reverse would be the case, for the
reason that, when nothing is mentioned, the court-owner impliedly
assumes the care. How, then, should the last part: "If he, however, told
him: 'Lead in your ox and *I* will take care of him,' etc., be
explained? Is it not to infer that the reason was because he expressly
said that he would take care of him, but if nothing was said as to care,
the owner of the ox is liable and the court-owner is free, for the
reason that under such circumstances the court-owner does not assume the
care, which is according to Rabbi, who holds that the court-owner is not
liable unless he expressly assumes the care, and so the first part would
be according to the rabbis and the last part according to Rabbi? Said
Rabha: The whole Mishna can be explained to be in accordance with the
rabbis, thus: Because it states in the first part "and *you* take care
of him," it states also in the last part, "and *I* will take care of
him." R. Papa said: The whole Mishna may be explained in accordance with
Rabbi, but that he holds with R. Tarphon, who says that the horn on the
premises of the plaintiff pays the whole, and therefore if he tell him,
"*You* take care," the court-owner has not assigned him any room, and
thus

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

it is to be considered as the horn on the premises of the plaintiff,
which pays the whole; but if he keep silent, it is considered that he
has assigned him room in the court, and thereby the court becomes a
partnership, and under such circumstances only half is paid.

MISHNA *III*.: If an ox intend to gore another ox, and injure a woman
and cause her to miscarry, the owner of the ox is free from paying for
the child. If, however, a man intend to hurt another man, and hurt a
woman and cause her to miscarry, he must pay for the child. How is this
payment made? The woman is appraised as to the difference in her value
(as a slave) before and after she gave birth. Said R. Simeon b.
Gamaliel: If so, then her value increases after giving birth. We must
therefore say that the worth of the infant is appraised and its value is
paid to her husband if she has one, or to his heirs if she has no
husband. If she was a manumitted slave or a proselyte, there is no
liability.

GEMARA: The reason is only because it intended to gore another ox, but
if it originally intended to gore the woman he is liable for the infant.
Shall we assume that this is a contradiction to R. Ada bar A'hba, who
said elsewhere that even in such a case there is no liability? Nay, R.
Ada b. A'hba may answer that, even according to our Mishna, there is no
liability even if it intended to gore the woman. But why does the Mishna
say that it intended to gore another ox? Because in the last part it
states a case where a *man* intended to injure another one, in which it
is essential, for so states the Scripture; therefore the same expression
was used.

"*How is this payment to be made*," etc. The value of the infant? It
ought to read "the increased valuation *caused* by the infant"? (for so
does the Mishna state, that the woman is "appraised," etc.). It really
means: "How does he pay the value of the infant and the increased
valuation *caused by* the infant? The woman is appraised," etc.

"*Said R. Simeon b. Gamaliel*," etc. What does he mean? Said Rabha: He
means thus: Is, then, the value of a woman during pregnancy higher than
after she gives birth-is not the reverse the fact? We must therefore say
"that the worth of the infant," etc., and so also we have learned in a
Boraitha elsewhere. Rabha, however, says: He means thus: Does, then, the
increase in value of the woman belong wholly to the husband, and she has
no share in the increase of value caused even

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

by her infant? The infant is appraised and its value paid to the
husband, and the money for the increase in valuation is divided between
the husband and the wife. We have so also learned plainly in a Boraitha,
with the addition that each item must be separately appraised: the pain,
the damage; the value of the infant, however, must be paid to the
husband only, but the increase in valuation caused by it must be
divided. If so, then the two statements of R. Simeon b. Gamaliel
contradict each other? This presents no difficulty. The one case is that
of a first-birth, and the other is not.

And the rabbis, who hold that the increase in valuation also belongs to
the husband, what is their reason? As we have learned in the following
Boraitha: From the Scripture, which reads \[Ex. xxi. 22\]: "And her
children depart from her," do I not know that she was with child? Why
does it state, "a woman with child"? To tell thee that the increase in
value caused by pregnancy belongs to the husband. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel,
however, applies the passage quoted to the following Boraitha: R.
Eliezer b. Jacob said: He is not liable unless he struck her over the
womb. And R. Papa explained the above statement of R. Eliezer b. Jacob,
that he does not mean the womb only, but any part of the body except the
arm or foot.

"*If she was a bondwoman*," etc., "*or a proselyte woman*," etc. Said
Rabba: This is to be explained that he wounded her before her husband
died, in which case the deceased acquired title to the money to be paid,
and upon his death the same is inherited by the defendant, in whose
possession the money still is (and so is the law as regards the property
of a proselyte who died without leaving heirs); but if he wounded her
after the death of her husband, the money is to be paid to her. Said R.
Hisda: "Who is the author of this statement? Are, then, children as
packages of money, that their ownership may pass from one to another?
Where there is a husband alive the Scripture made an exception, in that
the money to be paid should belong to him; but where there is none, no
payment at all is to be made." Regarding this statement the Tanaim of
the following Boraitha differ: "An Israelite's daughter that was married
to a proselyte and she has conceived by him, and some one wounded her,
if during the lifetime of the proselyte, the value of the infant goes to
him; if after his decease, one Boraitha states that the defendant must
pay to the mother and another Boraitha states that he is free."

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

According to Rabba's theory there is no doubt that the Tanaim differ,
but according to R. Hisda's theory, in accordance with whom will be the
Boraitha which states that he must pay? It is in accordance with Rabban
Simeon b. Gamaliel, who said that the mother gets one-half of the money
to be paid even when her husband is alive, and the whole if he is dead.

R. Iba the elder propounded the following question to R. Na'hman: One
who took possession of the documents of a proselyte (which he held
against the lands of an Israelite), what is the law? Shall we assume, of
one who receives mortgages on estates, that his main intention is to
take possession of the lands, and whereas of the latter the proselyte
has as yet not taken possession, the one who took possession of the
documents has acquired no title, because these documents are not
considered property, or is it considered that the proselyte's intention
was also as to the documents (and so they *are* his property)? He said
to him: Answer me, my Master, could the intention of the proselyte be to
wrap up a bottle in them? He answered: Yea, it may have been also for
that very purpose.

Rabba said: "If an Israelite's pledge is in the hands of a proselyte and
the latter dies, and another Israelite comes and takes possession of it,
he may be deprived of the possession (by the owner of the pledged
article). Why so? Because as soon as the proselyte died the lien on the
pledge became null and void. If, however, a proselyte's pledge is held
by an Israelite and the proselyte dies, and another Israelite takes
possession of it, the pledgee has his lien on the pledge to the extent
of his debt and the other one acquires title as to the balance. Why
should not the pledgee's premises (on which the pledge is located)
acquire the title for its owner? Did not R. Jose b. Hanima say that
one's premises acquire title for their owner even without his knowledge?
It may be explained that he was not there, and therefore when the owner
is there, and he wishes he himself could acquire title, his premises can
also do so for him; but where there is no owner to acquire title
himself, his premises cannot do so for him. And so the Halakha prevails.

MISHNA IV.: One who digs a pit on private ground and opens it into
public ground, or *vice versa*, or on private ground and opens it into
the private ground of another person, is liable.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: One who digs a pit on private premises and
opens it into public premises is liable; and this is the kind of a pit
that was meant by the Scripture. Such

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

is the dictum of R. Ishmael. R. Aqiba says: The pit mentioned in the
Scripture is where one renounced ownership to his premises (on which
there was a pit), but did not renounce it to the pit. Said Rabba: As to
a pit on public ground, all agree that there is a liability, but as to
one on one's own premises, R. Aqiba holds that even in such a case there
is a liability, for it is written \[Ex. xxi. 34\]: "The owner of the
pit"; that means that the Scripture meant a pit that has an owner, while
R. Ishmael holds that it means the one to whom the cause of the injury
previously belonged. But what does R. Aqiba mean by his saying, "That is
the pit meant by the Scripture"? Thus: Why should this case be free from
payment? Is this not the very case with which the Scripture began as
regards payment? <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) R. Joseph, however,
says, that as to a pit on private premises all agree that there is a
liability, for the reason stated by R. Aqiba; they only differ as to a
pit on public ground. R. Ishmael holds that one is also liable in such a
case, thus: It is written \[ibid., ibid. 33\]: "And if a man open a pit,
or if a man dig a pit"; now, if for the opening one is liable, so much
the more is he for the digging? We must therefore say that the liability
came to him because of the digging and opening only (*i.e.*, that
neither the premises nor the pit is his, as being on public ground). R.
Aqiba, however, may explain it thus: Both statements are necessary, for
if the Scripture should state only as to the opening, one might say that
only in case of opening it is sufficient to cover it, but in case of
digging it is not, unless he stuff it up; and if the Scripture should
state only the digging one might say that only in such a case it must be
covered, for he has done some substantial act; but in case of opening
only there is no need even to cover it, for no substantial act was done.
Hence the necessity of both verses. And what does R. Ishmael mean by his
statement, "This is the pit," etc.? He means that this is the pit with
which the passage began as to damages.

There is an objection from the following: One who digs a pit on public
ground and opens it into private ground is free, although it is not
permitted to do so, for the reason that no excavation must be made under
public ground. One who digs

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

a round, oval, or obtuse-angle-shaped pit on private ground and opens it
into public ground is liable. And one who digs pits on private premises
adjoining public ground, as, for instance, those who dig pits to lay
foundations for buildings, is free. R. Jose b. Jehudah, however, makes
him liable, unless he put up a partition ten spans high, or unless the
pit was at least four spans distant from the pathway for man and beast.
Now the first Tana holds him free, because it was for laying
foundations; but otherwise he would also hold him liable? (Hence there
is a liability for a pit on one's own premises?) According to whose
theory is the statement of the first Tana? It would be correct according
to Rabba, for it could be explained that the first part is according to
R. Ishmael and the last part according to R. Aqiba; but according to R.
Joseph, the last part is in accordance with all and the first part in
accordance with none? R. Joseph may say that the whole Boraitha is in
accordance with all, but the first part treats of a case where he
renounced ownership neither to the premises nor to the pit (and although
he must not do so, nevertheless there is no liability). Said R. Ashi:
Now that we arrive at the conclusion that according to R. Joseph's
theory the Boraitha is in accordance with all, the same may be explained
also according to Rabba's theory that the whole Boraitha is in
accordance with R. Ishmael; but the reason why, according to your
inference, there would be a liability, if it is not for laying a
foundation, is because he extended the excavation under the public
ground (and therefore, if not for laying foundations, it should be
considered digging on public ground).

The rabbis taught: One who digs and opens a well and delivers it over to
the community is free (if any accident happened). Otherwise he is
liable. And so also was the custom of Nehunia the pit-digger, to dig and
open wells and deliver them over to the community. And when the rabbis
heard of it, they said: "He is acting in accordance with the Halakha."

The rabbis taught: It happened to the daughter of the very same Nehunia,
that she fell into a large well. They came and informed R. Hanina b.
Dosa of it. During the first hour he said to them: "Go in peace"; and so
also during the second. At the third (when there was fear that she might
have died), he said that she was out already and saved. When the girl
was asked who saved her, she said that a ram passed by led by an old man
(the ram of Isaac led by Abraham), who saved

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

her. When R. Hanina b. Dosa was asked whether he knew of her safety by
prophecy, he said: I am no prophet, nor am I the son of a prophet, but I
thought to myself, "Can it be that the children of that upright man
(Nehunia, who was digging wells to enable the pilgrims to drink water
from them) shall die by the very thing he was taking so much pains to
prepare for the welfare of Israel?" Said R. A'ha: Notwithstanding this,
his son died of thirst. The reason is, that the Holy One, blessed be He,
is particular with the upright around Him, even on a hairbreadth, as it
is written \[Ps. l. 3\]: "And round him there rageth a mighty
storm" <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) (and there must have been
some sin committed by Nehunia for which he was punished). R. Nehunia
says: From the following passage \[ibid. lxix. 8\]: "God is *greatly*
terrific in the secret council of the holy ones, and fear-inspiring
overall that are about him." R. Hanina said: One who says that the Holy
One, blessed be He, is liberal (to forgive every one his sins), his life
may be disposed of liberally (for he encourages people to sin), as it is
written \[Deut. xxxiii. 4\]: "He is the Rock, his work is *perfect*; for
all his ways are just." R. Hana, and according to others R. Samuel b.
Na'hmani, says: It is written \[Ex. xxxiv. 6\], "Long-suffering" in the
plural, and not in the singular, to signify that He is long-suffering
towards the upright and also towards the wicked.

The rabbis taught: One shall not remove stones from his own premises to
public ground. It happened once that one did so, and a pious one passing
by at the time and seeing him do that said to him: "Thou ignoramus, why
dost thou remove stones from premises not belonging to thee to thy own
premises?" He laughed at him. Some time later he was compelled to sell
his lands, and while walking on the public highway in front of his
former lands he stumbled over the stones he once piled up. He then
exclaimed: "I see now that the pious one was right in his saying!"

MISHNA V.: One who digs a pit on public ground and an ox or an ass falls
into it (and is killed), he is liable. It matters not as to the shape of
the pit, whether round, oval, or a cavern, rectangular or acute-angular,
in all cases he is liable. If this is so, then why is it written "pit"
\[‏בור‎\]? To infer from this that as a round pit in order to be
sufficient to cause death must

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

be no less than ten spans deep, so also all other forms must be at least
ten spans deep. If they were of less depth, however, there is no
liability for death; but for injuries there is.

GEMARA: Rabh said: The pit for which the Scripture made one liable is
because of the vapors (therein contained), but not because of the shock
(the animal receives). From this may be inferred that Rabh holds that
the vapors kill the ox for which the digger of the pit is liable; if the
ox should be killed not by the vapors, but by the shock received at the
bottom of the pit, there should be no liability, because the ground is
considered ownerless. Samuel, however, holds because of the vapors, and
so much the more because of the shock; and if one might say that the
Scripture meant only as to the shock and not as to the vapors, and
therefore if it should be proved that the death was caused by the vapors
and not by the shock there should be no liability, it would be
incorrect, for the Scripture is testifying that the digger of a pit is
liable, and even if the pit were filled with wool sponges, On what point
do they differ (for according to both, if the ox was killed he must be
paid for)? The difference is in case he formed a hill (ten spans high)
on public ground (from which the ox fell down and was killed): according
to Rabh he is not liable, while according to Samuel he is. What is the
reason of Rabh's opinion? The passage states \[Ex. xxi. 33\], "*Fall*
into it," which signifies that there must be the usual way of falling
(into an excavation, and face downward), but according to Samuel "fall"
means in any manner.

There is an objection from our Mishna: If so, then for what purpose is
written "pit," etc.? Now, it would be correct according to Samuel, for
the "so also," etc., would include also a hill on public ground; but
according to Rabh, what does this include? It includes rectangular and
acute-angular pits. But are these not expressly stated therein? They are
first stated, and then it is explained whence they are deduced; and it
was necessary to enumerate all the forms of a pit, to teach that in each
of them there are sufficient vapors to kill, if they are ten spans deep.
It happened that an ox fell into a lake from which the neighboring lands
used to be irrigated, and its owner slaughtered it. R. Na'hman
nevertheless declared him *trepha* (illegal, because, according to his
theory, the limbs of the ox were broken by the fall). The same, however,
declared that if the owner would spend only one kabh of flour in going
around and asking the law in his case, he would learn that if the animal

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

under such circumstances should be alive twenty-four hours after the
fall it could be held fit for eating, and he would not lose his ox,
which is worth many kabhim of flour. From this we see that R. Na'hman
holds that an animal may be killed from shock in a pit less than ten
spans deep.

Rabha objected to R. Na'hman from our Mishna: "If they were less than
ten spans deep and an ox or an ass fell into them and was killed, there
is no liability." Is not the reason because there is no shock? Nay,
because there are no vapors. If so, then why is it stated further: "If
he be injured, he is liable." Why so--there are no vapors? He answered:
"There are no vapors sufficient to kill, but sufficient to injure."

He again objected from the following Boraitha: It is written \[Deut.
xxii. 8\]: "If any one were to fall *from* there"--this signifies that
it means only *from* there, but not there*into*. How so? If the level of
the public highway were ten spans higher than the roof of the house, so
that some one might fall from the highway to the roof, there is no
liability (because there was no obligation to make a battlement); if,
however, the highway were ten spans lower than the roof, there is a
liability (for a battlement has to be made). Now then, if shock in an
excavation less than ten spans deep also kills, why state *ten*? He
answered: "This case is different, for it states 'house,' and less than
ten cannot be called a 'house.'"

MISHNA *VI*.: When a pit belongs to two partners, and one of them passes
by and does not cover it, and so also does the second, the latter only
is liable.

GEMARA: Let us see. How can there be a pit of two partners on public
ground? This case could be if we should say that the Halakha prevails in
accordance with R. Aqiba, who holds one liable for a pit even if it be
on his own premises, and partnership in the pit would be possible if
both partners dig a pit on their premises and subsequently renounce
their ownership to the premises but not to the pit; but if the Halakha
prevails according to him who says that if one dig a pit on his own
premises there is no liability, how is it possible on the one hand that
there should be liability for the same pit on public ground, and on the
other hand how can there be a partnership pit on the public ground?
Shall we assume that both of them together hired an agent to dig the pit
for them? Is there not a rule that there can be no agent to commit a
transgression, for the agent ought not to commit any transgression if
even he was hired to

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

do so? Consequently the partners could not be responsible for the acts
of the agent. If we assume that the partnership consisted in that each
of them dug five spans deep, then there can be no partnership, for the
act of the first one can be taken into account according to Rabbi's
theory only as to injuries; but even according to him as to death, and
according to the rabbis' theory as to both injuries and death, it cannot
be counted. How, then, can there be a partnership in a pit? Said R.
Johanan: It is possible if both of them together removed a lump of earth
from it which completed it to make it ten spans deep.

Where are the theories of Rabbi and his colleagues, mentioned above,
stated? In the following Boraitha: "If one dig a pit nine spans deep and
another one complete it to make it ten deep, the latter one is liable.
Rabbi, however, says: The latter one only is liable in case of death,
and both are liable in case of injuries."

What is the reason of the rabbis' theory? It is written \[ibid., ibid.
33\]: "And if a *man* dig a pit," which signifies that it must be by
*one* only. Rabbi, however, explains this passage to mean that it must
be dug by a *man* and not by an ox.

The rabbis taught: "If one dig a pit ten spans deep and another one
complete it to make it twenty, and still another one make it thirty
deep, all of them are liable." There is a contradiction from what we
have learned in the following: "If one dig a pit ten spans deep and
another one plaster and lime it (and thereby makes it narrow and
increases its vapors), the last one is liable." Shall we not assume that
the one case (where all are liable) is according to Rabbi and the other
is according to his colleagues?

Said R. Zbid: "Both may be explained to be according to Rabbi only,
thus: The case where all are liable is correct, as stated, and the case
where only the last one is liable is where there were originally in it
not sufficient vapors even to injure, and the other one by his acts
produced so much vapors as to be sufficient both to injure and kill."

Rabha said: "If one place a stone at the edge of a pit which is less
than ten spans deep and thereby complete its walls to measure ten spans,
whether he is responsible or not would raise the same difference of
opinion as between Rabbi and his colleagues stated above." Is this not
self-evident? One might say that if one dig one span more in the
*bottom*, and by doing so he increase the vapors to be sufficient to
kill, he is liable,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

because the vapors produced by him killed the animal; but if he raise
the walls at the top (by placing the stone), by which he did not
increase the vapors, as they were there already, one might say that he
was not liable, because the animal was not killed by the vapors produced
by him--he comes to teach us that there is no difference.

Rabba bar bar Hana in the name of Samuel bar Martha said: A pit eight
spans deep, two of which are filled with water, there is a liability.
Why so? Each span of water equals two of dry ground. The schoolmen
propounded a question: If the pit was nine spans deep and only one span
of them was filled with water, what is the law--shall we say that as
there is only a little water there are no vapors in it, or shall we say
that as it is nine spans deep the vapors of the water complete it to
make it ten? Again, if the pit was seven spans deep, three of which were
filled with water, what is the law--shall we say that as there is much
water in it there are vapors, or because it is not sufficiently deep
there are none? This remains unanswered.

R. Shizbi questioned Rabba: "If one dig a pit ten spans deep and another
widen it (toward one direction only), what is the law?" He answered:
"Then he diminished the vapors!" The former rejoined: "But he increased
the possibility of being injured?" Rabba made no answer. Said R. Ashi:
"A case of this kind must be examined. If he fell in through the side
which was widened, then he surely increased the possibility of falling
in, and he is responsible; if, however, he fell in through the other
side, then he diminished the vapors, and he is not."

It was taught: "A pit the depth of which is of the same dimensions as
its width, Rabba and R. Joseph, both in the name of Rabba bar bar Hana
quoting R. Mani, differ as to the decision of those quoted: One holds
that there are always vapors (sufficient to kill) therein unless the
width exceeds its depth, and one holds that there are no vapors therein
unless the depth exceeds its width."

"*If one passed by and did not cover it*." From what time on is he free?
(That we say that the other one was charged with covering it, for the
case undoubtedly is that the first one not only passed by but also used
the pit; because if not so, then the first one ought to be liable as
well, as it was negligence also on his part not to cover it.) As to this
the following Tanaim differs: "One is drawing water from a well and
another comes telling him to let him draw water, as soon as he lets him
do so,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the liability of the first ceases. R. Eliezer b. Jacob, however, says
that the liability ceases from the moment he delivered him the cover of
the well. On what point do they differ? R. Eliezer b. Jacob holds that
the theory of choice <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) applies to such
a case, and each drew water from his own part (and therefore the second
is not considered to have borrowed from the first his share, so as to be
charged with the care of the whole, and for that reason both are liable
in case of damages; but if he accepted the cover, he thereby became
charged with the care of the whole), and the rabbis hold that the theory
of choice does not apply to such a case. R. Elazar said: One who sells
his well, title passes with the delivery of the cover. How was the case?
If he sold it for money, let the title pass by the payment of the money;
if by occupancy, let the title pass by this act? The case was by
occupancy, which requires that he should expressly tell him, "go and
occupy and acquire title"; and if he delivered the cover to him, it is
considered as if he told him so.

R. Jehoshua b. Levi said: One who sells his house, the title passes with
the delivery of the keys (as it is the same as the delivery of the cover
of the pit).

Resh Lakish in the name of, R. Janai said: "One who sells a flock of
cattle, title passes with the delivery of the Mashkhukhith (the
drawing-rope). How was the case? If he drew them (removed them from one
place to another), let title pass by this act? If by delivery, let title
pass by doing this? The case was that he drew them, which requires that
the vendor shall tell the vendee expressly, "Draw them and acquire
title," and as soon as he delivered the Mashkhukhith it is considered as
if he told the vendee expressly, "Draw, and acquire title to them." What
is meant by Mashkhukhith? It means the bell. R. Jacob said: "It means
the forerunning goat kept at the head of the flock as leader, as a
certain Galilean lectured in the presence of R. Hisda: When the shepherd
gets angry at his flock, he blinds the leading-goat at the head of the
flock (so that the leader falls and with him all the flock)."

MISHNA *VII*.: If the first one covered it, but when the second one
passed by he found it uncovered and did not cover it, the latter is
liable. If the owner of a pit properly cover it, and still an ox or an
ass fall into it and is killed, there is no liability. If however, he do
not properly cover it, he is liable.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If an ox fall
forward, face downward, into a pit by reason of the noise caused by the
digging, there is a liability; if, however, it fall backward, there is
none. If an ox or an ass with its housings fall into it and the housings
be damaged, there is a liability for the animal but not for the
housings. If there fall therein an ox, deaf, raging, or young, there is
a liability (explained further on). If a boy or a girl, a male or a
female slave, fall in, there is none.

GEMARA: Until what time is the first one free? Said Rabh: Until he again
knows of his own knowledge that the pit is uncovered. Samuel, however,
says: Until he is informed, even if he has not seen it himself. R.
Johanan says: Time must be allowed him until he could be informed and
could hire workmen to cut wood and cover it.

"*If he cover it properly*," etc. If he covered it properly, how could
the animal fall in? Said R. Itz'hak bar bar Hana: The case was, that the
cover became rotten from the inside (and could not be noticed).

The schoolmen propounded the following question: "If he covered it
sufficiently to withstand oxen but not camels, and camels came along and
made the cover shaky and then oxen fell therein, what is the law? Let us
see. How was the case? If camels are usual there, then certainly the act
is wilful; if they are not, then it is only an accident? The question is
only where camels come there at times. Shall we say that, because camels
do come there, it is considered wilful, for he should have had it in
mind, or do we say that because at that time they were not there it
might be considered an accident?" According to others the schoolmen did
not question as to such a case; for there is no doubt that, as long as
they came at times, he should have had it in mind, but what they did
question was this: If he covered it sufficiently to withstand oxen but
not camels, and the latter are usual there and the cover became rotten
from within, what is the law? Do we say that *because* it is considered
wilful as to camels it is so also as to allowing it to rot, or that the
theory of *because* does not apply here? Come and hear: "An ox that was
deaf, raging, young, or blind, or an ox that walked in the night-time,
he is liable; if, however, the ox was sound and it was in the day-time,
he is free." Now, why should it be so? Why not say *because* it is
considered wilful as to an unsound ox it is also considered so as to a
sound one? Infer from this that the theory of *because* does not apply
to such cases,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

"*If it fell in forward*," etc. Said Rabh: By "forward" is meant that it
fell on his face, and by "backward" that it struck the back of its head
against the bottom of the pit. And both of them have reference to the
pit. \[And this is in accordance with his theory that the Scripture made
one liable in case of a pit only because of the vapors, but not because
of the shock.\] Samuel, however, says: "In case of a pit there is no
difference whether it fall forward or backward, but he is liable." \[For
he follows his theory as to the vapors, and so much the more because of
the shock.\] But how is the case possible that when it fall backward
from the sound of the digging he shall be free? As, for instance, when
it stumbles over the pit and falls backward and strikes outside of the
pit. Samuel objected to Rabh from the following Boraitha: "As regards a
pit, whether it fall backward or forward, he is liable?" This objection
remains.

R. Hisda said: Rabh admits in case of a pit on one's own premises that
he is liable, because the owner of the ox may say, "You are liable
either way; for whether he died from the vapors or from the shock, it
was yours." Rabha, however, says: The case in the above Boraitha, which
states that he is liable if even the ox fall backward, was that he
turned over; that is, he first fell face downward, but before. he
reached the ground he turned over and fell on his back, and therefore it
is the vapors that he inhaled while falling face downward that kill him.
R. Joseph says: The Boraitha in question does not mean to say that the
owner of the pit is liable, but, on the contrary, that the owner of the
ox is liable, and it treats of a case where the ox did damage to a well,
namely, by (entering a courtyard without permission, the owner of which
renounced ownership neither to the courtyard nor to the well, and)
falling into the well, spoiling the water therein contained; in which
case he is liable, no matter which way it fell. R. Hanina taught in
support of Rabh: It is written: "And fall"--that means that the falling
should be in the usual manner, face downward. From this it was said that
if he fell face forward into a pit from the sound of the digging there
is a liability; if backward from the same cause, there is none.

The Master said: "If he fall face downward from the sound of the
digging, there is a liability." Why so? Was this not caused by the one
who was doing the digging? (In this case it is assumed that the owner
has hired another person to do the digging, and the latter is only the
*germon* (medium), and there

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

is no liability for being the *germon*?) Said R. Simi b. Ashi: It is in
accordance with R. Nathan, who said that the damage must be paid by the
owner of the place where it was done, for the reason that the digger
cannot be liable, because he is only the *germon* of the damage, as we
have learned in the following Boraitha: "An ox that pushed another ox
into a pit, the owner of the ox, and not the owner of the pit, is
liable. R. Nathan, however, said that each one of them pays half (for
both have their share in it)." But have we not learned in another
Boraitha: "R. Nathan said: The pit-owner pays three-fourths and the
owner of the ox one-fourth"? This presents no difficulty: One case
treats of a vicious and the other of a non-vicious ox. But what does he
hold in case of a non-vicious ox? If he holds that each one has done the
*whole* damage, let each one pay half? And if, on the other hand, he
holds that each one has done *half* the damage (and therefore the owner
of the ox pays as for a non-vicious one one-fourth, which is half of the
damage he did), only three-fourths are paid and one-fourth is suffered
by the plaintiff? Said Rabha: R. Nathan was a judge, and he dived into
the very depth of the Halakha. He holds that each has done only half the
damage; but as to the objection raised that the owner of the ox should
pay only one-fourth, it may be said that the owner of the killed ox may
say to the owner of the pit: "I found my ox in your pit and you killed
him; therefore, whatever I can realize from the owner of the ox who
pushed mine in I will, and the balance you will have to pay."

Rabha said: "One who places a stone on the edge of the opening of a pit
and an ox stumbles over the stone and falls into the pit," as to this
question the difference of the rabbis and R. Nathan comes in (according
to the rabbis the one who placed the stone is liable, for he caused the
fall, and he cannot be considered as the *germon*, for the placing of a
stone in itself is considered the same as a pit; and according to R.
Nathan both are liable, for both contributed). Is this not self-evident?
Lest one say: In that case the pit-owner may say to the owner of the ox,
"Were it not for my pit your ox would have (instead of pushing him in)
killed him"; but here, in this case, the one who placed the stone may
say to the pit-owner, "Were it not for your pit, what harm would my
stone have done him? Had he stumbled over, he would have gotten up at
once?" It therefore teaches that he may, however, say to him, "Were it
not for your stone, he would not have fallen into the pit."

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

Rabha said: An ox and a man who together push some other into a pit (so
that the ox, the man, and the pit have all contributed), as regards
damages all are liable; as regards the four things and the value of the
infant (if it should be the case), the man is liable and the others are
free; as to payment of atonement money and the thirty shekels for a
slave, the ox is liable and the others are free; as regards damage to
vessels and an ox that became desecrated and was redeemed, the man and
the owner of the ox are liable, and the owner of the pit is free. Why is
the owner of the pit free in this latter case of a redeemed ox? Because
it is written \[Ex. xxi. 36\]: "And the dead shall belong to him," which
means in a case where the dead can belong to him, excepting this case
(for although it was redeemed the carcass cannot be sold but must be
buried).

"*If an ox fall in*," etc. Our Mishna is not in accordance with R.
Jehudah of the following Boraitha: "R. Jehudah makes one liable for
damages to vessels caused by a pit." What is the reason for the rabbis'
theory? It is written \[ibid.\]: "And an ox or an ass fall therein,"
which signifies an ox but not a man, an ass but not vessels. R. Jehudah,
however, holds that the "or" means to add also vessels. Now, according
to R. Jehudah, who admits that the word "ox" means to exclude man, what
does the word "ass" mean to exclude? Therefore said Rabha: The necessity
of stating "ass" as regards a pit according to R. Jehudah, and "lamb" as
regards a lost thing according to all, is really difficult to explain.

"*If an ox, deaf*," etc. What does this mean? Shall we assume that the
ox *belongs* to a deaf person, etc., but if he belongs to a sound person
there is no liability? How is that possible? Said R. Johanan: It means
that the *ox* was deaf, etc. But if he was sound, there is no liability?
Said Rabha: "Yea, an ox that is deaf, etc., but if he was sound there is
no liability, because a sound ox is capable of taking care of himself.
The following Boraitha is plainly in support of the above: If there fall
therein a deaf, raging, young, or blind ox, or an ox walking in the
night-time, there is a liability. If it was a sound one, however, and in
the day-time, there is no liability.

MISHNA *VIII.*: There is no difference between an ox and another animal
as regards falling into a pit; to have been kept distant from Mount
Sinai \[Ex. xiii.\] as to payment of double, to restitution of lost
property; as regards unloading; muzzling, kilayim \[of species\], and as
regards Sabbath. Neither is there

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

any difference between the above-mentioned and a beast or bird. If so,
why does the Scripture mention "ox or ass"? Because the verse speaks of
what is usual.

GEMARA: Concerning falling into a pit, it reads \[Ex. xxi. 34\]: "In
money unto the *owner* thereof," which signifies any animal that has an
owner. Concerning Mount Sinai, it reads \[ibid. xix. 13\]: "Whether it
be *animal* <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) or man, it shall not
live," which includes also beasts; and the word "whether" includes also
birds. Concerning payment of double, it reads \[ibid. xxii. 8\]: "For
*all* manner of trespass," which signifies that every manner of trespass
(wilfulness and even as regards inanimate subjects). Concerning
restitution of a lost thing, it reads \[Deut. xxii. 3\]: "Every lost
thing of thy brother's." Concerning unloading, we deduce it from the
analogy of expression of "ass" used here, and in regard to Sabbath
\[Deut. v. 14\] (as concerning the latter, other animals are also
included, so also here). Concerning muzzling \[Deut. xxv. 4\], we deduce
it from the analogy of the term "ox" used here, and concerning Sabbath
\[ibid.\]. Concerning kilayim, if it relates to that of ploughing, we
deduce it from the analogy of the term "ox" in the manner just stated;
if it relates to that of coupling of animals, it is deduced from the
analogy of the word "any of thy cattle" used here, and concerning
Sabbath. And whence do we know that it is so as to Sabbath itself? From
the following Boraitha: R. Jose says in the name of R. Ishmael: At the
first commandments it is written \[Ex. xx. 10\]: "Thy man-servant, nor
thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle"; and at the second commandments it is
written \[Deut. v. 14\]: "Nor thy *ox*, nor thy *ass*, nor any of thy
cattle." Why were they expressly stated? Are, then, the ox and the ass
not included in it cattle"? To tell thee that, as the terms "ox" and
"ass" mentioned here include beasts and birds, to put them on the same
footing, so also, wherever these two terms are mentioned, they include
beasts and birds. But perhaps the statement in the first commandments
should be taken as *general* and that of the last commandments as
*particular*, and as there is a rule that the *general* includes nothing
but the *particular*, this means to say that only ox and ass are meant,
and nothing else? Nay, it states, at the last commandments, also
"*all* <span id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35.md) of thy cattle," and the word

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "all" adds all
other beasts. Is it really so, that wherever "all" is written it adds
something? Is not the same word used at tithing, and still it is
construed to be a case of *general* and *particular*? (See Erubim, p.
64.) We may say that "all" is sometimes also a *general*, but in this
particular instance it must be explained only as to add; for it would
have been sufficient to state only "and cattle," as it does in the first
commandments, and still it states, "and *all* cattle," to infer that it
plainly means to add.

Now, having come to the conclusion that this "all" means to add, why was
it necessary to state "cattle" in the first and "ox" and "ass" in the
last commandments? It can be explained that these particular expressions
were mentioned for the purpose of deducing muzzling, unloading, and
kilayim by the analogy of expression stated above. If also (that as
regards kilayim it is deduced from Sabbath), let even a man be
prohibited from drawing a wagon together with an animal, as he is also
prohibited as regards Sabbath? Why, then, have we learned in the
following Mishna: "A man is permitted with all of them to plough and
draw"? Said R. Papa: One of the inhabitants of Papanai knew the reason
for that, and that was R. A'ha bar Jacob, who explained it thus: It is
written \[ibid. 14\]: "In order that thy man-servant and thy
maid-servant may rest as well as thou"--that means that they are
compared to them only as regards rest, but not as regards any other
thing.

R. Hanina b. Egil asked R. Hyya b. Aba: Why in the first commandments is
it not written "that it may be well with thee," and in the second
commandments it is so written \[Deut. v. 16\]? He rejoined: "Instead of
asking me for the reason, you had better ask me whether it is so written
at all; for I did not notice it. You had better go to R. Tan'hum b.
Hanilai, who used to frequent R. Joshua b. Levi, who was well versed in
Agadah." He went there and got the answer from R. Tan'hum. From R.
Joshua b. Levi I heard nothing about it, but so told me Samuel b. Na'hum
the brother of R. Aha b. Hanina's mother \[according to others, the
father of the same\]: The reason is because the first commandments
(contained on the tables) were destined to be broken. And if so, what of
it? Said R. Ashi: If this had been written thereon and subsequently (the
tables) had been broken, Heaven save! "good" would have ceased from
Israel.

R. Jehushua said: One who sees the letter "*Teth*" in his

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

dream, it is a good omen for him. Why so? Because the first time this
letter is used in the Scripture is in the word "*Tobh*" (good) in the
verse \[Gen. i. 4\]: "And God saw the light, that it was good (tobh)."

"*And so also a beast*," etc. Said Resh Lakish: In this Mishna Rabh
teaches us that a cock and a peacock and a pheasant are considered
kilayim with each other. Is this not self-evident? Said R. Habiba:
Because they are usually raised together, one might say that they are
one species. Hence this statement.

Samuel said: The ordinary goose and the wild goose are considered
kilayim. Rabha b. R. Hanan opposed. Why so? If because the one has a
long beak and the other a short one, then let a Persian and an Arabian
camel also be kilayim, because the one has a thick and the other a thin
neck? Therefore said Abayi: The reason is because the one has his
testicles on the outside, while the other has them inside. R. Papa said:
The one hatches one egg at a time, while the other hatches many at a
time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[116:1](kam08.htm#fr_31.md) Rashi explains that of
the pit mentioned as regards payment it is plainly written, "the *owner*
of the pit shall pay"; of a pit, however, on public ground the Scripture
begins with, "If one *open* a pit"--and the Mishna treats of one that
*dug* a pit. Hence R. Aqiba's statement.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[118:1](kam08.htm#fr_32.md) The Hebrew term is
"Nisarah," and the Talmud explains it to mean a "hair," from the Hebrew
word "saar" (a hair).

<span id="fn_33"></span>[123:1](kam08.htm#fr_33.md) See Erubin, pages
80-82.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[128:1](kam08.htm#fr_34.md) Leeser translates
"beast."

<span id="fn_35"></span>[128:2](kam08.htm#fr_35.md) The Talmud translates
the Hebrew term literally, "all," while Leeser translates it "any."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.](kam09.md)
