[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kam09)  [Next](kam11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 5: Tracts Aboth, Derech Eretz-Rabba,
Eretz-Zuta, and Baba Kama (First Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE PAYMENT OF DOUBLE, AND FOUR AND
FIVE COLLUSIVE WITNESSES; THE RAISING OF YOUNG CATTLE IN PALESTINE, ETC.

MISHNA. *I*: The payment of double (in cases of larceny) is more
rigorous than the payment of four and five fold; for the former is
applicable to animate as well as to inanimate beings, while the latter
is applicable to an ox and a sheep alone, as it is written \[Ex. xxi.
37\]: "If a man steal an ox or a sheep, and kill it or sell it," etc.

The one who steals a stolen article from a thief does not pay double,
neither does he pay four or five fold if he afterward slaughtered or
sold it.

GEMARA: It does not state that the payment of double is applicable to a
thief as well as to one who claims that the bailment was stolen from
him, and the payment of four and five fold is applicable to a thief
only. Shall we assume from this that this is a support to R. Hyya b.
Aba, who said in the name of R. Johanan: One who avails himself, as
regards a bailment, of the claim that it was stolen from him, pays
double; if he slaughtered or sold it, he pays four and five fold? Does,
then, the Mishna state, "there is no difference," etc., "and *only* in
this case," etc.? It states only "is more rigorous" and mentioned only
one, and did not care to enumerate all.

"*For the payment of four*," etc. Whence is this deduced? From the
following Boraitha: The rabbis taught: It is written \[Ex. xxii. 6\]:
"For all manner of trespass"--this is a *general term*; "for ox, for
ass, for lamb, for raiment"--this is a *particular term*; "or for any
manner of lost thing"--which is again a *general term*. It is, then, a
general, particular, and again a general term, in which case it is
construed to be limited to the particular term; and as the particular
term states expressly a movable subject, the substance of which is
counted as money (a value is put on it), so also the others mean only
movable subjects the substances of which are counted as money,

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

excluding land, which is not movable; slaves, who are likened to land;
also documents, which, although movable, their substance is not counted
for money; as well as consecrated articles, because the Scripture reads
"his *neighbor's*." (The further discussion which follows here belongs
to Mishna VI., Chapter IX. of this volume, and is to be found there.)

R. Ilaa said: If he stole a lamb and while in his possession it grew
into a ram, or a calf and it grew into an ox, this is considered a
(material) change while in his possession and he acquires title to it;
and if he subsequently slaughtered or sold it, it is considered his own
(and he is not liable to the payment of four and five fold). R. Hanina
objected to him from the following: If he stole a lamb and it grew into
a ram, or a calf and it grew into an ox, he is still liable to the
payment of double, and four and five fold, and the payment may be made
in such cattle as they were at the time when the theft was committed.
Now, if he acquired title by the change, why should he pay--did he not
slaughter or sell his own? He answered: But what is your opinion--that
the change does not acquire title? why, should he pay as at the time the
theft was committed--why not their present value? He answered: Because
he may say: "Did I then steal of you an ox? I stole of you a calf!" He
rejoined: May the Merciful save us from such opinions! He retorted: On
the contrary, may the Merciful save us from such opinions as yours.

R. Zera opposed: Let title be acquired (if not by the change in the body
of the stolen subject) by the change in its name? Said Rabha: There was
no change of name, for a calf one day old is already called "ox," as it
is written \[Lev. xxii. 27\]: "When an *ox* or a sheep or a goat is
*born*," etc., and so also a ram, as it is written \[Gen. xxxi. 38\]:
"And the rams of thy flock have I not eaten." Did Jacob then mean to say
that only, rams he did not eat, but lambs he did? Infer from this that a
lamb one day old is already termed *ram*. But, in any event, is this not
an objection to R. Ilaa? Said R. Shesheth: The, above Boraitha is in
accordance with the school of Shammai, who hold that the change does not
affect the title of the owner, as we have learned in the following
Boraitha: If one give to a harlot as her hire wheat and she grind it
into fine flour, or olives and she press them into oil, or grapes and
she press them into wine--one Boraitha teaches that it is prohibited (to
be used for an offering under Deut. xxiii. 19), and another Boraitha
teaches

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

that it is permitted; and R. Joseph said that Gorion of Asphark
explained the above, that those who prohibited their use are of the
school of Shammai and those who permitted their use are of the school of
Hillel. What is the reason of the Beth Shammai? Because it is written
\[ibid., ibid.\]: "For *both* (‏גם‎) of them," which means to include
also their changed forms; and the Beth Hillel are not very particular
about the word "both," and hold that it means only their original but
not their changed form.

Now, let us see: The point of difference (between R. Ilaa and R. Hanina)
is that one holds that the change does, while the other holds that it
does not acquire title; but as to the payment, both agree that the
original value must be paid, as further on the Boraitha teaches: He pays
double, four or five fold, as at the time the theft was committed. Shall
we assume that from this there is an objection to Rabh, who said above
that where the principal only is paid the original value at the time the
theft was committed is paid, but double, four and five fold, is paid as
at the time of the *trial*? Said Rabha: If he makes restitution in
specie, he returns lambs; but if he pays money, he pays their present
value.

Rabba said: That a change acquires title is both written and taught:
*Written* \[Lev. v. 23\]: "And he shall restore the robbed article <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) that he hath taken violently away." Why
did the Scripture mention "that he hath taken violently away"? (is it
not understood from the words "*robbed* article"?)--to teach that if it
is still in the same state as at the time it was stolen it must be
returned in specie; if not, money only shall be paid. *Taught*: if one
robbed wood and made it into vessels, wool and made it into garments, he
pays as at the time of the theft. "If he had not succeeded in giving it
to him (to the priest, the first shorn wool) until he died he is free."
Hence we see that change acquires title.

Resignation of hope (when an article was robbed or lost and its owner
resigned his hope to regain it), the rabbis said that it does acquire
title for the robber. But we do not know whether they mean that it is so
biblically, or rabbinically only. It may be said that it is biblically,
because it may be equal to one who found an article of which its owner
resigned his hope to regain it immediately after it was lost and before
it reached the hands of the finder; and the same can be said of the
robber that, when

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

the robbed one resigned his hope of regaining it immediately after he
was robbed, the robber subsequently acquired title. On the other hand,
it cannot be equalled to a lost article, for when it reached the finder
he took it permissively, while the robber, when he took the article,
committed a sin. Therefore biblically he never acquired title; but
rabbinically it was enacted that he should acquire title for the benefit
of those who might wish to repent (that they might be able to return its
value). R. Joseph, however, says that resignation of hope does not
acquire title even rabbinically (and the stolen article must be returned
in specie), and he objected to Rabba from the following: If he stole
leaven and kept it over Passover, he may say to the owner, "Yours is
before you as it was" (although the owner can no more derive benefit
from it, still the damage is not visible). Now, in this case it is
certain that the owner has resigned his hope of regaining it, as it is
of no value at all for him even if returned; and if this acquires title,
why may he say to him, "Yours is before you"--did not the thief acquire
title as soon as hope was resigned? And if he desires to repent, he
ought to pay the full value in money? He answered: What I mean is, in a
case where the one resigned his hope and the other desired to acquire
title to it; but in your case, although the owner resigned his hope, the
thief did not want to acquire title, as also to him it was of no value.

Rabha said: The discussion whether change in name or action, or
resignation of hope, does or does not acquire title remained unexplained
for twenty-two years, until R. Joseph became the president of the
college, and explained that the change of name is equivalent to change
in act, which surely acquires title, as the reason for both is the same.
For instance, change in act--if he made vessels out of stolen wood,
there is no more wood, but vessels, and at the same time the name was
also changed; consequently the acquisition of title comes from both the
change in act and in name. The same theory can apply to a thing where
the change in act was slight, scarcely noticed; as, for instance, if he
trimmed a hide into a horse-blanket, in which case the principal thing
is the change in name; for before it was known as a hide, while now it
is known as a horse-blanket, and title is acquired.

But is there not a case of a robbed beam which was built into a house--a
case very similar to the above, and in which the principal change was in
name; because before it was known as

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

beam and after as a roof, and nevertheless, if not for the rabbinical
enactment for the benefit of those who might wish to repent, biblically
he had to take apart the building and return the beam in specie?
Answered R. Joseph: In this case there was no change in name, as it was
called a beam even after being built into the house (as all the beams
together are called a roof, but each one separately still retains the
name beam; and we so find it in a Boraitha elsewhere).

R. Zera says: Even if the beam in question does no more retain its
original name when built into the roof, it would still not be considered
a change; for as soon as the building is taken apart the original name
"beam" is used again, while in the case of the hide, as soon as it was
changed into a horse-blanket, it will never be called "hide" again.

R. Hisda in the name of R. Jonathan said: Whence is it deduced that a
change does not acquire title? It is written \[Lev. V. 23\]: "And he
shall return the stolen article," which means in specie under all
circumstances. But is it not also written "that he hath taken violently
away" (which may be explained to include the value thereof)? This verse
is needed to deduce from it that he pays an additional fifth part for
his own theft, but not for that of his father (as will be explained in
Chapter IX.).

Ula said: Whence is it deduced that resignation of hope to regain
property does not acquire title? It is written \[Mal. i. 13\]: "And ye
brought what was robbed, and the lame, and the sick"--that means that
"what was robbed" is equal to the lame in this respect, that as the lame
cannot be remedied neither can robbery, no matter whether before or
after resignation of hope. Rabha deduced this from the expression \[Lev.
i. 3\] "*his* offering," which means but not what was robbed. If before
resignation of hope, it is self-evident--why, then, the verse? We must
therefore say that it means even after resignation. Infer from this that
resignation of hope does not acquire title.

"*And the payment of four*," etc. Why so? Let it be deduced by an
analogy of expression of the word "ox" mentioned here and "ox" mentioned
in regard to observation of Sabbath; as there "ox" includes beasts and
birds, so also here? Said Rabha: The verse says here \[Ex. xxi. 37\]:
"An ox or a sheep twice, to teach it of only those two, but no others.

"*The one who steals*," etc. Rabh said: This was taught only before
resignation of hope; but if after that the first thief

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

acquired title, and the second thief must pay him double. Said R.
Shesheth: "I would say that Rabh said this while he was napping, for we
have learned: R. Aqiba said: Why did the Scripture say that if he
slaughtered and sold it he must pay four and five fold? Because the sin
was deeply rooted in him (and he acquired title to it by his acts). Now,
let us see. When? If before resignation, what deep-rooting is there? (he
has not acquired title and his acts helped nothing, as no one holds that
title is acquired before resignation of hope). We must therefore say
that it was after resignation. Now then, if resignation acquires title,
why should he pay four and five fold--did he not kill or sell his own?
It may be explained as Rabha said (that he must pay four and five fold
even before resignation of hope, and the reason is) because he repeated
his sin.

(An objection was raised.) Come and hear: It is written \[Ex. xxi. 37\]:
"And kill it, or sell it"; as if killed it can no more return to life,
so also in case of sale it must be such that it should not return again.
When? If before resignation, it does return? We must therefore say that
it relates to after resignation. Now, if resignation acquires title, why
should he pay four and five fold--was it not his own when he slaughtered
or sold it? It is as R. Na'hman said elsewhere, that even before
resignation of hope, if the thief hired it out to a third party for
thirty days, although the thief had no title to it, still his act of
hiring was valid. So also can our case be explained.

It was taught: One who sells before resignation of hope to regain it, R.
Na'hman says that he is liable to pay four fold because he sold it; and
the Scripture holds him liable to pay whether before or after
resignation. R. Shesheth says that he is free, because it cannot be
called sale when the sale is invalid; and therefore his acts were of no
effect, and the liability is only where his acts are of effect, as in
case of slaughtering. So also was R. Elazar's opinion, that it means
after resignation of hope. As R. Elazar said: It must be declared that
resignation of hope to regain stolen property comes generally
immediately after the occurrence of the theft (and if the thief sold it,
his act is valid, because there were both resignation of hope and change
of control); and this theory is supported by the Scripture, which holds
the thief liable to the payment of four and five fold without fear that
the owner might have not resigned his hope; and this is only because
generally hope is resigned immediately after the occurrence of the
theft. But perhaps the Scripture means even

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

before resignation of hope? This would not be correct, for sale and
slaughtering are written together; and as in case of slaughtering his
acts are accomplished and cannot be undone, so also in case of sale. But
perhaps this is so when we know for certain that he has resigned his
hope? This also would not be correct, for the same reason that sale and
slaughtering are written together; and as in case of slaughtering there
is no difference whether before or after resignation of hope, so also is
the case with sale. Said R. Johanan to him: The case of kidnapping \[Ex.
xxi. 16\], in which there is surely no resignation of hope, for no one
gives up hope in such cases, and still the Scripture makes him guilty,
can prove that the Scripture does not require any resignation of hope.
\[From this we see that R. Johanan holds that he is liable before
resignation of hope.\] But what is the law after resignation of hope?
(Does he agree with Rabh's opinion stated above?) Nay, he holds him
liable whether before or after resignation of hope. Resh Lakish,
however, holds him liable only before resignation of hope but not after
that; for after resignation he acquired title, and if he killed or sold
it he did so to his own.

R. Johanan said: A stolen thing of which the owners have not resigned
hope to regain it cannot be consecrated. By the owner thereof, because
it is not under his control; and by the thief, because he has no title
thereto. Did, indeed, R. Johanan say so? did not R. Johanan say that the
Halakha always prevails according to an anonymous Mishna, and there is a
Mishna \[Second Tithe, Chap. V., M. 1\]: A vineyard in the fourth year
of its planting (the fruit of which must first be redeemed before using
it) used to be marked with clods (of earth), and this was a sign that
benefit might be derived from it after being redeemed, as benefit may be
derived from earth. In the third year of its planting, however, in which
the fruit must be destroyed without deriving any benefit at all from it,
it used to be marked with fragments of broken clay vessels, for a sign
that as from such fragments no benefit can be had, so also none must be
had from the fruit. Graves used to be marked with limestone (to warn
passers-by not to step on them lest they become unclean), which is
white, for a sign that therein were interred (human) bones, which are
also white; and the limestone was dissolved and spread upon the graves,
to be more visible. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel, however, said that the
vineyards used to be marked in the Sabbatical year only, because the
fruit was

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

considered ownerless, and therefore warning had to be given not to use
it (because of the third and fourth years); but in other years, when the
fruit must not be used without the permission of the owner, it was not
marked, but, on the contrary, let the wicked thief eat of it, and suffer
the consequences.

The pious man, however, used to place money in the vineyard, declaring:
"All that is plucked and gathered of this fruit shall be redeemed by
this money." (Hence we see that although not under his control, still it
is redeemed--how, then, can R. Johanan say that neither can consecrate a
stolen thing?) But lest one say that the above statement regarding the
pious one is not anonymous, but is the continuation of the statement of
R. Simeon b. Gamaliel (even then R. Johanan would contradict himself),
as Rabba bar bar Hana said in his name, that wherever the teachings of
R. Simeon b. Gamaliel are mentioned in our Mishnayoth the Halakha
prevails according to him, except in three cases? (which are enumerated
in Sanhedrin), it may be said: Do not read, The pious man used to place
money in the vineyard, declaring, 'All that was plucked,' etc., but
read, 'All that *will* be plucked,' etc. (*i.e.*, that the money was
placed when the fruit was still attached to the trees, and as in the
Sabbatical year all fruit is ownerless, the one who plucks and gathers
it becomes its owner and at the same time the money placed there redeems
it)." But, after all, could, then, R. Johanan say so--did he not say
elsewhere that the declaration of the pious ones and of R. Dosa were of
one and the same theory, and in the declaration of R. Dosa it is plainly
stated "that *was* plucked," as we have learned in the following
Boraitha: R. Jehudah said: In the morning the owner of the ground gets
up and says, "All that the poor will pluck and gather to-day is hereby
declared ownerless." R. Dosa said: The declaration is made toward
evening, and thus: "All that the poor *have* plucked and gathered is
hereby declared to have been ownerless"? Change the names in the
Boraitha, and read instead of R. Dosa R. Jehudah, and instead of R.
Jehudah R. Dosa. Why do you declare that Boraitha incorrect--better
correct the statement of R. Johanan and place R. Johanan instead of R.
Dosa? It may be said that the names in the Boraitha must be changed in
any event, for from this Boraitha is to be inferred that R. Jehudah
holds to the theory of choice, <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38.md) and
it is known from his statements elsewhere

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

that he does not hold this theory. But, after all, why do you change the
names in the Boraitha--because it would be a contradiction between one
statement of R. Jehudah and another one? There would be the same
contradiction between one statement of R. Johanan and another, as it is
known that also R. Johanan does not hold to the theory of choice \[and
if we should make his declaration read, "that what the poor *will*
gather," it would show that R. Johanan does hold to the theory of choice
(as the declaration is made previous to the gathering of the fruit, and
whatever had been gathered by the poor had been chosen previously in his
mind)\]. As R. Assi said in the name of R. Johanan: "Brothers that have
partitioned among themselves estates that they inherited, they are
considered as vendees, and the estates return in the jubilee year" (and
we do not say that the part which came to him by partition was chosen
previously to be his part of the inheritance, which, according to the
biblical law, does not return; hence he does not hold to the theory of
choice?). Therefore R. Johanan's statement above remains unchanged, but
his statement that stolen property cannot be consecrated, etc., is based
upon our Mishna (*supra*, page [149](#page_149).md), which states, "The one
who steals a stolen article from a thief does not pay double" (which is
anonymous). And why so? It would be correct that he should not pay to
the thief, for it is written \[Ex. xxii. 6\]: "And it be stolen out of
the *man's house*," but not of the house of the *thief*. But why should
he not pay it to the *owner* of the property? We must say, then, that to
the thief he does not pay because it was not his, and not to the owner
because it was not under his control; and this is the very statement of
R. Johanan. But still, why should he adopt *this* anonymous Mishna and
ignore the *other*--why not adopt the anonymous Mishna which treats of
the pious ones? Because for this statement support can be found in the
Scripture \[Lev. xxvii. 14\]: "And if a man sanctify his house as holy
unto the Lord," from which is to be deduced that as "his house" is under
his own control, so also other things which are under his own control
(but not otherwise).

Abayi said: If it should not be said in the name of R. Johanan that "the
pious" and R. Dosa are of the same theory, I would say that the pious
ones hold to the theory of R. Dosa, but R. Dosa does not hold to the
theory of the pious ones, viz.: The pious ones hold to the theory of R.
Dosa because they arrived at their decision to make such declaration by
drawing

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

the following *a fortiori* conclusion: A thief who has committed a sin,
the rabbis made an enactment for him not to pay double (to enable him to
repent and to make restitution); so much the more an enactment must be
made for the poor (to prevent them from sin). R. Dosa, however, does not
concur with them, for according to him the rabbis made their enactment
for the poor only and not for the thief (and the law that the thief must
not pay double to the first thief is not an enactment of the rabbis but
a biblical law). Said Rabha: Were it not for the above statement of R.
Johanan that the pious ones and R. Dosa, etc., I would say that under
"the pious ones" R. Meir is meant, because did not R. Meir say elsewhere
that second tithe is consecrated property, and nevertheless as regards
its redemption the Law considers it as if it were under the owner's
control? <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md)

The sages of Nahardea said: No writ of replevin of personal property is
granted by the court, the bailee of which denied its possession before
the court. This is so when the bailee denied its possession, for it
would look as if the court issued a writ the execution of which was not
certain; but when he admitted possession but not ownership by the
plaintiff, a writ might be issued. The same said also: A writ of
replevin which does not contain the following direction: "Investigate,
take possession, and retain it for yourself," is invalid; for the bailee
can say to him, "The property is not assigned to you, and you are not
the proper party plaintiff." Said Abayi: If the direction is contained,
but it states only as to part of it, the bailee cannot say that he is
not the proper party plaintiff; for if part is assigned to him by the
court, he has authority to replevy the whole. Said Ameimar: If the writ
did not contain the above direction, and nevertheless he took possession
of it, the court cannot compel him to return it. (Rashi explains that
according to other commentators it means that if the messenger of the
court who executed the writ of replevin has kept the property for
himself for a debt due him from one of the parties to the litigation,
the court cannot compel him to give it up. Rashi approves of this
explanation, saying that he found it in the Decisions of the Gaonim.) R.
Ashi, however, says that the court has the right to compel him to return
it, because when

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the court appointed one to execute its mandates it was upon the written
condition that he should obey all the orders of the court; consequently
he is only a messenger of the court and he has no right to keep it for
himself. And so also the Halakha prevails.

MISHNA *II*.: If two witnesses testify that one stole (an ox or a
sheep), and either the same or other witnesses testify that he
slaughtered or sold the same, he must pay four and five fold. If one
stole the same and sold it on the Sabbath, or he stole and sold it for
idolatry; or he stole and slaughtered it on the Day of Atonement; or he
stole from his father and slaughtered and sold it, and thereafter his
father died; or he stole and slaughtered it and then consecrated it-in
all those cases he pays four and five fold. The same is the case if he
stole and slaughtered it in order to use it as a medicine, or to feed
his dogs therewith; or he slaughtered it and it was found unfit for
eating (*trepha*); or he slaughtered it in the Temple court without
consecrating it as an offering. R. Simeon, however, makes him free in
the two last-named cases.

GEMARA: "*If he stole and sold it on the Sabbath*," etc. But have we not
learned elsewhere that in such a case he is free? Said Rami b. Hama: The
Boraitha which says that he is free from the payment of four and five
fold treats of a case where the thief sold the stolen property to the
owner of a garden and received in payment figs which the thief himself
plucked on Sabbath (and thus incurred the penalty of capital punishment,
and there is a rule that where there is capital punishment there can be
no mention of civil liability). But it may be said that such must not be
considered a sale. For if, for instance, the owner of the garden should
claim before the court that he has not received from the thief the value
of the figs, we would not make him liable to pay for the figs as he has
committed a crime, and the above maxim applies also here; consequently
there was no sale.

Said Rabha: Even in a case where the court would not entertain the
plaintiff's complaint, the sale would still be called a sale as regards
the same required by Scripture. As, for instance, the law prohibits the
hire of a harlot, even if she was his own mother (and he promised her a
sheep as her hire). Now, if she would sue him before a court for failing
to pay her the hire, would the court then direct him to pay it--and
nevertheless if he had given her the sheep it would be called "harlot's
hire" and its use would be

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

prohibited? The same is the case here: although as regards the
enforcement of payment of the claim the court would not interfere,
still, because he transferred it to him in this manner the sale is
valid.

"*If he stole and sold it on the Day of Atonement*," etc. Why so? It is
true that there is no capital punishment; but is he not liable to
punishment by stripes--and there is a rule that he who is punished by
stripes is free from payment? It may be said that it is according to R.
Meir, who holds that stripes do not absolve from civil liability. If so,
then let him also be liable if he slaughtered it on the Sabbath. And
lest one say that R. Meir holds only that stripes do not free from
payment but capital punishment does, have we not learned in the
following Boraitha: If he stole and slaughtered it on the Sabbath . . .
(although he incurs the death penalty) he pays four and five: such is
the dictum of R. Meir. The rabbis, however, make him free? Said the
schoolmen: Leave the Boraitha alone, as it was taught in regard to the
same: R. Abin, R. Ilaa, and the whole society said in the name of R.
Johanan that the Boraitha treats of a case where he slaughtered it
through an agent. But is there, then, a case where one commits a
transgression and another is liable for it (have we not a rule that
there is no agent to commit a sin)? Said Rabha: The case here is
different, for the verse reads \[Ex. xxi. 37\]: "And kill it or sell
it." As in case of sale there must be another person (to buy it), so
also in case of slaughtering, when it was slaughtered by another under
his direction. The school of R. Ishmael inferred this from the
additional word "or"; the school of Hezkiah inferred it from the word
"for" used in that verse.

Mar Zutra opposed: Is there, then, a case where one, if he did it
himself, would not be liable, but if he did it though a messenger he
would be liable? Said R. Ashi to him: There the reason is not because he
is not liable, but because he is guilty of a capital punishment, and the
above rule applies. Now, when you say that the above Boraitha treats of
a case where he slaughtered it through a messenger, why do the rabbis
make him free of four and five fold? The schoolmen explained that by the
"rabbis" mentioned in the Boraitha in question is meant R. Simeon, who
holds that slaughtering which is not legal is not called slaughtering in
accordance with the requirements of the Scripture.

"*If he stole from his father*, "etc. Rabha questioned R. Nahman:

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If he stole an ox
belonging to two partners and slaughtered him, and then he confessed to
one of the partners, what is the law? Shall we say that the Scripture
\[Ex. xxi. 37\] meant five *whole* oxen, but not *half* oxen (for every
partner has a right only to one-half of each ox), or shall we say that
in "five oxen" the halves arc included? He answered him: The Scripture
reads "five (whole) oxen," and not *half* oxen. He objected: It states
further: "If he stole from his father and slaughtered or sold it, and
thereafter his father died (and the thief became one of the heirs), he
pays four or five." Now, when he is one of the heirs, is this not equal
to the case where he confessed to one partner (and this makes him free
entirely for the above reason--"an ox" and not "a half ox"; and the same
ought to be here, because he is an heir, and the payment of a "whole" ox
does no longer hold)? He answered him: The case here was that his father
before he died laid already the matter before the court. But how is it
if he had not laid the matter before the court--does he not pay? If so,
why should it state in the latter part, "If he stole from his father and
he died, and thereafter he slaughtered or sold it, he does not pay"? Let
the Tana distinguish in the very first case, thus: This was said only
where the deceased laid the matter before the court; but if he had not
yet done so, he does not pay? He rejoined: It is really so; but because
it states in the first part, "If he stole from his father and
slaughtered it, and thereafter the father died," it also states in the
latter part, "If he stole from his father, who soon died, and thereafter
he slaughtered or sold it." On the next morning R. Nahman said to Rabha:
(I have reconsidered the matter, have changed my mind, and came to the
conclusion thus:) In the expression "five oxen" halves are included, and
what I told you last night was said without careful deliberation. But
what difference is there between the first and the last part (why does
the latter part make him free)? He answered: The Scripture reads, "*and*
killed it," which means that as the stealing was in transgression, so
also ought to be the killing, as is the case in the first part. In the
latter part, however, the killing was no more in transgression, as it
belonged to him.

"*One who slaughtered*," etc., "*and it was found unfit*," etc. Said R.
Simeon in the name of R. Levi the elder: It is considered slaughtered
only when the act is fully accomplished. R. Johanan, however, says: It
is so considered from the very beginning. Said R. Habibi of Husnahah to
R. Ashi: Shall we assume that R. Johanan holds that the prohibition to
use meat

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

of cattle slaughtered in the Temple court, which was not consecrated as
an offering, is not biblical? (See Kiddushin, p. 58.) For if it is
biblical, as soon as the act of slaughtering began it became a forbidden
thing from which no benefit must be derived, and the remainder of the
act was carried out on what belonged no more to the owner-why then is he
liable to pay four and five fold? Said R. A'ha the son of Rabha to him:
The liability is incurred from the very beginning of the act. Said R.
Ashi: This is no answer, for it reads "and kill it," which means the
fully accomplished act, which would not be so in this case. But then the
above question remains? He rejoined: So said R. Gamda in the name of
Rabha: The liability is incurred in case he cut part of the trachea and
gullet outside, and the remainder of same inside the Temple court (in
which case there is the fully accomplished act before it became a
prohibited thing).

MISHNA III.: If two witnesses testify that one stole an animal, and
those very same witnesses testify that he had thereafter slaughtered or
sold it, and subsequently those witnesses are proved collusive, the
collusive witnesses must pay the full liability of four and five fold.
If two witnesses testify that he stole it and other two testify that he
slaughtered or sold it, and both sets of witnesses are proved collusive,
the first set pays the double and the second set pays the balance of the
five. If the second set is found collusive, the thief pays for two and
the collusive witnesses for three. If only one of the second set is
proved collusive, the whole testimony of the second set is invalidated.
If one of the first set was found collusive, the whole testimony in the
case was invalidated; for if there is no theft, there can be no
(liability for) slaughtering or selling.

GEMARA: It was taught: A collusive witness--Abayi said that he is
considered such from the date on which he gave the collusive testimony
(and all the testimony he gave since then is incompetent); for as soon
as he gave the collusive testimony he was considered wicked, and it is
written \[Ex. xxiii. 1\]: "Put not . . . wicked to be a witness." Rabha
says that he is considered such only from the date on which he was
proved collusive; for a collusive witness is an exception in the law,
for they are two against two. Why, then, give more veracity to the
latter two than to the former? Therefore the law applying to a collusive
witness begins only from the date on which he was proved such. According
to others, Rabha agrees with Abayi that he is considered collusive from
the date on which the testimony

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

was given; but in case they have in the meantime signed their names to a
bill of sale, Rabha does not hold the conveyance invalid, in order that
the grantee should suffer no damage. In which case can there be a
difference in those two versions? In case two witnesses proved the
collusiveness of one and two others proved the collusiveness of the
other, or that their testimony was made incompetent by other witnesses
testifying that they were robbers: according to the first version the
reason of Rabha is because it is an exception. Here there is no
exception, because there are four against two; consequently Rabha would
agree with Abayi that all their testimony given in the meantime is
invalid. According to the others, who say that the reason is that the
grantee shall suffer no damages by invalidating the conveyance, there is
no difference whether there were two or four. R. Jeremiah of Diphthi
said: There happened a case and R. Papa acted in accordance with Rabha.
R. Ashi, however, said that the Halakha prevails according to Abayi.
There is a rule that always the Halakha prevails according to Rabha when
he differs with Abayi, except in the six cases, the case at bar being
one of them.

There is an objection from our Mishna, which states: "If two witnesses
testified that he stole an animal, etc., they pay the full liability."
Shall we not assume that they at one time testified as to the theft and
at another time as to the slaughtering, and then they were first proved
collusive as to the theft and subsequently as to the slaughtering? Now
then, if they were considered collusive from the date on which they gave
the collusive testimony, as soon as they were proved collusive as to the
theft, it was established that their testimony as to the slaughtering
was incompetent, and why should they pay for the testimony of the
slaughtering? It may be explained that the case was that they were
proved collusive as to the slaughtering first. But still, when they were
subsequently proved collusive as to the theft it was established that
they were incompetent, and why should they pay for their testimony of
slaughtering? The Halakha prevails that the Mishna treats of a case
where their testimony was given at one and the same time, and
subsequently they were proved collusive.

Rabha said: Witnesses that testified that one has committed murder and
the court found the accused guilty on their testimony, and two other
witnesses subsequently denied the testimony, and still another set of
two witnesses testified that the first two

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

were with them at another place at the alleged time of the murder
(*alibi*), which testimony makes them collusive (according to
Scripture), they must suffer the death penalty, for denial is the
beginning of collusion which is subsequently proved by the last
witnesses. And he said again: My theory is based upon the following
Boraitha: "If two witnesses testify that a certain person blinded his
slave's eye and thereafter knocked out one of his teeth, and they also
testify that the owner of the slave admitted it, and subsequently the
witnesses are found collusive, they must pay to the slave the value of
the eye." Now, how is the case? Shall we assume that it was as stated
without any other set of witnesses to deny the former testimony, and the
slave was manumitted on their testimony, then the expression ought to be
"and they pay to *him* (instead of 'to the slave,' for he was already
manumitted) the value of his eye, and to his master the value of an
uninjured slave"? Another proof is that the case is that there was no
denial--that they also testify that the owner admitted it, for what
purpose it this? We must therefore say that another set of two witnesses
testify that he knocked out one of his teeth first, and then blinded his
eye, in which case the owner must pay him the value of the eye; then
came a third set of witnesses and testified that he *first* blinded his
eye and *then* knocked out his tooth, in which case the owner must pay
him only the value of the tooth, because there is a contradiction
between the first and the middle sets, and the statement that the owner
admitted it means that he is more satisfied with their testimony, as he
has to pay only the value of a tooth, and the statement that they were
found collusive has reference to the middle set, and nevertheless it is
stated that they must pay the slave the value of the eye, hence that
denial is the beginning of collusion. (For if it is not, why should the
law of collusion apply to them after their testimony became
incompetent?) Said Abayi: Nay, not as you say, that because if there
would be three sets of witnesses, as soon as the middle one was denied
by the first one the third set could not make it collusive. The case,
however, was that the set which became afterwards collusive is the first
set, and your proof from the fact that the Boraitha does not state that
the collusive set has to pay to the master can be explained thus: The
second set did not deny the fact, but only reversed the order, *i.e.*,
they say to the first set, "On that day on which you claim that the
master had blinded his eye," etc., "you were with us and you could not
witness the crime; but we did witness on another day that the master
first

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

knocked out his tooth and then blinded his eye." And therefore the
Boraitha does not state that they must pay the value of the slave, etc.,
because the slave becomes free even on their testimony; and I take this
from the last part of the same Boraitha: "We testify that a certain
person knocked out his slave's tooth and blinded his eye, and this is
just as the slave says, and thereafter they were proved collusive, they
pay the value of the eye to the owner." Now, how was the case? If the
second set does not admit any wounding at all, then the first set must
pay to the owner the value of the whole slave. It is therefore apparent
that all admit that he wounded him, but that they reverse the order of
the wounding, and thus prove them collusive. Now, as the last part
treats of a case where they became collusive through the reversal, the
first part must also treat of a similar case. (Says the Gemara:) After
all, let us see how the case was: If the second set testify that it
happened on a later date, then the first must still pay the full value
of the slave, because on the day on which they testify it happened the
slave had not to be manumitted? We must therefore say that the second
set testify that it happened on an earlier date. But still, even in such
a case, if the slave had not summoned him to court before the testimony
of the first was given, they must still pay the full value of the slave;
for before their testimony the owner was not subject to liability (to
manumit the slave)? It must therefore be said that the case was after
judgment was given.

R. Zera opposed: Whence do we know that money must be paid? Perhaps when
he only blinded his eye he is manumitted because of that, if when he
only knocked out one of his teeth he is manumitted because of that, and
when he did both-blinded his eye and knocked out one of his teeth-he is
also only manumitted and no money is paid. Said Abayi: As to your
question, the verse reads, "for the sake of his tooth," which does not
mean for the sake of his tooth *and* eye; and also "for the sake of his
eye," which does not mean for the sake of his eye *and* tooth.

Regarding witnesses whose testimony was first denied and then proved
collusive (as to which Abayi and Rabha differ above), R. Johanan and R.
Elazar also differ: One holds that they are put to death, the other
holds that they are not. It may be inferred that the one who holds that
they are not put to death is R. Elazar, for he said elsewhere that
witnesses whose testimony was only denied (but not proved collusive), in
a case in which human life was involved, have to stiffer the penalty of

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

stripes. Now, if we should assume that R. Elazar is the one who holds
that they have to suffer the death penalty if proved collusive, why
should they be punished with stripes in case their testimony was only
denied? is it not a "negative process" that entails the death penalty by
the court, and in such cases no stripes are administered? We must
therefore say that it is R. Elazar who holds in the above Boraitha that
they have not to suffer the death penalty.

"They are punished with stripes." Why so? Are they not two against two?
Why should more credence be given to the one set than to the other? Said
Abayi: The case is that the supposed murdered person appeared in court
alive.

MISHNA *IV*.: If two witnesses testify that he stole it, and one
witness, or he himself, testifies that he slaughtered or sold it, he
pays only two, but not four and five fold. If he stole and slaughtered
it on Sabbath, or sold it for purposes of idolatry; if he stole it from
his father and this latter died, and subsequently he slaughtered or sold
it; if he stole and consecrated it, and thereafter slaughtered or sold
it--in all those cases he pays only double and not four and five fold.
R. Simeon says: If one stole consecrated cattle for which the one who
consecrated them is responsible, and slaughtered them, he must pay four
and five fold; if, however, it is that for which he is not responsible,
the thief is free.

GEMARA: The Mishna states, "If one witness," etc. Is this not
self-evident? It may be said that it means to teach us that when he
himself admits that he slaughtered, it is equal to the case where one
witness testifies; as in the latter case, if thereafter another witness
conies and testifies to the same thing, their testimony is taken
together to make up the requisite number of witnesses, so also in this
case the testimony of another witness is added to his own, in opposition
to what R. Huna said in the name of Rabh, that one who admits to the
court that he has incurred the liability to pay a fine and thereafter
witnesses appear, he is free. R. Hisda objected to R. Huna's statement
from the following: It happened that R. Gamaliel blinded the eye of his
slave Tabi and he was very glad of the occurrence. When he met R.
Jehoshua, he said to him: Do not you know yet that my slave Tabi is
manumitted because I blinded his eye? Said R. Jehoshua to him: Your
statement does not make him free, for he has no witnesses. Hence we
infer from R. Jehoshua's answer that if there appear witnesses after an
admission of the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

incurrence of the liability to pay a fine, the latter must be paid? He
answered him: The case of R. Gamaliel is different, for he had not
admitted it before the court. But was, then, R. Jehoshua not the
president of the court? Yea, but it was not during the session of the
court, but only as to a private person. But have we not learned in
another Boraitha that what R. Jehoshua said to him was: This is nothing,
for you yourself admitted it (from which is to be inferred that even if
witnesses appear thereafter he is also free)? And is it not also to be
assumed that the reason for the different statements of the Boraithas
is: The Tana who says that he told him, "because he has no witnesses,"
holds that if witnesses should appear after the admission the slave
would be liberated, and the Tana who says that R. Jehoshua told him,
"because you already admitted," means to say that after admission the
testimony of witnesses is of no avail? Nay, all agree that witnesses who
appear after an admission count nothing; but the point of difference is
this: The one who says, "because he has no witnesses," means that it was
not before the court, and the one who says, "because you already
admitted," means that he had done so before the court.

It was taught: "One who admits that he has incurred the liability of a
fine and thereafter witnesses appear, Rabh says that he is free. Samuel,
however, says that he must pay." Said Rabha for Ahilai: The reason of
Rabh's theory is because in the verse \[Ex. xxii. 31 the word "found" is
repeated twice, which means that if it should be "found" by testimony of
witnesses, he should be "found" (liable to pay the fine) by the court,
excluding the case of self-incrimination. But is this not deduced from
the verse \[ibid., ibid. 8\]: "And he whom the *judges* may condemn"? We
must therefore say that the first-quoted verse means to exclude the case
where one admits his liability to pay a fine and thereafter witnesses
appear.

What does Samuel deduce from this verse? He deduces that the thief
himself must pay double, as it was taught in the school of Hezkiah that
the double payment applies only when he himself stole it, but not where
he claims that it was stolen from him. Rabh objected to Samuel from the
following: If on seeing that witnesses were coming the thief admits the
theft, but denies the slaughtering, etc,, he pays only the principal.
(Hence we see that if he admits before witnesses appear he is free from
the payment of double, which is a fine?) He answered him: The case is,
that the witnesses withdrew and did not appear. But since it

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

states in the last part: "R. Elazar b. R. Simeon said: Let witnesses
come and testify (after he admitted, so that the fine should be paid),"
it is to be inferred that the Tana of the first part holds that he is
not liable (although the witnesses came and testify?) Said Samuel: The
very same R. Elazar b. Simeon quoted by you, who holds as I do, is the
basis of my theory.

According to Samuel, surely Tanaim differ (and the Tana of the first
part cannot be explained to be in accordance with him); but according to
Rabh is it to be assumed that he explains Elazar's statement to be in
accordance with him, namely: Elazar's statement was only where he admits
for fear of witnesses; but where the admission is made without such
fear, even he would concede that he is free? (Yea, so it is.) Said R.
Hamnuna: It seems that Rabh's theory is applicable to the following
case: If one confesses to theft and thereafter witnesses testify to the
same, he is free from fine, for by his confession he made himself liable
to pay the principal; but when he first denies, and after witnesses
testify that he committed the theft he confesses to both the theft and
the slaughtering, he is liable to pay four and five fold, for he sought
to free himself entirely. Said Rabha to him: By your statement you
caused grief to all the elders of the college: Did not R. Gamaliel by
his confession, "I have blinded the eye of my slave," make himself free
from fine, and still R. Huna, who was objected to from this fact by R.
Hisda, did not give the reason stated by you (and R. Huna was an actual
disciple of Rabh? hence, your statement is not correct)?
(Notwithstanding the objection of Rabha, it was taught by R. Hyya b. Aba
in the name of R. Johanan exactly as stated by R. Hamnuna.)

Said R. Ashi: From both our Mishna and the above-quoted Boraitha it is
also to be inferred that R. Johanan's statement is correct, viz.: The
Mishna, viz.: "If two witnesses testify that he committed the theft,"
etc. Why should it not better state: "If one witness or he himself
testifies that he stole and slaughtered it, he pays only the principal"
(for all what the Mishna means to teach us is that one's own confession
frees him from the payment of fine; and if it should state as just
mentioned, it would also include the payment of four and five fold)? We
must therefore say that the Mishna comes to teach that only in case he
did not make himself liable even for the payment of the principal, as e.
g. that witnesses testify to the theft, and he only confessed, or one
witness testifies to the slaughtering, etc., then only may it be said
that his confession is equivalent to the testimony of one

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

witness; so that if another witness should come thereafter and testify,
his testimony would be added to that of the first witness and he would
be liable; so also if after he confessed one witness appears, his
testimony should be added to the confession, and he should be liable to
pay four and five fold; but when he first confesses to both the theft
and the slaughtering, or only one witness testifies thereto, in which
case he makes himself liable to the payment of the principal, if even
thereafter another witness comes, his testimony is not to be added to
the confession, and he has to pay only the principal.

The Boraitha, viz.: "If one seeing witnesses coming confesses to the
theft, but denies the slaughtering," etc. Why does the Boraitha state as
it does? Let it state, " . . . and he admits that he stole it, *or* that
he slaughtered and sold it, he pays the principal only"? (And we would
infer from this that also when he even admits only the slaughtering, in
which case he seeks to be entirely free, it is nevertheless considered
an admission to make him liable for the principal?) We must therefore
say that it means to teach us that only when he confess to the theft
which makes him liable to the payment of the principal he is free (from
fine), but when he does not confess to the theft, but the same is proved
by witnesses and thereafter he admits that he slaughtered and sold it,
and subsequently the same is also proved by wit. nesses, in which case
he did not make himself liable even to the payment of the principal, he
is liable (also to pay fine). Hence, we see that the admission of having
slaughtered it (not coupled with the confession to the theft) is not
considered an admission at all? Nay, it may be said that it means to
teach us this very thing, viz.. Because he confessed to the theft,
although he did not admit that he slaughtered or sold it, and thereafter
witnesses testify that he slaughtered and sold it, he is nevertheless
free from four and five, for the Scripture reads, "four or five," but
not "four or three" (and here, when he confesses to the theft, he is
liable to the payment of the principal only, and if we should make him
liable for the slaughtering, etc., he would have to pay two more for a
sheep or three more for an ox, so that it would be "three or four," but
not "four or five").

"*If he stole and consecrated it, and thereafter slaughtered or sold
it*," etc. This would be correct in case of slaughtering, for at the
time of the slaughtering it was already consecrated property and not
that of the owner, But why should he not be liable for the consecration
itself--is this not considered a transfer from one

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

owner to another, and what difference is there whether he sold it to a
human being or to the sanctuary? Nay, there is a difference: In the
first case its name is changed, for before the sale he is the ox of
Reuben and after the sale he is the ox of Simeon, while when he
consecrated him he still continues to be known as "*Reuben's*
consecrated ox."

"*R. Simeon says*," etc. Now, when R. Simeon holds that there is no
difference whether he is sold to another person or sold to the
Sanctuary, then the reverse should be the conclusion: If his
responsibility still continues after the consecration, he should be
free, because it is still under his control; and if his responsibility
ceases upon the consecration he should be liable, for by the act of the
consecration he placed it under the control of the Sanctuary; and
according to him, it is the same as if he sold it to a commoner? R.
Simeon's statement has reference to the following Boraitha: "It may be
said that the payment of four and five fold applies neither to one who
steals stolen property from a thief, nor to one who steals consecrated
property from the house of him who consecrated it, because it is written
\[Ex. xx. 6\]: 'And it be stolen out of the *man's* house,' which means
but not out of the house of the Sanctuary." <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) R. Simeon says: If he is responsible for
the consecrated property, he is liable, for the reason that it is still
under his control, and the verse, "be stolen out of the *man's* house,"
is still to be applied, but not when it is not under his control. Rabha
questioned: If one makes a vow to bring a burnt-offering and sets aside
an ox for such offering, and thereafter the ox is stolen, may the thief
make restitution by returning a sheep, according to the rabbis, or a
dove or a pigeon, according to R. Elazar b. Azariah, as we have learned
in the following Mishna: "If one say, 'I oblige myself to bring a
burnt-offering,' he may bring a sheep; R. Elazar b. Azariah, however,
says that he may bring a dove or a pigeon." Now, how is the law in our
case: Shall we assume that the thief may say, "You obliged yourself to
bring a burnt-offering, and here it is," or the owner may say, "My wish
is to do this merit in the best manner possible"? After he questioned,
he himself answered: The restitution of the thief is acceptable
according to the rabbis if it is a sheep, and according to R. Elazar b.
Azariah if it is a fowl. R. A'ha the son of R. Iqa taught that the above

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

saying of, Rabha was not questioned and answered as stated above, but
was originally said so by him.

MISHNA *V*.: If the thief sells all but one-hundredth part of it, or he
is a co-owner of it, or he slaughters it illegally so that it becomes a
carrion, or he lacerates it (from the nostrils to the heart), or he
tears the trachea and gullet, he pays only double, but not four and five
fold.

GEMARA: What is meant by one-hundredth part of it? Said Rabh: It means
of the meat which is made permissible for use by the legal slaughtering
of the animal. Levi, however, holds even of the wool which is to be
shorn. So also was taught plainly in a Boraitha. But according to whom,
then, is Rabh's statement? According to R. Simeon b. Elazar of the
following Boraitha, who said: "If he sells all but one of its fore or
hind legs, he does not pay four and five fold; if, however, he sells all
but its horns or its wool, he does pay four and five fold." On what
point do they differ? The first Tana holds that "and kill it or sell it"
\[Ex. xxi. 37\] means, as in case of slaughtering, it must be the whole,
so also in case of sale. R. Simeon b. Elazar, however, holds that the
fore and hind legs, which require legal slaughtering, if he excluded
them from the sale, it is considered a sufficient remainder, and he is
free from payment of four and five fold; but the horns and wool, which
require no slaughtering, are not considered a sufficient remainder.

The rabbis taught: "One who steals an animal one leg of which is
missing, or which is lame or blind, or one who steals an animal
belonging to a co-partnership, is liable. But partners that steal
together are free." But have we not learned in another Boraitha that
partners are liable? Said R. Na'hman: This presents no difficulty: The
first Boraitha treats of a case where one partner stole of his
co-partner (and therefore it is not considered a sale of the whole, for
he himself is entitled to halo, and the other Boraitha treats of a case
where one partner steals from a third party. Rabha objected to R.
Na'hman: "Lest it be assumed that a partner who steals from his
co-partner, or two partners that steal together (from a third party),
should be liable, therefore it is written \[ibid\]. 'And kill it,' which
means the *whole* of it, which cannot be the case here?" Therefore said
R. Na'hman: This presents no difficulty: The Boraitha which states that
he is liable means a case where he slaughters it with the knowledge of
his co-partner (in which case he is considered the agent of the other
partner, and the act is that of both partners),

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

and the Boraitha which states that he is free means a case where he
slaughters it without the knowledge of his co-partner (in which case it
is considered that he slaughters the part stolen by his co-partner,
which he did without permission, and it was said above that if one
slaughters the animal stolen by another one is free from four and five
fold; for his own half, however, he cannot be liable, for it is not
considered the slaughtering of the whole).

The Rabbis taught: "If he steals it and gives it to another party who
slaughters, sells, or consecrates it; or he steals and sells it to
another party on credit, or exchanged it, or makes a present of it, or
gives it to his creditor in payment of a loan made to him, or he gives
it to his creditor in payment for merchandise sold to him on credit, or
makes it a bridal-gift--in all those cases he pays four and five fold."
What new thing does this mean to teach us? The first part, which states
the case where he gives it to another who slaughters it, means to teach
us that in this particular case he is liable for the act of his agent,
although in other cases one who appoints a messenger to commit a
transgression is not liable for the act of the messenger (see above, p.
[120](kam08.htm#page_120.md), and the latter part, which states that he
consecrates it, means to teach us that there is no difference whether he
sells it to an ordinary person or to the Sanctuary.[)](errata.htm#20.md)

MISHNA *VI*.: (The liability to the fine of four and five fold applies
only where the thief slaughters it after he acquired title to it, or he
slaughters it outside of the owner's premises, namely:) If he steals it
within the premises of the owner and slaughters or sells it
[outside](errata.htm#21.md) of it, or he steals it outside of the owner's
premises and slaughters or sells it within the premises, or the
stealing, slaughtering, and sale are outside of the owner's premises, he
pays four and five fold. If, however, the stealing, slaughtering, and
sale are within the owner's premises, he is free.

If while the thief is leading the animal out it dies, still within the
premises of the owner, he is free. If he lifts it up or leads it out of
the premises, and it dies, he is liable. If he redeems his first-born
son with it, or he gives it to his creditor, or to a gratuitous bailee
or to a borrower to do work with it, or to a bailee for hire, or to a
hirer, and the other person is drawing it forth and it dies while still
on the premises of the owner, he is free. If, however, he lifts it up or
he leads it out of the premises and it dies, he is liable.

GEMARA. Ameimar questioned: Was it enacted that a

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

bailee should not be liable unless he should first draw (see above) the
bailment, or not? Said R. Imar to him: Come and hear the statement of
our Mishna: "If he redeems his first-born son with it, or he gives it to
his creditor, etc., he is free." Does this not mean that the bailee drew
it? Infer from this that there is such an enactment. We have so also
learned in the following Boraitha: "R. Elazar said: As it was enacted
that a buyer has to acquire title by drawing the article he buys, so
also was it enacted that the bailee should draw the bailment when he
takes it under his control." So also we have learned in a Boraitha with
the addition: "And as title to real property can be acquired by money,
conveyance, and occupancy (*hazaka*), so also title to rents can be
acquired by those three." What kind of rents? Shall we assume rent of
personal property--can, then, personal property be rented by a
conveyance? Must it not be drawn? Said R. Hisda: Rent of real property
is meant.

R. Elazar said: If it was noticed that the thief was hiding himself in
the forest (for the purpose of stealing an animal) and he slaughters or
sells it therein, he pays four and five fold. Why so--he had not drawn
it? Said R. Hisda: The case was that he drove it on with a stick. But if
he did it so openly that it could be noticed, then he is a robber (and
not a thief, and according to the Scripture he is free from the payment
of four and five fold)? Nay, because he tried to hide himself, he is
considered a thief. Under what circumstances, then, can he be considered
a robber? Said R. Abbahu: As, for instance, Benayahu the son of
Yehoyada, of whom it is written \[II Samuel, xxxiii. 21\]: "And he
snatched the spear out of the Egyptian's hand and slew him with his own
spear." R. Johanan says: As, for instance, the men of Shechem, of whom
it is written \[Judges, ix. 25\]: "And the men of Shechem set persons to
lie in wait for him on the top of the mountains, and they robbed all
that passed by them on that way."

The disciples questioned R. Johanan b. Zakkai: Why did the Scripture
treat more rigorously with the thief than with the robber? He answered
them: Because the robber put the honor of his Creator at least on the
same level with that of His servant, while the thief did not do so, but,
on the contrary, considered the eye and car of Heaven as if it would not
see and hear; as it is written \[Is. xxix. 15\]: "Woe unto those that
seek to hide deeply their counsel from the Lord, so that their works may
be in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us?" etc.; and it is also
written \[Ps. xliv. 7\]: "And they say, The Lord will not see, and the
God

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

of Jacob will not take notice of it"; and it is also written \[Ezek. ix.
9\]: "For they have said, The Lord hath forsaken the land and the Lord
seeth not."

R. Meir said: The following parable was related in the name of R.
Gamaliel: To what is the above equal? To two persons who lived in one
and the same town. One made a feast and invited all the inhabitants of
the town, but not the princes; the other one made a feast and invited
neither the inhabitants nor the princes. Whose punishment ought to be
severer? Surely that of the first one.

The same said again: Ponder over the greatness of labor: In case of
stealing an ox which he prevented from laboring, the thief pays five; in
case of a sheep which does not perform any work, he pays only four. R.
Johanan b. Zakkai said: Ponder over the greatness of the honor of
creatures. For an ox who walks with his feet, he pays five; but for a
sheep, for which he had to humiliate himself by carrying it on his
shoulders, he pays only four.

MISHNA *VII*.: No tender cattle must be raised in Palestine, but they
may be raised in Syria and in the deserts of Palestine. No cocks or hens
must be raised in Jerusalem (even by laymen), because of the voluntary
offerings (the meat of which may be eaten in any part of the city, and
as the habit of the named fowls is to peck with their beaks in the
rubbish, they may peck into a dead reptile and then peck in the meat of
the offerings). In all other parts of Palestine priests only must not
raise them, as they use leave-offerings for their meals, and they must
be very careful about cleanliness. Swine must not be raised by Jews at
any place. One shall keep no dog unless on a chain, and no noose is to
be laid out for trapping pigeons unless fifty riss distant from
inhabited places.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: "No tender cattle must be raised in Palestine
but in its forests; in Syria, however, even in the inhabited places,
and, of course, in all other places." Another Boraitha states: No tender
cattle must be raised in Palestine but in the deserts of Judea, and in
those of the village of Achu; and although no tender cattle must be
raised, still large cattle may, for no restrictions are made for the
community unless most of the people can observe them. Tender cattle may,
but large cattle may not be imported from other countries. And although
they must not be raised, still they may be kept during the thirty days
immediately preceding a feast day, or the celebration of the wedding of
one's children. But this shall not be construed to mean

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

that they may be kept for thirty days, and that if some cattle were
bought less than thirty days before the feast day that one may continue
keeping them after the feast day until the expiration of the thirty
days, but that as soon as the feast day is over he must not keep them
any longer. The butcher, however, may buy and slaughter them at once, or
keep them (until the market day), provided that the cattle he bought
last shall not be kept after the market-day to complete the thirty days.

The disciples once questioned R. Gamaliel, whether it was permitted to
raise tender cattle, and he answered: "Yea." But have we not learned in
our Mishna that it is not? It must be said, therefore, that they
questioned him whether it was permitted to keep them, and he answered
them: "Yea, provided they are kept locked in the house, so that they
shall not go out and pasture with the flock."

The rabbis taught: It happened that a pious person was suffering from a
severe cough, and the physicians declared that he could not be cured
unless by drinking every morning fresh-drawn milk which was still warm.
He obtained a goat, which he tied to the leg of his bed, and drew her
milk every morning. Once his colleagues came to visit him, and on seeing
the goat tied to the leg of the bed they turned back, saying: There are
armed robbers in the house of this man (for the habit of a goat is to
stray upon other's fields), and shall we visit him? They sat down and
examined into his conduct, and found no other transgression in him
except that one. The pious one himself before he died said: I know that
there can be no other transgression found in me except the one of the
goat, that I disregarded the prohibition of my colleagues.

R. Ishmael said: My father's family was of the citizens of upper
Galilea, and why was that locality destroyed? Because they pastured
their young cattle in the forests and tried civil cases by one judge;
and although their forests were near their houses (in the immediate
neighborhood, and they were pasturing their cattle in their own
forests), still, a small-sized field was between those forests (which
belonged to strangers), and they used to pass their cattle over that
field.

The rabbis taught: "A shepherd (who raises tender cattle) that repented,
we do not compel him to sell out all his cattle at once, but he may do
so by degrees. So also is the case with a proselyte who inherited dogs
and swine; we do not compel him to sell out all at once. So, also, one
who made a vow to buy a

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

house or marry a woman in Palestine; we do not compel him to do so until
he finds one fit for him. It happened once with a woman whom her son
used to annoy, that she swore that she would marry the first one who
would propose to her, and unsuitable persons came forward with
propositions. When this came before the sages, they declared that her
intention was only for a suitable person.

As it was said that no tender cattle must be raised (in Palestine), so
also was it said that no tender beasts should be raised. R. Ishmael,
however, said that hunters' dogs, cats, monkeys, and weasels might be
raised, for they are kept for the purpose of keeping the house clean. R.
Jehudah said in the name of Rabh: We follow in Babylon the practice
prevailing in Palestine regarding tender cattle. Said R. Ada b. Ahba to
R. Huna: But do not you raise tender cattle? He answered: Mine are taken
care of by Haubah my wife. According to others, R. Huna said: We follow
in Babylon the practice prevailing in Palestine regarding tender cattle
since Rabh settled in Babylon (whom many followed from Palestine and who
bought or rented all the land in Babylon). Rabh, Samuel, and R. Assi
happened to meet at a circumcision feast, and according to others at a
redemption feast. Rabh declined to enter the house before Samuel, and
Samuel declined to enter before R. Assi, and the latter in his turn
refused to enter before Rabh. It was then decided that Samuel should
wait until Rabh and R. Assi had entered. (But why did Rabh refuse to
enter before Samuel, he was surely greater than Samuel?) Rabh simply
paid this courtesy to Samuel on account of his cursing him (see Sabbath,
pp. 221-222). While they were so discussing a cat came and bit off the
arm of the child, after which Rabh lectured that it is permitted to kill
a cat and prohibited to keep it and that there can be no robbery in
respect to it, and that if a cat gets lost no one need return it to its
owner. If it is permitted to kill it, is it not self evident that it is
prohibited to keep it? Lest one say that there is no prohibition to kill
it but it may also be kept, hence the statement. Again, if it says that
there can be no robbery in respect to it, why, then, the statement that
it need not be returned to its owner if lost? Said Rabhina: It means
even as far as its skin is concerned. An objection was raised from our
Mishna: "R. Simeon b. Elazar said: Dogs, cats, etc."? This presents no
difficulty. A black one may, but a white one may not. But in the case of
Rabh, was it not a black one? It was a black descending from a white
one.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

R. A'ha b. Papa said in the name of R. Hanina b. Papa <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) the following three things: (*a*.md) In case
of a plague of the itch a fast day with the blowing of the horn may be
ordered on the Sabbath; (*b*) if the door of success is closed to one,
it will not open soon; and (*c*) if one buy a house in Palestine, the
deed may be written and executed even on Sabbath. What does the
statement, "if the door of success," etc., mean? Said Mar Zutra: The
granting of a diploma for a rabbi <span id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42.md).
R. Ashi said: It means that when one falls into misfortune he cannot
soon recover. "If one buy, etc., the deed, etc., on Sabbath." Does it
really mean that the Sabbath may be violated in such a case? Nay, it
means as Rabha said, that a Gentile may be told to do it, although in
ordinary cases the rabbis prohibited it on account of Sabbath-rest;
still, in this particular case they did not. R. Samuel b. Na'hmani said
in the name of R. Jonathan: One who buys a town in Palestine is
compelled also to buy a tract of land around it to make it accessible
from all four sides, in order to promote settlement in Palestine.

The rabbis taught: "Upon the following ten conditions did Joshua divide
the land to the settlers: (*a*) That one may pasture his cattle in the
forest of another; (*b*) he may gather wood upon another's field; (*c*)
grass may be gathered on another's field at any place, except that of
the carob-bean; (*d*) a branch may be cut off a tree at any place,
except of an olive tree; (*e*) the townspeople may use the water of
springs even newly opened by strangers; (*f*) nets may be spread in the
Tiberian waters by every one for fishing purposes, provided he does not
stake them so as to interfere with navigation; (*g*) one may evacuate
behind a fence even of a field of saffron; (*h*) one may walk the cross
way (opened on a field) until the second quarter of the season; (*i*)
one may walk the side road when the main road is cloddy; (*j*) one who
lost his way in a vineyard might raise and lower the tree branches in
trying to find it; and, lastly, (*k*) a stranger who dies in a field
should be interred in the place where he dies (see Erubin, p. 38)." Are
there only ten, are there not eleven enumerated? The condition that one
may walk the cross-walks was not made by Joshua but by Solomon, as we
have learned in the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

following Boraitha: When all the fruit is gathered in from the field and
the owner still permits no one to enter his field, do not people murmur
and say: What benefit does that man derive from it and what injury would
the people cause him by crossing his field? Of him the verse says: When
you can afford to be good, do not cause people to call you bad. Is
there, then, such a verse to be found in Scripture? There is a verse
similar to it, viz. \[Proverbs, iii. 27\]: "Withhold not a benefit from
him who is deserving it, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it."

But are there no more than those enumerated? Is there not another one,
of which R. Jehudah speaks in the following Boraitha: "R. Jehudah says:
During the manuring season, etc., for on this condition did Joshua, etc.
(supra, p. [66](kam06.htm#page_66).md)?" Again, there are those enumerated
in the following Boraitha: R. Ishmael the son of R. Johanan b. Broka
says: The court declared the following conditions to have been made by
Joshua when he distributed the land among Israel: (*a*) That one may
enter his neighbor's orchard to cut off a tree branch and use it in
saving his bee-hive, paying the owner of the orchard the value thereof;
(*b*) one shall empty his vessel containing wine and save therewith his
neighbor's honey (if one carrying wine and one carrying honey met
together and the vessel containing the honey broke), and receive from
him the value of the wine; (*c*) one shall unload his wood and load on
his neighbor's hemp (under circumstances similar to those stated above),
and get from him the value of his wood? The Boraitha enumerated only
those which were declared to have been so unanimously, but not those
that were stated by individuals without being supported by their
colleagues.

But did not R. Abin upon his return (from Palestine) say in the name of
R. Johanan that one more condition was made by Joshua, namely, that
whether it be a tree branching over into a neighboring field or one
standing near the boundary, he may bring the first-fruit to Jerusalem
and read the scriptural passages \[Deut. xxvi. 51; and if the
above-enumerated ten conditions were a Boraitha, R. Johanan, who was
(not a Tana but only) an Amora, would not contradict it? Therefore it
must be said that the phrase, "The rabbis taught. Ten conditions,"
mentioned above does not mean that it was a Boraitha (as it usually
indicates), but that it was taught by R. Jehoshua b. Levi (who was also
an Amora, and R. Johanan may differ with him). R. Gebiah of the city of
Khthil taught so plainly: R. Tanhum and R.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brice said in the
name of the certain elder who was R. Jehoshua b. Levi, that ten
conditions did Joshua make with the settlers.

Ten enactments were enacted by Ezra, viz.: (*a*) That portions of the
Scripture should be read at the Saturday afternoon prayer; (*b*) on
Mondays and Thursdays; (*c*) the court should be open on Mondays and
Thursdays; (*d*) clothes should be washed on Thursdays (for the honor of
the Sabbath); (*e*) garlic should be eaten on the eve of Sabbath; (*f*)
a woman should do her baking early in the morning (so as to have fresh
bread for the poor who should ask for it); (*g*) a woman should wear
underwear; (*h*) a woman should comb her hair before immersing (in the
legal bath); (*i*) vendors should travel from town to town and peddle
their wares unmolested. He also enacted immersion (in a legal bath) for
those who see Keri (wet-dreams). Ten things were said of the city of
Jerusalem (when it was the capital of Palestine): (*a*) Real property
should always be redeemed by the seller; (*b*) if a slain person is
found in the neighborhood of Jerusalem, the ceremony of the heifer
\[Deut. xxi.\] should not be performed; (*c*) it should never be
declared a condemned town \[Deut. xiii. 14\]; (*d*) the laws of plagues
\[Levi. xiv. 35\] should not apply to the houses of Jerusalem; (*e*) no
beams should be permitted to protrude, nor any corner boards (Erubin, p.
40); (*f*) no dumping places for rubbish should be permitted therein;
(*g*) no potter's kiln should be permitted to be constructed therein;
(*h*) no gardens or orchards should be permitted there except those of
roses, that existed since the time of the first prophets; (*i*) no hens
or cocks should be raised; and (*j*) no dead body should remain
over-night in the city (but should be carried out of the city).

"*No swine is permitted to be raised at any place*." The rabbis taught:
"During the civil war of the Maccabees, Hurkanoth was within and
Aristobulos was without the city wall, and every day those within
lowered by means of a chair a basket full of dinars from the top of the
wall to those outside, and the latter sent them up cattle for the daily
sacrifices. Among the outsiders was an old man who was learned in Greek
science, and he said to them: So long as your enemies continue to
perform the holy service you will not subdue them. On the next day, when
the basket of dinars was lowered, they sent them up a swine. When the
swine reached the centre of the wall he fastened his feet in the wall,
and Palestine trembled for a distance of four hundred square parsa. At
that time it was declared that cursed be he who raised swine and cursed
be he who taught his sons Greek

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

science. Of that time it was taught (Tract Mena'hoth, p. 64*b*) that the
omer was brought from the gardens of Zriphin and the two loaves from the
valley of Ein Sokher."

But is, then, the study of Greek science prohibited--have we not learned
in the following Boraitha: "Rabbi said: In Palestine there is no use for
the Syriac language, which is not clear, when there are the Holy
language (pure Hebrew) and the Greek language, both of which are very
clear; and R. Jose said: In Babylon there is no use for the Aramean
language, for there are the Holy language and the Persian language"? It
maybe said: Greek language is one thing and Greek *science* is another.
But is, then, the study of Greek science prohibited--has not R. Jehudah
said in the name of Samuel: So said R. Simeon b. Gamaliel: It is written
\[Lam. iii. 5 I \]: "My eye affected my soul because of all the
daughters of my city. There were a thousand young men in my father's
house, five hundred of whom studied Scripture and five hundred *Greek
science*, and of all of them only two remained--I here and my nephew in
Assia"? R. Gamaliel's house was an exception, for its proximity to the
government, as is stated in a Boraitha: "He who cuts his hair χομη
imitates the ways of the Amorites, which are prohibited \[Lev. xviii.
3\]. Abtulmus bar Reuben, however, was permitted to do so, for he had
stood near the government. The house of R. Gamaliel was permitted to
study Greek science for the same reason."

"*No dog shall be kept*," etc. The rabbis taught: No one shall raise a
dog unless he is kept on a chain, or unless in a town adjoining the
frontier, in which he is permitted to keep him without a chain only in
the night-time. There is a Boraitha: R. Eliezer the great said: The
raising of dogs is equivalent to the raising of swine. For what purpose
is this equivalence? That the curse said of him who raises swine should
apply also to him.

R. Joseph b. Maniumi said in the name of R. Na'hman: Babylon
\[Nahardea\] is considered a city located at the frontier.

R. Dosthai of Biri lectured: It is written \[Numb. x. 36\]: "And when it
rested, he said, Return, O Lord, among the myriads of the thousands of
Israel." Infer from this that the Shekhina does not rest on Israel
unless they number two myriads two thousand. If it should happen that
this number should be one less and there should be a pregnant woman
whose child when born would complete it, and a dog should bark and cause
the woman to miscarry, it would appear that he caused the Shekhina to
withdraw from Israel.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

It happened with a woman that entered a house to bake there, etc. (See
Sabbath, p. 124).

"*No nets are spread*," etc. But do we go as far as that? Have we not
learned in the following Mishna: "Dove-cots may be located at a distance
of fifty ells from a town"? Said Abayi: They fly for a much longer
distance, but as to pecking up food they do so only within fifty ells.
But do they fly only thirty ris? <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)
Have we not learned in the following Boraitha that nets should not be
spread out in the neighborhood of inhabited places, even at a distance
of one hundred mil? R. Joseph said that "inhabited" means where
vineyards are laid out, Rabba said that it means where dove-cots are
kept. If so, let him say that it must not be done for the doves
themselves, in order that they should not be caught in? If you wish, it
can be answered that the doves are ownerless; and if you wish, it can be
answered that he himself is the owner of the doves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[151:1](kam10.htm#fr_37.md) Leeser does not
translate this word literally.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[156:1](kam10.htm#fr_38.md) This is explained in
Section Moed.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[158:1](kam10.htm#fr_39.md) R. Meir's statement and
the full discussion of it will be found translated in the forthcoming
tracts at the proper place.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[170:1](kam10.htm#fr_40.md) Because it now belongs
to the Sanctuary and not to him who consecrated it, it is considered as
if it would be stolen from the house of the Sanctuary.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[177:1](kam10.htm#fr_41.md) Papa had many children,
and the Gemara is not certain who of them was the author of this
statement.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[177:2](kam10.htm#fr_42.md) There were many sages
who were worthy of this honor, but circumstances prevented them from
getting the diploma. The well-known Samuel was one of them, (See Vol.
XI., Tract Baba Metzia.)

<span id="fn_43"></span>[181:1](kam10.htm#fr_43.md) Seven and a half ris
equalled one Palestinian mile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](kam11.md)
