[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18108)  [Next](sbe18110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

1\. *As to* that which is written <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[3](#fn_1200), that it is declared in the Sakâ*d*ûm
*Nask* <span id="fr_1205"></span>[4](#fn_1201), that the consecrated
bull's

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

urine, when it becomes fetid, is to be stirred up (ba*r*â
agâr*d*ŏîni*s*nŏ), *and* they should not carry *it* forth so to the
fire, so that the stench extends to the fire; because, if that stench
extends to the fire, on account of the moisture *and* through carrying
bodily refuse (hîgar) <span id="fr_1206"></span>[1](#fn_1202) on and
forth to the fire, it overwhelms it; that is taught *in* like manner
lest, and owing to what is said, it then seemed to one that the bodily
refuse and pollution of fetid bull's urine is on account of the stench.
2. But it is proper to observe it more fully mindfully, perfectly
completely, *and* with better understanding, because that which is said
by it, that the carrying of bodily refuse forth to the fire overwhelms
*it*, is not on account of the pollution of the bull's urine, but the
proportion of the sin through this; so that it becomes the origin of as
much sin for him as that pollution of the bull's urine; but the stench,
on account of moisture, is like *him* even who shall bring clean *and*
purified water into the fire, *and* thereby becomes sinful <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[2](#fn_1203)

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

3\. This, too, is a saying, that the proportion of the sin is mentioned
not on account of the pollution of the bull's urine; it is said *to be*
a counterpart even of that *which* is declared of the care of the *flesh
of the* ass and pig, so that when they shall now carry unto the fire
more than the proportion which is ordered, it overwhelms *it* through
carrying bodily refuse forth to the fire, and even then that flesh,
investigated as to purity, is mentioned as a supply for the
season-festival <span id="fr_1208"></span>[1](#fn_1204).

4\. The fetid bull's urine is itself likewise prepared, so that on this
account it is ordered that *it* is to be stirred up, that so long as
*it* is stirred up they *may* thereupon order the use of it; if then
*it* is to be rendered quite useless, *there* is afterwards no necessity
for stirring it. 5. The stirring is declared a purification as regards
polluted *things*, where bodily refuse is only such that *it* is not
endless, and so pure that it purifies even that of another.

6\. When *it* is written of it itself, that *it* is thus declared in the
Sakâ*d*ûm *Nask*, that consecrated bull's urine which is fetid is to be
stirred up for the fire, *it* is afterwards declared that *it* is not
speaking *only of* the bull's urine *which* is provided those three
days <span id="fr_1209"></span>[2](#fn_1205); but that, too, which is
old *and* consecrated,

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

become fetid *and* is stirred again, when they keep it in use, is
proper. 7. And that which the Sakâ*d*ûm *has* declared is, specially,
that one of the high-priests *has* individually said: 'That stench is
mentioned with reference to the *occasion* when a stench reaches it of a
different kind *from that* which exists naturally in it.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[309:3](sbe18109.htm#fr_1204) In the epistle
to which he is replying.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[309:4](sbe18109.htm#fr_1205) This was the
eighteenth of the lost books of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers (see Sls. X, 25,
note). It was one of the seven law books, and treated of many legal
matters. Among the contents of its first thirty sections the following
items are mentioned by the Dînka*rd*, <span id="page_310">p. 310</span>
and one of these passages probably contained the statement quoted in our
text:--'On carrying forth the holy-water and also the pot (dîgŏ-*k*) to
the fire, that is, *with* purified *and* thoroughly-washed hands; *and*
the sin of carrying *them* forth with unpurified *and*
imperfectly-washed hands. On preserving the pot and the other *things*,
whose use is with the fire, from defilement with bodily refuse; when,
through want of care, defilement occurs, *and* any one shall carry *it*
unawares to the fire, he who is careless overwhelms *it* thereby. . . .
On lawfully warming the bull's urine on the fire, *and* the sin when
*it* is not *done* lawfully.'

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[310:1](sbe18109.htm#fr_1206) See Dd. XLVIII,
19, note.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[310:2](sbe18109.htm#fr_1207) The argument is
that the urine being a consecrated liquid, its corruption is not
contaminating (provided it be not occasioned by foreign matter, as
alluded to in § 7); but if the stench be sufficient to extinguish or
injure the fire, it is as sinful to expose the fire to its influence as
it would be to injure the fire with holy-water.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[311:1](sbe18109.htm#fr_1208) So the damage to
the fire is not occasioned by any impurity of the flesh of the ass or
pig (which could be used for a sacred feast), but by the excessive
quantity brought to it. The pig was formerly domesticated by the Parsis
(see Sls. II, 58), but they have long since adopted the prejudices of
the Hindus and Muhammadans as regards its uncleanness.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[311:2](sbe18109.htm#fr_1209) Referring
probably to the times of the three washings, subsequent to the chief
ceremony, which take place after the third, sixth, and ninth nights,
respectively, (see Vend. IX, 136, 140, 144.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](sbe18110)
