[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18123)  [Next](sbe18125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

### II. THE NÎRANG-I KUSTÎ.

THE Nîrang-i Kustî, or girdle formula, is a religious rite which a Parsi
man or woman ought to perform every time the hands have been washed,
whether for the sake of cleanliness, or in preparation for prayer; but
it is not always strictly performed in all its details.

The Kustî, or sacred thread-girdle, is a string about the size of a
stay-lace, and long enough to pass three times very loosely round the
waist, to be tied twice in a double knot, and to leave the short ends
hanging behind. It is composed of seventy-two very fine, white, woollen
threads, as described in Dd. XXXIX, 1, note, and is. tied in the manner
there mentioned, but with the actions and ritual detailed below <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1](#fn_1475).

The ceremonial ablution having been performed, and the Kustî taken off,
the person stands facing the sun by day, or a lamp or the moon at night;
when there is no light he should face the south, as he should also at
midday, even when the sun is northerly <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[2](#fn_1476). The Kustî is then doubled, and the
loop thus formed is held in the right hand, with the thumb in the loop;
while the left hand holds the two parts of the string together, some
twenty inches horizontally from the other hand; and the ends hang
loosely from the left hand.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

Holding the Kustî in this fashion, the person recites the following
prayer in Pâzand, bowing and raising to his forehead the horizontal
portion of the string at the name of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, dashing the string
loosely and sharply downwards towards the left when mentioning Aharman,
and repeating this downward jerk to the left, less violently, as each of
the other evil beings is named:--'May Aûha*r*ma*zd* be lord! *and*
Aharman unprevailing, keeping far away, smitten, *and* defeated! May
Aharman, the demons, the fiends, the wizards, the wicked, the Kîks, the
Karaps <span id="fr_1483"></span>[1](#fn_1477), the tyrants, the
sinners, the apostates, the impious, the enemies, *and* the witches be
smitten *and* defeated! May evil sovereigns be unprevailing! May the
enemies be confounded! May the enemies be unprevailing!'

Bending forwards and holding the doubled Kustî up, horizontally, as
before, he continues: 'Aûha*r*ma*zd* *is* the lord; of all sin I am *in*
renunciation and penitent, of all kinds of evil thoughts, evil words,
*and* evil deeds, whatever *was* thought by me, and spoken by me, and
done by me, and happened through me, and has originated through me in
the world.'

Then, holding the Kustî single with both hands near the middle of the
string, but as far apart as before, while the loose ends of the string
are shortened

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (to prevent their
touching the ground) by being partially gathered up in a large loop
hanging under each hand, like a pair of spectacles, he proceeds: 'For
those sins of thought, word, *and* deed, of body *and* soul, worldly
*and* spiritual, do thou pardon this one <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1](#fn_1478)! I am penitent *and* in renunciation
through the three words <span id="fr_1485"></span>[2](#fn_1479).'

He then continues to recite the following Avesta phrases: 'Satisfaction
for Ahura-mazda!' bowing and raising the Kustî to the forehead; 'scorn
for Angra-mainyu!' jerking the Kustî to the left, without altering the
mode of holding it; 'which is the most forward of actual exertions
through the will. Righteousness is the best good, a blessing it is; a
blessing *be* to that which *is* righteousness to perfect
rectitude <span id="fr_1486"></span>[3](#fn_1480).' Applying the middle
of the Kustî to the front of the waist at the first word,
'righteousness,' of the last sentence, it is passed twice round the
waist during the remainder of the sentence, by the hands meeting behind,
exchanging ends, and bringing them round again to the front.

The following Avesta formula is then recited: 'As a *patron* spirit is
to be chosen, so is an *earthly* master, for the sake of righteousness,
*to be* a giver of good thought of the actions of life towards Ma*zd*a;
and the dominion is for the lord whom he has given

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

*as* a protector for the poor <span id="fr_1487"></span>[1](#fn_1481).'
At the first word the long ends of the Kustî, hanging in front, are
loosely twisted round each other at the waist, with a right-handed turn
(that is, with the sun), and the reciter, holding his hands together,
should think that Aûha*r*ma*zd* is the sole creator of the good
creation, until he comes to the word 'actions,' after which the twist is
drawn closer to the waist during the remainder of the recitation.

The same Avesta formula is then repeated. At the first word the second
half of the knot is formed, by twisting the long ends of the Kustî
loosely round each other with a left-handed turn (that is, against the
sun), so as to complete a loose reef-knot, and the reciter, holding his
hands together, should think that Ma*zd*a-worship is the true faith,
until he comes to the word 'actions,' after which the complete double
knot is drawn close during the remainder of the recitation.

Then, passing the long ends of the Kustî round the waist for the third
time, from front to back, the previous Avesta formula, 'Righteousness is
the best good,' &c., is recited. At the first word the ends of the Kustî
are loosely twisted round each other behind the waist, with a
right-handed turn as before, and the reciter should think that
Zaratû*s*t was the true apostle, until he comes to the first occurrence
of the word 'blessing,' when the twist is drawn close. During the
remainder of the formula the second half of the knot is formed, with a
left-handed twist as before, while the reciter thinks that he must
practise

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, and avoid all evil thoughts,
evil words, and evil deeds; the double knot being completed behind as
the last word of the formula is uttered.

Afterwards, bending forward and holding the front knot of the Kustî with
both hands, the person recites the following Avesta formula: 'Come for
my protection, O Ma*zd*a <span id="fr_1488"></span>[1](#fn_1482)! A
Ma*zd*a-worshipper am I, a Zarathu*s*trian Ma*zd*a-worshipper will I
profess *myself*, both praising and preferring *it*. I praise a
well-considered thought, I praise a well-spoken word, I praise a
well-performed deed. I praise the Ma*zd*a-worshipping religion,
expelling controversy <span id="fr_1489"></span>[2](#fn_1483) *and*
putting down attack, *and* the righteous union of kinsfolk <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[3](#fn_1484), which is the greatest and best and
most excellent of things that exist and will exist, which is Ahurian
*and* Zarathu*s*trian. I ascribe all good to Ahura-mazda. Let this be
the eulogy of the Ma*zd*a-worshipping religion.' And the reciter then
repeats the formula, 'Righteousness is the best good,' &c., as before,
bowing reverently, which completes the rite.

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

During the rite the person performing it must remain standing on the
same spot, without stepping either backwards or forwards, and must speak
to no one. Should anything compel him to speak, he must re-commence the
rite after the interruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[383:1](sbe18124.htm#fr_1481) For most of the
details which follow I am indebted to Dastûr Jâmâspji Minochiharji
Jâmâsp-Âsâ-nâ.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[383:2](sbe18124.htm#fr_1482) As it is, in
Bombay, for about two months in the summer.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[384:1](sbe18124.htm#fr_1483) These two
Pahlavi names are merely transliterations of the Av. Kavi and Karapan,
the names of certain classes of evil-doers, traceable back to the
earliest times, and, probably, to the Vedic kavi and kalpa, which would
naturally be used in a bad sense in the Avesta (see Haug's Essays, p.
289). The Pahlavi translators of the Yasna explain these names by the
words kûr, 'blind,' and kar, 'deaf,' which are merely guesses.

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[385:1](sbe18124.htm#fr_1484) The Pâzand word
is ukhê or aokhê, which the Gu*g*arâti Khurdah Avesta translates by
khudâtâelâ, 'most high God;' but it seems more probably a misreading of
Pahl. hanâ-*i*, 'this one.' These phrases are a portion of the Patit or
renunciation of sin.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[385:2](sbe18124.htm#fr_1485) That is, in
thought, word, and deed. So far the phrases are recited in Pâzand, but
the following recitations are in the Avesta language.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[385:3](sbe18124.htm#fr_1486) This last
sentence is the Ashem-vohû formula (see Bd. XX, 2).

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[386:1](sbe18124.htm#fr_1487) This is the
Ahunavar, or Yathâ-ahû-vairyô formula (see Bd. I, 21, Zs. I, 12-19).

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[387:1](sbe18124.htm#fr_1488) What follows is
from Yas. XIII, 25-29, and is the conclusion of the Ma*zd*a-worshipper's
creed.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[387:2](sbe18124.htm#fr_1489) The meaning of
the original term fraspâyaokhedhrãm is rather uncertain, and the Pahlavi
version is not easy to understand clearly; it translates this sentence,
as far as the next epithet, as follows: 'I praise the good religion of
the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, from which the disunion cast forth and the
assault put down are manifest (this is manifest from it, that it is not
desirable to go to others without controversy, and with that which
arises without controversy it is quite requisite to occasion
controversy):

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[387:3](sbe18124.htm#fr_1490) This is one of
the earliest references to *hv*aêtvadatha, or marriage among
next-of-kin; the passage being written in the later Gâtha dialect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Meaning of Khvêtûk-das or Khvêtûdâ*d*](sbe18125)
