[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18049)  [Next](sbe18051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIII.

1\. *As to* the forty-second question and reply, that which you ask is
thus: *Regarding* a man who is consecrating a sacred cake <span
id="fr_527"></span>[3](#fn_525), and the fire is his household attendant
(khavag-î mânô) from afar, when he sees *it*, at how many steps is it
improper? 2. When they consecrate a sacred cake by *light of* a lamp,
why do they not say *the words* 'tava âthrô (for thee, the fire),' as
*by* another fire? 3. And of the propitiatory dedications
(shnûmanŏihâ) <span id="fr_528"></span>[4](#fn_526) to the period of the
day (gâh), the day, and the month of the consecration of the sacred
cake, which is that

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

which when earlier *or* later is also then not proper, *and* which is
that which is proper? 4. When they shall accomplish the consecration of
a sacred cake *with* one more dedication *than those* of the thirty days
of the months in the year, how is it necessary to act so that it may not
enter *too* early; and which is the one more dedication which, when they
shall make *it*, is proper, which is that which is not proper, and which
is that which is earlier and later?

5\. The reply is this, that at forty-eight <span
id="fr_529"></span>[1](#fn_527) feet from the sacred twigs <span
id="fr_530"></span>[2](#fn_528) to the fire--which would be about nine
reeds, *if* of a medium man--even though *one* 

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

sees the fire *and* does not say 'tava âthrô <span
id="fr_531"></span>[1](#fn_529),' it is proper. 6. And a lamp also has
the same contingency (ham-brâh) as a fire; and by our teaching they do
not consecrate a sacred cake *at* a lamp on which there is no burning of
firewood, *but* they should cause a burning of firewood on that at which
they consecrate a sacred cake, and they say 'tava âthrô <span
id="fr_532"></span>[2](#fn_530).'

7\. And *there is* a propitiatory dedication *for* each separate
consecration of a sacred cake, and not again from the first to the
last <span id="fr_533"></span>[3](#fn_531); and the first is the nearest
to the first day, Aûha*r*ma*zd*, just as Âtûr ('fire') *and* Â*v*ân
('waters') are other days in the series; and the last is the day Anîrân,
because in the same series the day Anîrân is the latest <span
id="fr_534"></span>[4](#fn_532). 8. When the seven

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

archangels are in the propitiatory dedication it is proper to put the
seven archangels first in their own order, then the period of the
day <span id="fr_535"></span>[1](#fn_533), then the day, then the month
of the consecration, and, afterwards, the other dedications in such
order as they are written.

9\. And as to the earlier which they should put later, one is when they
shall put a dedication before the seven archangels, one is that when
they shall put the day before the period of the day, one is when they
shall put the month before the day, and one is that when a dedication,
distinct from the seven archangels, the period of the day, the day, and
the month, on account of being before the archangels, or before the
period of the day, or before the day, or before the month, is accounted
as improper a dedication

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

as *that of* yesterday, *or* the day before, is for this day.

10\. So that when *it is* the propitiatory dedication for the day Khûr
of the month of consecration Â*v*ân <span
id="fr_536"></span>[1](#fn_534), the day *and* month are such that their
order and the Âtûr ('fire') and Â*v*ân ('waters') succeeding them are
thereby set in reverse order to the *proper* sequence <span
id="fr_537"></span>[2](#fn_535). 11. Then, too, when in the same
month <span id="fr_538"></span>[3](#fn_536) its propitiatory dedication
for the day *and* month becomes *alike for* day and month <span
id="fr_539"></span>[4](#fn_537), it is recited as regards *both* the
month and the 'waters' (â*v*ân), because *they are* not connected
together and *have* again become non-inclusive; *and* then *one* is to
consider them as proper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_525"></span>[141:3](sbe18050.htm#fr_527) See Chap. XXX, I.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[141:4](sbe18050.htm#fr_528) See Chap. XXIX, I.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[142:1](sbe18050.htm#fr_529) K35 has
'forty-seven.' Taking the foot at 10½ English inches (see Bd. XXVI, 3 n)
the 48 feet would be 42 English feet, and the nâî or reed would be 4
feet 8 inches.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[142:2](sbe18050.htm#fr_530) The baresôm (Av.
baresma), or bundle of sacred twigs, is an indispensable part of the
ceremonial apparatus; it is held in the hand of the officiating priest
while reciting many parts of the liturgy, and is frequently washed with
water and sprinkled with milk. It consists of a number of slender rods,
varying with the nature of the ceremony, but usually from five to
thirty-three. These rods were formerly twigs cut from some particular
trees, but now thin metal wires are generally used; and when not in the
hand of the priest they are laid upon the crescent-shaped tops of two
adjacent metal stands, each called a mâh-rû, 'moon-face,' and both
together forming the baresôm-din or 'twig-stand.' The baresôm is
prepared for the sacred rites by the officiating priest while reciting
certain prayers (see Haug's Essays, pp. 396--399), during which he
washes the twigs with water, and ties them together with a kûstîk, or
girdle, formed of six thread-like ribbons split out of a leaflet of the
date-palm and twisted together. This girdle, being passed twice round
the middle of the bundle of twigs, is secured with a right-handed and
left-handed knot on one side of the bundle, and is then passed round a
third time and secured with a similar double knot on the other side,
exactly as the kûstîk or sacred thread-girdle is secured round the waist
of a Parsi man or woman (see Chap. XXXIX, 1).

<span id="fn_529"></span>[143:1](sbe18050.htm#fr_531) These Avesta
words, meaning 'for thee, the fire,' are used when addressing the fire,
or presenting anything to it, such as fire-wood and incense (see Yas.
III, 52, VII, 3, XXII, 10, 22, &C.); they are not to be used, however,
when the fire is so far off, or so feeble, that its light cannot be seen
by the speaker (see Sls. X, 37).

<span id="fn_530"></span>[143:2](sbe18050.htm#fr_532) Meaning that in
his opinion a lamp is no proper substitute for a sacred fire unless a
little firewood is burnt in it.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[143:3](sbe18050.htm#fr_533) In the liturgy for
the consecration of the sacred cakes, which consists chiefly of Yas.
III, 1--VIII, 9 (see Haug's Essays, p. 408), the portion contained in
Yas. III, IV, VI, VII is filled with propitiatory formulas, some of
which are fixed, but others vary according to the hour, day, and month
of the service. Some of the variable propitiatory dedications for the
day and month are, however, identical with some of the fixed ones, such
as those for fire, waters, &c. And in case of the day or month requiring
the use of a variable dedication of this description, the object of the
text is to prohibit the use of the corresponding, fixed dedication,
which would be an unnecessary repetition of the same words. This appears
to he the meaning of the words va akha*r* min zak-î levînŏ va*l* akha*r*
lâ translated in the text; but it would be hardly possible to express so
simple a meaning in a more obscure fashion.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[143:4](sbe18050.htm#fr_534) The series of
propitiatory dedications for the thirty days of the <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> month (which are also used for months of the
same names) constitute the Sirôzah, which is given in two forms, one in
which the names and titles are in the, genitive case, and the other in
which they are in the accusative. From the first form of the Sirôzah the
proper dedications for the actual day and month are taken and
substituted for Yas. III, 50, 51, IV, 40, 41, VII, 41, 42 (which
passages, as they stand, are correct only for the first day,
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, of the first month, Fravar*d*în); and from the second
form of the Sirôzah they are similarly taken and substituted for Yas.
VI, 37, 38; somewhat in the same way as the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel
for the day are taken from the complete series of such writings, and
inserted in the Communion service of the Church of England. The first
day is Aûha*r*ma*zd*, the ninth day and ninth month are Âtûr, the tenth
day and eighth month are. Â*v*ân, and the last day is Anîrân. Following
these variable dedications for the day and month are the fixed
dedications for Âtûr, 'fire,' and Â*v*ân, 'waters,' unless they have
been already recited for the day or month.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[144:1](sbe18050.htm#fr_535) The dedication for
the gâh or period of the day occupies the place of Yas. III, 21-37 (in
which the formulas for all five gâhs are given); so that when the
archangels are to be propitiated the dedications for them must precede
Yas. III, 21.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[145:1](sbe18050.htm#fr_536) The eleventh day
of the eighth month.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[145:2](sbe18050.htm#fr_537) The meaning is
that in such a case the dedications for the day and month, and the fire
and waters (Yas. III, 52, 53) which follow, will stand in the following
order:--Khûr, Â*v*ân, Âtûr (the second Â*v*ân being omitted as directed
by § 7), which is precisely the reverse order of those names among the
days of the month.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[145:3](sbe18050.htm#fr_538) The eighth month,
Â*v*ân.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[145:4](sbe18050.htm#fr_539) That is, on the
tenth day of the eighth month, when both day and month are Â*v*ân, in
which case there would be three Â*v*ân dedications, but only two are to
he used as here directed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV](sbe18051)
