[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18024)  [Next](sbe18026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVII.

1\. The sixteenth question is that which you ask thus: What is the
purpose <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_101) of giving up a corpse to
the birds?

2\. The reply is this, that the construction of the body of those passed
*away* is so wonderful that two co-existences have come together for
*it*, one which is to occasion endurance (dêr pa*d*âyînî*d*anŏ) *and*
one which is to cause conflict (nipôr*d*înî*d*anŏ), and their natures
are these, for watching the angels *and* averting the demons. 3. After
appertaining *to it* the life--so long as *it is* in the locality of the
place of the body--and the demons of dull intellects, *who* are
frightened by the body, are just like a sheep startled by wolves when
they shall further frighten *it* by a wolf <span
id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_102). 4. The spirit of the body, on account
of being the spiritual life (hûkŏ) for the heart in the body, is
indestructible; so is the will which resided therein, even when they
shall release it from *its* abode.

5\. In the same way the body of those who are

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

passed *away* is so much the more innocently worthy of the rights (sânŏ)
of *one* properly passed *away*, and *what it* is therein provided with,
as it has uttered thanksgivings. 6. *For* those guardian spirits who
keep watch over the body of Keresâsp <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_103) the Sâmân are also such praises from the
life and body, for that reason, moreover, when they unite.

7\. The injury of the destroyer to the body of those passed *away* is
contaminating; the Nasû*s* corruption') <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_104) rushes on it and, owing to its violence
when it becomes triumphant over the life of the righteous man, and
frightens it from the place of the catastrophe (hanka*rd*îkîh), and puts
itself into the place of the body, that body is then, for that reason,
called Nasâî ('dead matter'). 8. And, on account of the co-existence of
rapid changing and the mode of attacking of the same Nasû*s*, even when
it is necessary for the disintegration of the body, this is also then to
lie and change sanatorily.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

9\. Hence, as the body of men is formed out of hard bone and soft fat,
that *which* is established is the expulsion of the hone from the fat.
10. For the bone through its hardness, when no damp fat is with it, and
it does not become a holder of its damp, is itself essentially dry; and
it becomes unconsumable and attaining durability, through dryness, out
of the dead matter even for perpetuity. I1. And the sun is provided to
make rotten, dispersed, *and* useless the fat that is around the bone,
which on the decay of the animating life is to become increasingly damp,
and, after the departure of life through. terror and disgust (adôstîh),
it comes to rottenness and stench; and the noxious creatures in it alike
afflict *it* and the hard *part* such as bone.

12\. As regards the shrinking away of those who are sinners, the nearer
way to a remedy is the gnawer away from men <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_105); the fat becomes separate from the.
bone, and is seized and digested, as by the separation of the fat from
the dead matter for digestion, moreover, the permanent matter (asarîh)
and bone attain more fully unto their own nature (*s*ânŏ), *and* the
body (kâlpû*d*ŏ) to emptiness. 13. Because there is no *other* way to
consume that fat of men, since *it* is most grievous to them (the
sinners), and the pollution and contamination are made a blessing unto
it (the gnawer). 14. The dispersers.(astâr*d*ŏgarân) completely disperse
from it  <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_106); they are appointed

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

and produced, a production not worthy, for its defilement of those
purified *and* animals is contaminating, through contact again with men.
15. The crow (galâg) and such-like, through scorching away by the fire
of the luminaries, become worthy; moreover, the affliction of that which
is completely pure fire arises therefrom, as it is not able itself to
come unto the scorched *one*, *for* then the defilement (darvâkh) of the
scorcher by the most grievous gnawer *would* be possible.

16\. But it is not proper to recount (angâ*s*tanŏ) the devouring of the
noxious creatures, for the spirit of the body is troubled when it
observes the alarmed (vazî*d*) spirituality which *was* in the body of
those destroyed, the noxious creatures upon the goodly forms, and the
mode and strangeness of *their* disintegration and spoliation. 17. And
so it then becomes the more remedial way <span
id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_107) when, as it is ordered in
revelation <span id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_108), the body fraught with
corruption is placed on the ground of a clear mountain-spur (kôf
vakhsh); *and*, in order not to convey *it* to the water, plants, and
men of the plain, it is fastened <span id="fr_110"></span>[3](#fn_109)
in the customary manner, so that the corpse-eating dogs and
corpse-eating birds, which are not subject to the hand (dastô-âmûkŏ) of
men, and are likewise not entertained as food, shall yet not drag *any*
of it away for man's eating of dead matter.

18\. For streams and waters go themselves <span
id="fr_111"></span>[4](#fn_110) *and*

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

consume that fat, and are digested by the vital fire <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111) which is in the life of the creatures of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*; *and* from fat the corpses and dead matter are reduced
unto dregs of clay <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_112) and permanent
matter, even with the dust they are mingled *and* become scattered
about. 19. Likewise to those dogs, flying creatures, *and* birds they
themselves (the waters) have given the corpse-eating quality *and*
habit <span id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_113), and on account of dull
intellect they (the creatures) are not overwhelmed even by that sin.

20\. From that fat which is mingled with the living body of a creature
of Aûha*r*ma*zd* then *arises* also the assault <span
id="fr_115"></span>[4](#fn_114) of the demons, as is shown in the
chapter <span id="fr_116"></span>[5](#fn_115) on the reason for showing
a dog to a dead *person*, so that the body of those passed *away*, when
the gnawers away are mingled with the living body of a creature of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, exhibits a partial resurrection and the tokens *of it*,
and thereby the demons keep in it (the living body), and give pain <span
id="fr_117"></span>[6](#fn_116) by the will of the sacred beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[38:1](sbe18025.htm#fr_102) Assuming that âhan
stands for âhang.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[38:2](sbe18025.htm#fr_103) This last clause is
a quotation, slightly altered, from Pahl. Vend. XIX, 108, 109.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[39:1](sbe18025.htm#fr_104) An ancient hero,
mentioned both in the Avesta and Shâhnâmah, who, owing to his disregard
of religion, is said to be lying asleep on the plain of Pê*s*yânsaî
(probably the Pi*s*în valley near Qandahâr), watched by a myriad
guardian spirits of the righteous, until he shall be hereafter aroused
by the angels to kill the revived usurper A*z*-i Dahâk (see Bd. XXIX, 7,
8, Byt. III, 59-61). Regarding his soul a legend is related in the.
Pahlavi tracts which precede Dd. in some MSS., of which a translation
will be found in Appendix I.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[39:2](sbe18025.htm#fr_105) Supposed to be a
fiend who enters and pervades every corpse immediately after death,
except in certain cases of violent death, when its arrival is delayed
till the next period of the day (see Sls. X, 32). This exception is made
in Vend. VII, 5, 6, and was probably intended, in most cases, to prevent
a person who had met with a serious accident being left to perish,
through fear of his death contaminating any one coming to his relief;
not from any idea of the fiend being taken unawares bi the suddenness of
the death. This fiend is the Av. nasu (nom. nasu*s*).

<span id="fn_105"></span>[40:1](sbe18025.htm#fr_106) That is, in the
case of those who neglect the proper exposure of corpses, there is a
natural remedy in the worms produced for consuming them. Perhaps the
word khastâr, 'cutter, or gnawer, stands for khastar, 'noxious
creature.'

<span id="fn_106"></span>[40:2](sbe18025.htm#fr_107) The consumers of
the corpse disperse when their work is done, and carry contamination
with them unless purified by the sun's heat, as described in § 15.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[41:1](sbe18025.htm#fr_108) That is, it is
better to adopt the customary mode of removing the corpse.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[41:2](sbe18025.htm#fr_109) See Vend. VI,
93-97.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[41:3](sbe18025.htm#fr_110) This is ordered
only when the corpse is not placed in any enclosure.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[41:4](sbe18025.htm#fr_111) Or, as Vend. V,
49-62 describes it. the water is rained down by <span id="page_42">p.
42</span> Aûha*r*ma*zd*, purified in the Pûtîk sea, and conveyed through
the wide-formed ocean to the well-watered tree of all seeds, whence the
falling seeds are brought back, with the misty clouds, and rained upon
the earth, to grow there and yield food for cattle and men.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[42:1](sbe18025.htm#fr_112) The vital heat, or
Vohu-fryãn fire (see Bd. XVII, 1, 2).

<span id="fn_112"></span>[42:2](sbe18025.htm#fr_113) Reading
gîl-valî*g*îh (compare Pers. kalî*k*, 'sediment,' or galîz, 'saliva').

<span id="fn_113"></span>[42:3](sbe18025.htm#fr_114) Which they have
imbibed by contact with dead matter.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[42:4](sbe18025.htm#fr_115) Or 'weapon.'

<span id="fn_115"></span>[42:5](sbe18025.htm#fr_116) No such chapter is
now extant in Dd., and, therefore, this remark favours the supposition
that some chapters are lost between Chaps. XCIII and XCIV. A corpse must
be shown to a dog in order that the demon, Nasû*s*, may be driven out of
it by the look, or touch, of the dog (see Sls. II, 1-4, X, 33).

<span id="fn_116"></span>[42:6](sbe18025.htm#fr_117) A recognition of
the fact that the-drinking of impure water, or eating of tainted food,
is apt to produce disease.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](sbe18026)
