[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18009)  [Next](sbe18011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

1\. First you ask thus: Why is a righteous man created better than the
stars and moon *and* sun and fire of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and is called in
revelation greater and better than the spiritual creation, *and* also
than that which is worldly?

2\. The reply is this, that the greatness and goodness of advance in
wisdom and just judgment over the creatures arise from proficiency
(hûnar). 3. Justice is the one good proficiency over the creatures, the
means of wisdom are great, and praise bestowed is the most effectual
performance

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

of what is desirable (kâmi*s*n-karîh). 4. For all three are mutually
connected together; since the manifestation of justice is through
wisdom, and its advantage is the performance of what is desirable for
the creator; wisdom is the performance of what is desirable for the
requirements of the creator, and its weapon (zênô) is justice; and the
desire of the creator, which is progress, is in wisdom with justice. 5.
All three are great among the creatures, and their lodgment in the
superior beings and righteous men is spiritual, in the spirit which is
the pure guardian angel <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38), *in* the
understanding for encountering, averting, smiting, and prostrating
(khvâpâk) the fiend, *in* the army of angels, and in the sovereignty of
the far-seeing (dûr-vênâko) <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) spirit,
Aûha*r*ma*zd*; and, materially, in the worldly equipment and mutual
connection of body *and* life. 6. And their appliances are the wisdom
and worldly efficacy of treatises on the wise adoption of good thoughts,
good words, *and* good deeds, *and* the relinquishment *and*
discontinuance of evil thoughts, evil words, *and* evil deeds. 7. And
their acquirer is the worldly ruler who is providing for Aûha*r*ma*zd*,
and approving and stimulating the pure religion, a praiser of the good
and pure creator, and a director of persistence in destruction of the
fiend. 8. And in the promulgation

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
(rûbâkŏ-dahi*s*nîh) of the good and religious liturgy (mânsar), the
coming of the good cause of the resurrection, and the production of the
renovation *of the universe* <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) are
*his* cŏoperation and his own thanksgiving; and over the creatures of
*this* prior world *he* is a guardian, defender, and manager.

9\. And *such rulers* are great and pre-eminent; yet every man is not
for that greatness, but it is mentioned as to superior beings *and*
concerning righteous men, in whom it *has* arisen, and the best are the
three who are the beginning, middle, *and* end of the creation. 10. One
is the pure man, Gâyômar*d*, who was its first rational praiser; he in
whose keeping *was* the whole creation of the sacred beings, from *its*
beginning and immaturity unto the final completion of the worldly
creatures, over which *was* the exercise of goodness of his
well-destined progeny, such as Hôshâng, Tâkhmôrup, Yim, and
Frê*d*ûn <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41), such as the apostles of
the religion, like Zaratû*s*t, Hûshê*d*ar, and Hûshê*d*ar-mâh <span
id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42), and the producers of the renovation *of
the universe*, like Sôshâns <span id="fr_43"></span>[4](#fn_43),
Rôshanô-*k*ashm, and

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Khûr-*k*ashm <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44). 11. The approver <span
id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) of the enterprises (rûbâk-dahi*s*nîhâ) of
cŏoperators, the purely-praising and just worshipper of the sacred
beings through the strength of the spirit, the disabler of the worldly
activity of the fiend as regards worldly bodies, and the one of pure
religion--which is his charge (spôr) <span
id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46), the revelation of the place of the
beneficent spirit and of the destruction of the depravity of the evil
spirit <span id="fr_47"></span>[4](#fn_47), the subjugation
(khvâpi*s*nŏ) of the fiend, the completion of the triumph of the
creator, and the unlimited progress of the creatures--is the upholder of
Ma*zd*a-worship. 12. And likewise through the goodness of Gâyômar*d*,
which is the begetting of Zaratû*s*t, *he* is also just; likewise
through the goodness of Sôshâns, by which he is the progeny of
Zaratû*s*t, *he* is also progressive in every good thought, good word,
*and* good deed, *more* than the creatures which are produced with a
hope of the religion, and equally thankful. 13. And one is the producer
of bodies <span id="fr_48"></span>[5](#fn_48),

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the renovator (frashagar) Sôshâns, who is the putter down, with complete
subjugation from the world, of the glorification of fiends *and* demons,
and of the contention with angels in apostasy and heterodoxy of various
kinds and unatoned for; and the completer of the renovation through the
full continuance of the glorification of the angels, and the perfect
continuance of the pure religion.

14\. And through that excellent, unblemished, brotherly work <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](sbe18011.htm#fn_49) *such a ruler* may be seen
above the sun with swift horses, the primeval luminaries, and all
removal of darkness, the advance of illumination which is the display
(tô*g*isnŏ) of the days *and* nights of the world <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](sbe18011.htm#fn_50). 15. Regarding the same
completion of the renovation *of the universe* it is said in the
revelation of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, that this great light is the
vesture of the like righteous men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[12:1](sbe18010.htm#fr_38) The fravâhar or
fravashi, which is the prototype or spiritual counterpart supposed to
have been created in the beginning for each good creature and creation
afterwards produced, whether material or immaterial, and whose duty is
to represent the creature and watch over its interests in the spiritual
world.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[12:2](sbe18010.htm#fr_39) This word is badly
written in K35, so that it has become zôrînâk in later MSS., which might
perhaps mean 'strength--exerting.'

<span id="fn_40"></span>[13:1](sbe18010.htm#fr_40) Which is expected to
take place about the time of the resurrection (see Bd. XXX, 32).

<span id="fn_41"></span>[13:2](sbe18010.htm#fr_41) The first four rulers
of the world (omitting the usurper Dahâk) after Gâyômar*d* (see Bd.
XXXI, 1-3, 7). The five names of these primeval sovereigns are
corruptions of the Avesta names, Gaya-maretan, Haoshyangha,
Takhmô-urupa, Yima, and Thraêtaona. The third name is always written
Tâkhmôrî*d*ŏ in Dd.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[13:3](sbe18010.htm#fr_42) Corruptions of Av.
Zarathu*s*tra, Ukhshya*d*-ereta, and Ukhshya*d*-nemangh. The last two
are future apostles still expected by the Parsis to restore their
religion to its original purity, in preparation for the resurrection
(see Bd. XXXII, 2-10, Byt. III, 13, 43-48, 52, 53).

<span id="fn_43"></span>[13:4](sbe18010.htm#fr_43) Av. Saoshyãs. The
last of the future apostles, in whose <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>
time the universe is expected to be renovated and the resurrection to
take place (see Bd. XXX, 4-27, XXXII, 8, Byt. III, 62).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[14:1](sbe18010.htm#fr_44) These two names,
which mean 'bright-eyed' and 'sunny-eyed,' are the Av.
Rao*k*as-*k*aêshman and Hvare-*k*aêshman of Fravar*d*în Yt. 128 (see
also Chap. XXXVI, 4).

<span id="fn_45"></span>[14:2](sbe18010.htm#fr_45) This is Zaratû*s*t
(see § 12), the righteous apostle of the middle portion of the history
of creation referred to in § 9.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[14:3](sbe18010.htm#fr_46) Or 'which is wholly
his.'

<span id="fn_47"></span>[14:4](sbe18010.htm#fr_47) These two spirits are
supposed to be the authors of all the good and evil, respectively, that
exists in creation. They appear, originally, to have been both supposed
to spring from Aûha*r*ma*zd*, who speaks of 'the more beneficent of my
two spirits' in Yas. XIX, 21; but in later times, and throughout the
Pahlavi literature, the beneficent spirit is identified with
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and the origin of the evil spirit is left in obscurity.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[14:5](sbe18010.htm#fr_48) The renovated bodies
of the future existence which are prepared for mankind at the
resurrection (see Bd. XXX, 4, 7, 25-27).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sbe18011)
