[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18010)  [Next](sbe18012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

1\. The second is that which you ask thus: For what purpose is a
righteous man created for the world, and in what manner is it necessary
for him to exist in the world?

2\. The reply is this, that the creator created the creatures for
progress, which is his wish; and

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

it is necessary for us to promote whatever is his wish, so that we may
obtain whatever is our wish. 3. And, since that persistent creator is
powerful, whatever is our wish, and so far as we remain very faithful,
such is as *it were* deserving of his wish, which is for our obtainment
of whatever is our wish <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51).

4\. The miracle of these creatures was fully achieved (â*v*ôrî*d*ŏ) not
unequally, and the gain (gûâftâkŏ) also from the achievement of the same
miracle is manifest; that is, achieving, and knowing <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) that his achievement is with design
(*k*îm) and his desire is goodness, when the designed achievement, which
is his creature, and also the goodness, which is his wish, are certain,
and like-wise, owing to the perfect ability which is due to the creator,
the wish is achieved, *it* is manifest. 5. And, afterwards, it is
decided by wisdom that *he has* achieved it, and the creatures, as
perfected for the complete progress which is his wish, lapse into evil;
and since when evil exists good becomes the subjugation of evil--for
when evil is not complete, and after it is expressly said that his
creatures are created for his own will, the progress due to subjugations
of evil is on account of the good completed--it is similarly testified,
*in accordance* with the will aforesaid, that it <span
id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53) is achieved.

6\. The creatures are for the performance of what is desirable for the
creator, and the performance of what is desirable for the creator is
necessary

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

for two *purposes*, which are the practice of worship *and* contention.
7. As the worship is that of the persistent creator, who is a friend to
his own creatures, *and* the contention is that with the fiend--the
contender who is an enemy to the creation of the creator--that great
worship is a pledge, most intimate to one's self, of the utmost
contention also, and a pledge for the prosperity owing to the friend
subjugating by a look which is a contender with the enemy, the great
endeavour. of the acquirers of reliance upon any mortals whatever <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54). 8. For when the persistent *one*
accomplished that most perfect and wholly miraculous creation of the
lord, and his unwavering look--which *was* upon the coming on of the
wandering evil spirit, the erratic, unobservant spirit--*was* unmingled
with the sight of an eye <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55), he made a
spirit of observant temperament, which *was* the necessary soul, the
virtuous lord of the body moving into the world. 9. And the animating
life, the preserving guardian spirit, the acquiring intellect, the
protecting understanding, the deciding wisdom, the demeanour which is
itself a physician, the impelling strength, the eye for *what* is seen,
the ear for *what* is heard, the nose for *what* is smelt, the mouth for
recognising flavour, the body for approaching the assembly (pi*d*râm) of
the righteous, the heart for

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

thinking, the tongue for speaking, the hand for working, the foot for
walking, these which make life comfortable, these which are developments
in creating, these which are to join the body, these which are to be
considered perfected, are urged on by him continuously, and the means of
industry of the original body are arranged advisedly. 10. *And* by
proper regulation, and the recompense of good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds, he announced and adorned conspicuous, patient, and virtuous
conduct; *and* that procurer of the indispensable did not forget to keep
men *in* his own true service and proper bounds, the supreme sovereignty
of the creator.

11\. And *man* became a pure glorifier and pure praiser of that all-good
friend, through the progress which is his wish. 12. Because pure
friendship is. owing to sure meditation on every virtue, and from its
existence no harm whatever arose pure glorifying is owing to glorifying
every goodness, and from its existence no vileness whatever arose; and
pure praising is owing to all prosperity, and from its existence no
distress whatever arose. 13. And pronouncing the benedictions he is
steadfast *in* the same pure friendship, just glorifying, and expressive
praising, *which* are performed even as though Vohûman were kept lodging
in the thoughts, Srôsh in the words, and Ar*d* in the actions <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56). 14. That, moreover, which is owing to the
lodgment of Vohûman in the thoughts is virtuously

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

rushing unto true propitiation from the heart, and keeping selfishness
away from the desires; the lodgment of Srôsh in the words is owing to
him who is intelligent *being* a true speaker, *and* him who is
unintelligent being a listener to *what is* true and *to* the
high-priests; *and* the lodgment of Ar*d* in the actions is declared to
be owing to promoting that which is known *as* goodness, *and*
abstaining *from* that which *one* does not know. 15. And these three
benefits <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) which *have been* recited
are sent down (farôstakŏ) in two ways that the ancients *have*
mentioned, which are *that* deliberately taken and that they should
deliberately leave <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58), whose means are
wisdom and proper exertion.

16\. And his (man's) high-priest is he whose instigation is to keep him
truly *in accordance* with the revelation (dine)) of the sacred beings,
and is the origin of his pure meditation which is truly through.
goodness like Vohûman's. 17. As the religious of the ancients *have*
religiously said, that of him who keeps the goodness of Vohûman lodging
in the thoughts the true way is then that of the good spirit. 18. The
Ma*zd*a-worshipper understands the will of the creator in the true way,
and grows and acquires by performing what is desirable for the creator,
which obtains the benefit of the renovation.

19\. A more concise reply is this, that a righteous man is the creature
by whom is accepted that occupation which is provided for him, and is
fully

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

watchful in the world as to his not being deceived by the rapacious
fiend. 20. And as a determiner, by wisdom, of the will of the
creator--*one* who is himself a propitiator and understander, and a
promoter of the understanding of goodness--and of whatever *pertains* to
him (the creator), *he* is a giver of heed thereto; and it is necessary
for him to be thus, so that such greatness *and* goodness may also be
his more securely in the spiritual *existence*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[15:1](sbe18010.htm#fr_49) Mentioned in §§ 7, 8.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[15:2](sbe18010.htm#fr_50) M14 and J have '*such
rulers*' own praise is above the sun with swift horses, the primeval
luminaries, and all good creatures; for that, too, which may be seen
when the light of the sun is owing to the removal of darkness, and the
removal is the advance of illumination of the world, is the display of
days *and* nights.'

<span id="fn_51"></span>[16:1](sbe18011.htm#fr_51) Reading kâmakŏ
instead of the dâmakŏ of the MSS., which was, no doubt, originally
gâmakŏ.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[16:2](sbe18011.htm#fr_52) M14 has 'knowing
perfectly.'

<span id="fn_53"></span>[16:3](sbe18011.htm#fr_53) The subjugation of
evil apparently.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[17:1](sbe18011.htm#fr_54) Referring probably to
the strong influence of a steady eye upon all living creatures.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[17:2](sbe18011.htm#fr_55) This appears to be
the meaning of agûmê*g*i*s*nŏ-î va*l* vênâftâkŏ dî*d*ag; which phrase is
followed by the conjunction 'and,' so that the original text means that
when the creator had done as in §§ 8, 9, he proceeded to act as in § 10.
This conjunction, for the sake of clearness, is here transferred to the
beginning of § 10.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[18:1](sbe18011.htm#fr_56) These three angels
are personifications of the Avesta terms vohû-manô, 'good thought,'
sraosha, 'listening, obedience,' and areta, 'righteous.' The coming of
Vohûman ('the good spirit' of § 17) and of Srôsh is mentioned in the
Gâthas (Yas. XLIII, 16, c d).

<span id="fn_57"></span>[19:1](sbe18011.htm#fr_57) The lodgments of the
three angels.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[19:2](sbe18011.htm#fr_58) Meaning, probably,
the deliberate adoption of good conduct and relinquishment of evil
(compare Chap. VII, 7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](sbe18012)
