[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18050)  [Next](sbe18052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLIV.

1\. *As to* the forty-third question *and* reply, that which you ask is
thus: *There is* a man who is super-intending (avar-mândakakŏ) and
skilful, in whom great skill as regards religion is provided, and the
high-priest's duty and officiating priest's duty (magôpatîh) are
performed by him; or they are not performed by him, but in him great
skill as regards

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

religion is provided. 2. In a place of *that* district there is no one
who rightly knows the commentary *and* 'the proper *and* improper <span
id="fr_540"></span>[1](#fn_538),' so that he comes forth into a place of
such decay (sapakhân); *and* the people of the district--who constantly
order all the religious rites (dînô <span
id="fr_541"></span>[2](#fn_539)) of many sacred ceremonies from any poor
*man* of the various persons from other districts whose skill and
superintending are not *like* his, but they constantly come *to* that
district--shall constantly receive *from him* all the many religious
rites and many sacred ceremonies. 3. *And* that man, who is revered and
skilful, proceeds not undejectedly (lâ ana*s*kandîhâ) and bashfully *to*
his own superintending position, the position of the religion and
position of the skill which are his; he does not demand any employment
in the district or any award (dînâ) from the district, and does not know
how to provide any other employment or award, in which there would be
*any* fitness for him, 4. Are the people of the district--on account of
the skill and activity which that man has exercised in religion, due to
the performance of all the religious rites and sacred ceremonies which
they constantly order--

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

thereupon to prepare that man a stipend (bâhar) <span
id="fr_542"></span>[1](#fn_540), and is it necessary for them to give a
stipend to that man, or how is it necessary to act; and is 'it necessary
for them to collect *it* for him, or not? 5. And of the much advantage
of all the religious rites and work is it necessary to speak thus 'Until
the *time* that thou hadst come it was not possible for us to order
except of him who is inferior to thee,' or how is *it* to be done? 6. Is
it necessary to collect a stipend for him on account of the benefit and
reasoning thought (vîrmatŏ) on other subjects, of which *he was* the
means, or how is it necessary *for* the superintendent *of* our people
to collect such stipend of skill, position, and religion?

7\. The reply is this, that a man of such description as written
*above*, and superintending the exercise of skill and provision of
ability, is very worthy of a stipend and courtesy (khûpîh); also,
through good management of all religious rites *and* the ceremony of the
sacred beings, *he* is very confident in any uncertainty. 8. Therefore
it is necessary to consider that he manages more openly and better than
those whose skill and ability are not *like* his; and also as regards
stipend and reasoning thought, owing to the worthiness of the ceremony
of the sacred beings, his are more whose skill, ability, and activity in
religion are greater. 9. And *as to* a man who is as written
*above*--when all those religious rites and ceremonies are well-managed
by him, and his repeated direction and right continuance of proper
duties are an accumulation of his own reasoning

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

thought and great capability, and are ordered of him with great
solicitude--*one* is also to consider him a stipendiary <span
id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_541) thereby, and a thriving acquirement of
ample reasoning thought. 10. And *as to* him, moreover, who is less
skilled than he, *and* of inferior position, by as much as he is not
*so* worthy, *his* custom is therefore to produce a want of himself
again.

II\. But he who *has* much skill should have <span
id="fr_544"></span>[2](#fn_542) a great stipend, and he of medium
ability should have <span id="fr_545"></span>[2](#fn_542) a medium
*one*, he *having* less means of benefiting worthily, maturely, and
necessarily. 12. And the value is as it is said in revelation thus: 'The
stipend they should announce to him who is an upholder of religion is
two shares, *and* to him who is mediocre *only* one, to him whose lot is
inferior.'

13\. That man is a master *and* high-priest <span
id="fr_546"></span>[3](#fn_543) whose usage also (âîn-î*k*ŏ) is wise,
and in ability, goodness, and skill is the best of *those of* the
religion of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, which is the religion of wise
upholders. 14. And the exercise of his religious disposition--originally
possessing a religious stipend--which they shall order of him in *that*
place, and that *of* the other worthy *ones and* applicants in the place
and coming applying to the place, as much

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

as it is worth *and* happens *to be* their own want, *one* is to
altogether thoroughly well consider for him. 15. Good destiny is not
fulfilled by granting *to* those applying, *but* through forward
ability, the forward, kind-hearted <span
id="fr_547"></span>[1](#fn_544), *and* extreme skill provided, *and*
grand position he is worthy of much stipend, *and* it is important to
make *them* stipendiary in their own gradation of applying. 16. For the
observance of moderation *and* the granting of applications are mutually
destructive, *and* it is discriminatively said that the high-priest
*G*âmâsp of the Hvôvas <span id="fr_548"></span>[2](#fn_545) considered,
in that mode, the much skill of that good superintendent *being* without
a stipend *as* not disproportionate, *but* most justly very moderate.

17\. Moreover, to collect *for* all except for one skilful *man*, and to
provide a stipend *for* any other applicants, is not right; and the
limits should be <span id="fr_549"></span>[3](#fn_546) moderate, for
each one really shares the moderate apportionments according to his own
want, apart even from the sacred ceremony. 18. But to collect for such a
man, who *has* kind-heartedly superintended by rule during reasoning
thought, is a greater good work than to approve even him *who* is
superintending much more authoritatively. 19. And he who *has* himself
requested is to obtain everything last; for, except *in* that *case*
when a virtuous doer *has* in any

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

mode begged a livelihood <span id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_547) *and* is
not capable *of earning it*--so that something even of the righteous
gifts <span id="fr_551"></span>[2](#fn_548) of clothing is begged by
him--to live in idleness is not the way to be assisted; *but* he who
*has* not himself requested, and is wise, is to beg a suit of clothes
(rakht-hanâ).

20\. They give to the good provider of gifts much praise, *and* for the
preservation of the perfect giver are many religious friends <span
id="fr_552"></span>[3](#fn_549), *and* the position of the upholders of
religion <span id="fr_553"></span>[4](#fn_550); so it is necessary to
give, *and* to consider *it* as provided for the great female whom
revelation greatly celebrates <span id="fr_554"></span>[5](#fn_551),
that patron spirit (ahû) connected with religion, as it is said that in
the opinion of Hûmân <span id="fr_555"></span>[6](#fn_552), the
high-priest, the propitious religion is, as *it were*, the way of saving
their souls <span id="fr_556"></span>[7](#fn_553).

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

21\. About upholders of religion, and a more particular rule how the
lawful computation should be for glorifying with moderation, a chief of
the priests <span id="fr_557"></span>[1](#fn_554) *has* spoken thus:
'Shouldst thou be our father in wealthiness, I am thy protector in body,
*and* thou becomest thy protector in soul <span
id="fr_558"></span>[2](#fn_555).'

22\. The same collection <span id="fr_559"></span>[3](#fn_556) is the
way of the friends of religion for begging from the upholders of
religion the preservation of the soul, *and* for well considering,
extremely gracefully *and* fully reverently, the advantage *and*
pleasure of the position <span id="fr_560"></span>[4](#fn_557) of the
upholders of religion, so that they shall properly collect for the
preservation of souls by the mode of going to collect thoroughly with
great gain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_538"></span>[146:1](sbe18051.htm#fr_540) From this it would
appear that' a treatise called 'Shâyast Lâ-shâyast' existed a thousand
years ago, which probably bore some resemblance to Sls., the work which
now bears the same name.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[146:2](sbe18051.htm#fr_541) The words hamâk
dînô, translated 'all the religious rites' both here and elsewhere, are
a technical term which (as I am informed by Dastûr Peshotanji Behramji,
the high-priest of the Parsis in Bombay) is applied to 'those obligatory
religious rites and festivals that every Parsi is bound to observe by
performing certain ceremonies, in his or her name, with the assistance
of priests engaged for the purpose. These rites and festivals include
the Rapithvan, the Gâhâmbârs, the Fravardîgân, the monthly festivals,
&c.'

<span id="fn_540"></span>[147:1](sbe18051.htm#fr_542) Literally 'a
share' of the produce of the district, analogous to tithes.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[148:1](sbe18051.htm#fr_543) Literally 'a
shareholder.'

<span id="fn_542"></span>[148:2](sbe18051.htm#fr_545) Assuming that the
adverbial suffix -îhâ may he taken here (as it can be probably in all
cases) as the Pâz. conditional form hâê of the verb 'to be,' equivalent
to the more usual forms aê, âe, and the Huz. hômanâe (see Chap. XLVIII,
23).

<span id="fn_543"></span>[148:3](sbe18051.htm#fr_546) Or, ra*d* dastôbar
may mean 'an awarding high-priest,' as he is called ra*d*, 'master,
chief,' in virtue of his power of sentencing sinners and governing the
religious body, and he is called dastôbar, 'upholder of customs,' in
virtue of his control over rites and ceremonies.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[149:1](sbe18051.htm#fr_547) Literally
'good-hearted.'

<span id="fn_545"></span>[149:2](sbe18051.htm#fr_548) The Av. *G*âmâspa
Hvôgva (or Hvôva) of Yas. XLV, 17, L. 18, Fravar*d*în Yt. 103. He was
high-priest and prime minister of Kai-Vi*s*tâsp; but probably the
opinion of some much later *G*âmâsp is here erroneously attributed to
him, much in the same way as the comparatively modern Book of Enoch is
attributed to Enoch, 'the seventh from Adam,' in Jude, 14.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[149:3](sbe18051.htm#fr_549) Reading hâê
instead of -îhâ, as in § 11.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[150:1](sbe18051.htm#fr_550) M14 has zîvi*s*nŏ,
and K35 has zîvandân.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[150:2](sbe18051.htm#fr_551) Charitable
donations given to the priesthood and poor for the purpose of acquiring
religious merit on certain solemn occasions; they often consist of
clothing, and are then supposed to furnish the giver, or the person in
whose name they are given with garments in the other world after the
resurrection (see Bd. XXX, 28).

<span id="fn_549"></span>[150:3](sbe18051.htm#fr_552) The angels who
assist his soul after death, such as Srôsh, Mit*r*ô, Rashnû, Â*s*tâ*d*,
and the good Vâê (see Chaps. XIV, 3, 4, XXX, 2-4).

<span id="fn_550"></span>[150:4](sbe18051.htm#fr_553) That is, he will
occupy the same grade in heaven as the priesthood.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[150:5](sbe18051.htm#fr_554) Referring to the
maiden spirit supposed to meet the good soul after death and to conduct
it over the *K*inva*d* bridge to heaven (see Chaps. XXIV, 5, XXXVII,
117). She is described in Vend. XIX, 98-101, and more fully in Hn. II,
22-32 and the later Pahlavi works. Her beauty is said to be proportional
to the religious merit of the soul, and she is here identified with the
ahû or patron spirit.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[150:6](sbe18051.htm#fr_555) Probably some one
nearly contemporary with the author, such as Âtûr-pâ*d* son of Hêmî*d*
(see Bd. XXXIII, II), who is called hû-manô, 'well-meaning,' and styled
'the leader of the people of the good religion' in the Dînka*rd* (III,
ccccxiii).

<span id="fn_553"></span>[150:7](sbe18051.htm#fr_556) The maiden spirit,
being developed by religious actions, is <span id="page_151">p.
151</span> called the soul's 'own religion' in AV. IV, 23; it is,
therefore, that spirit's assistance which is probably meant here, when
speaking of religion saving the soul.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[151:1](sbe18051.htm#fr_557) A môbad of môbads.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[151:2](sbe18051.htm#fr_558) Meaning that the
wealthy man can easily protect his own soul by a proper expenditure of
his wealth on good works. The connection of this with the first part of
the sentence is rather obscure.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[151:3](sbe18051.htm#fr_559) Mentioned in §§
17, 18.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[151:4](sbe18051.htm#fr_560) In heaven (see §
20). To induce the laity to collect ample property for paying the
priesthood they are promised a share of the priest's happiness in
heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](sbe18052)
