[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18004)  [Next](sbe18006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. THE APPENDIX.

For the sake of elucidating certain matters, mentioned in the writings
of Mânû*sk*îhar, further information than could be given in the
foot-notes has been added in the shape of an appendix.

To a brief summary of the Avesta legends, relating to the ancient hero
Keresâsp, has been added a translation of a Pahlavi legend regarding the
fate of his soul, in which several of his more famous exploits are
detailed. This legend is found in the Pahlavi Rivâyat preceding the
Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk in the manuscripts BK and J, and is evidently derived
from the fourteenth fargar*d* of the Sû*d*kar Nask, whose contents, as
described in the ninth book of the Dînka*rd*, are also given. It is
likewise found in the later Persian Rivâyats, with several modifications
which are duly noticed.

The Nîrang-i Kustî, or ceremony of tying the sacred thread-girdle, is
also described in detail, with a translation of the ritual accompanying
it, partly from actual observation, and partly from Gu*g*arâti accounts
of the rite.

It having become necessary to ascertain with certainty whether the term
'next-of-kin marriage' was a justifiable translation of khvêtûk-das, as
used by Pahlavi writers, an extensive examination of all accessible
passages, which throw any light upon the meaning of the word, has been

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

made. The result of this enquiry can be best understood from the details
collected, but it may be stated in general terms that, though 'marriage
among kinsfolk' might fairly represent the varying meaning of
khvêtûk-das in different ages, its usual signification in Pahlavi
literature is more accurately indicated by 'next-of-kin marriage.'

Some apology is perhaps due to the Parsi community for directing
attention to a subject which they consider disagreeable. But, by the
publication of a portion of the Dînka*rd*, they have themselves placed
the most important passage, bearing on the subject, within the reach of
every European Orientalist; thus rendering it easy for any prejudiced
translator to represent the practice of such marriages as having been
general, instead of their being so distasteful to the laity as to
require a constant exertion of all the influence that the priesthood
possessed, in order to recommend them, even in the darkest ages of the
faith. To avoid such one-sided views of the matter, as well as to hinder
them in others, has been the special aim of the present translator in
trying to ascertain the exact meaning of the obscure texts he had to
deal with.

The translations from the Pahlavi Vendidâ*d*, regarding the Bareshnûm
ceremony and the purifications requisite after finding a corpse in the
wilderness, will be found necessary for explaining many allusions and
assertions in the Epistles of Mânû*sk*îhar.

The text followed in all passages translated from the Dînka*rd* is that
contained in the manuscript now in the library of Dastûr Sohrâbji
Rustamji, the high-priest of the Kadmi sect of Parsis in Bombay. It was
written A.D. 1669, and was brought from Persia to Surat by Mullâ Bahman
in 1783. All other known copies of the Dînka*rd* are descended from this
manuscript, except a codex, brought from Persia by the late Professor
Westergaard in 1843, which contains one-fifth of the Dînka*rd* mostly
written in 1574, and is now in the University Library at Kopenhagen.

For translations from the Pahlavi Vendidâ*d* the text adopted, wherever
available and not evidently defective, has been that of L4, a manuscript
of the Vendidâ*d* with

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pahlavi, Z. and P.
IV, in the India Office Library in London. The date of this manuscript
has been lost with its last folio, but its text is in the same
handwriting as that of three others, in Kopenhagen and Bombay, which
were written A.D. 1323-4. A considerable portion of the beginning of
this manuscript has also been lost, and is replaced by modern folios of
no particular value.

In conclusion, the translator must take the opportunity of thankfully
acknowledging the kindness and readiness with which Dastûr Peshotanji
Behrâmji Sanjânâ, the high-priest of the Parsis in Bombay, and Dastûr
Jâmâspji Minochiharji Jâmâsp-Asâ-nâ, of the same city, have always
furnished him with any information he applied for, not only on those
matters specially mentioned in the foot-notes, but also on many other
occasions.

E. W. WEST.                  

   MUNICH,  
September, 1882.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abbreviations Used In This Volume](sbe18006)
