[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18001)  [Next](sbe18003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# INTRODUCTION

### 1. GENERAL REMARKS.

THE Pahlavi texts selected for translation in this volume are
distinguished from all others by the peculiarity that both the name and
station of their author and the time in which he lived are distinctly
recorded.

His name, Mânû*sk*îhar, son of Yûdân-Yim (or Gû*s*ndam), is mentioned in
each of the headings and colophons to the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk and the
three Epistles attributed to him. He is styled simply aêrpat, or
'priest,' in the headings of Eps. I and II, and aêrpat khû*d*âî, or
'priestly lordship,' in that of Ep. III; but he is called the ra*d*,
'pontiff, or executive high-priest,' of Pârs and Kirmân, and the
farmâ*d*âr, 'director,' of the profession of priests, in the colophons;
to Dd. and Ep. II.; and we learn from Dd. XLV, 5 that the farmâ*d*âr was
also. the pe*s*ûpâî or, 'leader' of the religion, the supreme
high-priest of the Ma*zd*a-worshipping faith.

Regarding his family we learn, from Ep. I, iii, 10, vii, 5, that his
father, Yûdân-Yim, son of Shahpûhar, had been the .:leader of the
religion before him; and his own succession to this dignity indicates
that he was the eldest surviving son of his father, who, in his
declining years, seems to have been assisted by his advice(Ep: I, iii,
11). We also learn, from the heading of his second epistle, that
Zâ*d*-sparam was his brother, and this is confirmed by the language used
in Ep. II, vi, I, ix, 6, and by Zâ*d*-sparam being a son of the same
father (Eps. I, heading, III, 2); that he was a younger brother appears
from the general tone of authority over him adopted by Mânû*sk*îhar in
his epistles. Shortly before these epistles were written, Zâ*d*-sparam
appears to have been at, Sarakhs (Ep. I, v., 3), in

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

the extreme north-east of Khurâsân, where he probably came in contact
with the Tughazghuz (Ep. II, i, 12) and adopted some of their heretical
opinions, and whence he may have travelled through Nîvshahpûhar (Ep. II,
i, 2, note) and Shîrâ*z* (Ep. II, v, 3, 4) on his way to Sîrkân to take
up his appointment as high-priest of the south (Eps. I, heading, II, i,
4, v, 9, vii, 1, viii, 1, Zs. I, 0). Soon after his arrival at Sîrkân he
issued a decree, regarding the ceremonies of purification, which led to
complaints from the people of that place, and compelled his brother to
interfere by writing epistles, threatening him with deprivation of
office (Ep. I, xi, 7) and the fate of a heretic (Eps. II, viii, 2, 3,
III, 17-19). That Zâ*d*-sparam finally submitted, so far as not to be
deprived of his office, appears from his still retaining his position in
the south while writing his Selections (Zs. I, 0), which must have been
compiled at some later period, free from the excitement of active and
hazardous controversy.

The age in which Mânû*sk*îhar lived is decided by the date attached to
his third epistle, or public notification, to the Ma*zd*a-worshippers of
Irân; which date is the third month of the year 250 of Ya*zd*aka*rd*
(Ep. III, 21), corresponding to the interval between the 14th June and
13th July A.D. 881; at which time, we learn, he was an old man (Ep. II,
ix, 1), but not too old to travel (Eps. I, iii, 13, xi, 4, II, v, 5, vi,
4, 6, vii, 3, viii, 4, 5)

His writings, therefore, represent the state of the Zoroastrian religion
a thousand years ago; and it may be presumed, from the importance and
influentialness of his position, that his representations can be
implicitly relied upon. To detect any differences there may be between
the tenets and religious customs he describes, and those upheld by
Zoroastrians of the present time, would require all the learning and
experience of a Parsi priest; but, so far as a European can judge, from
these writings and his own limited knowledge of existing religious
customs among the Parsis, the change has been less than in any other
form of religion during the same period

The manuscripts containing the writings of Mânû*sk*îhar

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

are of two classes, one represented in Europe by the codex No. 35 of the
collection of Avesta and Pahlavi manuscripts in the University Library
at Kopenhagen, the other represented by No. 14 of the Haug Collection of
similar manuscripts in the State Library at Munich, which two
manuscripts are called K35 and M14, respectively, in this volume. In the
former of these classes, represented by K35, the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk
occupies the central third of the codex; being preceded by a nearly
equal extent of other miscellaneous religious writings of rather later
date, resembling a Pahlavi Rivâyat; and being followed by a third series
of similar writings of about the same age and extent as the Dâ*d*istân-î
Dînîk, which includes the Epistles of Mânû*sk*îhar and the Selections of
Zâ*d*-sparam. In the latter class of manuscripts, from which M14 is
descended, the text of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk contains many variations
from that in the former class, as if it had been revised by some one
whose knowledge of Pahlavi was insufficient to decipher difficult
passages, and who had freely exercised his editorial license in altering
and mutilating the text to suit his own limited comprehension of it.

The codex K35, which was brought from Persia by the late Professor
Westergaard in 1843, is one of the most important manuscripts of the
former class, and now consists of 181 folios; but it is incomplete at
both ends, having lost seventy-one folios at the beginning and about
thirty-five at the end. It still includes, however, the whole of the
Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk and the Epistles of Mânû*sk*îhar; though its date has
been lost with its last folios. But this date can be recovered from an
old copy of this codex existing in India (here called BK) and still
containing a colophon, probably copied from K35 <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0), which states that the manuscript was

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

completed by Mar*z*apân Frê*d*ûn Vâhrôm Rûstâm Bôndâr Malkâ-mar*d*ân
Dîn-ayâr, on the day Âsmân of the month Ame*r*ôda*d* A.Y. 941 (19th
March, 1572), in the district of the Dahîkân in the land of Kirmân. The
end of this colophon is lost with the last folio of BK, which renders it
possible that the last folio contained the further colophon of this
copy.

That BK is descended from K35 is proved by its containing several false
readings, which are clearly due to misshapen letters and accidental
marks in K35. And that it was copied direct from that codex is proved by
the last words of thirty-two of its pages being marked with interlined
circles in K35, which circles must have been the copyist's marks for
finding his place, when beginning a fresh page after turning over his
folios. This copy of K35 has lost many of its folios, in various parts,
but most of the missing text has been recently restored from the modern
manuscript J, mentioned below; there are still, however, eleven folios
of text missing, near the end of the codex, part of which can be
hereafter recovered from TK, described below. The independent value of
BK is that it supplies the contents of the seventy-one folios lost at
the beginning of K35, and of about nineteen of the folios missing at the
end of that codex.

A third manuscript of the first class, which may be even more important
than K35, was brought to Bombay from Persia about fifteen years ago, and
belongs to Mr. Tehmuras Dinshawji Anklesaria, of Bombay, but it has not
been available for settling the texts translated in this volume. It is
here called TK, and is described as still consisting of 227 folios,
though seventy folios are missing at the beginning and about fourteen at
the end. In its present state, therefore, it must begin very near the
same place as K35, but it extends much further, so as even to supply
nearly half the contents of the eleven folios missing from BK; it does
not, however, include the contents of the last three folios of BK.
According to a colophon appended in this manuscript to the Sayings of
Zâ*d*-sparam, son of Yûdân-Yim, about the formation of men out of body,
life,

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

and soul' (see Zs. XI, 10, note), some copy of these 'sayings' was
written by Gôpatshah Rûstôm Bândâr Malkâ-mar*d*ân in the land of Kirmân.
This Gôpatshah was evidently a brother of Vâhrôm, the grandfather of the
Mar*z*apân who wrote the colophon found in BK and supposed to have been
copied from K35 (see pp. [xv](#page_xv), [xvi](#page_xvi)). If,
therefore, this colophon in TK has not been copied from some older MS.,
it would indicate that TK is two generations older than K35.

A recent copy of TK exists in the library of the high priest of the
Parsis in Bombay, to whom I am indebted for the information that its
text does not differ from that of K35, at the two points (Dd. XCIII, 17
and Ep. III, 11) where some omission of text may be suspected.

The manuscripts of the second class appear to be all descended from an
old, undated codex brought to Bombay from Persia about sixty-five years
ago <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1), and recently in the library of
Mr. Dhanjibhâi Frâmji Pâtel of Bombay. From what is stated, concerning
the contents of this codex, it appears to commence with about
three-fourths of the miscellaneous religious writings, found at the
beginning of BK; and these are followed by the altered text of the
Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk, as appears from the copies described below, but how
the codex concludes is not stated. It may, however, be supposed that it
contains as much of the third series of writings, as is found in the
manuscript J, a copy of this codex which ends in Ep. II, vi, 2.

This manuscript J belongs to the library of Dastûr Jâmâspji Minochiharji
in Bombay; it commenced originally at the same point as the codex just
described, and, so far as it has been examined, it contains the same
altered text of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk. There is, therefore little doubt
that it was originally copied from that codex, but a considerable

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

portion of the additional matter at the beginning of BK has been
prefixed to it at a later date. The oldest portion of this copy,
extending to Ep. I, vii, 4, bears a date corresponding to 21st December
1818; the date of a further portion, extending to Ep. II, vi, 2,
corresponds to 12th February 1841; and a third portion copied from BK,
at the beginning of the manuscript, is still more recent.

Another copy of this codex, or of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk contained in
it, exists in the library of the high-priest of the Parsis in Bombay;
and from this copy the text of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk contained in M14
was transcribed.

This latter manuscript consists of two volumes, written in 1865 and
1868, respectively; the first volume containing Chaps. I, 1-XXXVII, 9,
and the second volume Chaps. XXXVI, 1-XCIV, 15 of the altered text of
the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk.

Other copies of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk, which have not been examined,
are to be found in India, but, unless descended from other manuscripts
than K35 and the above-mentioned codex recently belonging to Mr.
Dhanjibhâi Frâmji, they would be of no further use for settling the
text.

Of the manuscripts above described the following have been available for
the translations in this volume:--K35 for the whole of the Dâ*d*istân-î
Dînîk and the Epistles; M14 for the whole of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk
alone; BK for Dd. I, 1-VI, 3 <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2), X,
2-XIV, 3 <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3), LXXXVIII, 9-XCIV, 15, the
whole of the Epistles, the legend about the soul of Keresâsp (see pp.
[373](sbe18123.htm#page_373)-381), and the extracts from the Pahlavi
Rivâyat in these codices relating to Khvêtûk-das (see pp.
[415](sbe18125.htm#page_415)-423); and J for Dd. I, 1-XXXIX, 10 <span
id="fr_4"></span>[3](#fn_4); LXXXVIII, 9-LXXXIX, 1 <span
id="fr_5"></span>[4](#fn_5), XCI, 7-XCIV, 15, Ep. I, i, 1-II, ix,
7 <span id="fr_6"></span>[5](#fn_6), the

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

legend about Keresâsp, and the extracts relating to Khvêtûk-das. Other
manuscripts, used for the remaining extracts translated in the Appendix,
will be mentioned in § 4 of this introduction.

The existence of two versions of the text of the Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk
would have been a source of much perplexity to the translator, had it
not been soon apparent that the version represented by M14 was merely a
revision of that in K35, attempted by some editor who had found much
difficulty in understanding the involved phraseology of Mânû*sk*îhar.
There are, undoubtedly, some corrupt words and passages in K35, where
the revised version may be followed with advantage, but nine-tenths of
the alterations, introduced by the reviser, are wholly unnecessary, and
in many cases they are quite inconsistent with the context.

Under these circumstances it has been the duty of the translator to
follow the text given in K35, wherever it is not wholly unintelligible
after prolonged study, to note all deviations of the translation from
that text (which are usually small), and merely to mention the
variations of the revised text, so far as they are intelligible, in the
notes.

The writings of Mânû*sk*îhar are certainly difficult to translate, not
only from the involved and obscure style he affects, but also from the
numerous compound epithets he uses, which are not easy either to
understand with certainty, or to express clearly in English. The only
other Pahlavi writings that approach them in difficulty are those of his
brother, Zâ*d*-sparam, and those of the author of the third book of the
Dînka*rd*, who seems to have also been a con-temporary writer. To a
certain extent, therefore, an involved style of writing may have been a
failing of the age in which he lived; and his works, being of an
epistolary and hortatory character, would naturally be more abstruse and
idiomatic than simple narrative; but much of the obscurity of his style
must still be attributed to his own want of clear arrangement of thought
and inadequate, though wordy, expression of ideas, the usual sources of
all obscure and rambling writing.

When to the difficulty of tracing the thread of an argument

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

through the involved obscurity of the text is added the perplexity
occasioned by the ambiguity of many Pahlavi words, it can be readily
understood that no translation is likely to be even approximately
accurate, unless it be as literal as possible. The translator has to
avoid enough pitfals, in the shape of false constructions and incorrect
readings, without risking the innumerable sources of error offered by
the alluring by-paths of free translation. If, therefore, the reader
should sometimes meet with strange idioms, or uncouth phrases, he must
attribute them to a straining after correctness of translation, however
little that correctness may be really attained.

For the purpose of more effectually keeping a curb upon the imagination
of the translator, and indicating where he has been compelled to
introduce his own ideas, all words not expressed or fully understood in
the original text are italicised in the translation. Occasionally, also,
the original word is appended to its translation, where either the
reading or meaning adopted, is unusual, or where a scholar might wish to
know the particular Pahlavi word translated.

Some endeavour has likewise been made to introduce greater precision
than has hitherto been attempted, in the transliteration of Pahlavi
words and names, by taking advantage of the italic system, adopted for
this series of Sacred Books of the East, not only for distinguishing
variations of sound (as in the use of *g*, *k*, and *s* for the sounds
of j, soft ch, and sh, respectively, in English), but also to indicate
the use of particular Pahlavi letters, when there are more than one of
nearly the same sound. Thus, d is used where its sound is represented by
<span id="img__02000"></span> ![](img/_02000.jpg) t; *l* and *r* where
they are represented by <span id="img__02001"></span>
![](img/_02001.jpg) n, v, û, or by <span id="img__02002"></span>
![](img/_02002.jpg) Av. o; *v* and *z* where they are represented by
<span id="img__02003"></span> ![](img/_02003.jpg) *k*; and *zd* where
those letters are represented by <span id="img__02004"></span>
![](img/_02004.jpg). â. If, in addition to these particulars, the
Pahlavi scholar will remember that the uncircumflexed vowels are not
expressed in Pahlavi characters, and the vowel ŏ is expressed, he will
find no particular difficulty in restoring any of the transliterated
words to their original character, by merely following the

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

ordinary rules of Pahlavi writing. Without some such mode <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) of distinguishing the different Pahlavi
letters used for the same sound, it would be practically impossible to
restore the transliteration of any word, new to the reader, to its
original Pahlavi form. And even the system here adopted requires the
addition of *a* and *â* to represent the vowel <span
id="img__02100"></span> ![](img/_02100.jpg) a, â when one of its turns
is omitted in writing (as in <span id="img__02101"></span>
![](img/_02101.jpg) *a*p, *âv*, used for <span id="img__02102"></span>
![](img/_02102.jpg) ap, af; <span id="img__02103"></span>
![](img/_02103.jpg) *a*dîn used for <span id="img__02104"></span>
![](img/_02104.jpg) adîn, &c.), and of j or .j to represent <span
id="img__02105"></span> ![](img/_02105.jpg) y when it has the sound of
*g* or English j, in order to distinguish it from <span
id="img__02106"></span> ![](img/_02106.jpg) *k*, *g*.

The general reader should, however, observe that these niceties of
transliteration are merely matters of writing, as the exact
pronunciation of Pahlavi cannot now be fully ascertained in all its
details. There is every reason to suppose that the Semitic portion of
the Pahlavi was never pronounced by the Persians as it was written
(unless, indeed, in the earliest times); but to transliterate these
Semitic words by their Persian equivalents, as the Persians certainly
pronounced them, would produce a Pâzand text, instead of a Pahlavi one.
If, therefore, we really want the transliteration to represent the
Pahlavi text correctly, we must transliterate the Semitic words as they
are written, without reference to the mode in which we suppose that the
Persians used to, read them. With regard to the Persian words, if we
call to mind the fact that Pahlavi was the immediate parent of modern
Persian, we shall naturally accept the modern Persian pronunciation
(stripped of its Arabic corruptions) as a guide, so far as Pahlavi
orthography permits, in preference to tracing the sounds of these words
downwards from their remote ancestors' in ancient Persian or the Avesta.
But the pronunciation of words evidently derived directly from the
Avesta, as is the case with many religious terms, must clearly depend
upon the

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Avesta
orthography, so far as the alteration in spelling permits. These are the
general rules here adopted, but many uncertainties arise in their
practical application, which have to be settled in a somewhat arbitrary
manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xv:1](sbe18002.htm#fr_0) One reason for
supposing that this colophon was so copied is that K35 does not seem
older than the date mentioned in it. Another reason is that the loss of
the end of this colophon in BK allows us to assume that it was followed
by another colophon, as is often the case in. copies of old MSS. A
colophon that extends to the end of the last folio of a manuscript can
never be safely assumed to belong to that manuscript, because it may
have been followed by others on further folios.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xvii:1](sbe18002.htm#fr_1) There is some doubt
about this period. Dastûr Peshotanji mentions thirty or forty years. but
in the MS. J, which appears to have been copied chiefly from this codex
in Bombay, the date noted by the copyist of the older part of that MS.
is 'the day Rashn of the month Khûrdâd, A. Y. 1188' (21st December 1818,
according to the calendar of the Indian Parsis), showing that the codex
must have been at least sixty-four years in Bombay.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xviii:1](sbe18002.htm#fr_2) The text of Chaps.
VI, X, 2 has been lost, and recently supplied from J.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xviii:2](sbe18002.htm#fr_3) No copy of the
intermediate chapters obtained by the present translator, and several of
the original folios have been lost.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xviii:3](sbe18002.htm#fr_4) No copy of the
intermediate chapters taken by the present translator.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xviii:4](sbe18002.htm#fr_5) Chaps. LXXXIX,
I-XCI, 7 omitted.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xviii:5](sbe18002.htm#fr_6) Ep. vi, 2-ix, 7
being copied from BK and wrongly inserted in Dd. XXXVII, 33 (see [p.
89](sbe18044.htm#page_89), note 5).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxi:1](sbe18002.htm#fr_7) Dotted letters might
be used, if available, instead of italics; but they are liable to the
objection that, independent of the usual blunders due to the ordinary
fallibility of human eyesight, it has been found by the translator that
a dot, which was invisible on the proofs, will sometimes appear under a
wrong letter in the course of printing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Dâ*d*istân-î Dînîk](sbe18003)
