[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe18060)  [Next](sbe18062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part II (SBE18)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1882\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LIV.

1\. *As to* the fifty-third question *and* reply, that which you ask is
thus: A man whose wife, daughters, sisters, and relations are many, and
*who* is the master of much wealth, becomes sick, *and* during the
sickness *has* given this hoard of wealth unto one daughter. 2. And his
other sisters and daughters are not contented therewith, *and* speak
thus: 'This wealth ought *to have been* given during health and
consciousness, not during sickness; and now it should not be allowable
to give anything whatever unto any one during sickness, for if anything
happens <span id="fr_682"></span>[2](#fn_679) the wealth all comes back
for division amongst *us*.' 3. Would it be allowable to give anything
whatever of that wealth to any one, during sickness, or not?

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 4. Is it
necessary <span id="fr_683"></span>[1](#fn_680) *for* one of such wife,
daughters, and sisters as *there* happen *to be* to appoint an adopted
son for that man, because of that wealth, or not? 5. Are the wife,
daughters, and sisters who shall take their share of the wealth
responsible for <span id="fr_684"></span>[2](#fn_681) the religious
rites of every kind, and is it necessary for them to order the annual
ceremonies for that man at the daily and yearly *periods*, or not <span
id="fr_685"></span>[3](#fn_682)?

6\. The reply is this; that, when there is nothing therein on account of
which I *should* so deem *him* otherwise than a man in sickness *and*
nearly passing away, *it* is not allowable to give *it* up, except when
*it is* for his debts, or his wife *and* children, or an aged *person*
(zarmân) or father who is in *his* guardianship--whom it is
indispensably necessary to maintain--*and* is such as, or as much as, is
discreetly requisite for payment of the debt, or *for* the food,
maintenance, *and* protection of those that I *have* written *about*;
then, *however, it* is allowable to give it up away (bîrûnŏ) from those
of whom *you have* written, as much as during his consciousness.

7\. In other sickness, not while passing away, whatever is given up by
him himself during consciousness is allowable; when *he is* not
conscious *it* is not allowable. 8. And on. that which he says during
unconsciousness *one* is not reliant and *it* is not credible (vâ*v*ar);
*but* that which *he says* during

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

consciousness, and that, too, which the same man gave unto a daughter
when he was ill, if given by him consciously, are even then proceedings
to be granted; if given by him during unconsciousness it is just as
though he died without an opportunity of speaking (avâng-pîrû*z*) <span
id="fr_686"></span>[1](#fn_683).

9\. Of the property left by will <span id="fr_687"></span>[2](#fn_684),
one share is needful for each separate daughter for whom a husband is
not provided, *and* two shares for a wife who may be a privileged
*one* <span id="fr_688"></span>[3](#fn_685)*; and* so long as the wife
is living *she* exists as the house-mistress of the family; moreover, it
is not needful to appoint an

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

adopted son (satôr), for the adopted son's duty (satôrîh) remains with
her, *and* she manages to claim guardianship, for the family from some
man out of the relatives most nearly allied. 10. Out of the portion of
the property for food and maintenance the wife should provide the
daughters with husbands; and to keep going the necessities in the
guardianship, the nurture which the *deceased* man afforded, *and* the
ceremonies *and* good works imposed upon the family, *and* thereby
become indispensable, *she* herself is to take lapfuls and armfuls <span
id="fr_689"></span>[1](#fn_686) out of the income (bar).

11\. *As to* the sisters of that man, if they have been necessarily in
his guardianship, even as to nourishment, and there is no property for
them in *any* other way, their food and maintenance are also needful to
be out of the income of the property, unless <span
id="fr_690"></span>[2](#fn_687) that man *has otherwise* devised, or the
appointment of a husband is not provided on account of the
non-subjection (lôîtŏ aîrîh) *in which* they have been unto the
guardianship of that man, or anything else opposed to it, so that
nothing whatever of the property of that man is needful for them.

12\. He who is a husband of *one of* the daughters is a leader in the
management (dastôbarîh) of the family, *but with* the concurrence of the
house-mistress of the family, and *even* so when the action *is one*
which they should not do, and his son is not born, *or* becomes passing
*away* <span id="fr_691"></span>[3](#fn_688).

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

13\. *As to* a daughter not provided with a husband, should the one
whose husband is not provided be an only *child* <span
id="fr_692"></span>[1](#fn_689), to keep *her* subject also to the
house-mistress of the family it is needful *for* her *that there* should
be an adopted son in it; *and* when they shall appoint *her* husband
unto the adopted-sonship the property then comes over into his
possession.

14\. When the house-mistress of the family passes *away*, and the
daughters are provided with husbands, the adopted-sonship is to be
appointed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_679"></span>[183:2](sbe18061.htm#fr_682) M14 has if he
gives anything.'

<span id="fn_680"></span>[184:1](sbe18061.htm#fr_683) K35 has 'is it not
necessary,' by using lâ, 'not,' instead of râî, 'for,' which latter
reading is adopted in the text from M14, but it is doubtful which
reading is the better one. The same variation occurs in § 5.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[184:2](sbe18061.htm#fr_684) Literally 'are the
rites on their necks.'

<span id="fn_682"></span>[184:3](sbe18061.htm#fr_685) Ceremonies for the
dead have to be performed on the first font days, the tenth day, and
then at the end of a month and a year from the time of death (see Sls.
XVII, 5).

<span id="fn_683"></span>[185:1](sbe18061.htm#fr_686) For this uncommon
word M14 substitutes a*v*îk-andar*z*, 'intestate;' but the meaning is
that the gift is as invalid as if he had been unable to make a
declaration of his intentions.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[185:2](sbe18061.htm#fr_687) Levatman andar*z*
in K35, but M14 has a*v*îk andar*z*, 'without a will,' which, at first
sight, appears the more plausible reading (especially as a*v*îk,
'without,' is written very much like a*v*âk, 'with,' the Pâz. synonym of
levatman). But on further consideration it seems equally probable that
this section is intended to limit the power of a testator, so as to
prevent him from dividing so much of his property as he leaves to his
family in any unfair manner. The rule here laid down would, of course,
also apply in cases of intestacy when the testator has no son; and is
that given in the Persian Rivâyats.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[185:3](sbe18061.htm#fr_688) This does not
imply that a man might have more wives than one, but that wives are of
five classes, according to the circumstances of the marriage. A
pâ*d*akhshah or 'privileged' wife is one who was a maiden married with
the consent of her parents who have another child. A yûkan or
'only-child' wife differs from the last merely by being an only child,
and having, therefore, to give up her first child to her parents. A
satar or 'adopted' wife is one who was a maiden enabled to marry by
receiving a dowry from the relatives of a man who has died unmarried, on
condition that half of her children shall belong to the deceased. A
*k*akar or 'serving' wife is a widow who marries again. A khû*d*-*s*arâi
or 'self-disposing' wife is one who marries without her parents' consent
(see Bd. XXXII, 6 n).

<span id="fn_686"></span>[186:1](sbe18061.htm#fr_689) Literally 'the
bosom size and arm size,' a Pahlavi idiom for 'plenty.'

<span id="fn_687"></span>[186:2](sbe18061.htm#fr_690) In the Pahlavi
text this latter half of the section precedes the foregoing provisional
clauses.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[186:3](sbe18061.htm#fr_691) The meaning seems
to be that so long as he has no son (who <span id="page_187">p.
187</span> would be a member of the family in direct descent through his
mother) he can only assist and advise the widow, but on the birth of his
son he can act more authoritatively, as the representative of the child.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[187:1](sbe18061.htm#fr_692) Written aêvôk-aê
in Pâzand. She becomes a yûkan or 'only-child' wife (see § 9 n) until
she has given up her first child to her mother, after which she is a
'privileged' wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV](sbe18062)
