[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010492)  [Next](0010494) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xxxii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.—Trypho objecting that Christ is described as glorious by Daniel, Justin distinguishes two advents.

<span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p1.2"></span><span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p1.3"></span>And
when I had ceased, Trypho said, “These and such like Scriptures, sir,
compel us to wait for Him who, as Son of man, receives from the Ancient
of days the everlasting kingdom. But this so-called Christ of yours was
dishonourable and inglorious, so much so that the last curse contained
in the law of God fell on him, for he was crucified.”

<span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p2"></span>Then I replied to him, “If, sirs, it
were not said by the Scriptures which I have already quoted, that His
form was inglorious, and His generation not declared, and that for His
death the rich would suffer death, and with His stripes we should be
healed, and that He would be led away like a sheep; and if I had not
explained that there would be two advents of His,—one in which He was
pierced by you; a second, when you shall know Him whom you have pierced,
and your tribes shall mourn, each tribe by itself, the women apart, and
the men apart,—then I must have been speaking dubious and obscure
things. But now, by means of the contents of those Scriptures esteemed
holy and prophetic amongst you, I attempt to prove all \[that I have
adduced\], in the hope that some one of you may be found to be of that
remnant which has been left by the grace of the Lord of Sabaoth for the
eternal salvation. In order, therefore, that the matter inquired into
may be plainer to you, I will mention to you other words also spoken by
the blessed David, from which you will perceive that the Lord is called
the Christ by the Holy Spirit of prophecy; and that the Lord, the Father
of all, has brought Him again from the earth, setting Him at His own
right hand, until He makes His enemies His footstool; which indeed
happens from the time that our Lord Jesus Christ ascended to heaven,
after He rose again from the dead, the times now running on to their
consummation; and he whom Daniel foretells would have dominion for a
time, and times, and an half, is even already at the door, about to
speak blasphemous and daring things against the Most High. But you,
being ignorant of how long he will have dominion, hold another opinion.
For you interpret the ‘time’ as being a hundred years. But if this is
so, the man of sin must, at the shortest, reign three hundred and fifty
years, in order that we may compute that which is said by the holy
Daniel— ‘and times’—to be *two* times only. All this I have said to you
in digression, in order that you at length may be persuaded of what has
been declared against you by God, that you are foolish sons; and of
this, ‘Therefore, behold, I will proceed to take away this people, and
shall take them away; and I will strip the wise of their wisdom, and
will hide the understanding of their prudent men;’ <span
id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028) and may cease to deceive yourselves
and those who hear you, and may learn of us, who have been taught wisdom
by the grace of Christ. The words, then, which were spoken by David, are
these: <span id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029) ‘The Lord said unto My
Lord, Sit Thou at My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy
footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of Thy strength out of Sion: rule
Thou also in the midst of Thine enemies. With Thee shall be, in the day,
the chief of Thy power, in the beauties of Thy saints. From the womb,
before the morning star, have I begotten Thee. The Lord hath sworn, and
will not repent: Thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedek. The Lord is at Thy right hand: He has crushed kings in the
day of His wrath: He shall judge among the heathen, He shall fill
\[with\] the dead bodies. <span id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030) He
shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall He lift up the
head.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[210:2029](0010493.htm#fr_2028) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p3"></span> [Isa. xxix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[210:2030](0010493.htm#fr_2029) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p4"></span> [Ps.
cx.](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#000)<span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[210:2031](0010493.htm#fr_2030) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.xxxii-p5.1"></span>πληρώσει πτώματα</span>; Lat. version,
*implebit ruinas*. Thirlby suggested that an omission has taken place in
the <span class="upper"><span id="viii.iv.xxxii-p5.2"></span>mss.</span>
by the transcriber’s fault.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII.—Ps. cx. is not...](0010494)
