[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010805)  [Next](0010807) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—The old prophets and righteous men knew beforehand of the advent of Christ, and earnestly desired to see and hear Him, He revealing himself in the Scriptures by the Holy Ghost, and without any change in Himself, enriching men day by day with benefits, but conferring them in greater abundance on later than on former generations.

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>But
that it was not only the prophets and many righteous men, who,
foreseeing through the Holy Spirit His advent, prayed that they might
attain to that period in which they should see their Lord face to face,
and hear His words, the Lord has made manifest, when He says to His
disciples, “Many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.” <span
id="fr_3927"></span>[3928](#fn_3927) In what way, then, did they desire
both to hear and to see, unless they had foreknowledge of His future
advent? But how could they have foreknown it, unless they had previously
received foreknowledge from Himself? And how do the Scriptures testify
of Him, unless all things had ever been revealed and shown to believers
by one and the same God through the Word; He at one time conferring with
His creature, and at another propounding His law; at one time, again,
reproving, at another exhorting, and then setting free His servant, and
adopting him as a son (*in filium*); and, at the proper time, bestowing
an incorruptible inheritance, for the purpose of bringing man to
perfection? For He formed him for growth and increase, as the Scripture
says: “Increase and multiply.” <span
id="fr_3928"></span>[3929](#fn_3928)

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p4"></span>2. And in this respect God differs from
man, that God indeed makes, but man is made; and truly, He who makes is
always the same; but that which is made must receive both beginning, and
middle, and addition, and increase. And God does indeed create after a
skilful manner, while, \[as regards\] man, he *is* created skilfully.
God also is truly perfect in all things, Himself equal and similar to
Himself, as He is all light, and all mind, and all substance, and the
fount of all good; but man receives advancement and increase towards
God. For as God is always the same, so also man, when found in God,
shall always go on towards God. For neither does God at any time cease
to confer benefits upon, or to enrich man; nor does man ever cease from
receiving the benefits, and being enriched by God. For the receptacle of
His goodness, and the instrument of His glorification, is the man who is
grateful to Him that made him; and again, the receptacle of His just
judgment is the ungrateful man, who both despises his Maker and is not
subject to His Word; who has promised that He will give very much to
those always bringing forth fruit, and more \[and more\] to those who
have the Lord’s money. “Well done,” He says, “good and faithful servant:
because thou hast been faithful in little, I will appoint thee over many
things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” <span
id="fr_3929"></span>[3930](#fn_3929) The Lord Himself thus promises very
much.

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p6"></span>3. As, therefore, He has promised to give
very much to those who do now bring forth fruit, according to the gift
of His grace, but not according to the changeableness of “knowledge;”
for the Lord remains the same, and the same Father is revealed; thus,
therefore, has the one and the same Lord granted, by means of His
advent, a greater gift of grace to those of a later period, than what He
had granted to those under the Old Testament dispensation. For they
indeed used to hear, by means of \[His\] servants, that the King would
come, and they rejoiced to a certain extent, inasmuch as they hoped for
His coming; but those who have beheld Him actually present, and have
obtained liberty, and been made partakers of His gifts, do possess a
greater amount of grace, and a higher degree of exultation, rejoicing
because of the King’s arrival: as <span id="page_475">p. 475</span>
<span id="ix.vi.xii-Page_475"></span> also David says, “My soul shall
rejoice in the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>Lord</span>; it shall be glad in His
salvation.” <span id="fr_3930"></span>[3931](#fn_3930) And for this
cause, upon His entrance into Jerusalem, all those who were in the
way <span id="fr_3931"></span>[3932](#fn_3931) recognised David their
king in His sorrow of soul, and spread their garments for Him, and
ornamented the way with green boughs, crying out with great joy and
gladness, “Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is He that cometh in the
name of the Lord: hosanna in the highest.” <span
id="fr_3932"></span>[3933](#fn_3932) But to the envious wicked stewards,
who circumvented those under them, and ruled over those that had no
great intelligence, <span id="fr_3933"></span>[3934](#fn_3933) and for
this reason were unwilling that the king should come, and who said to
Him, “Hearest thou what these say?” did the Lord reply, “Have ye never
read, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected
praise?” <span id="fr_3934"></span>[3935](#fn_3934) —thus pointing out
that what had been declared by David concerning the Son of God, was
accomplished in His own person; and indicating that they were indeed
ignorant of the meaning of the Scripture and the dispensation of God;
but declaring that it was Himself who was announced by the prophets as
Christ, whose name is praised in all the earth, and who perfects praise
to His Father from the mouth of babes and sucklings; wherefore also His
glory has been raised above the heavens.

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p12"></span>4. If, therefore, the self-same person
is present who was announced by the prophets, our Lord Jesus Christ, and
if His advent has brought in a fuller \[measure of\] grace and greater
gifts to those who have received Him, it is plain that the Father also
is Himself the same who was proclaimed by the prophets, and that the
Son, on His coming, did not spread the knowledge of another Father, but
of the same who was preached from the beginning; from whom also He has
brought down liberty to those who, in a lawful manner, and with a
willing mind, and with all the heart, do Him service; whereas to
scoffers, and to those not subject to God, but who follow outward
purifications for the praise of men (which observances had been given as
a type of future things,—the law typifying, as it were, certain things
in a shadow, and delineating eternal things by temporal, celestial by
terrestrial), and to those who pretend that they do themselves observe
more than what has been prescribed, as if preferring their own zeal to
God Himself, while within they are full of hypocrisy, and covetousness,
and all wickedness,— \[to such\] has He assigned everlasting perdition
by cutting them off from life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3927"></span>[474:3928](0010806.htm#fr_3927) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p2"></span> [Matt. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017)<span id="ix.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3928"></span>[474:3929](0010806.htm#fr_3928) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p3"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="ix.vi.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3929"></span>[474:3930](0010806.htm#fr_3929) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span id="ix.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3930"></span>[475:3931](0010806.htm#fr_3930) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p7"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3931"></span>[475:3932](0010806.htm#fr_3931) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p8"></span> Or, “all those who were in the *way of
David*”—*omnes qui erant in viâ David, in dolore animæ cognoverunt suum
regem*.

<span id="fn_3932"></span>[475:3933](0010806.htm#fr_3932) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p9"></span> [Matt. xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3933"></span>[475:3934](0010806.htm#fr_3933) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p10"></span> The Latin text is ambiguous:
“dominabantur eorum, quibus ratio non constabat.” The rendering may be,
“and ruled over those things with respect to which it was not right that
they should do so.”

<span id="fn_3934"></span>[475:3935](0010806.htm#fr_3934) <span
id="ix.vi.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xii-p11"></span> [Matt. xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi.xii-p11.1"></span>;
[Ps. viii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)<span
id="ix.vi.xii-p11.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—It clearly appears that...](0010807)
