[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010700)  [Next](0010702) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.v"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Account given by the heretics of the formation of Achamoth; origin of the visible world from her disturbances.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.ii.v-p1.1"></span>The
following are the transactions which they narrate as having occurred
outside of the Pleroma: <span id="ix.ii.v-p1.2"></span>The enthymesis of
that Sophia who dwells above, which they also term Achamoth, <span
id="fr_2710"></span>[2711](#fn_2710) being removed from the Pleroma,
together with her passion, they relate to have, as a matter of course,
become violently excited in those places of darkness and vacuity \[to
which she had been banished\]. For she was excluded from light <span
id="fr_2711"></span>[2712](#fn_2711) and the Pleroma, and was without
form or figure, like an untimely birth, because she had received
nothing <span id="fr_2712"></span>[2713](#fn_2712) \[from a male
parent\]. But the Christ dwelling on high took pity upon her; and having
extended himself through and beyond Stauros, <span
id="fr_2713"></span>[2714](#fn_2713) he imparted a figure to her, but
merely as respected substance, and not so as to convey
intelligence. <span id="fr_2714"></span>[2715](#fn_2714) Having effected
this, he withdrew his influence, and returned, leaving Achamoth to
herself, in order that she, becoming sensible of her suffering as being
severed from the Pleroma, might be influenced by the desire of better
things, while she possessed in the meantime a kind of odour of
immortality left in her by Christ and the Holy Spirit. Wherefore also
she is called by two names—Sophia after her father (for Sophia is spoken
of as being her father), and Holy Spirit from that Spirit who is along
with Christ. Having then obtained a form, along with intelligence, and
being immediately deserted by that Logos who had been invisibly present
with her—that is, by Christ —she strained herself to discover that light
which had forsaken her, but could not <span id="page_321">p. 321</span>
<span id="ix.ii.v-Page_321"></span> effect her purpose, inasmuch as she
was prevented by Horos. <span id="ix.ii.v-p6.1"></span>And as Horos thus
obstructed her further progress, he exclaimed, <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.ii.v-p6.2"></span>Iao</span>, <span
id="fr_2715"></span>[2716](#fn_2715) whence, they say, this name *Iao*
derived its origin. And when she could not pass by Horos on account of
that passion in which she had been involved, and because she alone had
been left without, she then resigned herself to every sort of that
manifold and varied state of passion to which she was subject; and thus
she suffered grief on the one hand because she had not obtained the
object of her desire, and fear on the other hand, lest life itself
should fail her, as light had already done, while, in addition, she was
in the greatest perplexity. All these feelings were associated with
ignorance. And this ignorance of hers was not like that of her mother,
the first Sophia, an Æon, due to degeneracy by means of passion, but to
an \[innate\] opposition \[of nature to knowledge\]. <span
id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716) Moreover, another kind of passion
fell upon her (Achamoth), namely, that of desiring to return to him who
gave her life.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p9"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii.v-p9.1"></span>This
collection \[of passions\] they declare was the substance of the matter
from which this world was formed. For from \[her desire of\] returning
\[to him who gave her life\], every soul belonging to this world, and
that of the Demiurge <span id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717) himself,
derived its origin. All other things owed their beginning to her terror
and sorrow. For from her tears all that is of a liquid nature was
formed; from her smile all that is lucent; and from her grief and
perplexity all the corporeal elements of the world. For at one time, as
they affirm, she would weep and lament on account of being left alone in
the midst of darkness and vacuity; while, at another time, reflecting on
the light which had forsaken her, she would be filled with joy, and
laugh; then, again, she would be struck with terror; or, at other times,
would sink into consternation and bewilderment.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p11"></span>3. Now what follows from all this? No
light tragedy comes out of it, as the fancy of every man among them
pompously explains, one in one way, and another in another, from what
kind of passion and from what element being derived its origin. They
have good reason, as seems to me, why they should not feel inclined to
teach these things to all in public, but only to such as are able to pay
a high price for an acquaintance with such profound mysteries. For these
doctrines are not at all similar to those of which our Lord said,
“Freely ye have received, freely give.” <span
id="fr_2718"></span>[2719](#fn_2718) They are, on the contrary,
abstruse, and portentous, and profound mysteries, to be got at only with
great labour by such as are in love with falsehood. For who would not
expend all that he possessed, if only he might learn in return, that
from the tears of the enthymesis of the Æon involved in passion, seas,
and fountains, and rivers, and every liquid substance derived its
origin; that light burst forth from her smile; and that from her
perplexity and consternation the corporeal elements of the world had
their formation?

<span id="ix.ii.v-p13"></span>4. I feel somewhat inclined myself to
contribute a few hints towards the development of their system. For when
I perceive that waters are in part fresh, such as fountains, rivers,
showers, and so on, and in part salt; such as those in the sea, I
reflect with myself that all such waters cannot be derived from her
tears, inasmuch as these are of a saline quality only. It is clear,
therefore, that the waters which are salt are alone those which are
derived from her tears. But it is probable that she, in her intense
agony and perplexity, was covered with perspiration. And hence,
following out their notion, we may conceive that fountains and rivers,
and all the fresh water in the world, are due to this source. For it is
difficult, since we know that all tears are of the same quality, to
believe that waters both salt and fresh proceeded from them. The more
plausible supposition is, that some are from her tears, and some from
her perspiration. And since there are also in the world certain waters
which are hot and acrid in their nature, thou must be left to guess
their origin, how and whence. Such are some of the results of their
hypothesis.

<span id="ix.ii.v-p14"></span>5. They go on to state that, when the
mother Achamoth had passed through all sorts of passion, and had with
difficulty escaped from them, she turned herself to supplicate the light
which had forsaken her, that is, Christ. He, however, having returned to
the Pleroma, and being probably unwilling again to descend from it, sent
forth to her the Paraclete, that is, the Saviour. <span
id="fr_2719"></span>[2720](#fn_2719) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p15.2"></span>This being was endowed with all power by the
Father, who placed everything under his authority, the Æons <span
id="fr_2720"></span>[2721](#fn_2720) doing so likewise, so that “by him
were all things, visible and invisible, created, thrones, divinities,
dominions.” <span id="fr_2721"></span>[2722](#fn_2721) He then was sent
to her along with his contemporary angels. And they related that
Achamoth, filled with reverence, at first veiled herself through
modesty, but that by and by, when she had looked upon him with all his
endowments, and had acquired strength from his appearance, she ran
forward to meet him. He then imparted to her form as respected
intelligence, and brought healing to her passions, separating them from
her, but not <span id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span
id="ix.ii.v-Page_322"></span> so as to drive them out of thought
altogether. For it was not possible that they should be annihilated as
in the former case, <span id="fr_2722"></span>[2723](#fn_2722) because
they had already taken root and acquired strength \[so as to possess an
indestructible existence\]. All that he could do was to separate them
and set them apart, and then commingle and condense them, so as to
transmute them from incorporeal passion into unorganized matter. <span
id="fr_2723"></span>[2724](#fn_2723) He then by this process conferred
upon them a fitness and a nature to become concretions and corporeal
structures, in order that two substances should be formed,—the one evil,
resulting from the passions, and the other subject indeed to suffering,
but originating from her conversion. And on this account (i.e., on
account of this hypostatizing of ideal matter) they say that the Saviour
virtually <span id="fr_2724"></span>[2725](#fn_2724) created the world.
But when Achamoth was freed from her passion, she gazed with rapture on
the dazzling vision of the angels that were with him; and in her
ecstasy, conceiving by them, they tell us that she brought forth new
beings, partly after her own image, and partly a spiritual progeny after
the image of the Saviour’s attendants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2710"></span>[320:2711](0010701.htm#fr_2710) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p2"></span> This term, though Tertullian declares
himself to have been ignorant of its derivation, was evidently formed
from the Hebrew word <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.ii.v-p2.1"></span>חָכְמָה</span>—chockmah, *wisdom*.

<span id="fn_2711"></span>[320:2712](0010701.htm#fr_2711) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p3"></span> The reader will observe that *light* and
*fulness* are the exact correlatives of the *darkness* and *vacuity*
which have just been mentioned.

<span id="fn_2712"></span>[320:2713](0010701.htm#fr_2712) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p4"></span> As above stated (ii. 3), the Gnostics held
that form and figure were due to the male, substance to the female
parent.

<span id="fn_2713"></span>[320:2714](0010701.htm#fr_2713) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p5"></span> The Valentinian Stauros was the boundary
fence of the Pleroma beyond which Christ extended himself to assist the
enthymesis of Sophia.

<span id="fn_2714"></span>[320:2715](0010701.htm#fr_2714) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p6"></span> The peculiar *gnosis* which Nous received
from his father, and communicated to the other Æons.

<span id="fn_2715"></span>[321:2716](0010701.htm#fr_2715) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p7"></span> Probably corresponding to the Hebrew <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.ii.v-p7.1"></span>יהוה</span>, *Jehovah.*

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[321:2717](0010701.htm#fr_2716) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p8"></span> This sentence is very elliptical in the
original, but the sense is as given above. Sophia fell from *Gnosis* by
degradation; Achamoth never possessed this knowledge, her nature being
from the first opposed to it.

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[321:2718](0010701.htm#fr_2717) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p10"></span> “The Demiurge derived from Enthymesis an
animal, and not a spiritual nature.”— <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.ii.v-p10.1"></span>Harvey</span>.

<span id="fn_2718"></span>[321:2719](0010701.htm#fr_2718) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p12"></span> [Matt. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii.v-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2719"></span>[321:2720](0010701.htm#fr_2719) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p15"></span> “Jesus, or Soter, was also called the
Paraclete in the sense of Advocate, or one acting as the representative
of others.”—<span class="upper"><span
id="ix.ii.v-p15.1"></span>Harvey</span>.

<span id="fn_2720"></span>[321:2721](0010701.htm#fr_2720) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p16"></span> Both the Father and the other Æons
constituting Soter an impersonation of the entire Pleroma.

<span id="fn_2721"></span>[321:2722](0010701.htm#fr_2721) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p17"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="ix.ii.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2722"></span>[322:2723](0010701.htm#fr_2722) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p18"></span> That is, as in the case of her mother
Sophia, who is sometimes called “the Sophia above,” Achamoth being “the
Sophia below,” or “the second Sophia.”

<span id="fn_2723"></span>[322:2724](0010701.htm#fr_2723) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p19"></span> Thus Harvey renders <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.v-p19.1"></span>ἀσώματον ὕλην</span>: so
Baur, *Chr. Gnos.*, as quoted by Stieren. Billius proposes to read <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.v-p19.2"></span>ἐνσώματον</span>,
*corporeal*.

<span id="fn_2724"></span>[322:2725](0010701.htm#fr_2724) <span
id="ix.ii.v-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.v-p20"></span> Though not actually, for that was the
work of the Demiurge. See next chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—Formation of the...](0010702)
