[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010769)  [Next](0010771) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.iv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—A refutation of the heretics, from the fact that, in the various Churches, a perpetual succession of bishops was kept up.

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.iv-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.iv-p1.2"></span>It is within the power of all, therefore, in
every Church, who may wish to see the truth, to contemplate clearly the
tradition of the apostles manifested throughout the whole world; and we
are in a position to reckon up those who were by the apostles instituted
bishops in the Churches, and \[to demonstrate\] the succession of these
men to our own times; those who neither taught nor knew of anything like
what these \[heretics\] rave about. For if the apostles had known hidden
mysteries, which they were in the habit of imparting to “the perfect”
apart and privily from the rest, they would have delivered them
especially to those to whom they were also committing the Churches
themselves. For they were desirous that these men should be very perfect
and blameless in all things, whom also they were leaving behind as their
successors, delivering up their own place of government to these men;
which men, if they discharged their functions honestly, would be a great
boon \[to the Church\], but if they should fall away, the direst
calamity.

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p2"></span>2. <span id="ix.iv.iv-p2.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.iv-p2.2"></span><span id="ix.iv.iv-p2.3"></span>Since,
however, it would be very tedious, in such a volume as this, to reckon
up the successions of all the Churches, we do put to confusion all those
who, in whatever manner, whether by an evil self-pleasing, by vainglory,
or by blindness and perverse opinion, assemble in unauthorized meetings;
\[we do this, I say,\] by indicating that tradition derived from the
apostles, of the very great, the very ancient, and universally known
Church founded and organized at Rome by the two most glorious apostles,
Peter and Paul; as also \[by pointing out\] the faith preached to men,
which comes down to our time by means of the successions of the bishops.
For it is a matter of necessity that every Church should agree with this
Church, on account of its pre- eminent authority, <span
id="fr_3312"></span>[3313](#fn_3312) that is, the faithful everywhere,
<span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="ix.iv.iv-Page_416"></span>
inasmuch as the apostolical tradition has been preserved continuously by
those \[faithful men\] who exist everywhere.

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p4"></span>3. <span id="ix.iv.iv-p4.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.iv-p4.2"></span><span id="ix.iv.iv-p4.3"></span>The blessed
apostles, then, having founded and built up the Church, committed into
the hands of Linus the office of the episcopate. Of this Linus, Paul
makes mention in the Epistles to Timothy. To him succeeded Anacletus;
and after him, in the third place from the apostles, Clement was
allotted the bishopric. This man, as he had seen the blessed apostles,
and had been conversant with them, might be said to have the preaching
of the apostles still echoing \[in his ears\], and their traditions
before his eyes. Nor was he alone \[in this\], for there were many still
remaining who had received instructions from the apostles. In the time
of this Clement, no small dissension having occurred among the brethren
at Corinth, the Church in Rome despatched a most powerful letter to the
Corinthians, exhorting them to peace, renewing their faith, and
declaring the tradition which it had lately received from the apostles,
proclaiming the one God, omnipotent, the Maker of heaven and earth, the
Creator of man, who brought on the deluge, and called Abraham, who led
the people from the land of Egypt, spake with Moses, set forth the law,
sent the prophets, and who has prepared fire for the devil and his
angels. From this document, whosoever chooses to do so, may learn that
He, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, was preached by the Churches,
and may also understand the apostolical tradition of the Church, since
this Epistle is of older date than these men who are now propagating
falsehood, and who conjure into existence another god beyond the Creator
and the Maker of all existing things. To this Clement there succeeded
Evaristus. Alexander followed Evaristus; then, sixth from the apostles,
Sixtus was appointed; after him, Telephorus, who was gloriously
martyred; then Hyginus; after him, Pius; then after him, Anicetus. Sorer
having succeeded Anicetus, Eleutherius does now, in the twelfth place
from the apostles, hold the inheritance of the episcopate. In this
order, and by this succession, the ecclesiastical tradition from the
apostles, and the preaching of the truth, have come down to us. And this
is most abundant proof that there is one and the same vivifying faith,
which has been preserved in the Church from the apostles until now, and
handed down in truth.

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p5"></span>4. <span id="ix.iv.iv-p5.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.iv-p5.2"></span>But Polycarp also was not only instructed by
apostles, and conversed with many who had seen Christ, but was also, by
apostles in Asia, appointed bishop of the Church in Smyrna, whom I also
saw in my early youth, for he tarried \[on earth\] a very long time,
and, when a very old man, gloriously and most nobly suffering
martyrdom, <span id="fr_3313"></span>[3314](#fn_3313) departed this
life, having always taught the things which he had learned from the
apostles, and which the Church has handed down, and which alone are
true. To these things all the Asiatic Churches testify, as do also those
men who have succeeded Polycarp down to the present time,—a man who was
of much greater weight, and a more stedfast witness of truth, than
Valentinus, and Marcion, and the rest of the heretics. He it was who,
coming to Rome in the time of Anicetus caused many to turn away from the
aforesaid heretics to the Church of God, proclaiming that he had
received this one and sole truth from the apostles,—that, namely, which
is handed down by the Church. <span id="fr_3314"></span>[3315](#fn_3314)
<span id="ix.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>There are also those who heard from him
that John, the disciple of the Lord, going to bathe at Ephesus, and
perceiving Cerinthus within, rushed out of the bath-house without
bathing, exclaiming, “Let us fly, lest even the bath-house fall down,
because Cerinthus, the enemy of the truth, is within.” <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p7.2"></span>And Polycarp himself replied to Marcion, who
met him on one occasion, and said, “Dost thou know me?” “I do know thee,
the first-born of Satan.” Such was the horror which the apostles and
their disciples had against holding even verbal communication with any
corrupters of the truth; as Paul also says, “A man that is an heretic,
after the first and second admonition, reject; knowing that he that is
such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself.” <span
id="fr_3315"></span>[3316](#fn_3315) <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>There is also a very powerful <span
id="fr_3316"></span>[3317](#fn_3316) Epistle of Polycarp written to the
Philippians, from which those who choose to do so, and are anxious about
their salvation, can learn the character of his faith, and the preaching
of the truth. Then, again, the Church in Ephesus, founded by Paul, and
having John remaining among them permanently until the times of Trajan,
is a true witness of the tradition of the apostles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3312"></span>[415:3313](0010770.htm#fr_3312) <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p3"></span> The Latin text of this difficult but
important clause is, “Ad hanc enim ecclesiam propter potiorem
principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire ecclesiam.” Both the text
and meaning have here given rise to much discussion. It is impossible to
say with certainty of what words in the Greek original “potiorem
principalitatem” may be the translation. We are far from sure that the
rendering given above is correct, but we have been unable to think of
anything better. \[A most extraordinary confession. It would be hard to
find a worse; but take the following from a candid Roman Catholic, which
is better and more literal: “For to this Church, on account of more
potent principality, it is necessary that every Church (that is, those
who are on every side faithful) *resort*; in which Church ever, *by
those who are on every side*, has been preserved that tradition which is
from the apostles.” (Berington and Kirk, vol. i. p. 252.) Here it is
obvious that the faith was kept at Rome, by *those who resort there*
from all quarters. She was a mirror of the Catholic World, owing here
orthodoxy to them; not the Sun, dispensing her own light to others, but
the glass bringing their rays into a focus. See note at end of book
iii.\] A discussion of the subject may be seen in chap. xii. of Dr.
Wordsworth’s *St. Hippolytus and the Church of Rome*.

<span id="fn_3313"></span>[416:3314](0010770.htm#fr_3313) <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p6"></span> Polycarp suffered about the year 167, in
the reign of Marcus Aurelius. His great age of eighty-six years implies
that he was contemporary with St. John for nearly twenty years.

<span id="fn_3314"></span>[416:3315](0010770.htm#fr_3314) <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p7"></span> So the Greek. The Latin reads: “which he
also handed down to the Church.”

<span id="fn_3315"></span>[416:3316](0010770.htm#fr_3315) <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p8"></span> [Tit. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)<span id="ix.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3316"></span>[416:3317](0010770.htm#fr_3316) <span
id="ix.iv.iv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>ἰκανωτάτη</span>. Harvey translates this
*all-sufficient*, and thus paraphrases: *But his Epistle is
all-sufficient, to teach those that are desirous to learn*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—The truth is to be found...](0010771)
