[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010743)  [Next](0010745) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Valentinus and his followers derived the principles of their system from the heathen; the names only are changed.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Much
more like the truth, and more pleasing, is the account which
Antiphanes, <span id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050) one of the
ancient comic poets, gives in his *Theogony* as to the origin of all
things. For he speaks Chaos as being produced from Night and Silence;
relates that then Love <span id="fr_3051"></span>[3052](#fn_3051) sprang
from Chaos and Night; from this again, Light; and that from this, in his
opinion, were derived all the rest of the first generation of the gods.
After these he next introduces a second generation of gods, and the
creation of the world; then he narrates the formation of mankind by the
second order of the gods. <span id="ix.iii.xv-p3.1"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p3.2"></span>These men (the heretics), adopting this fable
as their own, have ranged their opinions round it, as if by a sort of
natural process, changing only the names of the things referred to, and
setting forth the very same beginning of the generation of all things,
and their production. In place of Night and Silence they substitute
Bythus and Sige; instead of Chaos, they put Nous; and for Love (by whom,
says the comic poet, all other things were set in order) they have
brought forward the Word; while for the primary and greatest gods they
have formed the Æons; and in place of the secondary gods, they tell us
of that creation by their mother which is outside of the Pleroma,
calling it the second Ogdoad. They proclaim to us, like the writer
referred to, that from this (Ogdoad) came the creation of the world and
the formation of man, maintaining that they alone are acquainted with
these ineffable and unknown mysteries. Those things which are everywhere
acted in the theatres by comedians with the clearest voices they
transfer to their own system, teaching them undoubtedly through means of
the same arguments, and merely changing the names.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p4"></span>2. And not only are they convicted of
bringing forward, as if their own \[original ideas\], those things which
are to be found among the comic poets, but they also bring together the
things which have been said by all those who were ignorant of God, and
who are termed philosophers; and sewing together, as it were, a motley
garment out of a heap of miserable rags, they have, by their subtle
manner of expression, furnished themselves with a cloak which is really
not their own. They do, it is true, introduce a new kind of doctrine,
inasmuch as by a new sort of art it has been substituted \[for the
old\]. Yet it is in reality both old and useless, since these very
opinions have been sewed together out of ancient dogmas redolent of
ignorance and irreligion. For instance, Thales <span
id="fr_3052"></span>[3053](#fn_3052) of Miletus affirmed that water was
the generative and initial principle of all things. Now it is just the
same thing whether we say *water* or *Bythus*. The poet Homer, <span
id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053) again, held the opinion that
Oceanus, along with mother Tethys, was the origin of the gods: this idea
these men have transferred to Bythus and Sige. <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p6.1"></span>Anaximander laid it down that infinitude is
the first principle of all things, having seminally in itself the
generation of them all, and from this he declares the immense worlds
\[which exist\] were formed: this, too, they have dressed up anew, and
referred to Bythus and their Æons. <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p6.2"></span>Anaxagoras, again, who has also been surnamed
“Atheist,” gave it as his opinion that animals were formed from seeds
falling down from heaven upon earth. This thought, too, these men have
transferred to “the seed” of their Mother, which they maintain to be
themselves; thus acknowledging at once, in the judgment of such as are
possessed of sense, that they themselves are the offspring of the
irreligious Anaxagoras.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p7"></span>3. Again, adopting the \[ideas of\] shade
and vacuity from Democritus and Epicurus, they have <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="ix.iii.xv-Page_377"></span> fitted
these to their own views, following upon those \[teachers\] who had
already talked a great deal about a vacuum and atoms, the one of which
they called *that which is*, and the other *that which is not*. In like
manner, these men call those things which are within the Pleroma real
existences, just as those philosophers did the atoms; while they
maintain that those which are without the Pleroma have no true
existence, even as those did respecting the vacuum. They have thus
banished themselves in this world (since they are here outside of the
Pleroma) into a place which has no existence. Again, when they maintain
that these things \[below\] are images of those which have a true
existence \[above\], they again most manifestly rehearse the doctrine of
Democritus and Plato. For Democritus was the first who maintained that
numerous and diverse figures were stamped, as it were, with the forms
\[of things above\], and descended from universal space into this world.
But Plato, for his part, speaks of matter, and exemplar, <span
id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054) and God. These men, following those
distinctions, have styled what he calls ideas, and exemplar, the
*images* of those things which are above; while, through a mere change
of name, they boast themselves as being discoverers and contrivers of
this kind of imaginary fiction.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p9"></span>4. This opinion, too, that they hold the
Creator formed the world out of previously existing matter, both
Anaxagoras, Empedocles, and Plato expressed before them; as, forsooth,
we learn they also do under the inspiration of their Mother. Then again,
as to the opinion that everything of necessity passes away to those
things out of which they maintain it was also formed, and that God is
the slave of this necessity, so that He cannot impart immortality to
what is mortal, or bestow incorruption on what is corruptible, but every
one passes into a substance similar in nature to itself, both those who
are named Stoics from the portico (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>στοὰ</span>), and indeed all that are
ignorant of God, poets and historians alike, make the same
affirmation. <span id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055) Those
\[heretics\] who hold the same \[system of\] infidelity have ascribed,
no doubt, their own proper region to spiritual beings,—that, namely,
which is within the Pleroma, but to animal beings the intermediate
space, while to corporeal they assign that which is material. And they
assert that God Himself can do no otherwise, but that every one of the
\[different kinds of substance\] mentioned passes away to those things
which are of the same nature \[with itself\].

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p11"></span>5. Moreover, as to their saying that the
Saviour was formed out of all the Æons, by every one of them depositing,
so to speak, in Him his own special flower, they bring forward nothing
new that may not be found in the Pandora of Hesiod. For what he says
respecting her, these men insinuate concerning the Saviour, bringing Him
before us as Pandoros (All-gifted), as if each of the Æons had bestowed
on Him what He possessed in the greatest perfection. Again, their
opinion as to the indifference of \[eating of\] meats and other actions,
and as to their thinking that, from the nobility of their nature, they
can in no degree at all contract pollution, whatever they eat or
perform, they have derived it from the Cynics, since they do in fact
belong to the same society as do these \[philosophers\]. They also
strive to transfer to \[the treatment of matters of\] faith that
hairsplitting and subtle mode of handling questions which is, in fact, a
copying of Aristotle.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p12"></span>6. <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p12.1"></span>Again, as to the desire they exhibit to
refer this whole universe to numbers, they have learned it from the
Pythagoreans. For these were the first who set forth numbers as the
initial principle of all things, and \[described\] that initial
principle of theirs as being both equal and unequal, out of which \[two
properties\] they conceived that both things sensible <span
id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056) and immaterial derived their
origin. And \[they held\] that one set of first principles <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) gave rise to the matter \[of
things\], and another to their form. They affirm that from these first
principles all things have been made, just as a statue is of its metal
and its special form. Now, the heretics have adapted this to the things
which are outside of the Pleroma. The \[Pythagoreans\] maintained that
the <span id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058) principle of intellect is
proportionate to the energy wherewith mind, as a recipient of the
comprehensible, pursues its inquiries, until, worn out, it is resolved
at length in the Indivisible and One. They further affirm that Hen—that
is, One—is the first principle of all things, and the substance of all
that has been formed. From this again proceeded the Dyad, the Tetrad,
the Pentad, and the manifold generation of the others. These things the
heretics repeat, word for word, with a reference to their Pleroma and
Bythus. <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xv-Page_378"></span> From the same source, too, they strive
to bring into vogue those conjunctions which proceed from unity. Marcus
boasts of such views as if they were his own, and as if he were seen to
have discovered something more novel than others, while he simply sets
forth the Tetrad of Pythagoras as the originating principle and mother
of all things.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p16"></span>7. But I will merely say, in opposition
to these men —Did all those who have been mentioned, with whom you have
been proved to coincide in expression, know, or not know, the truth? If
they knew it, then the descent of the Saviour into this world was
superfluous. For why \[in that case\] did He descend? Was it that He
might bring that truth which was \[already\] known to the knowledge of
those who knew it? If, on the other hand, these men did *not* know it,
then how is it that, while you express yourselves in the same terms as
do those who knew not the truth, ye boast that yourselves alone possess
that knowledge which is above all things, although they who are ignorant
of God \[likewise\] possess it? Thus, then, by a complete
perversion <span id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059) of language, they
style ignorance of the truth knowledge: and Paul well says \[of them,\]
that \[they make use of\] “novelties of words of false knowledge.” <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060) For that knowledge of theirs is
truly found to be false. If, however, taking an impudent course with
respect to these points, they declare that men indeed did not know the
truth, but that their Mother, <span id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061)
the seed of the Father, proclaimed the mysteries of truth through such
men, even as also through the prophets, while the Demiurge was ignorant
\[of the proceeding\], then I answer, in the first place, that the
things which were predicted were not of such a nature as to be
intelligible to no one; for the men themselves knew what they were
saying, as did also their disciples, and those again succeeded these.
And, in the next place, if either the Mother or her seed knew and
proclaimed those things which were of the truth (and the Father <span
id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) is truth), then on their theory the
Saviour spoke falsely when He said, “No one knoweth the Father but the
Son,” <span id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063) unless indeed they
maintain that their seed or Mother is *No-one*.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p22"></span>8. Thus far, then, by means of
\[ascribing to their Æons\] human feelings, and by the fact that they
largely coincide in their language with many of those who are ignorant
of God, they have been seen plausibly drawing a certain number away
\[from the truth\]. They lead them on by the use of those
\[expressions\] with which they have been familiar, to that sort of
discourse which treats of all things, setting forth the production of
the Word of God, and of Zoe, and of Nous, and bringing into the world,
as it were, the \[successive\] emanations of the Deity. The views,
again, which they propound, without either plausibility or parade, are
simply lies from beginning to end. Just as those who, in order to lure
and capture any kind of animals, place their accustomed food before
them, gradually drawing them on by means of the familiar aliment, until
at length they seize it, but, when they have taken them captive, they
subject them to the bitterest of bondage, and drag them along with
violence whithersoever they please; so also do these men gradually and
gently persuading \[others\], by means of their plausible speeches, to
accept of the emission which has been mentioned, then bring forward
things which are not consistent, and forms of the remaining emissions
which are not such as might have been expected. They declare, for
instance, that \[ten\] <span id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064) Æons
were sent forth by Logos and Zoe, while from Anthropos and Ecclesia
there proceeded twelve, although they have neither proof, nor testimony,
nor probability, nor anything whatever of such a nature \[to support
these assertions\]; and with equal folly and audacity do they wish it to
be believed that from Logos and Zoe, being Æons, were sent forth Bythus
and Mixis, Ageratos and Henosis, Autophyes and Hedone, Acinetos and
Syncrasis, Monogenes and Macaria. Moreover, \[as they affirm,\] there
were sent forth, in a similar way, from Anthropos and Ecclesia, being
Æons, Paracletus and Pistis, Patricos and Elpis, Metricos and Agape,
Ainos and Synesis, Ecclesiasticus and Macariotes, Theletos and Sophia.

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p24"></span>9. The passions and error of this
Sophia, and how she ran the risk of perishing through her investigation
\[of the nature\] of the Father, as they relate, and what took place
outside of the Pleroma, and from what sort of a defect they teach that
the Maker of the world was produced, I have set forth in the preceding
book, describing in it, with all diligence, the opinions of these
heretics. \[I have also detailed their views\] respecting Christ, whom
they describe as having been produced subsequently to all these, and
also regarding Soter, who, \[according to them,\] derived his being from
those Æons who were formed within the Pleroma. <span
id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065) But I have of necessity mentioned
their names at present, that from these the absurdity of their falsehood
may be made manifest, and also the confused nature of the nomenclature
they have devised. For <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xv-Page_379"></span> they themselves detract from \[the
dignity of\] their Æons by a multitude of names of this sort. They give
out names plausible and credible to the heathen, \[as being similar\] to
those who are called their twelve gods, <span
id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066) and even these they will have to be
images of their twelve Æons. But the images \[so called\] can produce
names \[of their own\] much more seemly, and more powerful through their
etymology to indicate divinity \[than are those of their fancied
prototypes\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[376:3051](0010744.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p2"></span> Nothing is known of this writer. Several
of the same name are mentioned by the ancients, but to none of them is a
work named *Theogonia* ascribed. He is supposed to be the same poet as
is cited by Athenæus, but that writer quotes from a work styled <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>᾽Αφροδίτης γοναι</span>.

<span id="fn_3051"></span>[376:3052](0010744.htm#fr_3051) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p3"></span> The Latin is “Cupidinem;” and Harvey
here refers to Aristotle, who “quotes the authority of Hesiod and
Parmenides as saying that Love is the eternal intellect, reducing Chaos
into order.”

<span id="fn_3052"></span>[376:3053](0010744.htm#fr_3052) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p5"></span> Compare, on the opinions of the
philosophers referred to in this chapter, Hippolytus, *Philosoph.*, book
i.

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[376:3054](0010744.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p6"></span> *Iliad*, xiv. 201; vii. 99.

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[377:3055](0010744.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p8"></span> The Latin has here *exemplum*,
corresponding doubtless to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>παράδειγμα</span>, and referring to those
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xv-p8.2"></span>ἰδέαι</span> of all
things which Plato supposed to have existed for ever in the divine mind.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[377:3056](0010744.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p10"></span> \[Our author’s demonstration of the
essential harmony of Gnosticism with the old mythologies, and the
philosophies of the heathen, explains the hold it seems to have gained
among nominal converts to Christianity, and also the necessity for a
painstaking refutation of what seem to us mere absurdities. The great
merit of Irenæus is thus illustrated: he gave the death-blow to
heathenism in extirpating heresy.\]

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[377:3057](0010744.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p13"></span> The Latin text reads “sensibilia et
insensata;” but these words, as Harvey observes, must be the translation
of <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>αἰσθητὰ καὶ
ἀναίσθητα</span>, —“the former referring to material objects of sense,
the latter to the immaterial world of intellect.”

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[377:3058](0010744.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p14"></span> This clause is very obscure, and we are
not sure if the above rendering brings out the real meaning of the
author. Harvey takes a different view of it, and supposes the original
Greek to have been, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p14.1"></span>καὶ ἄλλας μὲν τῆς ὑποστάσεως ἀρχὰς εἶναι
ἄλλας δὲ τῆς αἰσθήσεως καὶ τῆς οὐσίας</span>. He then remarks: “The
reader will observe that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p14.2"></span>ὑπόστασις</span> here means *intellectual
substance*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p14.3"></span>οὐσία</span> *material;* as in V. *c. ult*.
The meaning therefore of the sentence will be, *And they affirmed that
the first principles of intellectual substance and of sensible and
material existence were diverse*, viz., unity was the exponent of the
first, duality of the second.”

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[377:3059](0010744.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p14.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p15"></span> All the editors confess the above
sentence hopelessly obscure. We have given Harvey’s conjectural
translation.

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[378:3060](0010744.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p17"></span> Literally, “antiphrasis.”

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[378:3061](0010744.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p18"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.xv-p18.1"></span>.
The text is, “Vocum novitates falsæ agnitionis,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xv-p18.2"></span>καινοφωνίας</span>
having apparently been read in the Greek instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xv-p18.3"></span>κενοφωνίας</span> as in
Text. Rec.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[378:3062](0010744.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p19"></span> Grabe and others insert “vel” between
these words.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[378:3063](0010744.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p20"></span> It seems necessary to regard these
words as parenthetical, though the point is overlooked by all the
editors.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[378:3064](0010744.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p21"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ix.iii.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[378:3065](0010744.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p23"></span> “Decem” is of doubtful authority.

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[378:3066](0010744.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p25"></span> The text has “qui in labe facti sunt;”
but, according to Harvey, “the sense requires <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xv-p25.1"></span>πληρώματι</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xv-p25.2"></span>ἐκτρώματι</span> in the
original.”

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[379:3067](0010744.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="ix.iii.xv-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xv-p26"></span> Viz., the “Dii majorum gentium” of the
Gentiles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—No account can be given...](0010745)
