[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010725)  [Next](0010727) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xxx"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Doctrines of various other Gnostic sects, and especially of the Barbeliotes or Borborians.

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Besides those, however, among these heretics
who are Simonians, and of whom we have already spoken, a multitude of
Gnostics have sprung up, and have been manifested like mushrooms growing
out of the ground. I now proceed to describe the principal opinions held
by them. Some of them, then, set forth a certain Æon who never grows
old, and exists in a virgin spirit: him they style Barbelos. <span
id="fr_2962"></span>[2963](#fn_2962) They declare that somewhere or
other there exists a certain father who cannot be named, and that he was
desirous to reveal himself to this Barbelos. <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>Then this Ennœa went forward, stood before
his face, and demanded from him Prognosis (prescience). But when
Prognosis had, \[as was requested,\] come forth, these two asked for
Aphtharsia (incorruption), which also came forth, and after that Zoe
Aionios (eternal life). Barbelos, glorying in these, and contemplating
their greatness, and in conception <span
id="fr_2963"></span>[2964](#fn_2963) \[thus formed\], rejoicing in this
greatness, generated light similar to it. They declare that this was the
beginning both of light and of the generation of all things; and that
the Father, beholding this light, anointed it with his own benignity,
that it might be rendered perfect. Moreover, they maintain that this was
Christ, who again, according to them, requested that Nous should be
given him as an assistant; and Nous came forth accordingly. Besides
these, the Father sent forth Logos. The conjunctions of Ennœa and Logos,
and of Aphtharsia and Christ, will thus be formed; while Zoe Aionios was
united to Thelema, and Nous to Prognosis. These, then, magnified the
great light and Barbelos.

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p4"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii.xxx-p4.1"></span>They
also affirm that Autogenes was afterwards sent forth from Ennœa and
Logos, to be <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-Page_354"></span> a representation of the great light, and
that he was greatly honoured, all things being rendered subject unto
him. Along with him was sent forth Aletheia, and a conjunction was
formed between Autogenes and Aletheia. But they declare that from the
Light, which is Christ, and from Aphtharsia, four luminaries were sent
forth to surround Autogenes; and again from Thelema and Zoe Aionios four
other emissions took place, to wait upon these four luminaries; and
these they name Charis (grace), Thelesis (will), Synesis
(understanding), and Phronesis (prudence). Of these, Charis is connected
with the great and first luminary: him they represent as Soter
(Saviour), and style Armogenes. <span
id="fr_2964"></span>[2965](#fn_2964) Thelesis, again, is united to the
second luminary, whom they also name Raguel; Synesis to the third, whom
they call David; and Phronesis to the fourth, whom they name Eleleth.

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p6"></span>3. All these, then, being thus settled,
Autogenes moreover produces a perfect and true man, whom they also call
Adamas, inasmuch as neither has he himself ever been conquered, nor have
those from whom he sprang; he also was, along with the first light,
severed from Armogenes. Moreover, perfect knowledge was sent forth by
Autogenes along with man, and was united to him; hence he attained to
the knowledge of him that is above all. Invincible power was also
conferred on him by the virgin spirit; and all things then rested in
him, to sing praises to the great Æon. Hence also they declare were
manifested the mother, the father, the son; while from Anthropos and
Gnosis that Tree was produced which they also style Gnosis itself.

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p7"></span>4. Next they maintain, that from the
first angel, who stands by the side of Monogenes, the Holy Spirit has
been sent forth, whom they also term Sophia and <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p7.1"></span>Prunicus. <span
id="fr_2965"></span>[2966](#fn_2965) He then, perceiving that all the
others had consorts, while he himself was destitute of one, searched
after a being to whom he might be united; and not finding one, he
exerted and extended himself to the uttermost and looked down into the
lower regions, in the expectation of there finding a consort; and still
not meeting with one, he leaped forth \[from his place\] in a state of
great impatience, \[which had come upon him\] because he had made his
attempt without the good-will of his father. Afterwards, under the
influence of simplicity and kindness, he produced a work in which were
to be found ignorance and audacity. <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p8.1"></span>This work of his they declare to be
Protarchontes, the former of this \[lower\] creation. But they relate
that a mighty power carried him away from his mother, and that he
settled far away from her in the lower regions, and formed the firmament
of heaven, in which also they affirm that he dwells. And in his
ignorance he formed those powers which are inferior to himself—angels,
and firmaments, and all things earthly. They affirm that he, being
united to Authadia (audacity), produced Kakia (wickedness), Zelos
(emulation), Phthonos (envy), Erinnys (fury), and Epithymia (lust). When
these were generated, the mother Sophia deeply grieved, fled away,
departed into the upper regions, and became the last of the Ogdoad,
reckoning it downwards. On her thus departing, he imagined he was the
only being in existence; and on this account declared, “I am a jealous
God, and besides me there is no one.” <span
id="fr_2966"></span>[2967](#fn_2966) Such are the falsehoods which these
people invent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2962"></span>[353:2963](0010726.htm#fr_2962) <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p2"></span> Harvey supposes this name to be derived
from two Syriac words, meaning “God in a Tetrad.” Matter again derives
it from two Hebrew words, denoting “Daughter of the Lord.”

<span id="fn_2963"></span>[353:2964](0010726.htm#fr_2963) <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p3"></span> Both the text and meaning are here
altogether doubtful.

<span id="fn_2964"></span>[354:2965](0010726.htm#fr_2964) <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p5"></span> Harvey refers to the cabbalistic books
in explanation of this and the following names, but their meanings are
very uncertain.

<span id="fn_2965"></span>[354:2966](0010726.htm#fr_2965) <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p8"></span> Various explanations of this word have
been proposed, but its signification remains altogether doubtful.

<span id="fn_2966"></span>[354:2967](0010726.htm#fr_2966) <span
id="ix.ii.xxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p9"></span> [Ex. xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>;
[Isa. 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii.xxx-p9.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX.—Doctrines of the...](0010727)
