[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010520)  [Next](0010522) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.lx"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.lx-p0.1"></span>Chapter LX.—Opinions of the Jews with regard to Him who appeared in the bush.

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p1"></span>Then Trypho said, “We do not perceive
this from the passage quoted by you, but \[only this\], that it was an
angel who appeared in the flame of fire, but God who conversed with
Moses; so that there were really two persons in company with each other,
an angel and God, that appeared in that vision.”

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p2"></span>I again replied, “Even if this were so,
my friends, that an angel and God were together in the vision seen by
Moses, yet, as has already been proved to you by the passages previously
quoted, it will not be the Creator of all things that is the God that
said to Moses that He was the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, but it will be He who has been proved to you to have
appeared to Abraham, ministering to the will of the Maker of all things,
and likewise carrying into execution His counsel in the judgment of
Sodom; so that, even though it be as you say, that there were two—an
angel and God—he who has but the smallest intelligence will not venture
to assert that the Maker and Father of all things, having left all
supercelestial matters, was visible on a little portion of the earth.”

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p3"></span>And Trypho said, “Since it has been
previously proved that He who is called God and Lord, and appeared to
Abraham, received from the Lord, who is in the heavens, that which He
inflicted on the land of Sodom, even although an angel had accompanied
the God who appeared to Moses, we shall perceive that the God who
communed with Moses from the bush was not the Maker of all things, but
He who has been shown to have manifested Himself to Abraham and to Isaac
and to Jacob; who also is called and is perceived to be the Angel of God
the Maker of all things, because He publishes to men the commands of the
Father and Maker of all things.”

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p4"></span>And I replied, “Now assuredly, Trypho, I
shall show that, in the vision of Moses, this same One alone who is
called an Angel, and who is God, appeared to and communed with Moses.
For the Scripture says thus: ‘The Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a
flame of fire from the bush; and he sees that the bush burns with fire,
but the bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will turn aside and see
this great sight, for the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that
he is turning aside to behold, the Lord called to him out of the
bush.’ <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) In the same manner,
therefore, in which the Scripture calls Him who appeared to Jacob in the
dream an Angel, then \[says\] that the same Angel who appeared in the
dream spoke to him, <span id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164) saying,
‘I am the God that appeared to thee when thou didst flee from the face
of Esau thy brother;’ and \[again\] says that, in the judgment which
befell Sodom in the days of Abraham, the Lord had inflicted the
punishment <span id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) of the Lord who
\[dwells\] in the heavens;—even so here, the Scripture, in announcing
that the Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses, and in afterwards
declaring him to be Lord and God, speaks of the same One, whom it
declares by the many testimonies already quoted to be minister to God,
who is above the world, above whom there is no other \[God\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[227:2164](0010521.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="viii.iv.lx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p5"></span> [Ex. iii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span id="viii.iv.lx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[227:2165](0010521.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="viii.iv.lx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p6"></span> [Gen. xxxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007)<span id="viii.iv.lx-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[227:2166](0010521.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="viii.iv.lx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lx-p7"></span> Literally, “judgment.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI—Wisdom is begotten of...](0010522)
