[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010888)  [Next](0010890) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.xiv"></span>

### <span id="ix.viii.xiv-p0.1"></span>XIV.

<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>How <span
id="fr_4816"></span>[4817](#fn_4816) is it possible to say that the
serpent, created by God dumb and irrational, was endowed with reason and
speech? For if it had the power of itself to speak, to discern, to
understand, and to reply to what was spoken by the woman, there would
have been nothing to prevent every serpent from doing this also. If,
however, they say again that it was according to the divine will and
dispensation that this \[serpent\] spake with a human voice to Eve, they
render God the author of sin. Neither was it possible for the evil demon
to impart speech to a speechless nature, and thus from that which is not
to produce that which is; for if that were the case, he never would have
ceased (with the view of leading men astray) from conferring with and
deceiving them by means of serpents, and beasts, and birds. From what
quarter, too, did it, being a beast, obtain information regarding the
injunction <span id="page_571">p. 571</span> <span
id="ix.viii.xiv-Page_571"></span> of God to the man given to him alone,
and in secret, not even the woman herself being aware of it? Why also
did it not prefer to make its attack upon the man instead of the woman?
And if thou sayest that it attacked her as being the weaker of the two,
\[I reply that\], on the contrary, she was the stronger, since she
appears to have been the helper of the man in the transgression of the
commandment. For she did by herself alone resist the serpent, and it was
after holding out for a while and making opposition that she ate of the
tree, being circumvented by craft; whereas Adam, making no fight
whatever, nor refusal, partook of the fruit handed to him by the woman,
which is an indication of the utmost imbecility and effeminacy of mind.
And the woman indeed, having been vanquished in the contest by a demon,
is deserving of pardon; but Adam shall deserve none, for he was worsted
by a woman,—he who, in his own person, had received the command from
God. But the woman, having heard of the command from Adam, treated it
with contempt, either because she deemed it unworthy of God to speak by
means of it, or because she had her doubts, perhaps even held the
opinion that the command was given to her by Adam of his own accord. The
serpent found her working alone, so that he was enabled to confer with
her apart. Observing her then either eating or not eating from the
trees, he put before her the fruit of the \[forbidden\] tree. And if he
saw her eating, it is manifest that she was partaker of a body subject
to corruption. “For everything going in at the mouth, is cast out into
the draught.” <span id="fr_4817"></span>[4818](#fn_4817) If then
corruptible, it is obvious that she was also mortal. But if mortal, then
there was certainly no curse; nor was that a \[condemnatory\] sentence,
when the voice of God spake to the man, “For earth thou art, and unto
earth shall thou return,” <span id="fr_4818"></span>[4819](#fn_4818) as
the true course of things proceeds \[now and always\]. Then again, if
the serpent observed the woman not eating, how did he induce her to eat
who never had eaten? And who pointed out to this accursed man-slaying
serpent that the sentence of death pronounced against them by God would
not take \[immediate\] effect, when He said, “For in the day that ye eat
thereof, ye shall surely die?” And not this merely, but that along with
the impunity <span id="fr_4819"></span>[4820](#fn_4819) \[attending
their sin\] the eyes of those should be opened who had not seen until
then? But with the opening \[of their eyes\] referred to, they made
entrance upon the path of death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4816"></span>[570:4817](0010889.htm#fr_4816) <span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p2"></span> From the *Contemplations* of
Anastasius Sinaita, who flourished <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 685. Harvey doubts as to this
fragment being a genuine production of Irenæus; and its whole style of
reasoning confirms the suspicion.

<span id="fn_4817"></span>[571:4818](0010889.htm#fr_4817) <span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p3"></span> [Matt. xv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017)<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4818"></span>[571:4819](0010889.htm#fr_4818) <span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p4"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4819"></span>[571:4820](0010889.htm#fr_4819) <span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.xiv-p5"></span> The Greek reads the barbarous word
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.xiv-p5.1"></span>ἀθριξίᾳ</span>,
which Massuet thinks is a corruption of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.viii.xiv-p5.2"></span>ἀθανασίᾳ</span>, immortality. We have,
however, followed the conjecture of Harvey, who would substitute <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.viii.xiv-p5.3"></span>ἀπληξίᾳ</span>, which
seems to agree better with the context.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV.](0010890)
