[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010707)  [Next](0010709) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xii"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—The opinions of Valentinus, with those of his disciples and others.

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.ii.xii-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xii-p1.2"></span> Let us now look at the inconsistent opinions
of those heretics (for there are some two or three of them), how they do
not agree in treating the same points, but alike, in things and names,
set forth opinions mutually discordant. The first <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798) of them, Valentinus, who adapted
the principles of the heresy called “Gnostic” to the peculiar character
of his own school, taught as follows: <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>He maintained that there is a certain Dyad
(twofold being), who is inexpressible by any name, of whom one part
should be called Arrhetus (unspeakable), and the other Sige (silence).
But of this Dyad a second was produced, one part of whom he names Pater,
and the other Aletheia. From this Tetrad, again, arose Logos and Zoe,
Anthropos and Ecclesia. These constitute the primary Ogdoad. He next
states that from Logos and Zoe ten powers were produced, as we have
before mentioned. But from Anthropos and Ecclesia proceeded twelve, one
of which separating from the rest, and falling from its original
condition, produced the rest <span id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799)
of the universe. He also supposed two beings of the name of Horos, the
one of whom has his place between Bythus and the rest of the Pleroma,
and divides the created Æons from the uncreated Father, while the other
separates their mother from the Pleroma. <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>Christ also was not produced from the Æons
within the Pleroma, but was brought forth by the mother who had been
excluded from it, in virtue of her remembrance of better things, but not
without a kind of shadow. He, indeed, as being masculine, having severed
the shadow from himself, returned to the Pleroma; but his mother being
left with the shadow, and deprived of her spiritual substance, brought
forth another son, namely, the Demiurge, whom he also styles the supreme
ruler of all those things which are subject to him. He also asserts
that, along with the Demiurge, there was produced a left-hand power, in
which particular he agrees with those falsely called Gnostics, of whom
to we have yet to speak. Sometimes, again, he maintains that Jesus was
produced from him who was separated from their mother, and united to the
rest, that is, from Theletus, sometimes as springing from him who
returned into the Pleroma, that is, from Christ; and at other times
still as derived from Anthropos and Ecclesia. And he declares that the
Holy Spirit was produced by Aletheia <span
id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800) for the inspection and
fructification of the Æons, by entering invisibly into them, and that,
in this way, the Æons brought forth the plants of truth.

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p5"></span>2. Secundus again affirms that the
primary Ogdoad consists of a right hand and a left hand Tetrad, and
teaches that the one of these is called light, and the other darkness.
But he maintains that the power which separated from the rest, and fell
away, did not proceed directly from the thirty Æons, but from their
fruits.

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p6"></span>3. There is another, <span
id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801) who is a renowned teacher among
them, and who, struggling to reach something more sublime, and to attain
to a kind of higher knowledge, has explained the primary Tetrad as
follows: <span id="ix.ii.xii-p7.1"></span>There is \[he says\] a certain
Proarche who existed before all things, surpassing all thought, speech,
and nomenclature, whom I call Monotes (unity). Together with this
Monotes there exists a power, which again I term <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p7.2"></span>Henotes (oneness). This Henotes and Monotes,
being one, produced, yet not so as to bring forth \[apart from
themselves, as an emanation\] the beginning of all things, an
intelligent, unbegotten, and invisible being, which beginning language
terms “Monad.” With this Monad there co-exists a power of the same
essence, which again I term Hen (One). These powers then— Monotes, and
Henotes, and Monas, and Hen—produced the remaining company of the Æons.

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p8"></span>4. <span id="ix.ii.xii-p8.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xii-p8.2"></span>Iu, Iu! Pheu, Pheu!—for well may we utter
these tragic exclamations at such a pitch of audacity in the coining of
names as he has displayed without a blush, in devising a nomenclature
for his system of falsehood. For when he declares: There is a certain
Proarche before all things, surpassing all thought, whom I call Monotes;
and again, with this Monotes there co-exists a power which I also call
Henotes,—it is most manifest that he confesses the things which have
been said to be his own invention, and that he himself has given names
to his scheme of things, which had never been previously suggested by
any other. It is manifest also, that he himself is the one who has had
sufficient audacity to coin these names; so that, unless *he* had
appeared in the world, the truth would still have been destitute of a
name. But, in that case, nothing hinders any other, in dealing with the
same subject, to affix names after such a fashion as the following:
<span id="ix.ii.xii-p8.3"></span>There <span
id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802) is a certain Proarche, royal,
surpassing all thought, a power existing before every other substance,
and extended into space in every direction. But along with it there
exists a power which I term a *Gourd*; and along <span id="page_333">p.
333</span> <span id="ix.ii.xii-Page_333"></span> with this Gourd there
exists a power which again I term *Utter-Emptiness*. This Gourd and
Emptiness, since they are one, produced (and yet did not simply produce,
so as to be apart from themselves) a fruit, everywhere visible, eatable,
and delicious, which fruit-language calls a *Cucumber*. Along with this
Cucumber exists a power of the same essence, which again I call a
*Melon*. These powers, the Gourd, Utter-Emptiness, the Cucumber, and the
Melon, brought forth the remaining multitude of the delirious melons of
Valentinus. <span id="fr_2803"></span>[2804](#fn_2803) For if it is
fitting that that language which is used respecting the universe be
transformed to the primary Tetrad, and if any one may assign names at
his pleasure, who shall prevent us from adopting these names, as being
much more credible \[than the others\], as well as in general use, and
understood by all?

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p11"></span>5. Others still, however, have called
their primary and first-begotten Ogdoad by the following names: first,
<span id="ix.ii.xii-p11.1"></span>Proarche; then Anennoetos; thirdly,
Arrhetos; and fourthly, Aoratos. Then, from the first, Proarche, there
was produced, in the first and fifth place, Arche; from Anennoetos, in
the second and sixth place, Acataleptos; from Arrhetos, in the third and
seventh place, Anonomastos; and from Aoratos, in the fourth and eighth
place, Agennetos. This is the Pleroma of the first Ogdoad. They maintain
that these powers were anterior to Bythus and Sige, that they may appear
more perfect than the perfect, and more knowing than the very Gnostics!
To these persons one may justly exclaim: “O ye trifling sophists!”
since, even respecting Bythus himself, there are among them many and
discordant opinions. For some declare him to be without a consort, and
neither male nor female, and, in fact, nothing at all; while others
affirm him to be masculo-feminine, assigning to him the nature of a
hermaphrodite; others, again, allot Sige to him as a spouse, that thus
may be formed the first conjunction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[332:2799](0010708.htm#fr_2798) <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p2"></span> That is, the first of the two or three
here referred to, not the first of the Gnostic teachers, as some have
imagined. \[The Gnosticism of one age may be essentially the same in
spirit as the *Agnosticism* of another.\]

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[332:2800](0010708.htm#fr_2799) <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p3"></span> Viz., all outside of the Pleroma.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[332:2801](0010708.htm#fr_2800) <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p4"></span> Corrected from *Ecclesia* in the text.

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[332:2802](0010708.htm#fr_2801) <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p7"></span> Some have supposed that the name of this
teacher was *Epiphanes*, and that the old Latin mistakenly translates
this by *clarus*; others think that Colorbasus is the teacher in
question.

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[332:2803](0010708.htm#fr_2802) <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p9"></span> The Greek text is wanting till the end
of this section.

<span id="fn_2803"></span>[333:2804](0010708.htm#fr_2803) <span
id="ix.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xii-p10"></span> \[[1 Kings xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027)<span id="ix.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>.
“It came to pass that Elijah mocked them,” etc. This *reductio ad
absurdum* of our author is singularly applicable to certain forms of
what is called “Modern Thought.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—The doctrines of the...](0010709)
