[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010747)  [Next](0010749) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xix"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—Sophia was never really in ignorance or passion; her Enthymesis could not have been separated from herself, or exhibited special tendencies of its own.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xix-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xix-p1.2"></span>How can it
be regarded as otherwise than absurd, that they also affirm this Sophia
(wisdom) to have been involved in ignorance, and degeneracy, and
passion? For these things are alien and contrary to wisdom, nor can they
ever be qualities belonging to it. For wherever there is a want of
foresight, and an ignorance of the course of utility, there wisdom does
not exist. Let them therefore no longer call this suffering Æon, Sophia,
but let them give up either her name or her sufferings. And let them,
moreover, not call their entire Pleroma spiritual, if this Æon had a
place within it when she was involved in such a tumult of passion. For
even a vigorous soul, not to say a spiritual substance, would not pass
through any such experience.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p2"></span>2. And, again, how could her Enthymesis,
going forth \[from her\] along with the passion, have become a separate
existence? For Enthymesis (thought) is understood in connection with
some person, and can never have an isolated existence by itself. For a
bad Enthymesis is destroyed and absorbed by a good one, even as a state
of disease is by health. What, then, was the sort of Enthymesis which
preceded that of passion? \[It was this\]: to investigate the \[nature
of\] the Father, and to consider His <span id="page_384">p. 384</span>
<span id="ix.iii.xix-Page_384"></span> greatness. But what did she
afterwards become persuaded of, and so was restored to health? \[This,
viz.\], that the Father is incomprehensible, and that He is past finding
out. It was not, then, a proper feeling that she wished to know the
Father, and on this account she became passible; but when she became
persuaded that He is unsearchable, she was restored to health. And even
Nous himself, who was inquiring into the \[nature of\] the Father,
ceased, according to them, to continue his researches, on learning that
the Father is incomprehensible.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p3"></span>3. How then could the Enthymesis
separately conceive passions, which themselves also were her affections?
For affection is necessarily connected with an individual: it cannot
come into being or exist apart by itself. This opinion \[of theirs\],
however, is not only untenable, but also opposed to that which was
spoken by our Lord: “Seek, and ye shall find.” <span
id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083) For the Lord renders His disciples
perfect by their seeking after and finding the Father; but that Christ
of theirs, who is above, has rendered them perfect, by the fact that He
has commanded the Æons not to seek after the Father, persuading them
that, though they should labour hard, they would not find Him. And
they <span id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084) declare that they
themselves are perfect, by the fact that they maintain they have found
their Bythus; while the Æons \[have been made perfect\] through means of
this, that He is unsearchable who was inquired after by them.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p6"></span>4. Since, therefore, the Enthymesis
herself could not exist separately, apart from the Æon, \[it is obvious
that\] they bring forward still greater falsehood concerning her
passion, when they further proceed to divide and separate it from her,
while they declare that it was the substance of matter. As if God were
not light, and as if no Word existed who could convict them, and
overthrow their wickedness. For it is certainly true, that whatsoever
the Æon thought, that she also suffered; and what she suffered, that she
also thought. And her Enthymesis was, according to them, nothing else
than the passion of one thinking how she might comprehend the
incomprehensible. And thus Enthymesis (thought) was the passion; for she
was thinking of things impossible. How then could affection and passion
be separated and set apart from the Enthymesis, so as to become the
substance of so vast a material creation, when Enthymesis herself was
the passion, and the passion Enthymesis? Neither, therefore, can
Enthymesis apart from the Æon, nor the affections apart from Enthymesis,
separately possess substance; and thus once more their system breaks
down and is destroyed.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p7"></span>5. But how did it come to pass that the
Æon was both dissolved \[into her component parts\], and became subject
to passion? She was undoubtedly of the same substance as the Pleroma;
but the entire Pleroma was of the Father. Now, any substance, when
brought in contact with what is of a similar nature, will not be
dissolved into nothing, nor will be in danger of perishing, but will
rather continue and increase, such as fire in fire, spirit in spirit,
and water in water; but those which are of a contrary nature to each
other do, \[when they meet,\] suffer and are changed and destroyed. And,
in like manner, if there had been a production of light, it would not
suffer passion, or recur any danger in light like itself, but would
rather glow with the greater brightness, and increase, as the day does
from \[the increasing brilliance of\] the sun; for they maintain that
Bythus \[himself\] was the image of their father <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) (Sophia). Whatever animals are
alien \[in habits\] and strange to each other, or are mutually opposed
in nature, fall into danger \[on meeting together\], and are destroyed;
whereas, on the other hand, those who are accustomed to each other, and
of a harmonious disposition, suffer no peril from being together in the
same place, but rather secure both safety and life by such a fact. If,
therefore, this Æon was produced by the Pleroma of the same substance as
the whole of it, she could never have undergone change, since she was
consorting with beings similar to and familiar with herself, a spiritual
essence among those that were spiritual. For fear, terror, passion,
dissolution, and such like, may perhaps occur through the struggle of
contraries among such beings as we are, who are possessed of bodies; but
among spiritual beings, and those that have the light diffused among
them, no such calamities can possibly happen. But these men appear to me
to have endowed their Æon with the \[same sort of\] passion as belongs
to that character in the comic poet Menander, <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086) who was himself deeply in love, but
an object of hatred \[to his beloved\]. For those who have invented such
opinions have rather had an idea and mental conception of some unhappy
lover among men, than of a spiritual and divine substance.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p10"></span>6. Moreover, to meditate how to search
into \[the nature of\] the perfect Father, and to have a desire to exist
within Him, and to have a comprehension of His \[greatness\], could not
entail the stain of ignorance or passion, and that upon a spiritual Æon;
but would rather \[give rise to\] perfection, and impassibility, and
truth. For they do not say that even they, though they be but men, by
meditating on Him who was before <span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xix-Page_385"></span> them,—and while now, as it were,
comprehending the perfect, and being placed within the knowledge of Him,
—are thus involved in a passion of perplexity, but rather attain to the
knowledge and apprehension of truth. For they affirm that the Saviour
said, “Seek, and ye shall find,” to His disciples with this view, that
they should seek after Him who, by means of imagination, has been
conceived of by them as being above the Maker of all—the ineffable
Bythus; and they desire themselves to be regarded as “the perfect;”
because they have sought and found the perfect One, while they are still
on earth. Yet they declare that that Æon who was within the Pleroma, a
wholly spiritual being, by seeking after the Propator, and endeavouring
to find a place within His greatness, and desiring to have a
comprehension of the truth of the Father, fell down into \[the endurance
of\] passion, and such a passion that, unless she had met with that
Power who upholds all things, she would have been dissolved into the
general substance \[of the Æons\], and thus come to an end of her
\[personal\] existence.

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p11"></span>7. Absurd is such presumption, and
truly an opinion of men totally destitute of the truth. For, that this
Æon is superior to themselves, and of greater antiquity, they themselves
acknowledge, according to their own system, when they affirm that they
are the fruit of the Enthymesis of that Æon who suffered passion, so
that this Æon is the father of their mother, that is, their own
grandfather. And to them, the later grandchildren, the search after the
Father brings, as they maintain, truth, and perfection, and
establishment, and deliverance from unstable matter, and reconciliation
to the Father; but on their grandfather this same search entailed
ignorance, and passion, and terror, and perplexity, from which
\[disturbances\] they also declare that the substance of matter was
formed. To say, therefore, that the search after and investigation of
the perfect Father, and the desire for communion and union with Him,
were things quite beneficial to them, but to an Æon, from whom also they
derive their origin, these things were the cause of dissolution and
destruction, how can such assertions be otherwise viewed than as totally
inconsistent, foolish, and irrational? Those, too, who listen to these
teachers, truly blind themselves, while they possess blind guides,
justly \[are left to\] fall along with them into the gulf of ignorance
which lies below them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[384:3084](0010748.htm#fr_3083) <span
id="ix.iii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p4"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[384:3085](0010748.htm#fr_3084) <span
id="ix.iii.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p5"></span> It seems necessary to read “se quidem”
instead of “si quidem,” as in the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iii.xix-p5.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[384:3086](0010748.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="ix.iii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p8"></span> Although Sophia was a feminine Æon, she
was regarded as being the father of Enthymesis, who again was the
*mother* of the Valentinians.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[384:3087](0010748.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="ix.iii.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xix-p9"></span> Stieren refers for this allusion to
Meineke’s edition of the *Reliquiæ Menan. et Philem.*, p. 116.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX.—Absurdities of the...](0010749)
