[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010601)  [Next](0010603) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.cxli"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.cxli-p0.1"></span>Chapter CXLI.—Free-will in men and angels.

<span id="viii.iv.cxli-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxli-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.cxli-p1.2"></span>“But
that you may not have a pretext for saying that Christ must have been
crucified, and that those who transgressed must have been among your
nation, and that the matter could not have been otherwise, I said
briefly by anticipation, <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="viii.iv.cxli-Page_270"></span> that God, wishing men and angels to
follow His will, resolved to create them free to do righteousness;
possessing reason, that they may know by whom they are created, and
through whom they, not existing formerly, do now exist; and with a law
that they should be judged by Him, if they do anything contrary to right
reason: and of ourselves we, men and angels, shall be convicted of
having acted sinfully, unless we repent beforehand. But if the word of
God foretells that some angels and men shall be certainly punished, it
did so because it foreknew that they would be unchangeably \[wicked\],
but not because God had created them so. So that if they repent, all who
wish for it can obtain mercy from God: and the Scripture foretells that
they shall be blessed, saying, ‘Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputeth not sin;’ <span id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490) that is,
having repented of his sins, that he may receive remission of them from
God; and not as you deceive yourselves, and some others who resemble you
in this, who say, that even though they be sinners, but know God, the
Lord will not impute sin to them. We have as proof of this the one fall
of David, which happened through his boasting, which was forgiven then
when he so mourned and wept, as it is written. But if even to such a man
no remission was granted before repentance, and only when this great
king, and anointed one, and prophet, mourned and conducted himself so,
how can the impure and utterly abandoned, if they weep not, and mourn
not, and repent not, entertain the hope that the Lord will not impute to
them sin? And this one fall of David, in the matter of Uriah’s wife,
proves, sirs,” I said, “that the patriarchs had many wives, not to
commit fornication, but that a certain dispensation and all mysteries
might be accomplished by them; since, if it were allowable to take any
wife, or as many wives as one chooses, and how he chooses, which the men
of your nation do over all the earth, wherever they sojourn, or wherever
they have been sent, taking women under the name of marriage, much more
would David have been permitted to do this.”

<span id="viii.iv.cxli-p3"></span>When I had said this, dearest Marcus
Pompeius, I came to an end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[270:2491](0010602.htm#fr_2490) <span
id="viii.iv.cxli-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cxli-p2"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="viii.iv.cxli-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CXLII.—The Jews return...](0010603)
