[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010856)  [Next](0010858) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xx"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—A comparison is instituted between the disobedient and sinning Eve and the Virgin Mary, her patroness. Various and discordant heresies are mentioned.

<span id="ix.vii.xx-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vii.xx-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.vii.xx-p1.2"></span><span id="ix.vii.xx-p1.3"></span>That the
Lord then was manifestly coming to His own things, and was sustaining
them by means of that creation which is supported by Himself, and was
making a recapitulation of that disobedience which had occurred in
connection with a tree, through the obedience which was \[exhibited by
Himself when He hung\] upon a tree, \[the effects\] also of that
deception being done away with, by which that virgin Eve, who was
already espoused to a man, was unhappily misled,—was happily announced,
through means of the truth \[spoken\] by the angel to the Virgin Mary,
who was \[also espoused\] to a man. <span
id="fr_4615"></span>[4616](#fn_4615) For just as the former was led
astray by the word of an angel, so that she fled from God when she had
transgressed His word; so did the latter, by an angelic communication,
receive the glad tidings that she should sustain (*portaret*) God, being
obedient to His word. And if the former did disobey God, yet the latter
was persuaded to be obedient to God, in order that the Virgin Mary might
become the patroness <span id="fr_4616"></span>[4617](#fn_4616)
(*advocata*) of the virgin Eve. And thus, as the human race fell into
bondage to death by means of a virgin, so is it rescued by a virgin;
virginal disobedience having been balanced in the opposite scale by
virginal obedience. For in the same way the sin of the first created man
(*protoplasti*) receives amendment by the correction of the
First-begotten, and the coming of the serpent is conquered by the
harmlessness of the dove, those bonds being unloosed by which we had
been fast bound to death.

<span id="ix.vii.xx-p4"></span>2. <span id="ix.vii.xx-p4.1"></span>The
heretics being all unlearned and ignorant of God’s arrangements, and not
acquainted with that dispensation by which He took upon Him human nature
(*inscii ejus quæ est secundum hominem dispensationis*), inasmuch as
they blind themselves with regard to the truth, do in fact speak against
their own salvation. Some of them introduce another Father besides the
Creator; some, again, say that the world and its substance was made by
certain angels; certain others \[maintain\] that it was widely separated
by Horos <span id="fr_4617"></span>[4618](#fn_4617) from him whom they
represent as being the Father—that it sprang forth (*floruisse*) of
itself, and from itself was born. Then, again, others \[of them assert\]
that it obtained substance in those things which are contained by the
Father, from defect and ignorance; others still, despise the advent of
the Lord manifest \[to the senses\], for they do not admit His
incarnation; while others, ignoring the arrangement \[that He should be
born\] of a virgin, maintain that He was begotten by Joseph. And still
further, some affirm that neither their soul nor their body can receive
eternal life, but merely the inner man. Moreover, they will have it that
this \[inner man\] is that which is the understanding (*sensum*) in
them, and which they decree as being the only thing to ascend to “the
perfect.” Others \[maintain\], as I have said in the first book, that
while the soul is saved, their body does not participate in the
salvation which comes from God; in which \[book\] I have also set
forward the hypotheses of all these men, and in the second have pointed
out their weakness and inconsistency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4615"></span>[547:4616](0010857.htm#fr_4615) <span
id="ix.vii.xx-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xx-p2"></span> The text is here most uncertain and
obscure.

<span id="fn_4616"></span>[547:4617](0010857.htm#fr_4616) <span
id="ix.vii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xx-p3"></span> \[This word *patroness* is ambiguous.
The Latin may stand for Gr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xx-p3.1"></span>ἀντίληψις</span>, —a person called in to
help, or to take hold of the other end of a burden. The argument implies
that Mary was thus the counterpart or balance of Eve.\]

<span id="fn_4617"></span>[547:4618](0010857.htm#fr_4617) <span
id="ix.vii.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xx-p5"></span> The text reads “porro,” which makes no
sense; so that Harvey looks upon it as a corruption of the reading “per
Horum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.—Those pastors are to be...](0010858)
