[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010621)  [Next](0010623) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xii"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Antiquity of Moses proved.

<span id="viii.vi.xii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.vi.xii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xii-p1.3"></span>And I think it necessary also to consider
the times in which your philosophers lived, that you may see that the
time which produced them for you is very recent, and also short. For
thus you will be able easily to recognise also the antiquity of Moses.
But lest, by a complete survey of the periods, and by the use of a
greater number of proofs, I should seem to be prolix, I thing it may be
sufficiently demonstrated from the following. For Socrates was the
teacher of Plato, and Plato of Aristotle. Now these men flourished in
the time of Philip and Alexander of Macedon, in which time also the
Athenian orators flourished, as the Philippics of Demosthenes plainly
show us. And those who have narrated the deeds of Alexander sufficiently
prove that during his reign Aristotle associated with him. From all
manner of proofs, then, it is easy to see that the history of Moses is
by far more ancient than all profane <span
id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539) histories. And, besides, it is fit
that you recognise this fact also, that nothing has been accurately
recorded by Greeks before the era of the Olympiads, and that there is no
ancient work which makes known any action of the Greeks or Barbarians.
But before that period existed only the history of the prophet Moses,
which he wrote in the Hebrew character by the divine inspiration. For
the Greek character was not yet in use, as the teachers of language
themselves prove, telling us that Cadmus first brought the letters from
Phœnicia, and communicated them to the Greeks. And your first of
philosophers, Plato, testifies that they were a recent discovery. For in
the *Timæus* <span id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540) he wrote that
Solon, the wisest of the wise men, on his return from Egypt, said to
Critias that he had heard this from a very aged Egyptian priest, who
said to him, “O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are ever children, and aged
Greek there is none.” Then again he said, “You are all youths in soul,
for you hold no ancient opinion derived through remote tradition, nor
any system of instruction hoary with time; but all these things escape
your knowledge, because for many generations the posterity of these
ancient ages died mute, not having the use of letters.” It is fit,
therefore, that you understand that it is the fact that every history
has been written in these recently-discovered Greek letters; and if any
one would make mention of old poets, or legislators, or historians, or
philosophers, or orators, he will find that they wrote their own works
in the Greek character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[278:2540](0010622.htm#fr_2539) <span
id="viii.vi.xii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xii-p2"></span> Literally, “without,” not belonging to
the true faith.

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[278:2541](0010622.htm#fr_2540) <span
id="viii.vi.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xii-p3"></span> C. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—History of the...](0010623)
