[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010863)  [Next](0010865) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—John and Daniel have predicted the dissolution and desolation of the Roman Empire, which shall precede the end of the world and the eternal kingdom of Christ. The Gnostics are refuted, those tools of Satan, who invent another Father different from the Creator.

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>In a still clearer light has John, in the
Apocalypse, indicated to the Lord’s disciples what shall happen in the
last times, and concerning the ten kings who shall then arise, among
whom the empire which now rules \[the earth\] shall be partitioned. He
teaches us what the ten horns shall be which were seen by Daniel,
telling us that thus it had been said to him: “And the ten horns which
thou sawest are ten kings, who have received no kingdom as yet, but
shall receive power as if kings one hour with the beast. These have one
mind, and give their strength and power to the beast. These shall make
war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, because He is the
Lord of lords and the King of kings.” <span
id="fr_4675"></span>[4676](#fn_4675) It is manifest, therefore, that
<span id="page_555">p. 555</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-Page_555"></span> of these \[potentates\], he who is to
come shall slay three, and subject the remainder to his power, and that
he shall be himself the eighth among them. And they shall lay Babylon
waste, and burn her with fire, and shall give their kingdom to the
beast, and put the Church to flight. After that they shall be destroyed
by the coming of our Lord. For that the kingdom must be divided, and
thus come to ruin, the Lord \[declares when He\] says: “Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house
divided against itself shall not stand.” <span
id="fr_4676"></span>[4677](#fn_4676) It must be, therefore, that the
kingdom, the city, and the house be divided into ten; and for this
reason He has already foreshadowed the partition and division \[which
shall take place\]. Daniel also says particularly, that the end of the
fourth kingdom consists in the toes of the image seen by Nebuchadnezzar,
upon which came the stone cut out without hands; and as he does himself
say: “The feet were indeed the one part iron, the other part clay, until
the stone was cut out without hands, and struck the image upon the iron
and clay feet, and dashed them into pieces, even to the end.” <span
id="fr_4677"></span>[4678](#fn_4677) Then afterwards, when interpreting
this, he says: “And as thou sawest the feet and the toes, partly indeed
of clay, and partly of iron, the kingdom shall be divided, and there
shall be in it a root of iron, as thou sawest iron mixed with baked
clay. And the toes were indeed the one part iron, but the other part
clay.” <span id="fr_4678"></span>[4679](#fn_4678) The ten toes,
therefore, are these ten kings, among whom the kingdom shall be
partitioned, of whom some indeed shall be strong and active, or
energetic; others, again, shall be sluggish and useless, and shall not
agree; as also Daniel says: “Some part of the kingdom shall be strong,
and part shall be broken from it. As thou sawest the iron mixed with the
baked clay, there shall be minglings among the human race, but no
cohesion one with the other, just as iron cannot be welded on to pottery
ware.” <span id="fr_4679"></span>[4680](#fn_4679) And since an end shall
take place, he says: “And in the days of these kings shall the God of
heaven raise up a kingdom which shall never decay, and His kingdom shall
not be left to another people. It shall break in pieces and shatter all
kingdoms, and shall itself be exalted for ever. As thou sawest that the
stone was cut without hands from the mountain, and brake in pieces the
baked clay, the iron, the brass, the silver, and the gold, God has
pointed out to the king what shall come to pass after these things; and
the dream is true, and the interpretation trustworthy.” <span
id="fr_4680"></span>[4681](#fn_4680)

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p8"></span>2. <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>If therefore the great God showed future
things by Daniel, and confirmed them by His Son; and if Christ is the
stone which is cut out without hands, who shall destroy temporal
kingdoms, and introduce an eternal one, which is the resurrection of the
just; as he declares, “The God of heaven shall raise up a kingdom which
shall never be destroyed,”—let those thus confuted come to their senses,
who reject the Creator (*Demiurgum*), and do not agree that the prophets
were sent beforehand from the same Father from whom also the Lord came,
but who assert that prophecies originated from diverse powers. For those
things which have been predicted by the Creator alike through all the
prophets has Christ fulfilled in the end, ministering to His Father’s
will, and completing His dispensations with regard to the human race.
Let those persons, therefore, who blaspheme the Creator, either by
openly expressed words, such as the disciples of Marcion, or by a
perversion of the sense \[of Scripture\], as those of Valentinus and all
the Gnostics falsely so called, be recognised as agents of Satan by all
those who worship God; through whose agency Satan now, and not before,
has been seen to speak against God, even Him who has prepared eternal
fire for every kind of apostasy. For he did not venture to blaspheme his
Lord openly of himself; as also in the beginning he led man astray
through the instrumentality of the serpent, concealing himself as it
were from God. Truly has Justin remarked: <span
id="fr_4681"></span>[4682](#fn_4681) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>That before the Lord’s appearance Satan
never dared to blaspheme God, inasmuch as he did not yet know his own
sentence, because it was contained in parables and allegories; but that
after the Lord’s appearance, when he had clearly ascertained from the
words of Christ and His apostles that eternal fire has been prepared for
him as he apostatized from God of his own free-will, and likewise for
all who unrepentant continue in the apostasy, he now blasphemes, by
means of such men, the Lord who brings judgment \[upon him\] as being
already condemned, and imputes the guilt of his apostasy to his Maker,
not to his own voluntary disposition. Just as it is with those who break
the laws, when punishment overtakes them: they throw the blame upon
those who frame the laws, but not upon themselves. In like manner do
those men, filled with a satanic spirit, bring innumerable accusations
against our Creator, who has both given to us the spirit of life, and
established a law adapted for all; and they will not admit that the
judgment of God is just. Wherefore also they set about imagining some
other Father who neither cares about nor exercises a providence <span
id="page_556">p. 556</span> <span id="ix.vii.xxvii-Page_556"></span>
over our affairs, nay, one who even approves of all sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4675"></span>[554:4676](0010864.htm#fr_4675) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p2"></span> [Rev. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4676"></span>[555:4677](0010864.htm#fr_4676) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p3"></span> [Matt. xii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)<span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4677"></span>[555:4678](0010864.htm#fr_4677) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p4"></span> [Dan.
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)<span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4678"></span>[555:4679](0010864.htm#fr_4678) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p5"></span> [Dan.
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042)<span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4679"></span>[555:4680](0010864.htm#fr_4679) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p6"></span> [Dan.
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043)<span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4680"></span>[555:4681](0010864.htm#fr_4680) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p7"></span> [Dan.
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)<span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4681"></span>[555:4682](0010864.htm#fr_4681) <span
id="ix.vii.xxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxvii-p9"></span> The Greek text is here preserved by
Eusebius, *Hist. Eccl.*, iv. 18; but we are not told from what work of
Justin Martyr it is extracted. The work is now lost. An ancient catena
continues the Greek for several lines further.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII.—The future judgment...](0010865)
