[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010647)  [Next](0010649) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxxviii"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII.—Concluding appeal.

<span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p1"></span>But since, ye men of Greece, the
matters of the true religion lie not in the metrical numbers of poetry,
nor yet in that culture which is highly esteemed among you, do ye
henceforward pay less devotion to accuracy of metres and of language;
and giving heed without contentiousness to the words of the Sibyl,
recognise how great are the benefits which she will confer upon you by
predicting, as she does in a clear and patent manner, the advent of our
Saviour Jesus Christ; <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) who,
being the Word of God, inseparable from Him in power, having assumed
man, who had been made in the image and likeness of God, restored to us
the knowledge of the religion of our ancient forefathers, which the men
who lived after them abandoned through the bewitching counsel of the
envious devil, and turned to the worship of those who were no gods. And
if you still hesitate and are hindered from belief regarding the
formation of man, believe those whom you have hitherto thought it right
to give heed to, and know that your own oracle, when asked by some one
to utter a hymn of praise to the Almighty God, in the middle of the hymn
spoke thus, “Who formed the first of men, and called him Adam.” And this
hymn is preserved by many whom we know, for the conviction of those who
are unwilling to believe the truth which all bear witness to. If
therefore, ye men of Greece, ye do not esteem the false fancy concerning
those that are no gods at a higher rate than your own salvation,
believe, as I said, the most ancient and time-honoured Sibyl, whose
books are preserved in all the world, and who by some kind of potent
inspiration both teaches us in her oracular utterances concerning those
that are called gods, that have no existence; and also clearly and
manifestly prophesies concerning the predicted advent of our Saviour
Jesus Christ, and concerning all those things which were to be done by
Him. For the knowledge of these things will constitute your necessary
preparatory training for the study of the prophecies of the sacred
writers. And if any one supposes that he has learned the doctrine
concerning God from the most ancient of those whom you name
philosophers, let him listen to Ammon and Hermes: <span
id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591) to Ammon, who in his discourse
concerning God calls Him wholly hidden; and to Hermes, who says plainly
and distinctly, “that it is difficult to comprehend God, and that it is
impossible even for the man who can comprehend Him to declare Him to
others.” <span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>From every point of
view, therefore, it must be seen that in no other way than only from the
prophets who teach us by divine inspiration, is it at all possible to
learn anything concerning God and the true religion. <span
id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[289:2591](0010648.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p2"></span> \[The fascinating use made of this
by Virgil must not be overlooked:—

<span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p3"></span>“Ultima Cumæi venit jam carminis
ætas,” etc. *Ecl.*, iv. (Pollio) 4.\]

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[289:2592](0010648.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p4"></span> \[Hermes Trismegistus. Milton
(Penseroso, line 88,) translates this name.\]

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[289:2593](0010648.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p5"></span> <span
id="viii.vi.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>\[N.B.— This work is not supposed to be
Justin’s by modern critics.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Sole Government of God](0010649)
