[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010777)  [Next](0010779) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI—Proofs in continuation, extracted from St. John’s Gospel. The Gospels are four in number, neither more nor less. Mystic reasons for this.

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>John,
the disciple of the Lord, preaches this faith, and seeks, by the
proclamation of the Gospel, to remove that error which by Cerinthus had
been disseminated among men, and a long time previously by those termed
Nicolaitans, who are an offset of that “knowledge” falsely so called,
that he might confound them, and persuade them that there is but one
God, who made all things by His Word; and not, as they allege, that the
Creator was one, but the Father of the Lord another; and that the Son of
the Creator was, forsooth, one, but the Christ from above another, who
also continued impassible, descending upon Jesus, the Son of the
Creator, and flew back again into His Pleroma; and that Monogenes was
the beginning, but Logos was the true son of Monogenes; and that this
creation to which we belong was not made by the primary God, but by some
power lying far below Him, and shut off from communion with the things
invisible and ineffable. The disciple of the Lord therefore desiring to
put an end to all such doctrines, and to establish the rule of truth in
the Church, that there is one Almighty God, who made all things by His
Word, both visible and invisible; showing at the same time, that by the
Word, through whom God made the creation, He also bestowed salvation on
the men included in the creation; thus commenced His teaching in the
Gospel: “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the <span class="upper"><span id="ix.iv.xii-p1.2"></span>Word</span> was
God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by
Him, and without Him was nothing made. <span
id="fr_3428"></span>[3429](#fn_3428) What was made was life in Him, and
the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness, and
the darkness comprehended it not.” <span
id="fr_3429"></span>[3430](#fn_3429) “All things,” he says, “were made
by Him;” therefore in “all things” this creation of ours is
\[included\], for we cannot concede to these men that \[the words\] “all
things” are spoken in reference to those within their Pleroma. For if
their Pleroma do indeed contain these, this creation, as being such, is
not outside, as I have demonstrated in the preceding book; <span
id="fr_3430"></span>[3431](#fn_3430) but if they are outside the
Pleroma, which indeed appeared impossible, it follows, in that case,
that their Pleroma cannot be “all things:” therefore this vast creation
is not outside \[the Pleroma\].

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p5"></span>2. John, however, does himself put this
matter beyond all controversy on our part, when he says, “He was in this
world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not. He
came unto His own \[things\], and His own \[people\] received Him
not.” <span id="fr_3431"></span>[3432](#fn_3431) But according to
Marcion, and those like him, neither was the world made by Him; nor did
He come to His own things, but to those of another. And, according to
certain of the Gnostics, this world was made by angels, and not by the
Word of God. But according to the followers of Valentinus, the world was
not made by Him, but by the Demiurge. For he (Soter) caused such
similitudes to be made, after the pattern of things above, as they
allege; but the Demiurge accomplished the work of creation. For they say
that he, the Lord and Creator of the plan of creation, by whom they hold
that this world was made, was produced from the Mother; while the Gospel
affirms plainly, that by the Word, which was in the beginning with God,
all things were made, which Word, he says, “was made flesh, and dwelt
among us.” <span id="fr_3432"></span>[3433](#fn_3432)

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p8"></span>3. But, according to these men, neither
was the Word made flesh, nor Christ, nor the Saviour (Soter), who was
produced from \[the joint contributions <span id="page_427">p.
427</span> <span id="ix.iv.xii-Page_427"></span> of\] all \[the Æons\].
For they will have it, that the Word and Christ never came into this
world; that the Saviour, too, never became incarnate, nor suffered, but
that He descended like a dove upon the dispensational Jesus; and that,
as soon as He had declared the unknown Father, He did again ascend into
the Pleroma. Some, however, make the assertion, that this dispensational
Jesus did become incarnate, and suffered, whom they represent as having
passed through Mary just as water through a tube; but others allege him
to be the Son of the Demiurge, upon whom the dispensational Jesus
descended; while others, again, say that Jesus was born from Joseph and
Mary, and that the Christ from above descended upon him, being without
flesh, and impassible. But according to the opinion of no one of the
heretics was the Word of God made flesh. For if anyone carefully
examines the systems of them all, he will find that the Word of God is
brought in by all of them as not having become incarnate (*sine carne*)
and impassible, as is also the Christ from above. Others consider Him to
have been manifested as a transfigured man; but they maintain Him to
have been neither born nor to have become incarnate; whilst others
\[hold\] that He did not assume a human form at all, but that, as a
dove, He did descend upon that Jesus who was born from Mary. Therefore
the Lord’s disciple, pointing them all out as false witnesses, says,
“And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” <span
id="fr_3433"></span>[3434](#fn_3433)

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p10"></span>4. And that we may not have to ask, Of
what God was the Word made flesh? he does himself previously teach us,
saying, “There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same
came as a witness, that he might bear witness of that Light. He was not
that Light, but \[came\] that he might testify of the Light.” <span
id="fr_3434"></span>[3435](#fn_3434) By what God, then, was John, the
forerunner, who testifies of the Light, sent \[into the world\]? Truly
it was by Him, of whom Gabriel is the angel, who also announced the glad
tidings of his birth: \[that God\] who also had promised by the prophets
that He would send His messenger before the face of His Son, <span
id="fr_3435"></span>[3436](#fn_3435) who should prepare His way, that
is, that he should bear witness of that Light in the spirit and power of
Elias. <span id="fr_3436"></span>[3437](#fn_3436) But, again, of what
God was Elias the servant and the prophet? Of Him who made heaven and
earth, <span id="fr_3437"></span>[3438](#fn_3437) as he does himself
confess. John, therefore, having been sent by the founder and maker of
this world, how could he testify of that Light, which came down from
things unspeakable and invisible? For all the heretics have decided that
the Demiurge was ignorant of that Power above him, whose witness and
herald John is found to be. Wherefore the Lord said that He deemed him
“more than a prophet.” <span id="fr_3438"></span>[3439](#fn_3438) For
all the other prophets preached the advent of the paternal Light, and
desired to be worthy of seeing Him whom they preached; but John did both
announce \[the advent\] beforehand, in a like manner as did the others,
and actually saw Him when He came, and pointed Him out, and persuaded
many to believe on Him, so that he did himself hold the place of both
prophet and apostle. For this is to be more than a prophet, because,
“first apostles, secondarily prophets;” <span
id="fr_3439"></span>[3440](#fn_3439) but all things from one and the
same God Himself.

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p17"></span>5. That wine, <span
id="fr_3440"></span>[3441](#fn_3440) which was produced by God in a
vineyard, and which was first consumed, was good. None <span
id="fr_3441"></span>[3442](#fn_3441) of those who drank of it found
fault with it; and the Lord partook of it also. But that wine was better
which the Word made from water, on the moment, and simply for the use of
those who had been called to the marriage. For although the Lord had the
power to supply wine to those feasting, independently of any created
substance, and to fill with food those who were hungry, He did not adopt
this course; but, taking the loaves which the earth had produced, and
giving thanks, <span id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442) and on the
other occasion making water wine, He satisfied those who were reclining
\[at table\], and gave drink to those who had been invited to the
marriage; showing that the God who made the earth, and commanded it to
bring forth fruit, who established the waters, and brought forth the
fountains, was He who in these last times bestowed upon mankind, by His
Son, the blessing of food and the favour of drink: the Incomprehensible
\[acting thus\] by means of the comprehensible, and the Invisible by the
visible; since there is none beyond Him, but He exists in the bosom of
the Father.

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p21"></span>6. For “no man,” he says, “hath seen God
at any time,” unless “the only-begotten Son of God, which is in the
bosom of the Father, He hath declared \[Him\].” <span
id="fr_3443"></span>[3444](#fn_3443) For He, the Son who is in His
bosom, declares to all the Father who is invisible. Wherefore *they*
know Him to whom the Son reveals Him; and again, the Father, by means of
the Son, gives knowledge of His Son to those who love Him. By whom also
Nathanael, being taught, recognised \[Him\], he to whom also the Lord
bare witness, that he was “an Israelite indeed, in whom was no
guile.” <span id="fr_3444"></span>[3445](#fn_3444) The <span
id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span id="ix.iv.xii-Page_428"></span>
Israelite recognised his King, therefore did he cry out to Him, “Rabbi,
Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of Israel.” By whom also
Peter, having been taught, recognised Christ as the Son of the living
God, when \[God\] said, “Behold My dearly beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: I will put my Spirit upon Him, and He shall show judgment to
the Gentiles. He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear
His voice in the streets. A bruised reed shall He not break, and smoking
flax shall He not quench, until He send forth judgment into
contention; <span id="fr_3445"></span>[3446](#fn_3445) and in His name
shall the Gentiles trust.” <span id="fr_3446"></span>[3447](#fn_3446)

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p26"></span>7. Such, then, are the first principles
of the Gospel: that there is one God, the Maker of this universe; He who
was also announced by the prophets, and who by Moses set forth the
dispensation of the law,—\[principles\] which proclaim the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and ignore any other God or Father except Him. So
firm is the ground upon which these Gospels rest, that the very heretics
themselves bear witness to them, and, starting from these \[documents\],
each one of them endeavours to establish his own peculiar doctrine. For
the Ebionites, who use Matthew’s Gospel <span
id="fr_3447"></span>[3448](#fn_3447) only, are confuted out of this very
same, making false suppositions with regard to the Lord. But Marcion,
mutilating that according to Luke, is proved to be a blasphemer of the
only existing God, from those \[passages\] which he still retains.
Those, again, who separate Jesus from Christ, alleging that Christ
remained impassible, but that it was Jesus who suffered, preferring the
Gospel by Mark, if they read it with a love of truth, may have their
errors rectified. Those, moreover, who follow Valentinus, making copious
use of that according to John, to illustrate their conjunctions, shall
be proved to be totally in error by means of this very Gospel, as I have
shown in the first book. Since, then, our opponents do bear testimony to
us, and make use of these \[documents\], our proof derived from them is
firm and true.

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p28"></span>8. <span id="ix.iv.xii-p28.1"></span>It
is not possible that the Gospels can be either more or fewer in number
than they are. For, since there are four zones of the world in which we
live, and four principal winds, <span
id="fr_3448"></span>[3449](#fn_3448) while the Church is scattered
throughout all the world, and the “pillar and ground” <span
id="fr_3449"></span>[3450](#fn_3449) of the Church is the Gospel and the
spirit of life; it is fitting that she should have four pillars,
breathing out immortality on every side, and vivifying men afresh. From
which fact, it is evident that the Word, the Artificer of all, He that
sitteth upon the cherubim, and contains all things, He who was
manifested to men, has given us the Gospel under four aspects, but bound
together by one Spirit. As also David says, when entreating His
manifestation, “Thou that sittest between the cherubim, shine
forth.” <span id="fr_3450"></span>[3451](#fn_3450) For the cherubim,
too, were four-faced, and their faces were images of the dispensation of
the Son of God. <span id="ix.iv.xii-p31.2"></span>For, \[as the
Scripture\] says, “The first living creature was like a lion,” <span
id="fr_3451"></span>[3452](#fn_3451) symbolizing His effectual working,
His leadership, and royal power; the second \[living creature\] was like
a calf, signifying \[His\] sacrificial and sacerdotal order; but “the
third had, as it were, the face as of a man,”—an evident description of
His advent as a human being; “the fourth was like a flying eagle,”
pointing out the gift of the Spirit hovering with His wings over the
Church. <span id="ix.iv.xii-p32.2"></span>And therefore the Gospels are
in accord with these things, among which Christ Jesus is seated. <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p32.3"></span>For that according to John relates His
original, effectual, and glorious generation from the Father, thus
declaring, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
and the Word was God.” <span id="fr_3452"></span>[3453](#fn_3452) Also,
“all things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made.” For
this reason, too, is that Gospel full of all confidence, for such is His
person. <span id="fr_3453"></span>[3454](#fn_3453) But that according to
Luke, taking up \[His\] priestly character, commenced with Zacharias the
priest offering sacrifice to God. For now was made ready the fatted
calf, about to be immolated for <span
id="fr_3454"></span>[3455](#fn_3454) the finding again of the younger
son. Matthew, again, relates His generation as a man, saying, “The book
of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham;” <span id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455) and also, “The
birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise.” This, then, is the Gospel of
His humanity; <span id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456) for which
reason it is, too, that \[the character of\] a humble and meek man is
kept up through the whole Gospel. Mark, on the other hand, commences
with \[a reference to\] the prophetical spirit coming down from on high
to men, saying, “The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is
written in Esaias the prophet,”—pointing to the winged aspect of the
Gospel; and on this account he made a compendious and cursory narrative,
for such is the prophetical character. And the Word of God Himself used
to converse with the ante-Mosaic patriarchs, in accordance with His
divinity <span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xii-Page_429"></span> and glory; but for those under the law
he instituted a sacerdotal and liturgical service. <span
id="fr_3457"></span>[3458](#fn_3457) Afterwards, being made man for us,
He sent the gift of the celestial Spirit over all the earth, protecting
us with His wings. Such, then, as was the course followed by the Son of
God, so was also the form of the living creatures; and such as was the
form of the living creatures, so was also the character of the
Gospel. <span id="fr_3458"></span>[3459](#fn_3458) For the living
creatures are quadriform, and the Gospel is quadriform, as is also the
course followed by the Lord. For this reason were four principal (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xii-p39.1"></span>καθολικαί</span>)
covenants given to the human race: <span
id="fr_3459"></span>[3460](#fn_3459) one, prior to the deluge, under
Adam; the second, that after the deluge, under Noah; the third, the
giving of the law, under Moses; the fourth, that which renovates man,
and sums up all things in itself by means of the Gospel, raising and
bearing men upon its wings into the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p41"></span>9. <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p41.1"></span>These things being so, all who destroy the
form of the Gospel are vain, unlearned, and also audacious; those, \[I
mean,\] who represent the aspects of the Gospel as being either more in
number than as aforesaid, or, on the other hand, fewer. The former class
\[do so\], that they may seem to have discovered more than is of the
truth; the latter, that they may set the dispensations of God aside. For
Marcion, rejecting the entire Gospel, yea rather, cutting himself off
from the Gospel, boasts that he has part in the \[blessings of\] the
Gospel. <span id="fr_3460"></span>[3461](#fn_3460) Others, again (the
Montanists), that they may set at nought the gift of the Spirit, which
in the latter times has been, by the good pleasure of the Father, poured
out upon the human race, do not admit that *aspect* \[of the evangelical
dispensation\] presented by John’s Gospel, in which the Lord promised
that He would send the Paraclete; <span
id="fr_3461"></span>[3462](#fn_3461) but set aside at once both the
Gospel and the prophetic Spirit. Wretched men indeed! who wish to be
pseudo-prophets, forsooth, but who set aside the gift of prophecy from
the Church; acting like those (the Encratitæ) <span
id="fr_3462"></span>[3463](#fn_3462) who, on account of such as come in
hypocrisy, hold themselves aloof from the communion of the brethren. We
must conclude, moreover, that these men (the Montanists) can not admit
the Apostle Paul either. For, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, <span
id="fr_3463"></span>[3464](#fn_3463) he speaks expressly of prophetical
gifts, and recognises men and women prophesying in the Church. Sinning,
therefore, in all these particulars, against the Spirit of God, <span
id="fr_3464"></span>[3465](#fn_3464) they fall into the irremissible
sin. But those who are from Valentinus, being, on the other hand,
altogether reckless, while they put forth their own compositions, boast
that they possess more Gospels than there really are. Indeed, they have
arrived at such a pitch of audacity, as to entitle their comparatively
recent writing “the Gospel of Truth,” though it agrees in nothing with
the Gospels of the Apostles, so that they have really no Gospel which is
not full of blasphemy. For if what they have published is the Gospel of
truth, and yet is totally unlike those which have been handed down to us
from the apostles, any who please may learn, as is shown from the
Scriptures themselves, that that which has been handed down from the
apostles can no longer be reckoned the Gospel of truth. But that these
Gospels alone are true and reliable, and admit neither an increase nor
diminution of the aforesaid number, I have proved by so many and such
\[arguments\]. For, since God made all things in due proportion and
adaptation, it was fit also that the outward aspect of the Gospel should
be well arranged and harmonized. The opinion of those men, therefore,
who handed the Gospel down to us, having been investigated, from their
very fountainheads, let us proceed also to the remaining apostles, and
inquire into their doctrine with regard to God; then, in due course we
shall listen to the very words of the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3428"></span>[426:3429](0010778.htm#fr_3428) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p2"></span> Irenæus frequently quotes this text, and
always uses the punctuation here adopted. Tertullian and many others of
the Fathers follow his example.

<span id="fn_3429"></span>[426:3430](0010778.htm#fr_3429) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p3"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p3.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3430"></span>[426:3431](0010778.htm#fr_3430) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p4"></span> See ii. 1, etc.

<span id="fn_3431"></span>[426:3432](0010778.htm#fr_3431) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p6"></span> [John
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3432"></span>[426:3433](0010778.htm#fr_3432) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p7"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3433"></span>[427:3434](0010778.htm#fr_3433) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p9"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3434"></span>[427:3435](0010778.htm#fr_3434) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p11"></span> [John i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3435"></span>[427:3436](0010778.htm#fr_3435) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p12"></span> [Mal. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3436"></span>[427:3437](0010778.htm#fr_3436) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p13"></span> [Luke i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3437"></span>[427:3438](0010778.htm#fr_3437) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p14"></span> This evidently refers to [1 Kings
xviii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036)<span
id="ix.iv.xii-p14.1"></span>, where Elijah invokes God as the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc.

<span id="fn_3438"></span>[427:3439](0010778.htm#fr_3438) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p15"></span> [Matt. xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p15.1"></span>;
[Luke vii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#026)<span
id="ix.iv.xii-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3439"></span>[427:3440](0010778.htm#fr_3439) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3440"></span>[427:3441](0010778.htm#fr_3440) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p18"></span> The transition here is so abrupt, that
some critics suspect the loss of part of the text before these words.

<span id="fn_3441"></span>[427:3442](0010778.htm#fr_3441) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p19"></span> [John ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#003)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[427:3443](0010778.htm#fr_3442) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p20"></span> [John vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3443"></span>[427:3444](0010778.htm#fr_3443) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p22"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3444"></span>[427:3445](0010778.htm#fr_3444) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p23"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3445"></span>[428:3446](0010778.htm#fr_3445) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p24"></span> The reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xii-p24.1"></span>νεῖκος</span> having been followed instead
of <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xii-p24.2"></span>νῖκος</span>,
victory.

<span id="fn_3446"></span>[428:3447](0010778.htm#fr_3446) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p25"></span> [John i.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p25.1"></span>,
[John vi. 69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069)<span
id="ix.iv.xii-p25.2"></span>; [Matt. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p25.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3447"></span>[428:3448](0010778.htm#fr_3447) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p27"></span> Harvey thinks that this is the Hebrew
Gospel of which Irenæus speaks in the opening of this book; but comp.
Dr. Robert’s *Discussions on the Gospels*, part ii. chap. iv.

<span id="fn_3448"></span>[428:3449](0010778.htm#fr_3448) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p29"></span> Literally, “four catholic spirits;”
Greek, <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xii-p29.1"></span>τέσσαρα
καθολικὰ πνεύματα</span>: Latin, “quatuor principales spiritus.”

<span id="fn_3449"></span>[428:3450](0010778.htm#fr_3449) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p30"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3450"></span>[428:3451](0010778.htm#fr_3450) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p31"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3451"></span>[428:3452](0010778.htm#fr_3451) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p32"></span> [Rev. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3452"></span>[428:3453](0010778.htm#fr_3452) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p33"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3453"></span>[428:3454](0010778.htm#fr_3453) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p34"></span> The above is the literal rendering of
this very obscure sentence; it is not at all represented in the Greek
here preserved.

<span id="fn_3454"></span>[428:3455](0010778.htm#fr_3454) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p35"></span> The Greek is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xii-p35.1"></span>ὑπέρ</span>: the Latin, “pro.”

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[428:3456](0010778.htm#fr_3455) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p36"></span> [Matt.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[428:3457](0010778.htm#fr_3456) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p37"></span> The Greek text of this clause,
literally rendered, is, “This Gospel, then, is anthropomorphic.”

<span id="fn_3457"></span>[429:3458](0010778.htm#fr_3457) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p38"></span> Or, “a sacerdotal and liturgical
order,” following the fragment of the Greek text recovered here. Harvey
thinks that the old Latin “actum” indicates the true reading of the
original <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xii-p38.1"></span>πρᾶξιν</span>, and that <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xii-p38.2"></span>τάξιν</span> is an
error. The earlier editors, however, are of a contrary opinion.

<span id="fn_3458"></span>[429:3459](0010778.htm#fr_3458) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p39"></span> That is, the appearance of the Gospel
taken as a whole; it being presented under a fourfold aspect.

<span id="fn_3459"></span>[429:3460](0010778.htm#fr_3459) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p40"></span> A portion of the Greek has been
preserved here, but it differs materially from the old Latin version,
which seems to represent the original with greater exactness, and has
therefore been followed. The Greek represents the first covenant as
having been given to Noah, at the deluge, under the sign of the rainbow;
the second as that given to Abraham, under the sign of circumcision; the
third, as being the giving of the law, under Moses; and the fourth, as
that of the Gospel, through our Lord Jesus Christ. \[Paradise with the
*tree of life*, Adam with *Shechinah* ([Gen. iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p40.1"></span>,
[Gen. iv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016)<span
id="ix.iv.xii-p40.2"></span>), Noah with the *rainbow*, Abraham with
*circumcision*, Moses with *the ark*, Messiah with *the sacraments*, and
heaven with the *river of life*, seem the complete system.\]

<span id="fn_3460"></span>[429:3461](0010778.htm#fr_3460) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p42"></span> The old Latin reads, “partem gloriatur
se habere Evangelii.” Massuet changed *partem* into *pariter*, thinking
that *partem* gave a sense inconsistent with the Marcionite curtailment
of St. Luke. Harvey, however, observes: “But the *Gospel*, here means
the *blessings of the Gospel*, in which Marcion certainly claimed a
share.”

<span id="fn_3461"></span>[429:3462](0010778.htm#fr_3461) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p43"></span> [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p43.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3462"></span>[429:3463](0010778.htm#fr_3462) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p44"></span> Slighting, as did some later heretics,
the Pauline Epistles.

<span id="fn_3463"></span>[429:3464](0010778.htm#fr_3463) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p45"></span> [1 Cor.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3464"></span>[429:3465](0010778.htm#fr_3464) <span
id="ix.iv.xii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xii-p46"></span> [Matt. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031)<span id="ix.iv.xii-p46.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—Doctrine of the rest of...](0010779)
