[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010656)  [Next](0010658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.viii.i"></span>

### <span id="viii.viii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—The self-evidencing power of truth.

<span id="viii.viii.i-p1"></span><span
id="viii.viii.i-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.viii.i-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.viii.i-p1.3"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="viii.viii.i-p1.4"></span>The</span> word of truth is free, and
carries its own authority, disdaining to fall under any skilful
argument, or to endure the logical scrutiny of its hearers. But it would
be believed for its own nobility, and for the confidence due to Him who
sends it. Now the word of truth is sent from God; wherefore the freedom
claimed by the truth is not arrogant. For being sent with authority, it
were not fit that it should be required to produce proof of what is
said; since neither is there any proof beyond itself, which is God. For
every proof is more powerful and trustworthy than that which it proves;
since what is disbelieved, until proof is produced, gets credit when
such proof is produced, and is recognised as being what it was stated to
be. But nothing is either more powerful or more trustworthy than the
truth; so that he who requires proof of this is like one who wishes it
demonstrated why the things that appear to the senses do appear. For the
test of those things which are received through the reason, is sense;
but of sense itself there is no test beyond itself. As then we bring
those things which reason hunts after, to sense, and by it judge what
kind of things they are, whether the things spoken be true or false, and
then sit in judgment no longer, giving full credit to its decision; so
also we refer all that is said regarding men and the world to the truth,
and by it judge whether it be worthless or no. But the utterances of
truth we judge by no separate test, giving full credit to itself. And
God, the Father of the universe, who is the perfect intelligence, is the
truth. And the Word, being His Son, came to us, having put on flesh,
revealing both Himself and the Father, giving to us in Himself
resurrection from the dead, and eternal life afterwards. And this is
Jesus Christ, our Saviour and Lord. He, therefore, is Himself both the
faith and the proof of Himself and of all things. Wherefore those who
follow Him, and know Him, having faith in Him as their proof, shall rest
in Him. But since the adversary does not cease to resist many, and uses
many and divers arts to ensnare them, that he may seduce the faithful
from their faith, and that he may prevent the faithless from believing,
it seems to me necessary that we also, being armed with the invulnerable
doctrines of the faith, do battle against him in behalf of the weak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—Objections to the...](0010658)
