[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010870)  [Next](0010872) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—Further proofs of the same proposition, drawn from the promises made by Christ, when He declared that He would drink of the fruit of the vine with His disciples in His Father’s kingdom, while at the same time He promised to reward them an hundred-fold, and to make them partake of banquets. The blessing pronounced by Jacob had pointed out this already, as Papias and the elders have interpreted it.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p1"></span>1. For this reason, when about to
undergo His sufferings, that He might declare to Abraham and those with
him the glad tidings of the inheritance being thrown open, \[Christ\],
after He had given thanks while holding the cup, and had drunk of it,
and given it to the disciples, said to them: “Drink ye all of it: this
is My blood of the new covenant, which shall be shed for many for the
remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of
the fruit of this vine, until that day when I will drink it new with you
in my Father’s kingdom.” <span id="fr_4731"></span>[4732](#fn_4731)
Thus, then, He will Himself renew the inheritance of the earth, and will
re-organize the mystery of the glory of \[His\] sons; as David says, “He
who hath renewed the face of the earth.” <span
id="fr_4732"></span>[4733](#fn_4732) He promised to drink of the fruit
of the vine with His disciples, thus indicating both these points: the
inheritance of the earth in which the new fruit of the vine is drunk,
and the resurrection of His disciples in the flesh. For the new flesh
which rises again is the same which also received the new cup. And He
cannot by any means be understood as drinking of the fruit of the vine
when settled down with his \[disciples\] above in a super-celestial
place; nor, again, are they who drink it devoid of flesh, for to drink
of that which flows from the vine pertains to flesh, and not spirit.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p4"></span>2. And for this reason the Lord
declared, “When thou makest a dinner or a supper, do not call thy
friends, nor thy neighbours, nor thy kinsfolk, lest they ask thee in
return, and so repay thee. But call the lame, the blind, and the poor,
and thou shall be blessed, since they cannot recompense thee, but a
recompense shall be made thee at the resurrection of the just.” <span
id="fr_4733"></span>[4734](#fn_4733) And again He says, “Whosoever shall
have left lands, or houses, or parents, or brethren, or children because
of Me, he shall receive in this world an hundred-fold, and in that to
come he shall inherit eternal life.” <span
id="fr_4734"></span>[4735](#fn_4734) For what are the hundred-fold
\[rewards\] in this word, the entertainments given to the poor, and the
suppers for which a return is made? These are \[to take place\] in the
times of the kingdom, that is, upon the seventh day, which has been
sanctified, in which God rested from all the works which He created,
which is the true Sabbath of the righteous, which they shall not be
engaged in any earthly occupation; but shall have a table at hand
prepared for them by God, supplying them with all sorts of dishes.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p7"></span>3. <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>The blessing of Isaac with which he
blessed his younger son Jacob has the same meaning, when he says,
“Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a full field which the
Lord has blessed.” <span id="fr_4735"></span>[4736](#fn_4735) But “the
field is the world.” <span id="fr_4736"></span>[4737](#fn_4736) And
therefore he added, “God give to thee of the dew of heaven, and of the
fatness of the earth, plenty of corn and wine. And let the nations serve
thee, and kings bow down to thee; and be thou lord over thy brother, and
thy father’s sons shall bow down to thee: cursed shall be he who shall
curse thee, and blessed shall be he who shall bless thee.” <span
id="fr_4737"></span>[4738](#fn_4737) If any one, then, does not accept
these things as referring to the appointed kingdom, he must fall into
much contradiction and contrariety, as is the case with the Jews, who
are involved in absolute perplexity. For not only did not the nations in
this life serve this Jacob; but even after he had received the blessing,
he himself going forth \[from his home\], served his uncle Laban the
Syrian for twenty years; <span id="fr_4738"></span>[4739](#fn_4738) and
not only was he not made lord of his brother, but he did himself bow
down before his brother Esau, upon his return from Mesopotamia to his
father, and offered many gifts to him. <span
id="fr_4739"></span>[4740](#fn_4739) Moreover, in what way did he
inherit much corn and wine here, he who emigrated to Egypt because of
the famine which possessed the land in which he was dwelling, and became
subject to Pharaoh, who was then ruling over Egypt? The predicted
blessing, therefore, belongs unquestionably to the times of the kingdom,
when the righteous shall bear rule upon their rising from the
dead; <span id="fr_4740"></span>[4741](#fn_4740) when also the creation,
having been renovated and set free, shall fructify with an abundance of
all kinds of food, from the dew of heaven, and from the fertility of the
earth: as the elders who saw John, the disciple of the Lord, related
that they had heard <span id="page_563">p. 563</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-Page_563"></span> from him how the Lord used to teach
in regard to these times, and say: The days will come, in which vines
shall grow, each having ten thousand branches, and in each branch ten
thousand twigs, and in each true <span
id="fr_4741"></span>[4742](#fn_4741) twig ten thousand shoots, and in
each one of the shoots ten thousand clusters, and on every one of the
clusters ten thousand grapes, and every grape when pressed will give
five and twenty metretes of wine. And when any one of the saints shall
lay hold of a cluster, <span id="fr_4742"></span>[4743](#fn_4742)
another shall cry out, “I am a better cluster, take me; bless the Lord
through me.” In like manner \[the Lord declared\] that a grain of wheat
would produce ten thousand ears, and that every ear should have ten
thousand grains, and every grain would yield ten pounds (*quinque
bilibres*) of clear, pure, fine flour; and that all other fruit-bearing
trees, <span id="fr_4743"></span>[4744](#fn_4743) and seeds and grass,
would produce in similar proportions (*secundum congruentiam iis
consequentem*); and that all animals feeding \[only\] on the productions
of the earth, should \[in those days\] become peaceful and harmonious
among each other, and be in perfect subjection to man.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p17"></span>4. <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>And these things are borne witness to in
writing by Papias, the hearer of John, and a companion of Polycarp, in
his fourth book; for there were five books compiled (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p17.2"></span>συντεταγμένα</span>)
by him. <span id="fr_4744"></span>[4745](#fn_4744) And he says in
addition, “Now these things are credible to believers.” And he says
that, “when the traitor Judas did not give credit to them, and put the
question, ‘How then can things about to bring forth so abundantly be
wrought by the Lord?’ the Lord declared, ‘They who shall come to these
\[times\] shall see.’ ” When prophesying of these times, therefore,
Esaias says: “The wolf also shall feed with the lamb, and the leopard
shall take his rest with the kid; the calf also, and the bull, and the
lion shall eat together; and a little boy shall lead them. The ox and
the bear shall feed together, and their young ones shall agree together;
and the lion shall eat straw as well as the ox. And the infant boy shall
thrust his hand into the asp’s den, into the nest also of the adder’s
brood; and they shall do no harm, nor have power to hurt anything in my
holy mountain.” And again he says, in recapitulation, “Wolves and lambs
shall then browse together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox,
and the serpent earth as if it were bread; and they shall neither hurt
nor annoy anything in my holy mountain, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_4745"></span>[4746](#fn_4745) I am quite aware that some persons
endeavour to refer these words to the case of savage men, both of
different nations and various habits, who come to believe, and when they
have believed, act in harmony with the righteous. But although this is
\[true\] now with regard to some men coming from various nations to the
harmony of the faith, nevertheless in the resurrection of the just \[the
words shall also apply\] to those animals mentioned. For God is rich in
all things. And it is right that when the creation is restored, all the
animals should obey and be in subjection to man, and revert to the food
originally given by God (for they had been originally subjected in
obedience to Adam), that is, the productions of the earth. But some
other occasion, and not the present, is \[to be sought\] for showing
that the lion shall \[then\] feed on straw. And this indicates the large
size and rich quality of the fruits. For if that animal, the lion, feeds
upon straw \[at that period\], of what a quality must the wheat itself
be whose straw shall serve as suitable food for lions?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4731"></span>[562:4732](0010871.htm#fr_4731) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p2"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#027)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4732"></span>[562:4733](0010871.htm#fr_4732) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p3"></span> [Ps. civ.
30](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#030)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4733"></span>[562:4734](0010871.htm#fr_4733) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p5"></span> [Luke
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#013)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4734"></span>[562:4735](0010871.htm#fr_4734) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p6"></span> [Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>; [Luke
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#030)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4735"></span>[562:4736](0010871.htm#fr_4735) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p8"></span> [Gen. xxvii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#027)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4736"></span>[562:4737](0010871.htm#fr_4736) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p9"></span> [Matt. xiii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4737"></span>[562:4738](0010871.htm#fr_4737) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p10"></span> [Gen.
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#029)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4738"></span>[562:4739](0010871.htm#fr_4738) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p11"></span> [Gen. xxxi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4739"></span>[562:4740](0010871.htm#fr_4739) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p12"></span> [Gen. xxxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#003)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4740"></span>[562:4741](0010871.htm#fr_4740) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p13"></span> From this to the end of the section
there is an Armenian version extant, to be found in the *Spicil.
Solesm.* i. p. 1, edited by M. Pitra, Paris 1852, and which was taken by
him from an Armenian <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>ms.</span> in the Mechitarist Library at
Venice, described as being of the twelfth century.

<span id="fn_4741"></span>[563:4742](0010871.htm#fr_4741) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p14"></span> This word “true” is not found in the
Armenian.

<span id="fn_4742"></span>[563:4743](0010871.htm#fr_4742) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p15"></span> Or, following Arm. vers., “But if
any one shall lay hold of an holy cluster.”

<span id="fn_4743"></span>[563:4744](0010871.htm#fr_4743) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p16"></span> The Arm. vers. is here followed; the
old Latin reads, “Et reliqua autem poma.”

<span id="fn_4744"></span>[563:4745](0010871.htm#fr_4744) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p18"></span> \[See pp. 151–154, this volume.\]

<span id="fn_4745"></span>[563:4746](0010871.htm#fr_4745) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p19"></span> [Isa. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV.—He fortifies his...](0010872)
