[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010065)  [Next](0010067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span> <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_23"></span>

## <span id="iii.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note to the Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>\[<span
class="upper"><span id="iii.i-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span> 130.\] <span
class="upper"><span id="iii.i-p1.3"></span>The</span> anonymous author
of this Epistle gives himself the title (Mathetes) “a *disciple* <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) of the Apostles,” and I venture to
adopt it as his name. It is about all we know of him, and it serves a
useful end. I place his letter here, as a sequel to the Clementine
Epistle, for several reasons, which I think scholars will approve: (1)
It is full of the Pauline spirit, and exhales the same pure and
primitive fragrance which is characteristic of Clement. (2) No theory as
to its date very much conflicts with that which I adopt, and it is
sustained by good authorities. (3) But, as a specimen of the persuasives
against Gentilism which early Christians employed in their intercourse
with friends who adhered to heathenism, it admirably illustrates the
temper prescribed by St. Paul ([2 Tim. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)<span id="iii.i-p2.2"></span>), and
not less the peculiar social relations of converts to the Gospel with
the more amiable and candid of their personal friends at this early
period.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>Mathetes was possibly a catechumen of St.
Paul or of one of the apostle’s associates. I assume that his
correspondent was the tutor of M. Aurelius. Placed just here, it fills a
*lacuna* in the series, and takes the place of the pseudo (second)
Epistle of Clement, which is now relegated to its proper place with the
works falsely ascribed to St. Clement.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>Altogether, the Epistle is a gem of purest
ray; and, while suggesting some difficulties as to interpretation and
exposition, it is practically clear as to argument and intent. Mathetes
is, perhaps, the first of the apologists.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>The following is the original <span
class="upper"><span id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span> of
the learned editors and translators:—

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>The</span> following interesting and eloquent
Epistle is anonymous, and we have no clue whatever as to its author. For
a considerable period after its publication in 1592, it was generally
ascribed to Justin Martyr. In recent times Otto has inserted it among
the works of that writer, but Semisch and others contend that it cannot
possibly be his. In dealing with this question, we depend entirely upon
the internal evidence, no statement as to the authorship of the Epistle
having descended to us from antiquity. And it can scarcely be denied
that the whole tone of the Epistle, as well as special passages which it
contains, points to some other writer than Justin. Accordingly, critics
are now for the most part agreed that it is not his, and that it must be
ascribed to one who lived at a still earlier date in the history of the
Church. Several internal arguments have been brought forward in favour
of this opinion. Supposing chap. xi. to be genuine, it has been
supported by the fact that the writer there styles himself “a disciple
of the apostles.” But there is great suspicion that the two concluding
chapters are spurious; and even though <span id="page_24">p. 24</span>
<span id="iii.i-Page_24"></span> admitted to be genuine, the expression
quoted evidently admits of a different explanation from that which
implies the writer’s personal acquaintance with the apostles: it might,
indeed, be adopted by one even at the present day. More weight is to be
attached to those passages in which the writer speaks of Christianity as
still being a new thing in the world. Expressions to this effect occur
in several places (chap. i., ii., ix.), and seem to imply that the
author lived very little, if at all, after the apostolic age. There is
certainly nothing in the Epistle which is inconsistent with this
opinion; and we may therefore believe, that in this beautiful
composition we possess a genuine production of some apostolic man who
lived not later than the beginning of the second century.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>The names of Clement of Rome and of Apollos
have both been suggested as those of the probable author. Such opinions,
however, are pure fancies, which it is perhaps impossible to refute, but
which rest on nothing more than conjecture. Nor can a single word be
said as to the person named Diognetus, to whom the letter is addressed.
We must be content to leave both points in hopeless obscurity, and
simply accept the Epistle as written by an earnest and intelligent
Christian to a sincere inquirer among the Gentiles, towards the close of
the apostolic age.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>It is much to be regretted that the text is
often so very doubtful. Only three <span class="upper"><span
id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> of the Epistle, all probably
exhibiting the same original text, are known to exist; and in not a few
passages the readings are, in consequence, very defective and obscure.
But notwithstanding this drawback, and the difficulty of representing
the full force and elegance of the original, this Epistle, as now
presented to the English reader, can hardly fail to excite both his
deepest interest and admiration.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>\[N.B.—Interesting speculations concerning
this precious work may be seen in Bunsen’s *Hippolytus and his Age*,
vol. i. p. 188. The learned do not seem convinced by this author, but I
have adopted his suggestion as to Diognetus the tutor of M. Aurelius.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[23:263](0010066.htm#fr_262) <span
id="iii.i-p1.4"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>ἀποστόλων γενόμενος μαθητης</span>. Cap. xi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle to Diognetus](0010067)
