[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010456)  [Next](0010458) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.xii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Christians proved innocent by their contempt of death.

<span id="viii.iii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>For I myself, too, when I was delighting
in the doctrines of Plato, and heard the Christians slandered, and saw
them fearless of death, and of all other-things which are counted
fearful, perceived that it was impossible that they could be living in
wickedness and pleasure. For what sensual or intemperate man, or who
that counts it good to feast on human flesh, <span
id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941) could welcome death that he might
be deprived of his enjoyments, and would not rather continue always the
present life, and attempt to escape the observation of the rulers; and
much less would he denounce himself when the consequence would be death?
<span id="viii.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>This also the wicked demons have now
caused to be done by evil men. For having put some to death on account
of the accusations falsely brought against us, they also dragged to the
torture our domestics, either children or weak women, and by dreadful
torments forced them to admit those fabulous actions which they
themselves openly perpetrate; about which we are the less concerned,
because none of these actions are really ours, and we have the
unbegotten and ineffable God as witness both of our thoughts and deeds.
<span id="viii.iii.xii-p2.2"></span>For why did we not even publicly
profess that these were the things which we esteemed good, and prove
that these are the divine philosophy, saying that the mysteries of
Saturn are performed when we slay a man, and that when we drink our fill
of blood, as it is said we do, we are doing what you do before that idol
you honour, and on which you sprinkle the blood not only of irrational
animals, but also of men, making a libation of the blood of the slain by
the hand of the most illustrious and noble man among you? <span
id="viii.iii.xii-p2.3"></span><span id="viii.iii.xii-p2.4"></span>And
imitating Jupiter and the other gods in sodomy and shameless intercourse
with woman, might we not bring as our apology the writings of Epicurus
and the poets? But because we persuade men to avoid such instruction,
and all who practise them and imitate such examples, as now in this
discourse we have striven to persuade you, we are assailed in every kind
of way. But we are not concerned, since we know that God is a just
observer of all. But would that even now some one would mount a lofty
rostrum, and shout with a loud voice; <span
id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) “Be ashamed, be ashamed, ye who
charge the guiltless with those deeds which yourselves openly could
commit, and ascribe things which apply to yourselves and to your gods to
those who have not even the slightest sympathy with them. Be ye
converted; become wise.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[192:1942](0010457.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="viii.iii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.xii-p2"></span> Alluding to the common accusation
against the Christians.

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[192:1943](0010457.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="viii.iii.xii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.xii-p3"></span> Literally, “with a tragic voice,”—the
loud voice in which the Greek tragedies were recited through the *mask
\[persona\]*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—How the Word has been...](0010458)
