[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010732)  [Next](0010734) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.iv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—The Bythus and Pleroma of the Valentinians, as well as the God of Marcion, shown to be absurd; the world was actually created by the same Being who had conceived the idea of it, and was not the fruit of defect or ignorance.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iii.iv-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iii.iv-p1.2"></span>The Bythus, therefore, whom they conceive of
with his Pleroma, and the God of Marcion, are inconsistent. If indeed,
as they affirm, he has something subjacent and beyond himself, which
they style vacuity and shadow, this vacuum is then proved to be greater
than their Pleroma. But it is inconsistent even to make this statement,
that while he contains all things within himself, the creation was
formed by some other. For it is absolutely necessary that they
acknowledge a certain void and chaotic kind of existence (below the
spiritual Pleroma) in which this universe was formed, and that the
Propator purposely left this chaos as it was, <span
id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) either knowing beforehand what
things were to happen in it, or being ignorant of them. If he was really
ignorant, then God will not be prescient of all things. But they will
not even \[in that case\] be able to assign a reason on what account He
thus left this place void during so long a period of time. If, again, He
is prescient, and contemplated mentally that creation which was about to
have a being in that place, then He Himself created it who also formed
it beforehand \[ideally\] in Himself.

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p3"></span>2. Let them cease, therefore, to affirm
that the world was made by any other; for as soon as God formed a
conception in His mind, that was also done which He had thus mentally
conceived. For it was not possible that one Being should mentally form
the conception, and another actually produce the things which had been
conceived by Him in His mind. But God, according to these heretics,
mentally conceived either an eternal world or a temporal one, *both* of
which suppositions cannot be true. Yet if He had mentally conceived of
it as eternal, spiritual, <span id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) and
visible, it would also have been formed such. But if it was formed such
as it really is, then *He* made it such who had mentally conceived of it
as such; or He willed it to exist in the ideality <span
id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999) of the Father, according to the
conception of His mind, such as it now is, compound, mutable, and
transient. Since, then, it is just such as the Father had \[ideally\]
formed in counsel with Himself, it must be worthy of the Father. But to
affirm that what was mentally conceived and pre-created by the Father of
all, just as it has been actually formed, is the fruit of defect, and
the production of ignorance, is to be guilty of great blasphemy. For,
according to them, the Father of all will thus be \[regarded as\]
generating in His breast, according to His own mental conception, the
emanations of defect and the fruits of ignorance, since the things which
He had conceived in His mind have actually been produced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[362:2998](0010733.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="ix.iii.iv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p2"></span> In the barbarous Latin version, we here
find *utrum* … *an* as the translation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>ἤ </span>… <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>ἤ</span> instead of *aut* … *aut*.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[362:2999](0010733.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="ix.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p4"></span> We have translated the text as it here
stands in the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> Grabe omits *spiritalem et*;
Massuet proposes to read *et invisibilem*, and Stieren *invisibilem*.

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[362:3000](0010733.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="ix.iii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.iv-p5"></span> *In præsentia*: Grabe proposes *in
præscientia*, but without <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>ms.</span> authority. “The reader,” says
Harvey, “will observe that there are three suppositions advanced by the
author: that the world, as some heretics asserted, was eternal; that it
was created in time, with no previous idea of it in the divine mind; or
that it existed as a portion of the divine counsels from all eternity,
though with no temporal subsistence until the time of its creation,—and
of this the author now speaks.” The whole passage is most obscurely
expressed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—The absurdity of the...](0010734)
