[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010745)  [Next](0010747) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xvii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—The Creator of the world either produced of Himself the images of things to be made, or the Pleroma was formed after the image of some previous system; and so on ad infinitum.

<span id="ix.iii.xvii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>But if they will not yield assent to any
one of these conclusions, since in that case they would be proved by us
as incapable of rendering any reason for such a production of their
Pleroma, they will of necessity be shut up to this—that they confess
that, above the Pleroma, there was some other system more spiritual and
more powerful, after the image of which their Pleroma was <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span id="ix.iii.xvii-Page_380"></span>
formed. For if the Demiurge did not of himself construct that figure of
creation which exists, but made it after the form of those things which
are above, then from whom did their Bythus—who, to be sure, brought it
about that the Pleroma should be possessed of a configuration of this
kind—receive the figure of those things which existed before Himself?
For it must needs be, either that the intention \[of creating\] dwelt in
that god who made the world, so that of his own power, and from himself,
he obtained the model of its formation; or, if any departure is made
from this being, then there will arise a necessity for constantly asking
whence there came to that one who is above him the configuration of
those things which have been made; what, too, was the number of the
productions; and what the substance of the model itself? If, however, it
was in the power of Bythus to impart of himself such a configuration to
the Pleroma, then why may it not have been in the power of the Demiurge
to form of himself such a world as exists? And then, again, if creation
be an image of those things \[above\], why should we not affirm that
those are, in turn, images of others above them, and those above these
again, of others, and thus go on supposing innumerable images of images?

<span id="ix.iii.xvii-p2"></span>2. This difficulty presented itself to
Basilides after he had utterly missed the truth, and was conceiving
that, by an infinite succession of those beings that were formed from
one another, he might escape such perplexity. When he had proclaimed
that three hundred and sixty-five heavens were formed through succession
and similitude by one another, and that a manifest proof \[of the
existence\] of these was found in the number of the days of the year, as
I stated before; and that above these there was a power which they also
style Unnameable, and its dispensation—he did not even in this way
escape such perplexity. For, when asked whence came the image of its
configuration to that heaven which is above all, and from which he
wishes the rest to be regarded as having been formed by means of
succession, he will say, from that dispensation which belongs to the
Unnameable. He must then say, either that the Unspeakable formed it of
himself, or he will find it necessary to acknowledge that there is some
other power above this being, from whom his unnameable One derived such
vast numbers of configurations as do, according to him, exist.

<span id="ix.iii.xvii-p3"></span>3. How much safer and more accurate a
course is it, then, to confess at once that which is true: that this
God, the Creator, who formed the world, is the only God, and that there
is no other God besides Him—He Himself receiving from Himself the model
and figure of those things which have been made—than that, after
wearying ourselves with such an impious and circuitous description, we
should be compelled, at some point or another, to fix the mind on some
One, and to confess that from Him proceeded the configuration of things
created.

<span id="ix.iii.xvii-p4"></span>4. As to the accusation brought against
us by the followers of Valentinus, when they declare that we continue in
that Hebdomad which is below, as if we could not lift our minds on high,
nor understand those things which are above, because we do not accept
their monstrous assertions: this very charge do the followers of
Basilides bring in turn against them, inasmuch as they (the
Valentinians) keep circling about those things which are below,
\[going\] as far as the first and second Ogdoad, and because they
unskilfully imagine that, immediately after the thirty Æons, they have
discovered Him who is above all things Father, not following out in
thought their investigations to that Pleroma which is above the three
hundred and sixty-five heavens, which <span
id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070) is above forty-five Ogdoads. And
any one, again, might bring against them the same charge, by imagining
four thousand three hundred and eighty heavens, or Æons, since the days
of the year contain that number of hours. If, again, some one adds also
the nights, thus doubling the hours which have been mentioned, imagining
that \[in this way\] he has discovered a great multitude of Ogdoads, and
a kind of innumerable company <span id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071)
of Æons, and thus, in opposition to Him who is above all things Father,
conceiving himself more perfect than all \[others\], he will bring the
same charge against all, inasmuch as they are not capable of rising to
the conception of such a multitude of heavens or Æons as he has
announced, but are either so deficient as to remain among those things
which are below, or continue in the intermediate space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[380:3071](0010746.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="ix.iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xvii-p5"></span> The text is here doubtful: Harvey
proposes to read “qui” instead of “quæ,” but we prefer “quod” with
Grabe. The meaning is, that three hundred and sixty-five is more than
forty-five Ogdoads (45 × 8 = 360).

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[380:3072](0010746.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="ix.iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xvii-p6"></span> “Operositatem.” corresponding to <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xvii-p6.1"></span>πραγματείαν</span>,
lit. *manufacture*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—Inquiry into the...](0010747)
