[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010465)  [Next](0010467) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.v"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—The soul is not in its own nature immortal.

<span id="viii.iv.v-p1"></span>“ ‘These philosophers know nothing, then,
about these things; for they cannot tell what a soul is.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p2"></span>“ ‘It does not appear so.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p3"></span>“ ‘Nor ought it to be called immortal;
for if it is immortal, it is plainly unbegotten.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p4"></span>“ ‘It is both unbegotten and immortal,
according to some who are styled Platonists.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p5"></span>“ ‘Do you say that the world is also
unbegotten?’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p6"></span>“ ‘Some say so. I do not, however, agree
with them.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p7"></span>“ ‘You are right; for what reason has one
for supposing that a body so solid, possessing resistance, composite,
changeable, decaying, and renewed every day, has not arisen from some
cause? But if the world is begotten, souls also are necessarily
begotten; and perhaps at one time they were not in existence, for they
were made on account of men and other living creatures, if you will say
that they have been begotten wholly apart, and not along with their
respective bodies.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p8"></span>“ ‘This seems to be correct.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p9"></span>“ ‘They are not, then, immortal?’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p10"></span>“ ‘No; since the world has appeared to
us to be begotten.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p11"></span>“ ‘But I do not say, indeed, that all
souls die; for that were truly a piece of good fortune to the evil. What
then? The souls of the pious remain in a better place, while those of
the unjust and wicked are in a worse, waiting for the time of judgment.
Thus some which have appeared worthy of God never die; but others are
punished so long as God wills them to exist and to be punished.’

<span id="viii.iv.v-p12"></span>“ ‘Is what you say, then, of a like
nature with that which Plato in *Timæus* hints about the world, when he
says that it is indeed subject to decay, inasmuch as it has been
created, but that it will neither be dissolved nor meet with the fate of
death on account of the will of God? Does it seem to you the very same
can be said of the soul, and generally of all things? <span
id="viii.iv.v-p12.1"></span>For those things which exist after <span
id="fr_1961"></span>[1962](#fn_1961) God, or shall at any time
exist, <span id="fr_1962"></span>[1963](#fn_1962) these have the nature
of decay, and are such as may be blotted out and cease to exist; for God
alone is unbegotten and incorruptible, and therefore He is God, but all
other things after Him are created and corruptible. For this reason
souls both die and are punished: since, if they were unbegotten, they
would neither sin, nor be filled with folly, nor be cowardly, and again
ferocious; nor would they willingly transform into swine, and serpents,
and dogs and it would not indeed be just to compel them, if they be
unbegotten. For that which is unbegotten is similar to, equal to, and
the same with that which is unbegotten; and neither in power nor in
honour should the one be preferred to the other, and hence there are not
many things which are unbegotten: for if there were some difference
between them, you would not discover the cause of the difference, though
you searched for it; but after letting the mind ever wander to infinity,
you would at length, wearied out, take your stand on one Unbegotten, and
say that this is the Cause of all. Did such escape the observation of
Plato and Pythagoras, those wise men,’ <span id="page_198">p. 198</span>
<span id="viii.iv.v-Page_198"></span> I said, ‘who have been as a wall
and fortress of philosophy to us?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[197:1962](0010466.htm#fr_1961) <span
id="viii.iv.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.v-p13"></span> “Beside.”

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[197:1963](0010466.htm#fr_1962) <span
id="viii.iv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.v-p14"></span> Otto says: If the old man begins to
speak here, then <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.v-p14.1"></span>ἔχει</span> must be read for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.v-p14.2"></span>ἔχειν</span>. The
received text makes it appear that Justin continues a quotation, or the
substance of it, from Plato.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—These things were...](0010467)
