[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010843)  [Next](0010845) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.vii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.—God will bestow salvation upon the whole nature of man, consisting of body and soul in close union, since the Word took it upon Him, and adorned with the gifts of the Holy Spirit, of whom our bodies are, and are termed, the temples.

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>Now
God shall be glorified in His handiwork, fitting it so as to be
conformable to, and modelled after, His own Son. For by the hands of the
Father, that is, by the Son and the Holy Spirit, man, and not \[merely\]
a part of man, was made in the likeness of God. Now the soul and the
spirit are certainly a *part* of the man, but certainly not *the* man;
for the perfect man consists in the commingling and the union of the
soul receiving the spirit of the Father, and the admixture of that
fleshly nature which was moulded after the image of God. For this reason
does the apostle declare, “We speak wisdom among them that are
perfect,” <span id="fr_4475"></span>[4476](#fn_4475) terming those
persons “perfect” who have received the Spirit of God, and who through
the Spirit of God do speak in all languages, as he used Himself also to
speak. In like manner we do also hear <span
id="fr_4476"></span>[4477](#fn_4476) many brethren in the Church, who
possess prophetic gifts, and who through the Spirit speak all kinds of
languages, and bring to light for the general benefit the hidden things
of men, and declare the mysteries of God, whom also the apostle terms
“spiritual,” they being spiritual because they partake of the Spirit,
and not because their flesh has been stripped off and taken away, and
because they have become purely spiritual. For if any one take away the
substance <span id="page_532">p. 532</span> <span
id="ix.vii.vii-Page_532"></span> of flesh, that is, of the handiwork
\[of God\], and understand that which is purely spiritual, such then
would not be a spiritual man but would be the spirit of a man, or the
Spirit of God. But when the spirit here blended with the soul is united
to \[God’s\] handiwork, the man is rendered spiritual and perfect
because of the outpouring of the Spirit, and this is he who was made in
the image and likeness of God. But if the Spirit be wanting to the soul,
he who is such is indeed of an animal nature, and being left carnal,
shall be an imperfect being, possessing indeed the image \[of God\] in
his formation (*in plasmate*), but not receiving the similitude through
the Spirit; and thus is this being imperfect. Thus also, if any one take
away the image and set aside the handiwork, he cannot then understand
this as being a man, but as either some part of a man, as I have already
said, or as something else than a man. For that flesh which has been
moulded is not a perfect man in itself, but the body of a man, and part
of a man. Neither is the soul itself, considered apart by itself, the
man; but it is the soul of a man, and part of a man. Neither is the
spirit a man, for it is called the spirit, and not a man; but the
commingling and union of all these constitutes the perfect man. And for
this cause does the apostle, explaining himself, make it clear that the
saved man is a complete man as well as a spiritual man; saying thus in
the first Epistle to the Thessalonians, “Now the God of peace sanctify
you perfect (*perfectos*); and may your spirit, and soul, and body be
preserved whole without complaint to the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_4477"></span>[4478](#fn_4477) Now what was his
object in praying that these three—that is, soul, body, and spirit—might
be preserved to the coming of the Lord, unless he was aware of the
\[future\] reintegration and union of the three, and \[that they should
be heirs of\] one and the same salvation? For this cause also he
declares that those are “the perfect” who present unto the Lord the
three \[component parts\] without offence. Those, then, are the perfect
who have had the Spirit of God remaining in them, and have preserved
their souls and bodies blameless, holding fast the faith of God, that
is, that faith which is \[directed\] towards God, and maintaining
righteous dealings with respect to their neighbours.

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p5"></span>2. <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p5.1"></span>Whence also he says, that this handiwork is
“the temple of God,” thus declaring: “Know ye not that ye are the temple
of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man,
therefore, will defile the temple of God, him will God destroy: for the
temple of God is holy, which \[temple\] ye are.” <span
id="fr_4478"></span>[4479](#fn_4478) Here he manifestly declares the
body to be the temple in which the Spirit dwells. As also the Lord
speaks in reference to Himself, “Destroy this temple, and in three days
I will raise it up. He spake this, however,” it is said, “of the temple
of His body.” <span id="fr_4479"></span>[4480](#fn_4479) And not only
does he (the apostle) acknowledge our bodies to be a temple, but even
the temple of Christ, saying thus to the Corinthians, “Know ye not that
your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot?” <span
id="fr_4480"></span>[4481](#fn_4480) He speaks these things, not in
reference to some other spiritual man; for a being of such a nature
could have nothing to do with an harlot: but he declares “our body,”
that is, the flesh which continues in sanctity and purity, to be “the
members of Christ;” but that when it becomes one with an harlot, it
becomes the members of an harlot. And for this reason he said, “If any
man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy.” How then is it not
the utmost blasphemy to allege, that the temple of God, in which the
Spirit of the Father dwells, and the members of Christ, do not partake
of salvation, but are reduced to perdition? Also, that our bodies are
raised not from their own substance, but by the power of God, he says to
the Corinthians, “Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord,
and the Lord for the body. But God hath both raised up the Lord, and
shall raise us up by His own power.” <span
id="fr_4481"></span>[4482](#fn_4481)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4475"></span>[531:4476](0010844.htm#fr_4475) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p2"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="ix.vii.vii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4476"></span>[531:4477](0010844.htm#fr_4476) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p3"></span> The old Latin has “audivimus,” *have
heard*.

<span id="fn_4477"></span>[532:4478](0010844.htm#fr_4477) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p4"></span> [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="ix.vii.vii-p4.1"></span>.
\[I have before referred the student to the “Biblical Psychology” of
Prof. Delitzsch (translation), T. & T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1868.\]

<span id="fn_4478"></span>[532:4479](0010844.htm#fr_4478) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="ix.vii.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4479"></span>[532:4480](0010844.htm#fr_4479) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p7"></span> [John ii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vii.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4480"></span>[532:4481](0010844.htm#fr_4480) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="ix.vii.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4481"></span>[532:4482](0010844.htm#fr_4481) <span
id="ix.vii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.vii-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014)<span id="ix.vii.vii-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—Inasmuch as Christ did...](0010845)
