[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010733)  [Next](0010735) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.v"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—The absurdity of the supposed vacuum and defect of the heretics is demonstrated.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iii.v-p1.1"></span>The
cause, then, of such a dispensation on the part of God, is to be
inquired after; but the formation of the world is not to be ascribed to
any other. And all things are to be spoken of as having been so prepared
by God beforehand, that they should be made as they have been <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="ix.iii.v-Page_363"></span> made;
but shadow and vacuity are not to be conjured into existence. But
whence, let me ask, came this vacuity \[of which they speak\]? If it was
indeed produced by Him who, according to them, is the Father and Author
of all things, then it is both equal in honour and related to the rest
of the Æons, perchance even more ancient than they are. Moreover, if it
proceeded from the same source \[as they did\], it must be similar in
nature to Him who produced it, as well as to those along with whom it
was produced. <span id="ix.iii.v-p1.2"></span>There will therefore be an
absolute necessity, both that the Bythus of whom they speak, along with
Sige, be similar in nature to a vacuum, that is, that He really is a
vacuum; and that the rest of the Æons, since they are the brothers of
vacuity, should also be devoid <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000) of substance. If, on the other
hand, it has not been thus produced, it must have sprang from and been
generated by itself, and in that case it will be equal in point of age
to that Bythus who is, according to them, the Father of all; and thus
vacuity will be of the same nature and of the same honour with Him who
is, according to them, the universal Father. For it must of necessity
have been either produced by some one, or generated by itself, and
sprung from itself. But if, in truth, vacuity was produced, then its
producer Valentinus is also a vacuum, as are likewise his followers. If,
again, it was not produced, but was generated by itself, then that which
is really a vacuum is similar to, and the brother of, and of the same
honour with, that Father who has been proclaimed by Valentinus; while it
is more ancient, and dating its existence from a period greatly
anterior, and more exalted in honour than the remaining Æons of Ptolemy
himself, and Heracleon, and all the rest <span
id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001) who hold the same opinions.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p4"></span>2. But if, driven to despair in regard to
these points, they confess that the Father of all contains all things,
and that there is nothing whatever outside of the Pleroma (for it is an
absolute necessity that, \[if there be anything outside of it,\] it
should be bounded and circumscribed by something greater than itself),
and that they speak of what is *without* and what *within* in reference
to knowledge and ignorance, and not with respect to local distance; but
that, in the Pleroma, or in those things which are contained by the
Father, the whole creation which we know to have been formed, having
been made by the Demiurge, or by the angels, is contained by the
unspeakable greatness, as the centre is in a circle, or as a spot is in
a garment, —then, in the first place, what sort of a being must that
Bythus be, who allows a stain to have place in His own bosom, and
permits another one to create or produce within His territory, contrary
to His own will? Such a mode of acting would truly entail \[the charge
of\] degeneracy upon the entire Pleroma, since it might from the first
have cut off that defect, and those emanations which derived their
origin from it, <span id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002) and not have
agreed to permit the formation of creation either in ignorance, or
passion, or in defect. For he who can afterwards rectify a defect, and
does, as it were, wash away a stain, <span
id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) could at a much earlier date have
taken care that no such stain should, even at first, be found among his
possessions. Or if at the first he allowed that the things which were
made \[should be as they are\], since they could not, in fact, be formed
otherwise, then it follows that they must always continue in the same
condition. For how is it possible, that those things which cannot at the
first obtain rectification, should subsequently receive it? Or how can
men say that they are called to perfection, when those very beings who
are the causes from which men derive their origin—either the Demiurge
himself, or the angels—are declared to exist in defect? And if, as is
maintained, \[the Supreme Being,\] inasmuch as He is benignant, did at
last take pity upon men, and bestow on them perfection, He ought at
first to have pitied those who were the creators of man, and to have
conferred on them perfection. In this way, men too would verily have
shared in His compassion, being formed perfect by those that were
perfect. For if He pitied the *work* of these beings, He ought long
before to have pitied *themselves*, and not to have allowed them to fall
into such awful blindness.

<span id="ix.iii.v-p7"></span>3. Their talk also about shadow and
vacuity, in which they maintain that the creation with which we are
concerned was formed, will be brought to nothing, if the things referred
to were created within the territory which is contained by the Father.
For if they hold that the light of their Father is such that it fills
all things which are inside of Him, and illuminates them all, how can
any vacuum or shadow possibly exist within that territory which is
contained by the Pleroma, and by the light of the Father? For, in that
case, it behoves them to point out some place within the Propator, or
within the Pleroma, which is not illuminated, nor kept possession of by
any one, and in which either the angels or the Demiurge formed whatever
they pleased. Nor will it be a small amount of space in which such and
so great a creation can be <span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="ix.iii.v-Page_364"></span> conceived of as having been formed. There
will therefore be an absolute necessity that, within the Pleroma, or
within the Father of whom they speak, they should conceive <span
id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) of some place, void, formless, and
full of darkness, in which those things were formed which have been
formed. By such a supposition, however, the light of their Father would
incur a reproach, as if He could not illuminate and fill those things
which are within Himself. Thus, then, when they maintain that these
things were the fruit of defect and the work of error, they do moreover
introduce defect and error within the Pleroma, and into the bosom of the
Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[363:3001](0010734.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p2"></span> Literally, “should also possess a vacant
substance”

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[363:3002](0010734.htm#fr_3001) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p3"></span> The text has “reliquis omnibus,” which
would refer to the Æons; but we follow the emendation proposed by
Massuet, “reliquorum omnium,” as the reference manifestly is to other
heretics.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[363:3003](0010734.htm#fr_3002) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p5"></span> “*Ab eo:*” some refer “eo” to the
Demiurge, but it is not unusual for the Latin translator to follow the
Greek gender, although different from that of the Latin word which he
has himself employed. We may therefore here “eo” to “labem,” which is
the translation of the neuter noun <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p5.1"></span>ὑστέρημα</span>.

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[363:3004](0010734.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p6"></span> *Labem* is here repeated, probably by
mistake.

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[364:3005](0010734.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="ix.iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.v-p8"></span> The Latin is *fieri eos*: Massuet
conjectures that the Greek had been <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p8.1"></span>ποιεῖσθαι αὐτούς</span>, and that the
translator rendered <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.v-p8.2"></span>ποιεῖσθαι</span> as a passive instead of a
middle verb, *fieri* for *facere.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—This world was not formed...](0010735)
