[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010528)  [Next](0010530) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LXVIII.—He complains of the obstinacy of Trypho; he answers his objection; he convicts the Jews of bad faith.

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p1"></span>And Trypho said, “You endeavour to
prove an incredible and well-nigh impossible thing; \[namely\], that God
endured to be born and become man.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p2"></span>“If I undertook,” said I, “to prove
this by doctrines or arguments of man, you should not bear with me.
<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p2.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p2.2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p2.3"></span>But if I quote frequently Scriptures,
and so many of them, referring to this point, and ask you to comprehend
them, you are hard-hearted in the recognition of the mind and will of
God. But if you wish to remain for ever so, I would not be injured at
all; and for ever retaining the same \[opinions\] which I had before I
met with you, I shall leave you.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p3"></span>And Trypho said, “Look, my friend,
you made yourself master of these \[truths\] with much labour and
toil. <span id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) And we accordingly must
diligently scrutinize all that we meet with, in order to give our assent
to those things which the Scriptures compel us \[to believe\].”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p5"></span>Then I said to this, “I do not ask
you not to strive earnestly by all means, in making an investigation of
the matters inquired into; but \[I ask you\], when you have nothing to
say, not to contradict those things which you said you had admitted.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p6"></span>And Trypho said, “So we shall
endeavour to do.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p7"></span>I continued again: “In addition to
the questions I have just now put to you, I wish to put more: for by
means of these questions I shall strive to bring the discourse to a
speedy termination.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p8"></span>And Trypho said, “Ask the
questions.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p9"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p9.1"></span>Then I said, “Do you think that any
other one is said to be worthy of worship and called Lord and God in the
Scriptures, except the Maker of all, and Christ, who by so many
Scriptures was proved to you to have become man?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p10"></span>And Trypho replied, “How can we
admit this, when we have instituted so great an inquiry as to whether
there is any other than the Father alone?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p11"></span>Then I again said, “I must ask you
this also, that I may know whether or not you are of a different opinion
from that which you admitted some time ago.” <span
id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203)

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p13"></span>He replied, “It is not, sir.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p14"></span>Then again I, “Since you certainly
admit these things, and since Scripture says, ‘Who shall declare His
generation?’ ought you not now to suppose that He is not the seed of a
human race?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p15"></span>And Trypho said, “How then does the
Word say to David, that out of his loins God shall take to Himself a
Son, and shall establish His kingdom, and shall set Him on the throne of
His glory?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p16"></span>And I said, “Trypho, if the
prophecy which Isaiah uttered, ‘Behold, the virgin shall conceive,’ is
said not to the house of David, but to another house of the twelve
tribes, perhaps the matter would have some difficulty; but since this
prophecy refers to the house of David, Isaiah has explained how that
which was spoken by God to David in mystery would take place. But
perhaps you are not aware of this, my friends, that there were many
sayings written obscurely, or parabolically, or mysteriously, and
symbolical actions, which the prophets who lived after the persons who
said or did them expounded.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p17"></span>“Assuredly,” said Trypho.

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p18"></span>“If therefore, I shall show that
this prophecy of Isaiah refers to our Christ, and not to Hezekiah, as
you say, shall I not in this matter, too, compel you not to believe your
teachers, who venture to assert that the explanation which your <span
id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span id="viii.iv.lxviii-Page_233"></span>
seventy elders that were with Ptolemy the king of the Egyptians gave, is
untrue in certain respects? For some statements in the Scriptures, which
appear explicitly to convict them of a foolish and vain opinion, these
they venture to assert have not been so written. But other statements,
which they fancy they can distort and harmonize with human
actions, <span id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204) these, they say,
refer not to this Jesus Christ of ours, but to him of whom they are
pleased to explain them. Thus, for instance, they have taught you that
this Scripture which we are now discussing refers to Hezekiah, in which,
as I promised, I shall show they are wrong. And since they are
compelled, they agree that some Scriptures which we mention to them, and
which expressly prove that Christ was to suffer, to be worshipped, and
\[to be called\] God, and which I have already recited to you, do refer
indeed to Christ, but they venture to assert that this man is not
Christ. But they admit that He will come to suffer, and to reign, and to
be worshipped, and to be God; <span id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205)
and this opinion I shall in like manner show to be ridiculous and silly.
But since I am pressed to answer first to what was said by you in jest,
I shall make answer to it, and shall afterwards give replies to what
follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[232:2203](0010529.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p4"></span> \[Note the courteous admission of
Trypho, and the consent of both parties to the duty of searching the
Scriptures.\]

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[232:2204](0010529.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p12.1"></span>τέως</span>: Vulg. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p12.2"></span>παρὰ Θεῷ</span>,
*vitiose*. —<span class="upper"><span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p12.3"></span>Otto</span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[233:2205](0010529.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p19"></span> The text is corrupt, and various
emendations have been proposed.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[233:2206](0010529.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="viii.iv.lxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxviii-p20"></span> Or, “and to be worshipped as God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX.—The devil, since he...](0010530)
