[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010462)  [Next](0010464) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.ii"></span> <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="viii.iv.ii-Page_195"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—Justin describes his studies in philosophy.

<span id="viii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.ii-p1.2"></span>“I will tell you,” said I, “what seems to
me; for philosophy is, in fact, the greatest possession, and most
honourable before God, <span id="fr_1954"></span>[1955](#fn_1954) to
whom it leads us and alone commends us; and these are truly holy men who
have bestowed attention on philosophy. What philosophy is, however, and
the reason why it has been sent down to men, have escaped the
observation of most; for there would be neither <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p2.3"></span>Platonists, nor Stoics, nor <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p2.4"></span>Peripatetics, nor Theoretics, <span
id="fr_1955"></span>[1956](#fn_1955) nor <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>Pythagoreans, this knowledge being
*one*. <span id="fr_1956"></span>[1957](#fn_1956) I wish to tell you why
it has become many-headed. It has happened that those who first handled
it \[i.e., philosophy\], and who were therefore esteemed illustrious
men, were succeeded by those who made no investigations concerning
truth, but only admired the perseverance and self-discipline of the
former, as well as the novelty of the doctrines; and each thought that
to be true which he learned from his teacher: then, moreover, those
latter persons handed down to *their* successors such things, and others
similar to them; and this system was called by the name of him who was
styled the father of the doctrine. Being at first desirous of personally
conversing with one of these men, I surrendered myself to a certain
Stoic; and having spent a considerable time with him, when I had not
acquired any further knowledge of God (for he did not know himself, and
said such instruction was unnecessary), I left him and betook myself to
another, who was called a Peripatetic, and as *he* fancied, shrewd. And
this man, after having entertained me for the first few days, requested
me to settle the fee, in order that our intercourse might not be
unprofitable. Him, too, for this reason I abandoned, believing him to be
no philosopher at all. But when my soul was eagerly desirous to hear the
peculiar and choice philosophy, I came to a Pythagorean, very
celebrated—a man who thought much of his own wisdom. And then, when I
had an interview with him, willing to become his hearer and disciple, he
said, ‘What then? Are you acquainted with music, astronomy, and
geometry? Do you expect to perceive any of those things which conduce to
a happy life, if you have not been first informed on those points which
wean the soul from sensible objects, and render it fitted for objects
which appertain to the mind, so that it can contemplate that which is
honourable in its essence and that which is good in its essence?’ Having
commended many of these branches of learning, and telling me that they
were necessary, he dismissed me when I confessed to him my ignorance.
Accordingly I took it rather impatiently, as was to be expected when I
failed in my hope, the more so because I deemed the man had some
knowledge; but reflecting again on the space of time during which I
would have to linger over those branches of learning, I was not able to
endure longer procrastination. In my helpless condition it occurred to
me to have a meeting with the Platonists, for their fame was great. I
thereupon spent as much of my time as possible with one who had lately
settled in our city, <span id="fr_1957"></span>[1958](#fn_1957) —a
sagacious man, holding a high position among the Platonists,—and I
progressed, and made the greatest improvements daily. And the perception
of immaterial things quite overpowered me, and the contemplation of
ideas furnished my mind with wings, <span
id="fr_1958"></span>[1959](#fn_1958) so that in a little while I
supposed that I had become wise; and such was my stupidity, I expected
forthwith to look upon God, for this is the end of Plato’s philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[195:1955](0010463.htm#fr_1954) <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>ὧ</span> some omit, and put <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.ii-p2.2"></span>θεῷ</span> of prev. cl.
in this cl., reading so: “Philosophy is the greatest possession, and
most honourable, and introduces us to God,” etc.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[195:1956](0010463.htm#fr_1955) <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii-p3"></span> Maranus thinks that those who are
different from the masters of practical philosophy are called
*Theoretics*. I do not know whether they may be better designated
*Sceptics* or *Pyrrhonists*.—<span class="upper"><span
id="viii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>Otto</span>.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[195:1957](0010463.htm#fr_1956) <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii-p4"></span> Julian, *Orat.*, vi., says: “Let no one
divide our philosophy into many parts, or cut it into many parts, and
especially let him not make many out of *one*: for as truth is one, so
also is philosophy.”

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[195:1958](0010463.htm#fr_1957) <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii-p5"></span> Either Flavia Neapolis is indicated, or
Ephesus.—<span class="upper"><span
id="viii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>Otto</span>.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[195:1959](0010463.htm#fr_1958) <span
id="viii.iv.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.ii-p6"></span> Narrating his progress in the study of
Platonic philosophy, he elegantly employs this trite phrase of
Plato’s.—<span class="upper"><span
id="viii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>Otto</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—Justin narrates the...](0010464)
