[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010573)  [Next](0010575) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.cxiii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter CXIII.—Joshua was a figure of Christ.

<span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1.3"></span>“What I mean is this. Jesus (Joshua), as
I have now frequently remarked, who was called Oshea, when he was sent
to spy out the land of Canaan, was named by Moses Jesus (Joshua). Why he
did this you neither ask, nor are at a loss about it, nor make strict
inquiries. Therefore Christ has escaped your notice; and though you
read, you understand not; and even now, though you hear that Jesus is
our Christ, you consider not that the name was bestowed on Him not
purposelessly nor by chance. But you make a theological discussion as to
why one ‘<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1.4"></span>α</span>’ was added to Abraham’s first
name; and as to why one ‘<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1.5"></span>ρ</span>’ was added to Sarah’s name, you
use similar high-sounding disputations. <span
id="fr_2372"></span>[2373](#fn_2372) But why do you not similarly
investigate the reason why the name of Oshea the son of Nave (Nun),
which his father gave him, was changed to Jesus (Joshua)? But since not
only was his name altered, but he was also appointed successor to Moses,
being the only one of his contemporaries who came out from Egypt, he led
the surviving people into the Holy Land; and as he, not Moses, led the
people into the Holy Land, and as he distributed it by lot to those who
entered along with him, so also Jesus the Christ will turn again the
dispersion of the people, and will distribute the good land to each one,
though not in the same manner. For the former gave them a temporary
inheritance, seeing he was neither Christ who is God, nor the Son of
God; but the latter, after the holy resurrection, <span
id="fr_2373"></span>[2374](#fn_2373) shall give us the eternal
possession. The former, after he had been named Jesus (Joshua), and
after he had received strength from His Spirit, caused the sun to stand
still. For I have proved that it was Jesus who appeared to and conversed
with Moses, and Abraham, and all the other patriarchs without exception,
ministering to the will of the Father; who also, I say, came to be born
man by the Virgin Mary, and I lives for ever. For the latter is He
after <span id="fr_2374"></span>[2375](#fn_2374) whom and by whom the
Father will renew both the heaven and the earth; this is He who shall
shine an eternal light in Jerusalem; this is he who is the king of Salem
after the order of Melchizedek, and the eternal Priest of the Most High.
The former is said to have circumcised the people a second time with
knives of stone (which was a sign of this circumcision with which Jesus
Christ Himself has circumcised us from the idols made of stone and of
other materials), and to have collected together those who were
circumcised from the uncircumcision, i.e., from the error of the world,
in every place by the knives of stone, to wit, the words of our Lord
Jesus. For I have shown that Christ was proclaimed by the prophets in
parables a Stone and a Rock. Accordingly the knives of stone we shall
take to mean His words, by means of <span id="page_256">p. 256</span>
<span id="viii.iv.cxiii-Page_256"></span> which so many who were in
error have been circumcised from uncircumcision with the circumcision of
the heart, with which God by Jesus commanded those from that time to be
circumcised who derived their circumcision from Abraham, saying that
Jesus (Joshua) would circumcise a second time with knives of stone those
who entered into that holy land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2372"></span>[255:2373](0010574.htm#fr_2372) <span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p1.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p2"></span> According to the LXX., <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p2.1"></span>Σάρα</span> was
altered to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p2.2"></span>Σάῤῥα</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p2.3"></span>Ἄβραμ</span> to <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p2.4"></span>Ἀβραάμ</span>.

<span id="fn_2373"></span>[255:2374](0010574.htm#fr_2373) <span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p3"></span> Or, “resurrection of the saints.”

<span id="fn_2374"></span>[255:2375](0010574.htm#fr_2374) <span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cxiii-p4"></span> Justin seems to mean that the
renewal of heaven and earth dates from the incarnation of Christ. \[St.
[Matt. xix. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span
id="viii.iv.cxiii-p4.1"></span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CXIV.—Some rules for...](0010575)
