[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010703)  [Next](0010705) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.viii"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The mother Achamoth, when all her seed are perfected, shall pass into the Pleroma, accompanied by those men who are spiritual; the Demiurge, with animal men, shall pass into the intermediate habitation; but all material men shall go into corruption. Their blasphemous opinions against the true incarnation of Christ by the Virgin Mary. Their views as to the prophecies. Stupid ignorance of the Demiurge.

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>When all the seed shall have come to
perfection, they state that then their mother Achamoth shall pass from
the intermediate place, and enter in within the Pleroma, and shall
receive as her spouse the Saviour, who sprang from all the Æons, that
thus a conjunction may be formed between the Saviour and Sophia, that
is, Achamoth. These, then, are the bridegroom and bride, while the
nuptial chamber is the full extent of the Pleroma. The spiritual seed,
again, being divested of their animal souls, <span
id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) and becoming intelligent spirits,
shall in an irresistible and invisible manner enter in within the
Pleroma, and be bestowed as brides on those angels who wait upon the
Saviour. <span id="ix.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>The Demiurge himself will
pass into the place of his mother Sophia; <span
id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741) that is, the intermediate
habitation. In this intermediate place, also, shall the souls of the
righteous repose; but nothing of an animal nature shall find admittance
to the Pleroma. When these things have taken place as described, then
shall that fire which lies hidden in the world blaze forth and burn; and
while destroying all matter, shall also be extinguished along with it,
and have no further existence. They affirm that the Demiurge was
acquainted with none of these things before the advent of the Saviour.

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p4"></span>2. <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>There are also some who maintain that he
also produced Christ as his own proper son, but of an animal nature, and
that mention was <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742) made of him
by the prophets. This Christ passed through Mary <span
id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) just as water flows through a tube;
and there descended upon him in the form of a dove at the time of his
baptism, that Saviour who belonged to the Pleroma, and was formed by the
combined efforts of all its inhabitants. In him there existed also that
spiritual seed which proceeded from Achamoth. They hold, accordingly,
that our Lord, while preserving the type of the first-begotten and
primary tetrad, was compounded of these four substances,—of that which
is spiritual, in so far as He was from Achamoth; of that which is
animal, as being from the Demiurge by a special dispensation, inasmuch
as He was formed \[corporeally\] with unspeakable skill; and of the
Saviour, as respects that dove which descended upon Him. He also
continued free from all suffering, since indeed it was not possible that
He should suffer who was at once incomprehensible and invisible. And for
this reason the Spirit of Christ, who had been placed within Him, was
taken away when He was brought before Pilate. They maintain, further,
that not even the seed which He had received from the mother
\[Achamoth\] was subject to suffering; for it, too, was impassible, as
being spiritual, and invisible even to the Demiurge himself. It follows,
then, according to them, that the animal Christ, and that which had been
formed mysteriously by a special dispensation, underwent suffering, that
the mother might exhibit through him a type of the Christ above, namely,
of him who extended himself through Stauros, <span
id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) and imparted to Achamoth shape, so
far as substance was concerned. For they declare that all these
transactions were counterparts of what took place above.

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p8"></span>3. They maintain, moreover, that those
souls which possess the seed of Achamoth are superior to the rest, and
are more dearly loved by the Demiurge than others, while he knows not
the true cause thereof, but imagines that they are what they are through
his favour towards them. Wherefore, also, they say he distributed them
to prophets, priests, and kings; and they declare that many things were
spoken <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745) by this seed through
the prophets, inasmuch as it was endowed with a transcendently lofty
nature. The <span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="ix.ii.viii-Page_326"></span> mother also, they say, spake much about
things above, and that both through him and through the souls which were
formed by him. Then, again, they divide the prophecies \[into different
classes\], maintaining that one portion was uttered by the mother, a
second by her seed, and a third by the Demiurge. In like manner, they
hold that Jesus uttered some things under the influence of the Saviour,
others under that of the mother, and others still under that of the
Demiurge, as we shall show further on in our work.

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p10"></span>4. The Demiurge, while ignorant of
those things which were higher than himself, was indeed excited by the
announcements made \[through the prophets\], but treated them with
contempt, attributing them sometimes to one cause and sometimes to
another; either to the prophetic spirit (which itself possesses the
power of self-excitement), or to \[mere unassisted\] man, or that it was
simply a crafty device of the lower \[and baser order of men\]. <span
id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746) He remained thus ignorant until the
appearing of the Lord. <span id="ix.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>But they
relate that when the Saviour came, the Demiurge learned all things from
Him, and gladly with all, his power joined himself to Him. <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p11.2"></span><span id="ix.ii.viii-p11.3"></span>They
maintain that he is the centurion mentioned in the Gospel, who addressed
the Saviour in these words: “For I also am one having soldiers and
servants under my authority; and whatsoever I command they do.” <span
id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747) They further hold that he will
continue administering the affairs of the world as long as that is
fitting and needful, and specially that he may exercise a care over the
Church; while at the same time he is influenced by the knowledge of the
reward prepared for him, namely, that he may attain to the habitation of
his mother.

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p13"></span>5. They conceive, then, of three kinds
of men, spiritual, material, and animal, represented by Cain, Abel, and
Seth. These three natures are no longer found in one person, <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748) but constitute various kinds \[of
men\]. <span id="ix.ii.viii-p14.1"></span>The material goes, as a matter
of course, into corruption. The animal, if it make choice of the better
part, finds repose in the intermediate place; but if the worse, it too
shall pass into destruction. But they assert that the spiritual
principles which have been sown by Achamoth, being disciplined and
nourished here from that time until now in righteous souls (because when
given forth by her they were yet but weak), at last attaining to
perfection, shall be given as brides to the angels of the Saviour, while
their animal souls of necessity rest for ever with the Demiurge in the
intermediate place. And again subdividing the animal souls themselves,
they say that some are by nature good, and others by nature evil. The
good are those who become capable of receiving the \[spiritual\] seed;
the evil by nature are those who are never able to receive that seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[325:2741](0010704.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p2"></span> Their spiritual substance was received
from Achamoth; their animal souls were created by the Demiurge. These
are now separated; the spirit enters the Pleroma, while the soul remains
in heaven.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[325:2742](0010704.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p3"></span> Viz., Achamoth.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[325:2743](0010704.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p5"></span> A Syriac fragment here reads, “He spake
by the prophets through him.”

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[325:2744](0010704.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p6"></span> “Thus,” says Harvey, “we may trace back
to the Gnostic period the Apollinarian error, closely allied to the
Docetic, that the body of Christ was not derived from the blessed
Virgin, but that it was of heavenly substance, and was only brought
forth into the world through her instrumentality.”

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[325:2745](0010704.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p7"></span> By thus extending himself through
Stauros, who bounded the Pleroma, the Christ above became the type of
the Christ below, who was extended upon the cross.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[325:2746](0010704.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p9"></span> Billius, following the old Latin
version, reads, “They interpret many things, spoken by the prophets, of
this seed.”

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[326:2747](0010704.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p11"></span> Such appears to be the meaning of this
sentence, but the original is very obscure. The writer seems to refer to
the spiritual, the animal, and the material classes of men, and to imply
that the Demiurge supposed some prophecies to be due to one of these
classes, and some to the others.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[326:2748](0010704.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p12"></span> [Matt. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009)<span id="ix.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>;
[Luke vii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#008)<span
id="ix.ii.viii-p12.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[326:2749](0010704.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="ix.ii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.viii-p14"></span> As was the case at first, in Adam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—How the Valentinians...](0010705)
