[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010334)  [Next](0010336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span> <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_133"></span>

## <span id="vi.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note to the Epistle of Barnabas

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>\[<span
class="upper"><span id="vi.i-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span> 100.\] <span
class="upper"><span id="vi.i-p1.3"></span>The</span> writer of this
Epistle is supposed to have been an Alexandrian Jew of the times of
Trajan and Hadrian. He was a layman; but possibly he bore the name of
“Barnabas,” and so has been confounded with his holy and apostolic
name-sire. It is more probable that the Epistle, being anonymous, was
attributed to St. Barnabas, by those who supposed that apostle to be the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and who discovered similarities in
the plan and purpose of the two works. It is with great reluctance that
I yield to modern scholars, in dismissing the ingenious and temperate
argument of Archbishop Wake <span id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437)
for the apostolic origin of this treatise. The learned Lardner <span
id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) shares his convictions; and the
very interesting and ingenious views of Jones <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439) never appeared to me satisfactory,
weighed with preponderating arguments, on the other side. <span
id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440)

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>The Maccabæan spirit of the Jews never burned
more furiously than after the destruction of Jerusalem, and while it was
kindling the conflagration that broke out under Barchochebas, and blazed
so terribly in the insurrection against Hadrian. <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441) It is not credible that the Jewish
Christians at Alexandria and elsewhere were able to emancipate
themselves from their national spirit; and accordingly the old
Judaizing, which St. Paul had anathematized and confuted, would assert
itself again. If such was the occasion of this Epistle, as I venture to
suppose, a higher character must be ascribed to it than could otherwise
be claimed. This accounts, also, for the degree of favour with which it
was accepted by the primitive faithful.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>It is interesting as a specimen of their
conflicts with a persistent Judaism which St. Paul had defeated and
anathematized, but which was ever cropping out among believers
originally of the Hebrews. <span id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442)
Their own habits of allegorizing, and their Oriental tastes, must be
borne in mind, if we are readily disgusted with our author’s fancies and
refinements. St. Paul himself pays a practical tribute to their modes of
thought, in his Epistle to the [Galatians iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span id="vi.i-p9.1"></span>. This
is the *ad hominem* form of rhetoric, familiar to all speakers, which
laid even the apostle open to the slander of enemies ([2 Cor. xii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016)<span id="vi.i-p9.2"></span>),—that
he was “crafty,” and caught men with guile. It is interesting to note
the more Occidental spirit of Cyprian, as compared with our author, when
he also contends with Judaism. Doubtless we have in the pseudo-Barnabas
something of that *œconomy* which <span id="page_134">p. 134</span>
<span id="vi.i-Page_134"></span> is always capable of abuse, and which
was destined too soon to overleap the bounds of its moral limitations.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>It is to be observed that this writer
sometimes speaks as a Gentile, a fact which some have found it difficult
to account for, on the supposition that he was a Hebrew, if not a Levite
as well. But so, also, St. Paul sometimes speaks as a Roman, and
sometimes as a Jew; and, owing to the mixed character of the early
Church, he writes to the [Romans iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span> as if
they were all Israelites, and again to the same Church ([Rom. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013)<span id="vi.i-p10.2"></span>) as if
they were all Gentiles. So this writer sometimes identifies himself with
Jewish thought as a son of Abraham, and again speaks from the Christian
position as if he were a Gentile, thus identifying himself with the
catholicity of the Church.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>But the subject thus opened is vast; and “the
Epistle of Barnabas,” so called, still awaits a critical editor, who at
the same time shall be a competent expositor. Nobody can answer these
requisitions, who is unable, for this purpose, to be a Christian of the
days of Trajan.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>But it will be observed that this version has
great advantages over any of its predecessor, and is a valuable
acquisition to the student. The learned translators have had before them
the entire Greek text of the fourth century, disfigured is true by
corruptions, but still very precious, the rather as they have been able
to compare it with the text of Hilgenfeld. Their editorial notes are
sufficient for our own plan; and little has been left for me to do,
according to the scheme of this publication, save to revise the “copy”
for printing. I am glad to presume no further into such a labyrinth,
concerning which the learned and careful Wake modestly professes, “I
have endeavoured to attain to the sense of my author, and to make him as
plain and easy as I was able. If in anything I have chanced to mistake
him, I have only this to say for myself: that he must be better
acquainted with the road than I pretend to be, who will undertake to
travel so long a journey in the dark and never to miss his way.”

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>The following is the original <span
class="upper"><span id="vi.i-p13.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>:—

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="vi.i-p14.1"></span>Nothing</span> certain is known as to the author
of the following Epistle. The writer’s name is Barnabas, but scarcely
any scholars now ascribe it to the illustrious friend and companion of
St. Paul. External and internal evidence here come into direct
collision. The ancient writers who refer to this Epistle unanimously
attribute it to Barnabas the Levite, of Cyprus, who held such an
honourable place in the infant Church. Clement of Alexandria does so
again and again (*Strom.*, ii. 6, ii. 7, etc.). Origen describes it as
“a Catholic Epistle” (*Cont. Cels.*, i. 63), and seems to rank it among
the Sacred Scriptures (*Comm. in Rom.*, i. 24). Other statements have
been quoted from the fathers, to show that they held this to be an
authentic production of the apostolic Barnabas; and certainly no other
name is ever hinted at in Christian antiquity as that of the writer. But
notwithstanding this, the internal evidence is now generally regarded as
conclusive against this opinion. On perusing the Epistle, the reader
will be in circumstances to judge of this matter for himself. He will be
led to consider whether the spirit and tone of the writing, as so
decidedly opposed to all respect for Judaism—the numerous inaccuracies
which it contains with respect to Mosaic enactments and observances —the
absurd and trifling interpretations of Scripture which it suggests—and
the many silly vaunts of superior knowledge in which its writer
indulges—can possibly comport with its ascription to the fellow—labourer
of St. Paul. When it is remembered that no one ascribes the Epistle to
the apostolic Barnabas till the times of Clement of Alexandria, and that
it is ranked by Eusebius among the “spurious” writings, which, however
much known and read in the Church, were never regarded as authoritative,
little doubt can remain that the external evidence is of itself weak,
and should not make us hesitate for a moment in refusing to ascribe this
writing to Barnabas the Apostle.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>The date, object, and intended reader of the
Epistle can only be doubtfully inferred from some statements which it
contains. It was clearly written after the destruction of Jerusalem,
<span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="vi.i-Page_135"></span> since
reference is made to that event (chap. xvi.), but how long after is
matter of much dispute. The general opinion is, that its date is not
later than the middle of the second century, and that it cannot be
placed earlier than some twenty or thirty years before. In point of
style, both as respects thought and expression, a very low place must be
assigned it. We know nothing certain of the region in which the author
lived, or where the first readers were to be found. The intention of the
writer, as he himself states (chap. i), was “to perfect the knowledge”
of those to whom he wrote. Hilgenfeld, who has devoted much attention to
this Epistle, holds that “it was written at the close of the first
century by a Gentile Christian of the school of Alexandria, with the
view of winning back, or guarding from a Judaic form of Christianity,
those Christians belonging to the same class as himself.”

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>Until the recent discovery of the Codex
Sinaiticus by Tischendorf, the first four and a half chapters were known
only in an ancient Latin version. The whole Greek text is now happily
recovered, though it is in many places very corrupt. We have compared
its readings throughout, and noted the principal variations from the
text represented in our version. We have also made frequent reference to
the text adopted by Hilgenfeld in his recent edition of the Epistle
(Lipsiæ, T. O. Weigel, 1886). <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_136"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[133:1438](0010335.htm#fr_1437) <span
id="vi.i-p1.4"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span> Discourse (p. 148) to his *Genuine Epistles
of the Apostolical Fathers*. Philadelphia, 1846.

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[133:1439](0010335.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span> Works, ii. 250, note; and iv. 128.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[133:1440](0010335.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> *On the Canon*, vol. ii. p. 431.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[133:1441](0010335.htm#fr_1440) <span
id="vi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span> To those who may adhere to the older opinion,
let me commend the eloquent and instructive chapter (xxiii.) in Farrar’s
*Life of St. Paul*.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[133:1442](0010335.htm#fr_1441) <span
id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span> Hadrian’s purpose to rebuild their city seems
to be pointed out in chap. xvi.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[133:1443](0010335.htm#fr_1442) <span
id="vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span> M. Renan may be read with pain, and yet with
profit, in much that his Gallio-spirit suggests on this subject. Chap.
v., *St. Paul*, Paris, 1884.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of Barnabas](0010336)
