[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010173)  [Next](0010175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xii"></span> <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="v.iv.xii-Page_72"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Continue in unity and love.

<span id="v.iv.xii-p1"></span>I salute you from Smyrna, together with
the Churches of God which are with me, who have refreshed me in all
things, both in the flesh and in the spirit. <span
id="v.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>My bonds, which I carry about with me for the
sake of Jesus Christ (praying that I may attain to God), exhort you.
<span id="v.iv.xii-p1.2"></span><span id="v.iv.xii-p1.3"></span>Continue
in harmony among yourselves, and in prayer with one another; for it
becomes every one of you, and especially the presbyters, to refresh the
bishop, to the honour of the Father, of Jesus Christ, and of the
apostles. I entreat you in love to hear me, that I may not, by having
written, be a testimony against you. And do ye also pray for me, who
have need of your love, along with the mercy of God, that I may be
worthy of the lot for which I am destined, and that I may not be found
reprobate.

<span id="v.iv.xii-p2"></span>I salute you from Smyrna, together with
the Churches of God which are with me, whose rulers have refreshed me in
every respect, both in the flesh and in the spirit. <span
id="v.iv.xii-p2.1"></span>My bonds, which I carry about with me for the
sake of Jesus Christ (praying that I may attain to God), exhort you.
<span id="v.iv.xii-p2.2"></span><span id="v.iv.xii-p2.3"></span>Continue
in harmony among yourselves, and in supplication; for it becomes every
one of you, and especially the presbyters, to refresh the bishop, to the
honour of the Father, and to the honour of Jesus Christ and of the
apostles. I entreat you in love to hear me, that I may not, by having
thus written, be a testimony against you. And do ye also pray for me,
who have need of your love, along with the mercy of God, that I may be
thought worthy to attain the lot for which I am now designed, and that I
may not be found reprobate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Conclusion.](0010175)
