[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010527)  [Next](0010529) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LXVII.—Trypho compares Jesus with Perseus; and would prefer \[to say\] that He was elected \[to be Christ\] on account of observance of the law. Justin speaks of the law as formerly.

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxvii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p1.2"></span>And
Trypho answered, “The Scripture has not, ‘Behold, the virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son,’ but, ‘Behold, the young woman shall conceive,
and bear a son,’ and so on, as you quoted. But the whole prophecy refers
to Hezekiah, and it is proved that it was fulfilled in him, according to
the terms of this prophecy. Moreover, in the fables of those who are
called Greeks, it is written that Perseus was begotten of Danae, who was
a virgin; he who was called among them Zeus having descended on her in
the form of a golden shower. And you ought to feel ashamed when you make
assertions similar to theirs, and rather \[should\] say that this Jesus
was born man of men. And if you prove from the Scriptures that He is the
Christ, and that on account of having led a life conformed to the law,
and perfect, He deserved the honour of being elected to be Christ, \[it
is well\]; but do not venture to tell monstrous phenomena, lest you be
convicted of talking foolishly like the Greeks.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p2"></span>Then I said to this, “Trypho, I wish
to persuade you, and all men in short, of this, that even though you
talk worse things in ridicule and in jest, you will not move me from my
fixed design; but I shall always adduce from the words which you think
can be brought forward \[by you\] as proof \[of your own views\], the
demonstration of what I have stated along with the testimony of the
Scriptures. You are not, however, acting fairly or truthfully in
attempting to undo those things in which there has been constantly
agreement between us; namely, that certain commands were instituted by
Moses on account of the hardness of your people’s hearts. For you said
that, by reason of His living conformably to law, He was elected and
became Christ, if indeed He were proved to be so.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p3"></span>And Trypho said, “You admitted <span
id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) to us that He was both circumcised,
and observed the other legal ceremonies ordained by Moses.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p5"></span>And I replied, “I have admitted it,
and do admit it: yet I have admitted that He endured all these not as if
He were justified by them, but completing the dispensation which His
Father, the Maker of all things, and Lord and God, wished Him \[to
complete\]. For I admit that He endured crucifixion and death, and the
incarnation, and the suffering of as many afflictions as your nation put
upon Him. But since again you dissent from that to which you but lately
assented, Trypho, answer me: Are those righteous patriarchs who lived
before Moses, who observed none of those \[ordinances\] which, the
Scripture shows, received the commencement of \[their\] institution from
Moses, saved, \[and have they attained to\] the inheritance of the
blessed?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p6"></span> <span id="page_232">p. 232</span>
<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-Page_232"></span> And Trypho said, “The
Scriptures compel me to admit it.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p7"></span>“Likewise I again ask you,” said I,
“did God enjoin your fathers to present the offerings and sacrifices
because He had need of them, or because of the hardness of their hearts
and tendency to idolatry?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p8"></span>“The latter,” said he, “the
Scriptures in like manner compel us to admit.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p9"></span>“Likewise,” said I, “did not the
Scriptures predict that God promised to dispense a new covenant besides
that which \[was dispensed\] in the mountain Horeb?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p10"></span>This, too, he replied, had been
predicted.

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p11"></span>Then I said again, “Was not the old
covenant laid on your fathers with fear and trembling, so that they
could not give ear to God?”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p12"></span>He admitted it.

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p13"></span>“What then?” said I: “God promised
that there would be another covenant, not like that old one, and said
that it would be laid on them without fear, and trembling, and
lightnings, and that it would be such as to show what kind of commands
and deeds God knows to be eternal and suited to every nation, and what
commandments He has given, suiting them to the hardness of your people’s
hearts, as He exclaims also by the prophets.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p14"></span>“To this also,” said he, “those who
are lovers of truth and not lovers of strife must assuredly assent.”

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p15"></span>Then I replied, “I know not how you
speak of persons very fond of strife, \[since\] you yourself oftentimes
were plainly acting in this very manner, frequently contradicting what
you had agreed to.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[231:2202](0010528.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="viii.iv.lxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxvii-p4"></span> We have not seen that Justin
admitted this; but it is not to be supposed that the passage where he
did admit it has been lost, as Perionius suspected; for sometimes Justin
refers to passages at other places, which he did not relate in their own
place. —<span class="upper"><span
id="viii.iv.lxvii-p4.1"></span>Maranus</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII.—He complains of the...](0010529)
