[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010646)  [Next](0010648) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvii"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.—Of the Sibyl. <span id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588)

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p2"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>And you may in part easily learn the
right religion from the ancient Sibyl, who by some kind of potent
inspiration teaches you, through her oracular predictions, truths which
seem to be much akin to the teaching of the prophets. She, they say, was
of Babylonian extraction, being the daughter of Berosus, who wrote the
Chaldæan History; and when she had crossed over (how, I know not) into
the region of Campania, she there uttered her oracular sayings in a city
called Cumæ, six miles from Baiæ, where the hot springs of Campania are
found. And being in that city, we saw also a certain place, in which we
were shown a very large basilica <span
id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) cut out of one stone; a vast
affair, and worthy of all admiration. And they who had heard it from
their fathers as part of their country’s tradition, told us that it was
<span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="viii.vi.xxxvii-Page_289"></span> here she used to publish her
oracles. And in the middle of the basilica they showed us three
receptacles cut out of one stone, in which, when filled with water, they
said that she washed, and having put on her robe again, retires into the
inmost chamber of the basilica, which is still a part of the one stone;
and sitting in the middle of the chamber on a high rostrum and throne,
thus proclaims her oracles. And both by many other writers has the Sibyl
been mentioned as a prophetess, and also by Plato in his *Phædrus*. And
Plato seems to me to have counted prophets divinely inspired when he
read her prophecies. For he saw that what she had long ago predicted was
accomplished; and on this account he expresses in the Dialogue with Meno
his wonder at and admiration of prophets in the following terms: “Those
whom we now call prophetic persons we should rightly name divine. And
not least would we say that they are divine, and are raised to the
prophetic ecstasy by the inspiration and possession of God, when they
correctly speak of many and important matters, and yet know nothing of
what they are saying,” —plainly and manifestly referring to the
prophecies of the Sibyl. For, unlike the poets who, after their poems
are penned, have power to correct and polish, specially in the way of
increasing the accuracy of their verse, she was filled indeed with
prophecy at the time of the inspiration, but as soon as the inspiration
ceased, there ceased also the remembrance of all she had said. And this
indeed was the cause why some only, and not all, the metres of the
verses of the Sibyl were preserved. For we ourselves, when in that city,
ascertained from our *cicerone*, who showed us the places in which she
used to prophesy, that there was a certain coffer made of brass in which
they said that her remains were preserved. And besides all else which
they told us as they had heard it from their fathers, they said also
that they who then took down her prophecies, being illiterate persons,
often went quite astray from the accuracy of the metres; and this, they
said, was the cause of the want of metre in some of the verses, the
prophetess having no remembrance of what she had said, after the
possession and inspiration ceased, and the reporters having, through
their lack of education, failed to record the metres with accuracy. And
on this account, it is manifest that Plato had an eye to the prophecies
of the Sibyl when he said this about prophets, for he said, “When they
correctly speak of many and important matters, and yet know nothing of
what they are saying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[288:2589](0010647.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p0.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p1"></span> \[In Grabe’s edition consult notes
of Lang and Kortholt, ii. p. 45.\]

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[288:2590](0010647.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvii-p3"></span> \[Travellers must recognise the
agreement of Justin’s story with the traditional cave still shown in
this region.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII.—Concluding appeal.](0010648)
