[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010384)  [Next](0010386) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.xii"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Christians live as under God’s eye.

<span id="viii.ii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.ii.xii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xii-p1.3"></span><span id="viii.ii.xii-p1.4"></span>And more
than all other men are we your helpers and allies in promoting peace,
seeing that we hold this view, that it is alike impossible for the
wicked, the covetous, the conspirator, and for the virtuous, to escape
the notice of God, and that each man goes to everlasting punishment or
salvation according to the value of his actions. For if all men knew
this, no one would choose wickedness even for a little, knowing that he
goes to the everlasting punishment of fire; but would by all means
restrain himself, and adorn himself with virtue, that he might obtain
the good gifts of God, and escape the punishments. For those who, on
account of the laws and punishments you impose, endeavour to escape
detection when they offend (and they offend, too, under the impression
that it is quite possible to escape your detection, since you are but
men), those persons, if they learned and were convinced that nothing,
whether actually done or only intended, can escape the knowledge of God,
would by all means live decently on account of the penalties threatened,
as even you yourselves will admit. But you seem to fear lest all men
become righteous, and you no longer have any to punish. Such would be
the concern of public executioners, but not of good princes. But, as we
before said, we are persuaded that these things are prompted by evil
spirits, who demand sacrifices and service even from those who live
unreasonably; but as for you, we presume that you who aim at \[a
reputation for\] piety and philosophy will do nothing unreasonable.
<span id="viii.ii.xii-p1.5"></span>But if you also, like the foolish,
prefer custom to truth, do what you have power to do. But just so much
power have rulers who esteem opinion more than truth, as robbers have in
a desert. <span id="viii.ii.xii-p1.6"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xii-p1.7"></span>And that you will not succeed is declared
by the Word, than whom, after God who begat Him, we know there is no
ruler more kingly and just. For as all shrink from succeeding to the
poverty or sufferings or obscurity of their fathers, so whatever the
Word forbids us to choose, the sensible man will not choose. <span
id="viii.ii.xii-p1.8"></span>That all these things should come to pass,
I say, our Teacher foretold, He who is both Son and Apostle of God the
Father of all and the Ruler, Jesus Christ; from whom also we have the
name of Christians. Whence we become more assured of all the things He
taught us, since whatever He beforehand foretold should come to pass, is
seen in fact coming to pass; and this is the work of God, to tell of a
thing before it happens, and as it was foretold so to show it happening.
It were possible to pause here and add no more, reckoning that we demand
what is just and true; but because we are well aware that it is not easy
suddenly to change a mind possessed by ignorance, we intend to add a few
things, for the sake of persuading those who love the truth, knowing
that it is not impossible to put ignorance to flight by presenting the
truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Christians serve God...](0010386)
