[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010830)  [Next](0010832) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—The prophets were sent from one and the same Father from whom the Son was sent.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Which \[God\] the Lord does not reject,
nor does He say that the prophets \[spake\] from another god than His
Father; nor from any other essence, but from one and the same Father;
nor that any other being made the things in the world, except His own
Father, when He speaks as follows in His teaching: “There was a certain
householder, and he planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and
digged in it a winepress, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a far country: And when the time of the fruit
drew near, he sent his servants unto the husbandmen, that they might
receive the fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his servants: they cut
one to pieces, stoned another, and killed another. Again he sent other
servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise. But last
of all he sent unto them his only son, saying, Perchance they will
reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among
themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and we shall
possess his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the
vineyard, and slew him. When, therefore, the lord of the vineyard shall
come, what will he do unto these husbandmen? They say unto him, He will
miserably destroy these wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to
other husbandmen, who shall render him the fruits in their
season.” <span id="fr_4354"></span>[4355](#fn_4354) Again does the Lord
say: “Have ye never read, The stone which the builders rejected, the
same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord’s doing, and it
is marvellous in our eyes? Therefore I say unto you, that the kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the
fruits thereof.” <span id="fr_4355"></span>[4356](#fn_4355) By these
words He clearly points out to His disciples one and the same
Householder—that is, one God the Father, who made all things by Himself;
while \[He shows\] that there are various husbandmen, some obstinate,
and proud, and worthless, and slayers of the Lord, but others who render
Him, with all obedience, the fruits <span id="page_515">p. 515</span>
<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-Page_515"></span> in their seasons; and that it
is the same Householder who sends at one time His servants, at another
His Son. From that Father, therefore, from whom the Son was sent to
those husbandmen who slew Him, from Him also were the servants \[sent\].
But the Son, as coming from the Father with supreme authority
(*principali auctoritate*), used to express Himself thus: “But I say
unto you.” <span id="fr_4356"></span>[4357](#fn_4356) The servants,
again, \[who came\] as from their Lord, spake after the manner of
servants, \[delivering a message\]; and they therefore used to say,
“Thus saith the Lord.”

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p5"></span>2. Whom these men did therefore preach
to the unbelievers as Lord, Him did Christ teach to those who obey Him;
and the God who had called those of the former dispensation, is the same
as He who has received those of the latter. In other words, He who at
first used that law which entails bondage, is also He who did in after
times \[call His people\] by means of adoption. For God planted the
vineyard of the human race when at the first He formed Adam and chose
the fathers; then He let it out to husbandmen when He established the
Mosaic dispensation: He hedged it round about, that is, He gave
particular instructions with regard to their worship: He built a tower,
\[that is\], He chose Jerusalem: He digged a winepress, that is, He
prepared a receptacle of the prophetic Spirit. And thus did He send
prophets prior to the transmigration to Babylon, and after that event
others again in greater number than the former, to seek the fruits,
saying thus to them (the Jews): “Thus saith the Lord, Cleanse your ways
and your doings, execute just judgment, and look each one with pity and
compassion on his brother: oppress not the widow nor the orphan, the
proselyte nor the poor, and let none of you treasure up evil against his
brother in your hearts, and love not false swearing. Wash you, make you
clean, put away evil from your hearts, learn to do well, seek judgment,
protect the oppressed, judge the fatherless (*pupillo*), plead for the
widow; and come, let us reason together, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_4357"></span>[4358](#fn_4357) And again: “Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile; depart from evil, and do
good; seek peace, and pursue it.” <span
id="fr_4358"></span>[4359](#fn_4358) In preaching these things, the
prophets sought the fruits of righteousness. But last of all He sent to
those unbelievers His own Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the wicked
husbandmen cast out of the vineyard when they had slain Him. Wherefore
the Lord God did even give it up (no longer hedged around, but thrown
open throughout all the world) to other husbandmen, who render the
fruits in their seasons,—the beautiful elect tower being also raised
everywhere. For the illustrious Church is \[now\] everywhere, and
everywhere is the winepress digged: because those who do receive the
Spirit are everywhere. For inasmuch as the former have rejected the Son
of God, and cast Him out of the vineyard when they slew Him, God has
justly rejected them, and given to the Gentiles outside the vineyard the
fruits of its cultivation. This is in accordance with what Jeremiah
says, “The Lord hath rejected and cast off the nation which does these
things; for the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the
Lord.” <span id="fr_4359"></span>[4360](#fn_4359) And again in like
manner does Jeremiah speak: “I set watchmen over you; hearken to the
sound of the trumpet; and they said, We will not hearken. Therefore have
the Gentiles heard, and they who feed the flocks in them.” <span
id="fr_4360"></span>[4361](#fn_4360) It is therefore one and the same
Father who planted the vineyard, who led forth the people, who sent the
prophets, who sent His own Son, and who gave the vineyard to those other
husbandmen that render the fruits in their season.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p10"></span>3. And therefore did the Lord say to
His disciples, to make us become good workmen: “Take heed to yourselves,
and watch continually upon every occasion, lest at any time your hearts
be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
and that day shall come upon you unawares; for as a snare shall it come
upon all dwelling upon the face of the earth.” <span
id="fr_4361"></span>[4362](#fn_4361) “Let your loins, therefore, be
girded about, and your lights burning, and ye like to men who wait for
their lord, when he shall return from the wedding.” <span
id="fr_4362"></span>[4363](#fn_4362) “For as it was in the days of Noe,
they did eat and drink, they bought and sold, they married and were
given in marriage, and they knew not, until Noe entered into the ark,
and the flood came and destroyed them all; as also it was in the days of
Lot, they did eat and drink, they bought and sold, they planted and
builded, until the time that Lot went out of Sodom; it rained fire from
heaven, and destroyed them all: so shall it also be at the coming of the
Son of man.” <span id="fr_4363"></span>[4364](#fn_4363) “Watch ye
therefore, for ye know not in what day your Lord shall come.” <span
id="fr_4364"></span>[4365](#fn_4364) \[In these passages\] He declares
one and the same Lord, who in the times of Noah brought the deluge
because of man’s disobedience, and who also in the days of Lot rained
fire from heaven because of the multitude of sinners among the
Sodomites, and who, on account of this same disobedience and similar
sins, will bring on the day of judgment at the end of <span
id="page_516">p. 516</span> <span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-Page_516"></span>
time (*in novissimo*); on which day He declares that it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for that city and house which
shall not receive the word of His apostles. “And thou, Capernaum,” He
said, “is it that thou shalt be exalted to heaven? <span
id="fr_4365"></span>[4366](#fn_4365) Thou shalt go down to hell. For if
the mighty works which have been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained unto this day. Verily I say unto you, that it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment than for you.” <span
id="fr_4366"></span>[4367](#fn_4366)

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p17"></span>4. Since the Son of God is always one
and the same, He gives to those who believe on Him a well of water <span
id="fr_4367"></span>[4368](#fn_4367) \[springing up\] to eternal life,
but He causes the unfruitful fig-tree immediately to dry up; and in the
days of Noah He justly brought on the deluge for the purpose of
extinguishing that most infamous race of men then existent, who could
not bring forth fruit to God, since the angels that sinned had
commingled with them, and \[acted as He did\] in order that He might put
a check upon the sins of these men, but \[that at the same time\] He
might preserve the archetype, <span id="fr_4368"></span>[4369](#fn_4368)
the formation of Adam. And it was He who rained fire and brimstone from
heaven, in the days of Lot, upon Sodom and Gomorrah, “an example of the
righteous judgment of God,” <span id="fr_4369"></span>[4370](#fn_4369)
that all may know, “that every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit
shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.” <span
id="fr_4370"></span>[4371](#fn_4370) And it is He who uses \[the
words\], that it will be more tolerable for Sodom in the general
judgment than for those who beheld His wonders, and did not believe on
Him, nor receive His doctrine. <span
id="fr_4371"></span>[4372](#fn_4371) For as He gave by His advent a
greater privilege to those who believed on Him, and who do His will, so
also did He point out that those who did not believe on Him should have
a more severe punishment in the judgment; thus extending equal justice
to all, and being to exact more from those to whom He gives the more;
the more, however, not because He reveals the knowledge of another
Father, as I have shown so fully and so repeatedly, but because He has,
by means of His advent, poured upon the human race the greater gift of
paternal grace.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p23"></span>5. If, however, what I have stated be
insufficient to convince any one that the prophets were sent from one
and the same Father, from whom also our Lord was sent, let such a one,
opening the mouth of his heart, and calling upon the Master, Christ
Jesus the Lord, listen to Him when He says, “The kingdom of heaven is
like unto a king who made a marriage for his son, and he sent forth his
servants to call them who were bidden to the marriage.” And when they
would not obey, He goes on to say, “Again he sent other servants,
saying, Tell them that are bidden, Come ye, I have prepared my dinner;
my oxen and all the fatlings are killed, and everything is ready; come
unto the wedding. But they made light of it, and went their way, some to
their farm, and others to their merchandize; but the remnant took his
servants, and some they treated despitefully, while others they slew.
But when the king heard this, he was wroth, and sent his armies and
destroyed these murderers, and burned up their city, and said to his
servants, The wedding is indeed ready, but they which were bidden were
not worthy. Go out therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall
find, gather in to the marriage. So the servants went out, and collected
together as many as they found, bad and good, and the wedding was
furnished with guests. But when the king came in to see the guests, he
saw there a man not having on a wedding garment; and he said unto him,
Friend, how camest thou hither, not having on a wedding garment? But he
was speechless. Then said the king to his servants, Take him away, hand
and foot, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen.” <span
id="fr_4372"></span>[4373](#fn_4372) Now, by these words of His, does
the Lord clearly show all \[these points, viz.,\] that there is one King
and Lord, the Father of all, of whom He had previously said, “Neither
shalt thou swear by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great
King;” <span id="fr_4373"></span>[4374](#fn_4373) and that He had from
the beginning prepared the marriage for His Son, and used, with the
utmost kindness, to call, by the instrumentality of His servants, the
men of the former dispensation to the wedding feast; and when they would
not obey, He still invited them by sending out other servants, yet that
even then they did not obey Him, but even stoned and slew those who
brought them the message of invitation. He accordingly sent forth His
armies and destroyed them, and burned down their city; but He called
together from all the highways, that is, from all nations, \[guests\] to
the marriage feast of His Son, as also He says by Jeremiah: “I have sent
also unto you my servants the prophets to say, Return ye now, every man,
from <span id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-Page_517"></span> his very evil way, and amend your
doings.” <span id="fr_4374"></span>[4375](#fn_4374) And again He says by
the same prophet: “I have also sent unto you my servants the prophets
throughout the day and before the light; yet they did not obey me, nor
incline their ears unto me. And thou shall speak this word to them: This
is a people that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord, nor receiveth
correction; faith has perished from their mouth.” <span
id="fr_4375"></span>[4376](#fn_4375) The Lord, therefore, who has called
us everywhere by the apostles, is He who called those of old by the
prophets, as appears by the words of the Lord; and although they
preached to various nations, the prophets were not from one God, and the
apostles from another; but, \[proceeding\] from one and the same, some
of them announced the Lord, others preached the Father, and others again
foretold the advent of the Son of God, while yet others declared Him as
already present to those who then were afar off.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p28"></span>6. Still further did He also make it
manifest, that we ought, after our calling, to be also adorned with
works of righteousness, so that the Spirit of God may rest upon us; for
this is the wedding garment, of which also the apostle speaks, “Not for
that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up by immortality.” <span id="fr_4376"></span>[4377](#fn_4376)
But those who have indeed been called to God’s supper, yet have not
received the Holy Spirit, because of their wicked conduct “shall be,” He
declares, “cast into outer darkness.” <span
id="fr_4377"></span>[4378](#fn_4377) He thus clearly shows that the very
same King who gathered from all quarters the faithful to the marriage of
His Son, and who grants them the incorruptible banquet, \[also\] orders
that man to be cast into outer darkness who has not on a wedding
garment, that is, one who despises it. For as in the former covenant,
“with many of them was He not well pleased;” <span
id="fr_4378"></span>[4379](#fn_4378) so also is it the case here, that
“many are called, but few chosen.” <span
id="fr_4379"></span>[4380](#fn_4379) It is not, then, one God who
judges, and another Father who calls us together to salvation; nor one,
forsooth, who confers eternal light, but another who orders those who
have not on the wedding garment to be sent into outer darkness. But it
is one and the same God, the Father of our Lord, from whom also the
prophets had their mission, who does indeed, through His infinite
kindness, call the unworthy; but He examines those who are called, \[to
ascertain\] if they have on the garment fit and proper for the marriage
of His Son, because nothing unbecoming or evil pleases Him. This is in
accordance with what the Lord said to the man who had been healed:
“Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.” <span id="fr_4380"></span>[4381](#fn_4380) For he who is good,
and righteous, and pure, and spotless, will endure nothing evil, nor
unjust, nor detestable in His wedding chamber. This is the Father of our
Lord, by whose providence all things consist, and all are administered
by His command; and He confers His free gifts upon those who should
\[receive them\]; but the most righteous Retributor metes out
\[punishment\] according to their deserts, most deservedly, to the
ungrateful and to those that are insensible of His kindness; and
therefore does He say, “He sent His armies, and destroyed those
murderers, and burned up their city.” <span
id="fr_4381"></span>[4382](#fn_4381) He says here, “His armies,” because
all men are the property of God. For “the earth is the Lord’s, and the
fulness thereof; the world, and all that dwell therein.” <span
id="fr_4382"></span>[4383](#fn_4382) Wherefore also the Apostle Paul
says in the Epistle to the Romans, “For there is no power but of God;
the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever resisteth the power,
resisteth the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive unto
themselves condemnation. For rulers are not for a terror to a good work,
but to an evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that which
is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same; for he is the minister
of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid;
for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, the
avenger for wrath upon him that doeth evil. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For this
cause pay ye tribute also; for they are God’s ministers, attending
continually upon this very thing.” <span
id="fr_4383"></span>[4384](#fn_4383) Both the Lord, then, and the
apostles announce as the one only God the Father, Him who gave the law,
who sent the prophets, who made all things; and therefore does He say,
“He sent His armies,” because every man, inasmuch as he is a man, is His
workmanship, although he may be ignorant of his God. For He gives
existence to all; He, “who maketh His sun to rise upon the evil and the
good, and sendeth rain upon the just and unjust.” <span
id="fr_4384"></span>[4385](#fn_4384)

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p38"></span>7. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p38.1"></span>And not alone by what has been stated,
but also by the parable of the two sons, the younger of whom consumed
his substance by living luxuriously with harlots, did the Lord teach one
and the same Father, who did not even allow a kid to his elder son; but
for him who had been lost, \[namely\] his younger son, he ordered the
fatted calf to be killed, and he gave him the best robe. <span
id="fr_4385"></span>[4386](#fn_4385) <span id="page_518">p. 518</span>
<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-Page_518"></span> Also by the parable of the
workmen who were sent into the vineyard at different periods of the day,
one and the same God is declared <span
id="fr_4386"></span>[4387](#fn_4386) as having called some in the
beginning, when the world was first created; but others afterwards, and
others during the intermediate period, others after a long lapse of
time, and others again in the end of time; so that there are many
workmen in their generations, but only one householder who calls them
together. For there is but one vineyard, since there is also but one
righteousness, and one dispensator, for there is one Spirit of God who
arranges all things; and in like manner is there one hire, for they all
received a penny each man, having \[stamped upon it\] the royal image
and superscription, the knowledge of the Son of God, which is
immortality. And therefore He began by giving the hire to those \[who
were engaged\] last, because in the last times, when the Lord was
revealed He presented Himself to all \[as their reward\].

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p41"></span>8. Then, in the case of the publican,
who excelled the Pharisee in prayer, \[we find\] that it was not because
he worshipped another Father that he received testimony from the Lord
that he was justified rather \[than the other\]; but because with great
humility, apart from all boasting and pride, he made confession to the
same God. <span id="fr_4387"></span>[4388](#fn_4387) The parable of the
two sons also: those who are sent into the vineyard, of whom one indeed
opposed his father, but afterwards repented, when repentance profited
him nothing; the other, however, promised to go, at once assuring his
father, but he did not go (for “every man is a liar;” <span
id="fr_4388"></span>[4389](#fn_4388) “to will is present with him, but
he finds not means to perform” <span
id="fr_4389"></span>[4390](#fn_4389) ),—\[this parable, I say\], points
out one and the same Father. Then, again, this truth was clearly shown
forth by the parable of the fig-tree, of which the Lord says, “Behold,
now these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree, but I find
none” <span id="fr_4390"></span>[4391](#fn_4390) (pointing onwards, by
the prophets, to His advent, by whom He came from time to time, seeking
the fruit of righteousness from them, which he did not find), and also
by the circumstance that, for the reason already mentioned, the fig-tree
should be hewn down. And, without using a parable, the Lord said to
Jerusalem, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and
stonest those that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered
thy children together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings,
and ye would not! Behold, your house shall be left unto you
desolate.” <span id="fr_4391"></span>[4392](#fn_4391) For that which had
been said in the parable, “Behold, for three years I come seeking
fruit,” and in clear terms, again, \[where He says\], “How often would I
have gathered thy children together,” shall be \[found\] a falsehood, if
we do not understand His advent, which is \[announced\] by the
prophets—if, in fact, He came to them but once, and then for the first
time. But since He who chose the patriarchs and those \[who lived under
the first covenant\], is the same Word of God who did both visit them
through the prophetic Spirit, and us also who have been called together
from all quarters by His advent; in addition to what has been already
said, He truly declared, “Many shall come from the east and from the
west, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven. But the children of the kingdom shall go into outer
darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” <span
id="fr_4392"></span>[4393](#fn_4392) If, then, those who do believe in
Him through the preaching of His apostles throughout the east and west
shall recline with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven,
partaking with them of the \[heavenly\] banquet, one and the same God is
set forth as He who did indeed choose the patriarchs, visited also the
people, and called the Gentiles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4354"></span>[514:4355](0010831.htm#fr_4354) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p2"></span> [Matt. xxi.
33-41](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4355"></span>[514:4356](0010831.htm#fr_4355) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p3"></span> [Matt. xxi.
42-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4356"></span>[515:4357](0010831.htm#fr_4356) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p4"></span> [Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4357"></span>[515:4358](0010831.htm#fr_4357) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p6"></span> [Jer. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>;
[Zech. 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p6.2"></span>, [Zech. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#017)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p6.3"></span>; [Isa. i.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p6.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4358"></span>[515:4359](0010831.htm#fr_4358) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p6.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p7"></span> [Ps.
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4359"></span>[515:4360](0010831.htm#fr_4359) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p8"></span> [Jer.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4360"></span>[515:4361](0010831.htm#fr_4360) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p9"></span> [Jer.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#018)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4361"></span>[515:4362](0010831.htm#fr_4361) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p11"></span> [Luke
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4362"></span>[515:4363](0010831.htm#fr_4362) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p12"></span> [Luke
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4363"></span>[515:4364](0010831.htm#fr_4363) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p13"></span> [Luke xvii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p13.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4364"></span>[515:4365](0010831.htm#fr_4364) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p14"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4365"></span>[516:4366](0010831.htm#fr_4365) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p15"></span> No other of the Greek Fathers quotes
this text as above; from which fact Grabe infers that old Latin
translator, or his transcribers, altered the words of Irenæus
\[N.B.—From one example infer the rest\] to suit the Latin versions.

<span id="fn_4366"></span>[516:4367](0010831.htm#fr_4366) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p16"></span> [Matt.
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4367"></span>[516:4368](0010831.htm#fr_4367) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p18"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4368"></span>[516:4369](0010831.htm#fr_4368) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p19"></span> This is Massuet’s conjectural
emendation of the text, viz., *archetypum* for *arcætypum*. Grabe would
insert *per* before *arcæ*, and he thinks the passage to have a
reference to [1 Pet. iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>. Irenæus, in common with the other
ancient Fathers, believed that the fallen angels were the “sons of God”
who commingled with “the daughters of men,” and thus produced a race of
spurious men. \[[Gen. 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p19.2"></span>, and Josephus.\]

<span id="fn_4369"></span>[516:4370](0010831.htm#fr_4369) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p20"></span> [Jude
7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p20.1"></span>. \[And note “strange flesh” (Gr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p20.2"></span>σαρκὸς ἑτέρας</span>)
as to the angels. [Gen. 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p20.3"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_4370"></span>[516:4371](0010831.htm#fr_4370) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p21"></span> [Matt. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4371"></span>[516:4372](0010831.htm#fr_4371) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p22"></span> [Matt. xi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>; [Luke x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p22.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4372"></span>[516:4373](0010831.htm#fr_4372) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p24"></span> [Matt. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p24.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4373"></span>[516:4374](0010831.htm#fr_4373) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p25"></span> [Matt. v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>. Instead of placing a period here, as
the editors do, it seems to us preferable to carry on the construction.

<span id="fn_4374"></span>[517:4375](0010831.htm#fr_4374) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p26"></span> [Jer. xxxv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#015)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4375"></span>[517:4376](0010831.htm#fr_4375) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p27"></span> [Jer. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4376"></span>[517:4377](0010831.htm#fr_4376) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p29"></span> [2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4377"></span>[517:4378](0010831.htm#fr_4377) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p30"></span> [Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4378"></span>[517:4379](0010831.htm#fr_4378) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p31"></span> [1 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#005)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4379"></span>[517:4380](0010831.htm#fr_4379) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p32"></span> [Matt. xxii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4380"></span>[517:4381](0010831.htm#fr_4380) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p33"></span> [John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4381"></span>[517:4382](0010831.htm#fr_4381) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p34"></span> [Matt. xxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4382"></span>[517:4383](0010831.htm#fr_4382) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p35"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4383"></span>[517:4384](0010831.htm#fr_4383) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p36"></span> [Rom. xiii.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4384"></span>[517:4385](0010831.htm#fr_4384) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p37"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4385"></span>[517:4386](0010831.htm#fr_4385) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p39"></span> [Luke xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4386"></span>[518:4387](0010831.htm#fr_4386) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p40"></span> [Matt. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p40.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4387"></span>[518:4388](0010831.htm#fr_4387) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p42"></span> [Luke xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4388"></span>[518:4389](0010831.htm#fr_4388) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p43"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4389"></span>[518:4390](0010831.htm#fr_4389) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p44"></span> [Rom. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4390"></span>[518:4391](0010831.htm#fr_4390) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p45"></span> [Luke xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4391"></span>[518:4392](0010831.htm#fr_4391) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p46"></span> [Luke xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p46.1"></span>; [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p46.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4392"></span>[518:4393](0010831.htm#fr_4392) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p47"></span> [Matt.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxvii-p47.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII.—Men are possessed of...](0010832)
