[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010751)  [Next](0010753) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—The thirty Æons are not typified by the fact that Christ was baptized in His thirtieth year: He did not suffer in the twelfth month after His baptism, but was more than fifty years old when He died.

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p1"></span>1. I have shown that the number
*thirty* fails them in every respect; too few Æons, as they represent
them, being at one time found within the Pleroma, and then again too
many \[to correspond with that number\]. <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p1.3"></span>There are not, therefore, thirty Æons, nor
did the Saviour come to be baptized when He was thirty years old, for
this reason, that He might show forth the thirty silent <span
id="fr_3120"></span>[3121](#fn_3120) Æons of their system, otherwise
they must first of all separate and eject \[the Saviour\] Himself from
the Pleroma of all. Moreover, they affirm that He suffered in the
twelfth month, so that He continued to preach for one year after His
baptism; and they endeavour to establish this point out of the prophet
(for it is written, “To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and
the day of retribution” <span id="fr_3121"></span>[3122](#fn_3121) ),
being truly blind, inasmuch as they affirm they have found out the
mysteries of Bythus, yet not understanding that which is called by
Isaiah the acceptable year of the Lord, nor the day of retribution. For
the prophet neither speaks concerning a day which includes the space of
twelve hours, nor of a year the length of which is twelve months. For
even they themselves acknowledge that the prophets have very often
expressed themselves in parables and allegories, and \[are\] not \[to be
understood\] according to the mere sound of the words.

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p4"></span>2. <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p4.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>That,
then, was called the day of retribution on which the Lord will render to
every one according to his works—that is, the judgment. <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p4.3"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p4.4"></span>The
acceptable year of the Lord, again, is this present time, in which those
who believe Him are called by Him, and become acceptable to God—that is,
the whole time from His advent onwards to the consummation \[of all
things\], during which He acquires to Himself as fruits \[of the scheme
of mercy\] those who are saved. For, according to the phraseology of the
prophet, the day of retribution follows the \[acceptable\] year; and the
prophet will be proved guilty of falsehood if the Lord preached only for
a year, and if he speaks of it. For where is the day of retribution? For
the year has passed, and the day of retribution has not yet come; but He
still “makes His sun to rise upon the good and upon the evil, and sends
rain upon the just and unjust.” <span
id="fr_3122"></span>[3123](#fn_3122) And the righteous suffer
persecution, are afflicted, and are slain, while sinners are possessed
of abundance, and “drink with the sound of the harp and psaltery, but do
not regard the works of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3123"></span>[3124](#fn_3123) But, according to the language
\[used by the prophet\], they ought to be combined, and the day of
retribution to follow the \[acceptable\] year. For the words are, “to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of retribution.”
This present time, therefore, in which men are called and saved by the
Lord, is properly understood to be denoted by “the acceptable year of
the Lord;” and there follows on this “the day of retribution,” that is,
the judgment. And the time thus referred to is not called “a year” only,
but is also named “a day” both by the prophet and by Paul, of whom the
apostle, calling to mind the Scripture, says in the Epistle addressed to
the Romans, “As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day
long, we are counted as sheep for the slaughter.” <span
id="fr_3124"></span>[3125](#fn_3124) But here the expression “all the
day long” is put for all this time during which we suffer persecution,
and are killed as sheep. As then this *day* does not signify one which
consists of twelve hours, but the whole time during which believers in
Christ suffer and are put to death for His sake, so also the *year*
there mentioned does not denote one which consists of twelve months, but
the whole time of faith during which men hear and believe the preaching
of the Gospel, and those become acceptable to God who unite themselves
to Him.

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p8"></span>3. But it is greatly to be wondered
at, how it has come to pass that, while affirming that they have found
out the mysteries of God, they have not examined the Gospels to
ascertain how often after His baptism the Lord went up, at the time of
the passover, to Jerusalem, in accordance with what was the practice of
the Jews from every land, and every year, that they should assemble at
this period in Jerusalem, and there celebrate the feast of the passover.
First of all, after He had made the water wine at Cana of Galilee, He
went up to the festival day of the passover, on which occasion it is
written, “For many believed in Him, when they saw the signs which He
did,” <span id="fr_3125"></span>[3126](#fn_3125) <span id="page_391">p.
391</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxiii-Page_391"></span> as John the disciple
of the Lord records. Then, again, withdrawing Himself \[from Judæa\], He
is found in Samaria; on which occasion, too, He conversed with the
Samaritan woman, and while at a distance, cured the son of the centurion
by a word, saying, “Go thy way, thy son liveth.” <span
id="fr_3126"></span>[3127](#fn_3126) Afterwards He went up, the second
time, to observe the festival day of the passover <span
id="fr_3127"></span>[3128](#fn_3127) in Jerusalem; on which occasion He
cured the paralytic man, who had lain beside the pool thirty-eight
years, bidding him rise, take up his couch, and depart. Again,
withdrawing from thence to the other side of the sea of Tiberias, <span
id="fr_3128"></span>[3129](#fn_3128) He there seeing a great crowd had
followed Him, fed all that multitude with five loaves of bread, and
twelve baskets of fragments remained over and above. Then, when He had
raised Lazarus from the dead, and plots were formed against Him by the
Pharisees, He withdrew to a city called Ephraim; and from that place, as
it is written “He came to Bethany six days before the passover,” <span
id="fr_3129"></span>[3130](#fn_3129) and going up from Bethany to
Jerusalem, He there ate the passover, and suffered on the day following.
Now, that these three occasions of the passover are not included within
one year, every person whatever must acknowledge. And that the special
month in which the passover was celebrated, and in which also the Lord
suffered, was not the twelfth, but the first, those men who boast that
they know all things, if they know not this, may learn it from Moses.
Their explanation, therefore, both of the year and of the twelfth month
has been proved false, and they ought to reject either their explanation
or the Gospel; otherwise \[this unanswerable question forces itself upon
them\], How is it possible that the Lord preached for one year only?

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p14"></span>4. Being thirty years old when He
came to be baptized, and then possessing the full age of a Master, <span
id="fr_3130"></span>[3131](#fn_3130) He came to Jerusalem, so that He
might be properly acknowledged <span
id="fr_3131"></span>[3132](#fn_3131) by all as a Master. For He did not
seem one thing while He was another, as those affirm who describe Him as
being man only in appearance; but what He was, that He also appeared to
be. <span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>Being a Master, therefore, He
also possessed the age of a Master, not despising or evading any
condition of humanity, nor setting aside in Himself that law which He
had <span id="fr_3132"></span>[3133](#fn_3132) appointed for the human
race, but sanctifying every age, by that period corresponding to it
which belonged to Himself. For He came to save all through means of
Himself—all, I say, who through Him are born again to God <span
id="fr_3133"></span>[3134](#fn_3133) —infants, <span
id="fr_3134"></span>[3135](#fn_3134) and children, and boys, and youths,
and old men. He therefore passed through every age, becoming an infant
for infants, thus sanctifying infants; a child for children, thus
sanctifying those who are of this age, being at the same time made to
them an example of piety, righteousness, and submission; a youth for
youths, becoming an example to youths, and thus sanctifying them for the
Lord. So likewise He was an old man for old men, that He might be a
perfect Master for all, not merely as respects the setting forth of the
truth, but also as regards age, sanctifying at the same time the aged
also, and becoming an example to them likewise. Then, at last, He came
on to death itself, that He might be “the first-born from the dead, that
in all things He might have the pre-eminence,” <span
id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135) the Prince of life, <span
id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136) existing before all, and going
before all. <span id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137)

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p23"></span>5. They, however, that they may
establish their false opinion regarding that which is written, “to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,” maintain that He preached for
one year only, and then suffered in the twelfth month. \[In speaking
thus,\] they are forgetful to their own disadvantage, destroying His
whole work, and robbing Him of that age which is both more necessary and
more honourable than any other; that more advanced age, I mean, during
which also as a teacher He excelled all others. For how could He have
had disciples, if He did not teach? And how could He have taught, unless
He had reached the age of a Master? For when He came to be baptized, He
had not yet completed His thirtieth year, but was beginning to be about
thirty years of age (for thus Luke, who has mentioned His years, has
expressed it: “Now Jesus was, as it were, beginning to be thirty years
old,” <span id="fr_3138"></span>[3139](#fn_3138) when He came to receive
baptism); and, \[according to these men,\] He preached only one year
reckoning from His baptism. On completing His thirtieth year He
suffered, being in fact still a young man, and who had by no means
attained to advanced age. <span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>Now, that
the first <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-Page_392"></span> stage of early life embraces thirty
years, <span id="fr_3139"></span>[3140](#fn_3139) and that this extends
onwards to the fortieth year, every one will admit; but from the
fortieth and fiftieth year a man begins to decline towards old age,
which our Lord possessed while He still fulfilled the office of a
Teacher, even as the Gospel and all the elders testify; those who were
conversant in Asia with John, the disciple of the Lord, \[affirming\]
that John conveyed to them that information. <span
id="fr_3140"></span>[3141](#fn_3140) And he remained among them up to
the times of Trajan. <span id="fr_3141"></span>[3142](#fn_3141) Some of
them, moreover, saw not only John, but the other apostles also, and
heard the very same account from them, and bear testimony as to the
\[validity of\] the statement. Whom then should we rather believe?
Whether such men as these, or Ptolemæus, who never saw the apostles, and
who never even in his dreams attained to the slightest trace of an
apostle?

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p28"></span>6. But, besides this, those very Jews
who then disputed with the Lord Jesus Christ have most clearly indicated
the same thing. For when the Lord said to them, “Your father Abraham
rejoiced to see My day; and he saw it, and was glad,” they answered Him,
“Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast Thou seen Abraham?” <span
id="fr_3142"></span>[3143](#fn_3142) Now, such language is fittingly
applied to one who has already passed the age of forty, without having
as yet reached his fiftieth year, yet is not far from this latter
period. But to one who is only thirty years old it would unquestionably
be said, “Thou art not yet forty years old.” For those who wished to
convict Him of falsehood would certainly not extend the number of His
years far beyond the age which they saw He had attained; but they
mentioned a period near His real age, whether they had truly ascertained
this out of the entry in the public register, or simply made a
conjecture from what they observed that He was above forty years old,
and that He certainly was not one of only thirty years of age. For it is
altogether unreasonable to suppose that they were mistaken by twenty
years, when they wished to prove Him younger than the times of Abraham.
For what they saw, that they also expressed; and He whom they beheld was
not a mere phantasm, but an actual being <span
id="fr_3143"></span>[3144](#fn_3143) of flesh and blood. <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>He did not then want much of being fifty
years old; <span id="fr_3144"></span>[3145](#fn_3144) and, in accordance
with that fact, they said to Him, “Thou art not yet fifty years old, and
hast Thou seen Abraham?” He did not therefore preach only for one year,
nor did He suffer in the twelfth month of the year. For the period
included between the thirtieth and the fiftieth year can never be
regarded as *one* year, unless indeed, among their Æons, there be so
long years assigned to those who sit in their ranks with Bythus in the
Pleroma; of which beings Homer the poet, too, has spoken, doubtless
being inspired by the Mother of their \[system of\] error:—

> <span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p31.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
> id="ix.iii.xxiii-p31.3"></span>Οἱ δὲ θεοὶ πὰρ Ζηνὶ καθήμενοι
> ἠγορόωντο</span>  
> <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p31.5"></span>Χρυσέῳ ἐν
> δαπέδῳ:</span> <span id="fr_3145"></span>[3146](#fn_3145)  

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p33"></span>which we may thus render into
English: <span id="fr_3146"></span>[3147](#fn_3146) —

> <span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p34.1"></span>“The gods sat round, while Jove
> presided o’er,  
> And converse held upon the golden floor.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3120"></span>[390:3121](0010752.htm#fr_3120) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p2"></span> Harvey wishes, without any authority,
to substitute “tacitus” for “tacitos,” but there is no necessity for
alteration. Irenæus is here playing upon the word, according to a
practice in which he delights, and quietly scoffs at the *Sige*
(Silence) of the heretics by styling those Æons *silent* who were
derived from her.

<span id="fn_3121"></span>[390:3122](0010752.htm#fr_3121) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> [Isa. lxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3122"></span>[390:3123](0010752.htm#fr_3122) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p5"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3123"></span>[390:3124](0010752.htm#fr_3123) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p6"></span> [Isa. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3124"></span>[390:3125](0010752.htm#fr_3124) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p7"></span> [Rom. viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3125"></span>[390:3126](0010752.htm#fr_3125) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p9"></span> [John ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3126"></span>[391:3127](0010752.htm#fr_3126) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p10"></span> [John iv.
50](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#050)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3127"></span>[391:3128](0010752.htm#fr_3127) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11"></span> [John v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>, etc. It is well known that, to fix what
is meant by the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.2"></span>ἑορτή</span>, referred to in this passage
of St. John, is one of the most difficult points in New Testament
criticism. Some modern scholars think that the feast of Purim is
intended by the Evangelist; but, upon the whole, the current of opinion
that has always prevailed in the Church has been in favour of the
statement here made by Irenæus. Christ would therefore be present at
four passovers after His baptism: (1) [John ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.3"></span>; (2) [John v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.4"></span>; (3) [John vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#004)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.5"></span>; (4) [John xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_3128"></span>[391:3129](0010752.htm#fr_3128) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p11.7"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p12"></span> [John vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3129"></span>[391:3130](0010752.htm#fr_3129) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p13"></span> [John xi.
54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>, [John xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3130"></span>[391:3131](0010752.htm#fr_3130) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p15"></span> Or, “teacher,” *magistri*.

<span id="fn_3131"></span>[391:3132](0010752.htm#fr_3131) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p16"></span> Harvey strangely remarks here, that
“the reading *audiret*, followed by Massuet, makes no sense.” He gives
*audiretur* in his text, but proposes to read *ordiretur*. The passage
may, however, be translated as above, without departing from the
Benedictine reading *audiret*.

<span id="fn_3132"></span>[391:3133](0010752.htm#fr_3132) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p17"></span> “Neque solvens suam legem in se
humani generis.” Massuet would expunge “suam;” but, as Harvey well
observes, “it has a peculiar significance, *nor abrogating his own
law*.”

<span id="fn_3133"></span>[391:3134](0010752.htm#fr_3133) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p18"></span> “Renascuntur in Deum.” The reference
in these words is doubtless to baptism, as clearly appears from
comparing book iii. 17, 1.

<span id="fn_3134"></span>[391:3135](0010752.htm#fr_3134) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p19"></span> It has been remarked by Wall and
others, that we have here the statement of a valuable fact as to the
baptism of infants in the primitive Church.

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[391:3136](0010752.htm#fr_3135) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p20"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[391:3137](0010752.htm#fr_3136) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p21"></span> [Acts iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[391:3138](0010752.htm#fr_3137) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p22"></span> \[That our Lord was *prematurely*
old may be inferred from the text which Irenæus regards as proof that he
literally lived to be old. St. [John
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056),
[57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>; comp. [Isa. liii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p22.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3138"></span>[391:3139](0010752.htm#fr_3138) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p24"></span> [Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3139"></span>[392:3140](0010752.htm#fr_3139) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p25"></span> The Latin text of this clause is,
“Quia autem triginta annorum ætas prima indolis est juvenis” —words
which it seems almost impossible to translate. Grabe regarded “indolis”
as being in the nominative, while Massuet contends it is in the genitive
case; and so regarding it, we might translate, “Now that the age of
thirty is the first age of the mind of youth,” etc. But Harvey
re-translates the clause into Greek as follows: <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>Ὃτι δὲ ἡ τῶν
τριάκοντα ἐτῶν ἡλικία ἡ πρώτη τῆς διαθέσεώς ἐστι νέας</span>— words
which we have endeavoured to render as above. The meaning clearly is,
that the age of thirty marked the transition point from youth to
maturity.

<span id="fn_3140"></span>[392:3141](0010752.htm#fr_3140) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p26"></span> With respect to this extraordinary
assertion of Irenæus, Harvey remarks: “The reader may here perceive the
unsatisfactory character of tradition, where a mere fact is concerned.
From reasonings founded upon the evangelical history, as well as from a
preponderance of external testimony, it is most certain that our Lord’s
ministry extended but little over three years; yet here Irenæus states
that it included more than ten years, and appeals to a tradition
derived, as he says, from those who had conversed with an apostle”

<span id="fn_3141"></span>[392:3142](0010752.htm#fr_3141) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p27"></span> Trajan’s reign commenced <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>a.d.</span> 98, and
St. John is said to have lived to the age of a hundred years.

<span id="fn_3142"></span>[392:3143](0010752.htm#fr_3142) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p29"></span> [John
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056),
[57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057)<span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3143"></span>[392:3144](0010752.htm#fr_3143) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p30"></span> “Sed veritas”—literally, “the
truth.”

<span id="fn_3144"></span>[392:3145](0010752.htm#fr_3144) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p31"></span> \[This statement is simply
astounding, and might seem a providential illustration of the
worthlessness of *mere* tradition unsustained by the written Word. No
mere tradition could be more creditably authorized than this.\]

<span id="fn_3145"></span>[392:3146](0010752.htm#fr_3145) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p31.6"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p32"></span> *Iliad*, iv. 1.

<span id="fn_3146"></span>[392:3147](0010752.htm#fr_3146) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiii-p34"></span> *Latin*, of course, in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.—The woman who...](0010753)
