[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010827)  [Next](0010829) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—Whosoever confesses that one God is the author of both Testaments, and diligently reads the Scriptures in company with the presbyters of the Church, is a true spiritual disciple; and he will rightly understand and interpret all that the prophets have declared respecting Christ and the liberty of the New Testament.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p1.3"></span>A spiritual disciple of this sort truly
receiving the Spirit of God, who was from the beginning, in all the
dispensations of God, present with mankind, and announced things future,
revealed things present, and narrated things past—\[such a man\] does
indeed “judge all men, but is himself judged by no man.” <span
id="fr_4252"></span>[4253](#fn_4252) For he judges the Gentiles, “who
serve the creature more than the Creator,” <span
id="fr_4253"></span>[4254](#fn_4253) and with a reprobate mind spend all
their labour on vanity. And he also judges the Jews, who do not accept
of the word of liberty, nor are willing to go forth free, although they
have a Deliverer present \[with them\]; but they pretend, at a time
unsuitable \[for such conduct\], to serve, \[with observances\] beyond
\[those required by\] the law, God who stands in need of nothing, and do
not recognise the advent of Christ, which He accomplished for the
salvation of men, nor are willing to understand that all the prophets
announced His two advents: the one, indeed, in which He became a man
subject to stripes, and knowing what it is to bear infirmity, <span
id="fr_4254"></span>[4255](#fn_4254) and sat upon the foal of an
ass, <span id="fr_4255"></span>[4256](#fn_4255) and was a stone rejected
by the builders, <span id="fr_4256"></span>[4257](#fn_4256) and was led
as a sheep to the slaughter, <span id="fr_4257"></span>[4258](#fn_4257)
and by the stretching forth of His hands destroyed Amalek; <span
id="fr_4258"></span>[4259](#fn_4258) while He gathered from the ends of
the earth into His Father’s fold the children who were scattered
abroad, <span id="fr_4259"></span>[4260](#fn_4259) and remembered His
own dead ones who had formerly fallen asleep, <span
id="fr_4260"></span>[4261](#fn_4260) and came down to them that He might
deliver them: but the second in which He will come on the clouds, <span
id="fr_4261"></span>[4262](#fn_4261) bringing on the day which burns as
a furnace, <span id="fr_4262"></span>[4263](#fn_4262) and smiting the
earth with the word of His mouth, <span
id="fr_4263"></span>[4264](#fn_4263) and slaying the impious with the
breath of His lips, and having a fan in His hands, and cleansing His
floor, and gathering the wheat indeed into His barn, but burning the
chaff with unquenchable fire. <span id="fr_4264"></span>[4265](#fn_4264)

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p15"></span>2. Moreover, he shall also examine the
doctrine <span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-Page_507"></span> of Marcion, \[inquiring\] how he holds
that there are two gods, separated from each other by an infinite
distance. <span id="fr_4265"></span>[4266](#fn_4265) Or how can he be
good who draws away men that do not belong to him from him who made
them, and calls them into his own kingdom? And why is his goodness,
which does not save all \[thus\], defective? Also, why does he, indeed,
seem to be good as respects men, but most unjust with regard to him who
made men, inasmuch as he deprives him of his possessions? Moreover, how
could the Lord, with any justice, if He belonged to another father, have
acknowledged the bread to be His body, while He took it from that
creation to which we belong, and affirmed the mixed cup to be His
blood? <span id="fr_4266"></span>[4267](#fn_4266) And why did He
acknowledge Himself to be the Son of man, if He had not gone through
that birth which belongs to a human being? How, too, could He forgive us
those sins for which we are answerable to our Maker and God? And how,
again, supposing that He was not flesh, but was a man merely in
appearance, could He have been crucified, and could blood and water have
issued from His pierced side? <span id="fr_4267"></span>[4268](#fn_4267)
What body, moreover, was it that those who buried Him consigned to the
tomb? And what was that which rose again from the dead?

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p19"></span>3. \[This spiritual man\] shall also
judge all the followers of Valentinus, because they do indeed confess
with the tongue one God the Father, and that all things derive their
existence from Him, but do at the same time maintain that He who formed
all things is the fruit of an apostasy or defect. \[He shall judge them,
too, because\] they do in like manner confess with the tongue one Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, but assign in their \[system of\] doctrine
a production of his own to the Only-begotten, one of his own also to the
Word, another to Christ, and yet another to the Saviour; so that,
according to them, all these beings are indeed said \[in Scripture to
be\], as it were, one; \[while they maintain\], notwithstanding, that
each one of them should be understood \[to exist\] separately \[from the
rest\], and to have \[had\] his own special origin, according to his
peculiar conjunction. \[It appears\], then <span
id="fr_4268"></span>[4269](#fn_4268) that their tongues alone, forsooth,
have conceded the unity \[of God\], while their \[real\] opinion and
their understanding (by their habit of investigating profundities) have
fallen away from \[this doctrine of\] unity, and taken up the notion of
manifold deities,—\[this, I say, must appear\] when they shall be
examined by Christ as to the points \[of doctrine\] which they have
invented. Him, too, they affirm to have been born at a later period than
the Pleroma of the Æons, and that His production took place after \[the
occurrence of\] a degeneracy or apostasy; and they maintain that, on
account of the passion which was experienced by Sophia, they themselves
were brought to the birth. But their own special prophet Homer,
listening to whom they have invented such doctrines, shall himself
reprove them, when he expresses himself as follows:—

> <span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p20.1"></span> “Hateful to me that man as Hades’
> gates,  
> Who one thing thinks, while he another states.” <span
> id="fr_4269"></span>[4270](#fn_4269)  

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p22"></span>\[This spiritual man\] shall also
judge the vain speeches of the perverse Gnostics, by showing that they
are the disciples of Simon Magus.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p23"></span>4. He will judge also the Ebionites;
\[for\] how can they be saved unless it was God who wrought out their
salvation upon earth? Or how shall man pass into God, unless God has
\[first\] passed into man? And how shall he (man) escape from the
generation subject to death, if not by means <span
id="fr_4270"></span>[4271](#fn_4270) of a new generation, given in a
wonderful and unexpected manner (but as a sign of salvation) by God—\[I
mean\] that regeneration which flows from the virgin through
faith? <span id="fr_4271"></span>[4272](#fn_4271) Or how shall they
receive adoption from God if they remain in this \[kind of\] generation,
which is naturally possessed by man in this world? And how could He
(Christ) have been greater than Solomon, <span
id="fr_4272"></span>[4273](#fn_4272) or greater than Jonah, or have been
the Lord of David, <span id="fr_4273"></span>[4274](#fn_4273) who was of
the same substance as they were? How, too, could He have subdued <span
id="fr_4274"></span>[4275](#fn_4274) him who was stronger than
men, <span id="fr_4275"></span>[4276](#fn_4275) who had not only
overcome man, but also retained him under his power, and conquered him
who had conquered, while he set free mankind who had been conquered,
unless He had been greater than man who had thus been vanquished? But
who else is superior to, and more eminent than, that man who was formed
after the likeness of God, except the Son of God, after whose image man
was created? And for this reason He did in these last days <span
id="fr_4276"></span>[4277](#fn_4276) exhibit the similitude; \[for\] the
Son of God was made man, assuming the ancient production \[of His
hands\] into His own nature, <span id="fr_4277"></span>[4278](#fn_4277)
as I have shown in the immediately preceding book.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p32"></span> <span id="page_508">p. 508</span>
<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-Page_508"></span> 5. He shall also judge those who
describe Christ as \[having become man\] only in \[human\] opinion. For
how can they imagine that they do themselves carry on a real discussion,
when their Master was a mere imaginary being? Or how can they receive
anything stedfast from Him, if He was a merely imagined being, and not a
verity? And how can these men really be partaken of salvation, if He in
whom they profess to believe, manifested Himself as a merely imaginary
being? Everything, therefore, connected with these men is unreal, and
nothing \[possessed of the character of\] truth; and, in these
circumstances, it may be made a question whether (since, perchance, they
themselves in like manner are not men, but mere dumb animals) they do
not present, <span id="fr_4278"></span>[4279](#fn_4278) in most cases,
simply a shadow of humanity.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p34"></span>6. He shall also judge false prophets,
who, without having received the gift of prophecy from God, and not
possessed of the fear of God, but either for the sake of vainglory, or
with a view to some personal advantage, or acting in some other way
under the influence of a wicked spirit, pretend to utter prophecies,
while all the time they lie against God.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p35"></span>7. He shall also judge those who give
rise to schisms, who are destitute of the love of God, and who look to
their own special advantage rather than to the unity of the Church; and
who for trifling reasons, or any kind of reason which occurs to them,
cut in pieces and divide the great and glorious body of Christ, and so
far as in them lies, \[positively\] destroy it,—men who prate of peace
while they give rise to war, and do in truth strain out a gnat, but
swallow a camel. <span id="fr_4279"></span>[4280](#fn_4279) For no
reformation of so great importance can be effected by them, as will
compensate for the mischief arising from their schism. He shall also
judge all those who are beyond the pale of the truth, that is, who are
outside the Church; but he himself shall be judged by no one. For to him
all things are consistent: he has a full faith in one God Almighty, of
whom are all things; and in the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, by
whom are all things, and in the dispensations connected with Him, by
means of which the Son of God became man; and a firm belief in the
Spirit of God, who furnishes us with a knowledge of the truth, and has
set forth the dispensations of the Father and the Son, in virtue of
which He dwells with every generation of men, <span
id="fr_4280"></span>[4281](#fn_4280) according to the will of the
Father.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p38"></span>8. True knowledge <span
id="fr_4281"></span>[4282](#fn_4281) is \[that which consists in\] the
doctrine of the apostles, and the ancient constitution <span
id="fr_4282"></span>[4283](#fn_4282) of the Church throughout all the
world, and the distinctive manifestation of the body <span
id="fr_4283"></span>[4284](#fn_4283) of Christ according to the
successions of the bishops, by which they have handed down that Church
which exists in every place, and has come even unto us, being guarded
and preserved <span id="fr_4284"></span>[4285](#fn_4284) without any
forging of Scriptures, by a very complete system <span
id="fr_4285"></span>[4286](#fn_4285) of doctrine, and neither receiving
addition nor \[suffering\] curtailment \[in the truths which she
believes\]; and \[it consists in\] reading \[the word of God\] without
falsification, and a lawful and diligent exposition in harmony with the
Scriptures, both without danger and without blasphemy; and \[above all,
it consists in\] the pre-eminent gift of love, <span
id="fr_4286"></span>[4287](#fn_4286) which is more precious than
knowledge, more glorious than prophecy, and which excels all the other
gifts \[of God\].

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p45"></span>9. Wherefore the Church does in every
place, because of that love which she cherishes towards God, send
forward, throughout all time, a multitude of martyrs to the Father;
while all others <span id="fr_4287"></span>[4288](#fn_4287) not only
have nothing of this kind to point to among themselves, but even
maintain that such witness-bearing is not at all necessary, for that
their system of doctrines is the true witness \[for Christ\], with the
exception, perhaps, that one or two among them, during the whole time
which has elapsed since the Lord appeared on earth, have occasionally,
along with our martyrs, borne the reproach of the name (as if he too
\[the heretic\] had obtained mercy), and have been led forth with them
\[to death\], being, as it were, a sort of retinue granted unto them.
For the Church alone sustains with purity the reproach of those who
suffer persecution for righteousness’ sake, and endure all sorts of
punishments, and are put to death because of the love which they bear to
God, and their confession of His Son; often weakened indeed, yet
immediately increasing her members, and becoming whole again, after the
same manner as her type, <span id="fr_4288"></span>[4289](#fn_4288)
Lot’s wife, who became a pillar of salt. Thus, too, \[she passes through
an experience\] similar to that of the ancient prophets, as the Lord
declares, “For so persecuted they <span id="page_509">p. 509</span>
<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-Page_509"></span> the prophets who were before
you;” <span id="fr_4289"></span>[4290](#fn_4289) inasmuch as she does
indeed, in a new fashion, suffer persecution from those who do not
receive the word of God, while the self-same spirit rests upon her <span
id="fr_4290"></span>[4291](#fn_4290) \[as upon these ancient prophets\].

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p50"></span>10. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p50.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p50.2"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p50.3"></span>And indeed the prophets, along with other
things which they predicted, also foretold this, that all those on whom
the Spirit of God should rest, and who would obey the word of the
Father, and serve Him according to their ability, should suffer
persecution, and be stoned and slain. For the prophets prefigured in
themselves all these things, because of their love to God, and on
account of His word. <span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p50.4"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p50.5"></span>For since they themselves were members of
Christ, each one of them in his place as a member did, in accordance
with this, set forth the prophecy \[assigned him\]; all of them,
although many, prefiguring only one, and proclaiming the things which
pertain to one. For just as the working of the whole body is exhibited
through means of our members, while the figure of a complete man is not
displayed by one member, but through means of all taken together, so
also did all the prophets prefigure the one \[Christ\]; while every one
of them, in his special place as a member, did, in accordance with this,
fill up the \[established\] dispensation, and shadowed forth beforehand
that particular working of Christ which was connected with that member.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p51"></span>11. For some of them, beholding Him in
glory, saw His glorious life (*conversationem*) at the Father’s right
hand; <span id="fr_4291"></span>[4292](#fn_4291) others beheld Him
coming on the clouds as the Son of man; <span
id="fr_4292"></span>[4293](#fn_4292) and those who declared regarding
Him, “They shall look on Him whom they have pierced,” <span
id="fr_4293"></span>[4294](#fn_4293) indicated His \[second\] advent,
concerning which He Himself says, “Thinkest thou that when the Son of
man cometh, He shall find faith on the earth?” <span
id="fr_4294"></span>[4295](#fn_4294) Paul also refers to this event when
he says, “If, however, it is a righteous thing with God to recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that are troubled rest
with us, at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with His
mighty angels, and in a flame of fire.” <span
id="fr_4295"></span>[4296](#fn_4295) Others again, speaking of Him as a
judge, and \[referring\], as if it were a burning furnace, \[to\] the
day of the Lord, who “gathers the wheat into His barn, but will burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire,” <span
id="fr_4296"></span>[4297](#fn_4296) were accustomed to threaten those
who were unbelieving, concerning whom also the Lord Himself declares,
“Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which my Father has
prepared for the devil and his angels.” <span
id="fr_4297"></span>[4298](#fn_4297) And the apostle in like manner says
\[of them\], “Who shall be punished with everlasting death from the face
of the Lord, and from the glory of His power, when He shall come to be
glorified in His saints, and to be admired in those who believe in
Him.” <span id="fr_4298"></span>[4299](#fn_4298) There are also some
\[of them\] who declare, “Thou art fairer than the children of
men;” <span id="fr_4299"></span>[4300](#fn_4299) and, “God, Thy God,
hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows;” <span
id="fr_4300"></span>[4301](#fn_4300) and, “Gird Thy sword upon Thy
thigh, O Most Mighty, with Thy beauty and Thy fairness, and go forward
and proceed prosperously; and rule Thou because of truth, and meekness,
and righteousness.” <span id="fr_4301"></span>[4302](#fn_4301) And
whatever other things of a like nature are spoken regarding Him, these
indicated that beauty and splendour which exist in His kingdom, along
with the transcendent and pre-eminent exaltation \[belonging\] to all
who are under His sway, that those who hear might desire to be found
there, doing such things as are pleasing to God. Again, there are those
who say, “He is a man, and who shall know him?” <span
id="fr_4302"></span>[4303](#fn_4302) and, “I came unto the prophetess,
and she bare a son, and His name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, the
Mighty God;” <span id="fr_4303"></span>[4304](#fn_4303) and those \[of
them\] who proclaimed Him as Immanuel, \[born\] of the Virgin, exhibited
the union of the Word of God with His own workmanship, \[declaring\]
that the Word should become flesh, and the Son of God the Son of man
(the pure One opening purely that pure womb which regenerates men unto
God, and which He Himself made pure); and having become this which we
also are, He \[nevertheless\] is the Mighty God, and possesses a
generation which cannot be declared. And there are also some of them who
say, “The Lord hath spoken in Zion, and uttered His voice from
Jerusalem;” <span id="fr_4304"></span>[4305](#fn_4304) and, “In Judah is
God known;” <span id="fr_4305"></span>[4306](#fn_4305) — these indicated
His advent which took place in Judea. Those, again, who declare that
“God comes from the south, and from a mountain thick with
foliage,” <span id="fr_4306"></span>[4307](#fn_4306) announced His
advent at Bethlehem, as I have pointed out in the preceding book. <span
id="fr_4307"></span>[4308](#fn_4307) From that place, also, He who
rules, and who feeds the people of His Father, has come. Those, again,
who declare that at His coming “the lame man shall leap as an hart, and
the tongue of the dumb shall <span id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-Page_510"></span> \[speak\] plainly, and the eyes of the
blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear,” <span
id="fr_4308"></span>[4309](#fn_4308) and that “the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees, shall be strengthened,” <span
id="fr_4309"></span>[4310](#fn_4309) and that “the dead which are in the
grave shall arise,” <span id="fr_4310"></span>[4311](#fn_4310) and that
He Himself “shall take \[upon Him\] our weaknesses, and bear our
sorrows,” <span id="fr_4311"></span>[4312](#fn_4311) — \[all these\]
proclaimed those works of healing which were accomplished by Him.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p73"></span>12. Some of them, moreover—\[when they
predicted that\] as a weak and inglorious man, and as one who knew what
it was to bear infirmity, <span id="fr_4312"></span>[4313](#fn_4312) and
sitting upon the foal of an ass, <span
id="fr_4313"></span>[4314](#fn_4313) He should come to Jerusalem; and
that He should give His back to stripes, <span
id="fr_4314"></span>[4315](#fn_4314) and His cheeks to palms \[which
struck Him\]; and that He should be led as a sheep to the
slaughter; <span id="fr_4315"></span>[4316](#fn_4315) and that He should
have vinegar and gall given Him to drink; <span
id="fr_4316"></span>[4317](#fn_4316) and that He should be forsaken by
His friends and those nearest to Him; <span
id="fr_4317"></span>[4318](#fn_4317) and that He should stretch forth
His hands the whole day long; <span id="fr_4318"></span>[4319](#fn_4318)
and that He should be mocked and maligned by those who looked upon
Him; <span id="fr_4319"></span>[4320](#fn_4319) and that His garments
should be parted, and lots cast upon His raiment; <span
id="fr_4320"></span>[4321](#fn_4320) and that He should be brought down
to the dust of death <span id="fr_4321"></span>[4322](#fn_4321) with all
\[the other\] things of a like nature—prophesied His coming in the
character of a man as He entered Jerusalem, in which by His passion and
crucifixion He endured all the things which have been mentioned. Others,
again, when they said, “The holy Lord remembered His own dead ones who
slept in the dust, and came down to them to raise them up, that He might
save them,” <span id="fr_4322"></span>[4323](#fn_4322) furnished us with
the reason on account of which He suffered all these things. Those,
moreover, who said, “In that day, saith the Lord, the sun shall go down
at noon, and there shall be darkness over the earth in the clear day;
and I will turn your feast days into mourning, and all your songs into
lamentation,” <span id="fr_4323"></span>[4324](#fn_4323) plainly
announced that obscuration of the sun which at the time of His
crucifixion took place from the sixth hour onwards, and that after this
event, those days which were their festivals according to the law, and
their songs, should be changed into grief and lamentation when they were
handed over to the Gentiles. Jeremiah, too, makes this point still
clearer, when he thus speaks concerning Jerusalem: “She that hath born
\[seven\] languisheth; her soul hath become weary; her sun hath gone
down while it was yet noon; she hath been confounded, and suffered
reproach: the remainder of them will I give to the sword in the sight of
their enemies.” <span id="fr_4324"></span>[4325](#fn_4324)

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p87"></span>13. Those of them, again, who spoke of
His having slumbered and taken sleep, and of His having risen again
because the Lord sustained Him, <span
id="fr_4325"></span>[4326](#fn_4325) and who enjoined the principalities
of heaven to set open the everlasting doors, that the King of glory
might go in, <span id="fr_4326"></span>[4327](#fn_4326) proclaimed
beforehand His resurrection from the dead through the Father’s power,
and His reception into heaven. And when they expressed themselves thus,
“His going forth is from the height of heaven, and His returning even to
the highest heaven; and there is no one who can hide himself from His
heat,” <span id="fr_4327"></span>[4328](#fn_4327) they announced that
very truth of His being taken up again to the place from which He came
down, and that there is no one who can escape His righteous judgment.
And those who said, “The Lord hath reigned; let the people be enraged:
\[even\] He who sitteth upon the cherubim; let the earth be
moved,” <span id="fr_4328"></span>[4329](#fn_4328) were thus predicting
partly that wrath from all nations which after His ascension came upon
those who believed in Him, with the movement of the whole earth against
the Church; and partly the fact that, when He comes from heaven with His
mighty angels, the whole earth shall be shaken, as He Himself declares,
“There shall be a great earthquake, such as has not been from the
beginning.” <span id="fr_4329"></span>[4330](#fn_4329) And again, when
one says, “Whosoever is judged, let him stand opposite; and whosoever is
justified, let him draw near to the servant <span
id="fr_4330"></span>[4331](#fn_4330) of God;” <span
id="fr_4331"></span>[4332](#fn_4331) and, “Woe unto you, for ye shall
wax old as doth a garment, and the moth shall eat you up;” and, “All
flesh shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in the
highest,” <span id="fr_4332"></span>[4333](#fn_4332) —it is thus
indicated that, after His passion and ascension, God shall cast down
under His feet all who were opposed to Him, and He shall be exalted
above all, and there shall be no one who can be justified or compared to
Him.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p96"></span>14. And those of them who declare that
God would make a new covenant <span id="fr_4333"></span>[4334](#fn_4333)
with men, not such as that which He made with the fathers at Mount
Horeb, and would give to men a new heart and a new spirit; <span
id="fr_4334"></span>[4335](#fn_4334) and again, “And remember ye not the
things of old: behold, I <span id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-Page_511"></span> make new things which shall now arise,
and ye shall know it; and I will make a way in the desert, and rivers in
a dry land, to give drink to my chosen people, my people whom I have
acquired, that they may show forth my praise,” <span
id="fr_4335"></span>[4336](#fn_4335) —plainly announced that liberty
which distinguishes the new covenant, and the new wine which is put into
new bottles, <span id="fr_4336"></span>[4337](#fn_4336) \[that is\], the
faith which is in Christ, by which He has proclaimed the way of
righteousness sprung up in the desert, and the streams of the Holy
Spirit in a dry land, to give water to the elect people of God, whom He
has acquired, that they might show forth His praise, but not that they
might blaspheme Him who made these things, that is, God.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p101"></span>15. And all those other points which
I have shown the prophets to have uttered by means of so long a series
of Scriptures, he who is truly spiritual will interpret by pointing out,
in regard to every one of the things which have been spoken, to what
special point in the dispensation of the Lord is referred, and \[by thus
exhibiting\] the entire system of the work of the Son of God, knowing
always the same God, and always acknowledging the same Word of God,
although He has \[but\] now been manifested to us; acknowledging also at
all times the same Spirit of God, although He has been poured out upon
us after a new fashion in these last times, \[knowing that He descends\]
even from the creation of the world to its end upon the human race
simply as such, from whom those who believe God and follow His word
receive that salvation which flows from Him. Those, on the other hand,
who depart from Him, and despise His precepts, and by their deeds bring
dishonour on Him who made them, and by their opinions blaspheme Him who
nourishes them, heap up against themselves most righteous
judgment. <span id="fr_4337"></span>[4338](#fn_4337) He therefore (i.e.,
the spiritual man) sifts and tries them all, but he himself is tried by
no man: <span id="fr_4338"></span>[4339](#fn_4338) he neither blasphemes
his Father, nor sets aside His dispensations, nor inveighs against the
fathers, nor dishonours the prophets, by maintaining that they were
\[sent\] from another God \[than he worships\], or again, that their
prophecies were derived from different sources. <span
id="fr_4339"></span>[4340](#fn_4339)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4252"></span>[506:4253](0010828.htm#fr_4252) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p2"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>.
\[The argument of this chapter hinges on [Ps. xxv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>,
and expounds a difficult text of St. Paul. A man who has the mind of
God’s Spirit is the only judge of spiritual things. Worldly men are
incompetent critics of Scripture and of Christian exposition.

<span id="fn_4253"></span>[506:4254](0010828.htm#fr_4253) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p3"></span> [Rom. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4254"></span>[506:4255](0010828.htm#fr_4254) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p4"></span> [Isa. liii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4255"></span>[506:4256](0010828.htm#fr_4255) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p5"></span> [Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4256"></span>[506:4257](0010828.htm#fr_4256) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p6"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4257"></span>[506:4258](0010828.htm#fr_4257) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p7"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4258"></span>[506:4259](0010828.htm#fr_4258) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p8"></span> [Ex. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4259"></span>[506:4260](0010828.htm#fr_4259) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p9"></span> [Isa. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4260"></span>[506:4261](0010828.htm#fr_4260) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p10"></span> Comp. book iii. 20, 4.

<span id="fn_4261"></span>[506:4262](0010828.htm#fr_4261) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p11"></span> [Dan. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4262"></span>[506:4263](0010828.htm#fr_4262) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p12"></span> [Mal. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4263"></span>[506:4264](0010828.htm#fr_4263) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p13"></span> [Isa. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4264"></span>[506:4265](0010828.htm#fr_4264) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p14"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>; [Luke iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#017)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4265"></span>[507:4266](0010828.htm#fr_4265) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p16"></span> Harvey points this sentence
interrogatively.

<span id="fn_4266"></span>[507:4267](0010828.htm#fr_4266) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p17"></span> “Temperamentum calicis:” on which
Harvey remarks that “the mixture of water with the wine in the holy
Eucharist was the universal practice of antiquity … the wine signifying
the mystical Head of the Church, the water the body.” \[Whatever the
significance, it harmonizes with the Paschal chalice, and with [1 John
v. 6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>, and St. John’s gospel [John
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p17.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_4267"></span>[507:4268](0010828.htm#fr_4267) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p18"></span> [John xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4268"></span>[507:4269](0010828.htm#fr_4268) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p20"></span> This sentence is very obscure in the
Latin text.

<span id="fn_4269"></span>[507:4270](0010828.htm#fr_4269) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p20.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p21"></span> *Iliad*, ix. 312, 313.

<span id="fn_4270"></span>[507:4271](0010828.htm#fr_4270) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p24"></span> The text is obscure, and the
construction doubtful.

<span id="fn_4271"></span>[507:4272](0010828.htm#fr_4271) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p25"></span> The Latin here is, “quæ est ex
virgine per fidem regenerationem.” According to Massuet, “virgine” here
refers not to Mary, but to the Church. Grabe suspects that some words
have been lost.

<span id="fn_4272"></span>[507:4273](0010828.htm#fr_4272) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p26"></span> [Matt.
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4273"></span>[507:4274](0010828.htm#fr_4273) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p27"></span> [Matt. xxii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4274"></span>[507:4275](0010828.htm#fr_4274) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p28"></span> [Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p28.1"></span>; [Luke
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#022)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p28.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4275"></span>[507:4276](0010828.htm#fr_4275) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p29"></span> Literally, “who was strong against
men.”

<span id="fn_4276"></span>[507:4277](0010828.htm#fr_4276) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p30"></span> In fine; lit. “in the end.”

<span id="fn_4277"></span>[507:4278](0010828.htm#fr_4277) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p31"></span> In semetipsum: lit. “unto Himself.”

<span id="fn_4278"></span>[508:4279](0010828.htm#fr_4278) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p33"></span> We here follow the reading
“proferant:” the passage is difficult and obscure, but the meaning is as
above.

<span id="fn_4279"></span>[508:4280](0010828.htm#fr_4279) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p36"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4280"></span>[508:4281](0010828.htm#fr_4280) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p37"></span> The Greek text here is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p37.1"></span>σκηνοβατοῦν</span>
(lit. “to tabernacle:” comp. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p37.2"></span>ἐσκήνωσεν</span>, [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p37.3"></span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p37.4"></span>καθ’ ἐκάστην γενεὰν ἐν τοῖς
ἀνθρώποις</span>: the Latin is, “Secundum quas (dispositiones) aderat
generi humano.” We have endeavoured to express the meaning of both.

<span id="fn_4281"></span>[508:4282](0010828.htm#fr_4281) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p39"></span> The following section is an important
one, but very difficult to translate with undoubted accuracy. The
editors differ considerably both as to the construction and the
interpretation. We have done our best to represent the meaning in
English, but may not have been altogether successful.

<span id="fn_4282"></span>[508:4283](0010828.htm#fr_4282) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p40"></span> The Greek is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p40.1"></span>σύστημα</span>: the
Latin text has “status.”

<span id="fn_4283"></span>[508:4284](0010828.htm#fr_4283) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p41"></span> The Latin is, “character corporis.”

<span id="fn_4284"></span>[508:4285](0010828.htm#fr_4284) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p42"></span> The text here is, “custodita sine
fictione scripturarum;” some prefer joining “scripturarum” to the
following words.

<span id="fn_4285"></span>[508:4286](0010828.htm#fr_4285) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p43"></span> We follow Harvey’s text,
“tractatione;” others read “tractatio.” According to Harvey, the creed
of the Church is denoted by “tractatione;” but Massuet renders the
clause thus: \[“True knowledge consists in\] a very complete *tractatio*
of the Scriptures, which has come down to us by being preserved
(‘custoditione’ being read instead of ‘custodita’) without
falsification.”

<span id="fn_4286"></span>[508:4287](0010828.htm#fr_4286) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p44"></span> Comp. [2 Cor. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p44.1"></span>;
[1 Cor. xiii.](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#000)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="fn_4287"></span>[508:4288](0010828.htm#fr_4287) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p46"></span> i.e., the heretics.

<span id="fn_4288"></span>[508:4289](0010828.htm#fr_4288) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p47"></span> Comp. above, xxxi. 2.

<span id="fn_4289"></span>[509:4290](0010828.htm#fr_4289) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p48"></span> [Matt. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4290"></span>[509:4291](0010828.htm#fr_4290) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p49"></span> Comp. [1 Pet. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4291"></span>[509:4292](0010828.htm#fr_4291) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p52"></span> [Isa. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p52.1"></span>;
[Ps. cx. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p52.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4292"></span>[509:4293](0010828.htm#fr_4292) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p52.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p53"></span> [Dan. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4293"></span>[509:4294](0010828.htm#fr_4293) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p54"></span> [Zech. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4294"></span>[509:4295](0010828.htm#fr_4294) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p55"></span> [Luke xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p55.1"></span>.
There is nothing to correspond with “putas” in the received text.

<span id="fn_4295"></span>[509:4296](0010828.htm#fr_4295) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p56"></span> [2 Thess. i.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4296"></span>[509:4297](0010828.htm#fr_4296) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p57"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4297"></span>[509:4298](0010828.htm#fr_4297) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p58"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4298"></span>[509:4299](0010828.htm#fr_4298) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p59"></span> [2 Thess.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4299"></span>[509:4300](0010828.htm#fr_4299) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p60"></span> [Ps. xlv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4300"></span>[509:4301](0010828.htm#fr_4300) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p61"></span> [Ps. xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4301"></span>[509:4302](0010828.htm#fr_4301) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p62"></span> [Ps.
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4302"></span>[509:4303](0010828.htm#fr_4302) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p63"></span> [Jer. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p63.1"></span>
(LXX.). Harvey here remarks: “The LXX. read <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p63.2"></span>אֱנֹושׁ</span> instead of <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p63.3"></span>אָנֹושׁ</span>. Thus,
from a text that teaches us that *the heart is deceitful above all
things*, the Fathers extract a proof of the manhood of Christ.”

<span id="fn_4303"></span>[509:4304](0010828.htm#fr_4303) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p63.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p64"></span> [Isa. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p64.1"></span>,
[Isa. ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p64.2"></span>, [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p64.3"></span>. \[A confusion of texts.\]

<span id="fn_4304"></span>[509:4305](0010828.htm#fr_4304) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p64.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p65"></span> [Joel iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4305"></span>[509:4306](0010828.htm#fr_4305) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p66"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4306"></span>[509:4307](0010828.htm#fr_4306) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p67"></span> [Hab. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4307"></span>[509:4308](0010828.htm#fr_4307) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p68"></span> See III. xx. 4.

<span id="fn_4308"></span>[510:4309](0010828.htm#fr_4308) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p69"></span> [Isa.
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4309"></span>[510:4310](0010828.htm#fr_4309) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p70"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4310"></span>[510:4311](0010828.htm#fr_4310) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p71"></span> [Isa. xxvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4311"></span>[510:4312](0010828.htm#fr_4311) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p72"></span> [Isa. liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4312"></span>[510:4313](0010828.htm#fr_4312) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p74"></span> [Isa. liii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4313"></span>[510:4314](0010828.htm#fr_4313) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p75"></span> [Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4314"></span>[510:4315](0010828.htm#fr_4314) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p76"></span> [Isa. l.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4315"></span>[510:4316](0010828.htm#fr_4315) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p77"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4316"></span>[510:4317](0010828.htm#fr_4316) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p78"></span> [Ps. lxix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4317"></span>[510:4318](0010828.htm#fr_4317) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p79"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4318"></span>[510:4319](0010828.htm#fr_4318) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p80"></span> [Isa. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4319"></span>[510:4320](0010828.htm#fr_4319) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p81"></span> [Ps. xxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4320"></span>[510:4321](0010828.htm#fr_4320) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p82"></span> [Ps. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4321"></span>[510:4322](0010828.htm#fr_4321) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p82.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p83"></span> [Ps. xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4322"></span>[510:4323](0010828.htm#fr_4322) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p84"></span> Comp. book iii. cap. xx. 4 and book
iv. cap xxii. 1.

<span id="fn_4323"></span>[510:4324](0010828.htm#fr_4323) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p85"></span> [Amos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4324"></span>[510:4325](0010828.htm#fr_4324) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p86"></span> [Jer. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4325"></span>[510:4326](0010828.htm#fr_4325) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p88"></span> [Ps. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4326"></span>[510:4327](0010828.htm#fr_4326) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p89"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4327"></span>[510:4328](0010828.htm#fr_4327) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p90"></span> [Ps. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4328"></span>[510:4329](0010828.htm#fr_4328) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p91"></span> [Ps. xcix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4329"></span>[510:4330](0010828.htm#fr_4329) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p92"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4330"></span>[510:4331](0010828.htm#fr_4330) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p93"></span> Or “son.”

<span id="fn_4331"></span>[510:4332](0010828.htm#fr_4331) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p94"></span> [Isa.
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p94.1"></span>
(loosely quoted).

<span id="fn_4332"></span>[510:4333](0010828.htm#fr_4332) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p95"></span> [Isa. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4333"></span>[510:4334](0010828.htm#fr_4333) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p97"></span> [Jer.
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4334"></span>[510:4335](0010828.htm#fr_4334) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p98"></span> [Ezek. xxxvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4335"></span>[511:4336](0010828.htm#fr_4335) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p99"></span> [Isa. xliii.
19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4336"></span>[511:4337](0010828.htm#fr_4336) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p100"></span> [Matt. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#017)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4337"></span>[511:4338](0010828.htm#fr_4337) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p102"></span> [Rom. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4338"></span>[511:4339](0010828.htm#fr_4338) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p103"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4339"></span>[511:4340](0010828.htm#fr_4339) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxiv-p104"></span> “Ex alia et alia substantia fuisse
prophetias.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV.—Proof against the...](0010829)
