[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010737)  [Next](0010739) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.ix"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Created things are not a shadow of the Pleroma.

<span id="ix.iii.ix-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>If,
again, they declare that these things \[below\] are a shadow of those
\[above\], as some of them are bold enough to maintain, so that in this
respect they are images, then it will be necessary for them to allow
that those things which are above are possessed of bodies. For those
bodies which are above do cast a shadow, but spiritual substances do
not, since they can in no degree darken others. If, however, we also
grant them this point (though it is, in fact, an impossibility), that
there is a shadow belonging to those essences which are spiritual and
lucent, into which they declare their Mother descended; yet, since those
things \[which are above\] are eternal, and that shadow which is cast by
them endures for ever, \[it follows that\] these things \[below\] are
also not transitory, but endure along with those which cast their shadow
over them. If, on the other hand, these things \[below\] are transitory,
it is a necessary consequence that those \[above\] also, of which these
are the shadow, pass away; while; if they endure, their shadow likewise
endures.

<span id="ix.iii.ix-p2"></span>2. If, however, they maintain that the
shadow spoken of does not exist as being produced by the shade of
\[those above\], but simply in this respect, that \[the things below\]
are far separated from those \[above\], they will then charge the light
of their Father with weakness and insufficiency, as if it cannot extend
so far as these things, but fails to fill that which is empty, and to
dispel the shadow, and that when no one is offering any hindrance. For,
according to them, the light of their Father will be changed into
darkness and buried in obscurity, and will come to an end in those
places which are characterized by emptiness, since it cannot penetrate
and fill all things. Let them then no longer declare that their Bythus
is the fulness of all things, if indeed he has neither filled nor
illuminated that which is vacuum and shadow; or, on the other hand, let
them cease talking of vacuum and shadow, if the light of their Father
does in truth fill all things.

<span id="ix.iii.ix-p3"></span>3. Beyond the primary Father, then—that
is, the God who is over all—there can neither be any Pleroma into which
they declare the Enthymesis of that Æon who suffered passion, descended
(so that the Pleroma itself, or the primary God, should not be limited
and circumscribed by that which is beyond, and should, in fact, be
contained by it); nor can vacuum or shadow have any existence, since the
Father exists beforehand, so that His light cannot fail, and find end in
a vacuum. It is, moreover, irrational and impious to conceive of a place
in which He who is, according to them, Propator, and Proarche, and
Father of all, and of this <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="ix.iii.ix-Page_369"></span> Pleroma, ceases and has an end. Nor,
again, is it allowable, for the reasons <span
id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023) already stated, to allege that some
other being formed so vast a creation in the bosom of the Father, either
with or without His consent. For it is equally impious and infatuated to
affirm that so great a creation was <span
id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) formed by angels, or by some
particular production ignorant of the true God in that territory which
is His own. Nor is it possible that those things which are earthly and
material could have been formed within their Pleroma, since that is
wholly spiritual. And further, it is not even possible that those things
which belong to a multiform creation, and have been formed with mutually
opposite qualities \[could have been created\] after the image of the
things above, since these (i.e., the Æons) are said to be few, and of a
like formation, and homogeneous. Their talk, too, about the shadow of
*kenoma*— that is, of a vacuum—has in all points turned out false. Their
figment, then, \[in what way soever viewed,\] has been proved
groundless, <span id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025) and their
doctrines untenable. Empty, too, are those who listen to them, and are
verily descending into the abyss of perdition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[369:3024](0010738.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="ix.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.ix-p4"></span> See above, chap. ii. and v.

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[369:3025](0010738.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="ix.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.ix-p5"></span> The text has *fabricâsse*, for which,
says Massuet, should be read *fabricatam esse*; or *fabricâsse* itself
must be taken in a passive signification. It is possible, however, to
translate, as Harvey indicates, “that He (Bythus) formed so great a
creation by angels,” etc., though this seems harsh and unsuitable.

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[369:3026](0010738.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="ix.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.ix-p6"></span> Literally, *empty*: there is a play on
the words *vacuum* and *vacui* (which immediately follows), as there had
been in the original Greek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—There is but one Creator...](0010739)
