[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010778)  [Next](0010780) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xiii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Doctrine of the rest of the apostles.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>The
Apostle Peter, therefore, after the resurrection of the Lord, and His
assumption into the heavens, being desirous of filling up the number of
the twelve apostles, and in electing into the place of Judas any
substitute who should be chosen by God, thus addressed those who were
present: “Men \[and\] brethren, this Scripture must needs have been
fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of David, spake before
concerning Judas, which was made guide to them that took Jesus. For he
was numbered with us: <span id="fr_3465"></span>[3466](#fn_3465) … Let
his habitation be desolate, <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_430"></span> and let no man dwell therein; <span
id="fr_3466"></span>[3467](#fn_3466) and, His bishoprick let another
take;” <span id="fr_3467"></span>[3468](#fn_3467) —thus leading to the
completion of the apostles, according to the words spoken by David.
Again, when the Holy Ghost had descended upon the disciples, that they
all might prophesy and speak with tongues, and some mocked them, as if
drunken with new wine, Peter said that they were not drunken, for it was
the third hour of the day; but that this was what had been spoken by the
prophet: “It shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour
out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and they shall prophesy.” <span
id="fr_3468"></span>[3469](#fn_3468) The God, therefore, who did promise
by the prophet, that He would send His Spirit upon the whole human race,
was He who did send; and God Himself is announced by Peter as having
fulfilled His own promise.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p6"></span>2. For Peter said, “Ye men of Israel,
hear my words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God among you by
powers, and wonders, and signs, which God did by Him in the midst of
you, as ye yourselves also know: Him, being delivered by the determined
counsel and foreknowledge of God, by the hands of wicked men ye have
slain, affixing \[to the cross\]: whom God hath raised up, having loosed
the pains of death; because it was not possible that he should be holden
of them. For David speaketh concerning Him, <span
id="fr_3469"></span>[3470](#fn_3469) I foresaw the Lord always before my
face; for He is on my right hand, lest I should be moved: therefore did
my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also, my flesh shall
rest in hope: because Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt
Thou give Thy Holy One to see corruption.” <span
id="fr_3470"></span>[3471](#fn_3470) Then he proceeds to speak
confidently to them concerning the patriarch David, that he was dead and
buried, and that his sepulchre is with them to this day. He said, “But
since he was a prophet, and knew that God had sworn with an oath to him,
that of the fruit of his body one should sit in his throne; foreseeing
this, he spake of the resurrection of Christ, that He was not left in
hell, neither did His flesh see corruption. This Jesus,” he said, “hath
God raised up, of which we all are witnesses: who, being exalted by the
right hand of God, receiving from the Father the promise of the Holy
Ghost, hath shed forth this gift <span
id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471) which ye now see and hear. For
David has not ascended into the heavens; but he saith himself, The <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.iv.xiii-p9.3"></span>Lord</span> said unto my
Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand, until I make Thy foes Thy footstool.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made
that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.” <span
id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472) And when the multitudes exclaimed,
“What shall we do then?” Peter says to them, “Repent, and be baptized
everyone of you in the name of Jesus for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473) Thus the apostles did not preach
another God, or another Fulness; nor, that the Christ who suffered and
rose again was one, while he who flew off on high was another, and
remained impassible; but that there was one and the same God the Father,
and Christ Jesus who rose from the dead; and they preached faith in Him,
to those who did not believe on the Son of God, and exhorted them out of
the prophets, that the Christ whom God promised to send, He sent in
Jesus, whom they crucified and God raised up.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p12"></span>3. Again, when Peter, accompanied by
John, had looked upon the man lame from his birth, before that gate of
the temple which is called Beautiful, sitting and seeking alms, he said
to him, “Silver and gold I have none; but such as I have give I thee: In
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk. And immediately
his legs and his feet received strength; and he walked, and entered with
them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God.” <span
id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474) Then, when a multitude had gathered
around them from all quarters because of this unexpected deed, Peter
addressed them: “Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this; or why look ye
so earnestly on us, as though by our own power we had made this man to
walk? The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the
God of our fathers, hath glorified His Son, whom ye delivered up for
judgment, <span id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475) and denied in the
presence of Pilate, when he wished to let Him go. But ye were bitterly
set against <span id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476) the Holy One and
the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; but ye killed
the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead, whereof we are
witnesses. And in the faith of His name, him, whom ye see and know, hath
His name made strong; yea, the faith which is by Him, hath given him
this perfect soundness in the presence of you all. And now, brethren, I
wot that through ignorance ye did this wickedness. <span
id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477) … But those things which God before
had showed by the mouth of all the prophets, that His Christ should
suffer, He hath so fulfilled. Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out, and that <span
id="fr_3478"></span>[3479](#fn_3478) the times of refreshing <span
id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_431"></span> may
come to you from the presence of the Lord; and He shall send Jesus
Christ, prepared for you beforehand, <span
id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) whom the heaven must indeed receive
until the times of the arrangement <span
id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) of all things, of which God hath
spoken by His holy prophets. For Moses truly said unto our fathers, Your
Lord God shall raise up to you a Prophet from your brethren, like unto
me; Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever He shall say unto you.
And it shall come to pass, that every soul, whosoever will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. And all \[the
prophets\] from Samuel, and henceforth, as many as have spoken, have
likewise foretold of these days. Ye are the children of the prophets,
and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto
Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
Unto you first, God, having raised up His Son, sent Him blessing you,
that each may turn himself from his iniquities.” <span
id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481) Peter, together with John, preached
to them this plain message of glad tidings, that the promise which God
made to the fathers had been fulfilled by Jesus; not certainly
proclaiming another god, but the Son of God, who also was made man, and
suffered; thus leading Israel into knowledge, and through Jesus
preaching the resurrection of the dead, <span
id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) and showing, that whatever the
prophets had proclaimed as to the suffering of Christ, these had God
fulfilled.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p22"></span>4. For this reason, too, when the chief
priests were assembled, Peter, full of boldness, said to them, “Ye
rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, if we this day be examined
by you of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he has
been made whole; be it known to you all, and to all the people of
Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified,
whom God raised from the dead, even by Him doth this man stand here
before you whole. This is the stone which was set at nought of you
builders, which is become the head-stone of the corner. \[Neither is
there salvation in any other: for\] there is none other name under
heaven, which is given to men, whereby we must be saved:” <span
id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) Thus the apostles did not change
God, but preached to the people that Christ was Jesus the crucified One,
whom the same God that had sent the prophets, being God Himself, raised
up, and gave in Him salvation to men.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p24"></span>5. They were confounded, therefore,
both by this instance of healing (“for the man was above forty years old
on whom this miracle of healing took place” <span
id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) ), and by the doctrine of the
apostles, and by the exposition of the prophets, when the chief priests
had sent away Peter and John. \[These latter\] returned to the rest of
their fellow-apostles and disciples of the Lord, that is, to the Church,
and related what had occurred, and how courageously they had acted in
the name of Jesus. The whole Church, it is then said, “when they had
heard that, lifted up the voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord,
Thou art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all
that in them is; who, through the Holy Ghost, <span
id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) by the mouth of our father David,
Thy servant, hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine
vain things? The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were
gathered together against the Lord, and against His Christ. For of a
truth, in this city, <span id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486) against
Thy holy Son Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered
together, to do whatsoever Thy hand and Thy counsel determined before to
be done.” <span id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487) These \[are the\]
voices of the Church from which every Church had its origin; these are
the voices of the metropolis of the citizens of the new covenant; these
are the voices of the apostles; these are voices of the disciples of the
Lord, the truly perfect, who, after the assumption of the Lord, were
perfected by the Spirit, and called upon the God who made heaven, and
earth, and the sea,—who was announced by the prophets,— and Jesus Christ
His Son, whom God anointed, and who knew no other \[God\]. For at that
time and place there was neither Valentinus, nor Marcion, nor the rest
of these subverters \[of the truth\], and their adherents. Wherefore
God, the Maker of all things, heard them. For it is said, “The place was
shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldness” <span
id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) to every one that was willing to
believe. <span id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) “And with great
power,” it is added, “gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of
the Lord Jesus,” <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490) saying to
them, “The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye seized and slew,
hanging \[Him\] upon a beam of wood: Him hath God raised up by His right
hand <span id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) to be a Prince and
Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and <span id="page_432">p.
432</span> <span id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_432"></span> forgiveness of sins.
And we are in this witnesses of these words; as also is the Holy Ghost,
whom God hath given to them that believe in Him.” <span
id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) “And daily,” it is said, “in the
temple, and from house to house, they ceased not to teach and preach
Christ Jesus,” <span id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) the Son of
God. For this was the knowledge of salvation, which renders those who
acknowledge His Son’s advent perfect towards God.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p35"></span>6. But as some of these men impudently
assert that the apostles, when preaching among the Jews, could not
declare to them another god besides Him in whom they (their
hearers <span id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) ) believed, we say to
them, that if the apostles used to speak to people in accordance with
the opinion instilled into them of old, no one learned the truth from
them, nor, at a much earlier date, from the Lord; for they say that He
did Himself speak after the same fashion. Wherefore neither do these men
themselves know the truth; but since such was their opinion regarding
God, they had just received doctrine as they were able to hear it.
According to this manner of speaking, therefore, the rule of truth can
be with nobody; but all learners will ascribe this practice to all
\[teachers\], that just as every person thought, and as far as his
capability extended, so was also the language addressed to him. But the
advent of the Lord will appear superfluous and useless, if He did indeed
come intending to tolerate and to preserve each man’s idea regarding God
rooted in him from of old. Besides this, also, it was a much heavier
task, that He whom the Jews had seen as a man, and had fastened to the
cross, should be preached as Christ the Son of God, their eternal King.
Since this, however, was so, they certainly did not speak to them in
accordance with their old belief. For they, who told them to their face
that they were the slayers of the Lord, would themselves also much more
boldly preach that Father who is above the Demiurge, and not what each
individual bid himself believe \[respecting God\]; and the sin was much
less, if indeed they had not fastened to the cross the superior Saviour
(to whom it behoved them to ascend), since He was impassible. For, as
they did not speak to the Gentiles in compliance with their notions, but
told them with boldness that their gods were no gods, but the idols of
demons; so would they in like manner have preached to the Jews, if they
had known another greater or more perfect Father, not nourishing nor
strengthening the untrue opinion of these men regarding God. Moreover,
while destroying the error of the Gentiles, and bearing them away from
their gods, they did not certainly induce another error upon them; but,
removing those which were no gods, they pointed out Him who alone was
God and the true Father.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p37"></span>7. From the words of Peter, therefore,
which he addressed in Cæsarea to Cornelius the centurion, and those
Gentiles with him, to whom the word of God was first preached, we can
understand what the apostles used to preach, the nature of their
preaching, and their idea with regard to God. For this Cornelius was, it
is said, “a devout man, and one who feared God with all his house,
giving much alms to the people, and praying to God always. He saw
therefore, about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to
him, and saying, Thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.
Wherefore send to Simon, who is called Peter.” <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) But when Peter saw the vision, in
which the voice from heaven said to him, “What God hath cleansed, that
call not thou common,” <span id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) this
happened \[to teach him\] that the God who had, through the law,
distinguished between clean and unclean, was He who had purified the
Gentiles through the blood of His Son—He whom also Cornelius worshipped;
to whom Peter, coming in, said, “Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons: but in every nation, he that feareth Him, and
worketh righteousness, is acceptable to Him.” <span
id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) He thus clearly indicates, that He
whom Cornelius had previously feared as God, of whom he had heard
through the law and the prophets, for whose sake also he used to give
alms, is, in truth, God. The knowledge of the Son was, however, wanting
to him; therefore did \[Peter\] add, “The word, ye know, which was
published throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the
baptism which John preached, Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed Him
with the Holy Ghost, and with power; who went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with Him. And
we are witnesses of all those things which He did both in the land of
the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they slew, hanging Him on a beam of
wood: Him God raised up the third day, and showed Him openly; not to all
the people, but unto us, witnesses chosen before of God, who did eat and
drink with Him after the resurrection from the dead. And He commanded us
to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is He which was
ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To Him give all the
prophets witness, that, through His name, every one that believeth in
Him does receive remission of sins.” <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498) The apostles, therefore, did preach
the Son of God, of whom men were ignorant; and His advent, to those
<span id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_433"></span>
who had been already instructed as to God; but they did not bring in
another god. For if Peter had known any such thing, he would have
preached freely to the Gentiles, that the God of the Jews was indeed
one, but the God of the Christians another; and all of them, doubtless,
being awe-struck because of the vision of the angel, would have believed
whatever he told them. But it is evident from Peter’s words that he did
indeed still retain the God who was already known to them; but he also
bare witness to them that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, the Judge of
quick and dead, into whom he did also command them to be baptized for
the remission of sins; and not this alone, but he witnessed that Jesus
was Himself the Son of God, who also, having been anointed with the Holy
Spirit, is called Jesus Christ. And He is the same being that was born
of Mary, as the testimony of Peter implies. Can it really be, that Peter
was not at that time as yet in possession of the perfect knowledge which
these men discovered afterwards? According to them, therefore, Peter was
imperfect, and the rest of the apostles were imperfect; and so it would
be fitting that they, coming to life again, should become disciples of
these men, in order that they too might be made perfect. But this is
truly ridiculous. These men, in fact, are proved to be not disciples of
the apostles, but of their own wicked notions. To this cause also are
due the various opinions which exist among them, inasmuch as each one
adopted error just as he was capable <span
id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499) \[of embracing it\]. But the Church
throughout all the world, having its origin firm from the apostles,
perseveres in one and the same opinion with regard to God and His Son.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p43"></span>8. But again: Whom did Philip preach to
the eunuch of the queen of the Ethiopians, returning from Jerusalem, and
reading Esaias the prophet, when he and this man were alone together?
Was it not He of whom the prophet spoke: “He was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and as a lamb dumb before the shearer, so He opened not the
mouth?” “But who shall declare His nativity? for His life shall be taken
away from the earth.” <span id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500)
\[Philip declared\] that this was Jesus, and that the Scripture was
fulfilled in Him; as did also the believing eunuch himself: and,
immediately requesting to be baptized, he said, “I believe Jesus Christ
to be the Son of God.” <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) This
man was also sent into the regions of Ethiopia, to preach what he had
himself believed, that there was one God preached by the prophets, but
that the Son of this \[God\] had already made \[His\] appearance in
human nature (*secundum hominem*), and had been led as a sheep to the
slaughter; and all the other statements which the prophets made
regarding Him.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p46"></span>9. Paul himself also—after that the
Lord spoke to him out of heaven, and showed him that, in persecuting His
disciples, he persecuted his own Lord, and sent Ananias to him that he
might recover his sight, and be baptized—“preached,” it is said, “Jesus
in the synagogues at Damascus, with all freedom of speech, that this is
the Son of God, the Christ.” <span id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502)
This is the mystery which he says was made known to him by revelation,
that He who suffered under Pontius Pilate, the same is Lord of all, and
King, and God, and Judge, receiving power from Him who is the God of
all, because He became “obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross.” <span id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503) And inasmuch as this
is true, when preaching to the Athenians on the Areopagus—where, no Jews
being present, he had it in his power to preach God with freedom of
speech—he said to them: “God, who made the world, and all things
therein, He, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples
made with hands; neither is He touched <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) by men’s hands, as though He needed
anything, seeing He giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; who
hath made from one blood the whole race of men to dwell upon the face of
the whole earth, <span id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505)
predetermining the times according to the boundary of their habitation,
to seek the Deity, if by any means they might be able to track Him out,
or find Him, although He be not far from each of us. For in Him we live,
and move, and have our being, as certain men of your own have said, For
we are also His offspring. Inasmuch, then, as we are the offspring of
God, we ought not to think that the Deity is like unto gold or silver,
or stone graven by art or man’s device. Therefore God, winking at the
times of ignorance, does now command all men everywhere to turn to Him
with repentance; because He hath appointed a day, on which the world
shall be judged in righteousness by the man Jesus; whereof He hath given
assurance by raising Him from the dead.” <span
id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) Now in this passage he does not
only declare to them God as the Creator of the world, no Jews being
present, but that He did also make one race of men to dwell upon all the
earth; as also Moses declared: “When the Most High divided the nations,
as He scattered the sons of Adam, He set the bounds of the nations after
the number of the angels of God;” <span
id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) but <span id="page_434">p.
434</span> <span id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_434"></span> that people which
believes in God is not now under the power of angels, but under the
Lord’s \[rule\]. “For His people Jacob was made the portion of the Lord,
Israel the cord of His inheritance.” <span
id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) And again, at Lystra of Lycia
(Lycaonia), when Paul was with Barnabas, and in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ had made a man to walk who had been lame from his birth,
and when the crowd wished to honour them as gods because of the
astonishing deed, he said to them: “We are men like unto you, preaching
to you God, that ye may be turned away from these vain idols to
\[serve\] the living God, who made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and
all things that are therein; who in times past suffered all nations to
walk in their own ways, although He left not Himself without witness,
performing acts of goodness, giving you rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.” <span
id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) But that all his Epistles are
consonant to these declarations, I shall, when expounding the apostle,
show from the Epistles themselves, in the right place. But while I bring
out by these proofs the truths of Scripture, and set forth briefly and
compendiously things which are stated in various ways, do thou also
attend to them with patience, and not deem them prolix; taking this into
account, that proofs \[of the things which are\] contained in the
Scriptures cannot be shown except from the Scriptures themselves.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p55"></span>10. And still further, Stephen, who was
chosen the first deacon by the apostles, and who, of all men, was the
first to follow the footsteps of the martyrdom of the Lord, being the
first that was slain for confessing Christ, speaking boldly among the
people, and teaching them, says: “The God of glory appeared to our
father Abraham, … and said to him, Get thee out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall show thee; … and He
removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell. And He gave him none
inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on; yet He
promised that He would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed
after him. … And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in
a strange land, and should be brought into bondage, and should be
evil-entreated four hundred years; and the nation whom they shall serve
will I judge, says the Lord. And after that shall they come forth, and
serve me in this place. And He gave him the covenant of circumcision:
and so \[Abraham\] begat Isaac.” <span
id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510) And the rest of his words announce
the same God, who was with Joseph and with the patriarchs, and who spake
with Moses.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p57"></span>11. And that the whole range of the
doctrine of the apostles proclaimed one and the same God, who removed
Abraham, who made to him the promise of inheritance, who in due season
gave to him the covenant of circumcision, who called his descendants out
of Egypt, preserved outwardly by circumcision—for he gave it as a sign,
that they might not be like the Egyptians—that He was the Maker of all
things, that He was the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that He was the
God of glory,—they who wish may learn from the very words and acts of
the apostles, and may contemplate the fact that this God is one, above
whom is no other. But even if there were another god above Him, we
should say, upon \[instituting\] a comparison of the quantity \[of the
work done by each\], that the latter is superior to the former. For by
deeds the better man appears, as I have already remarked; <span
id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511) and, inasmuch as these men have no
works of their father to adduce, the latter is shown to be God alone.
But if any one, “doting about questions,” <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512) do imagine that what the apostles
have declared about God should be allegorized, let him consider my
previous statements, in which I set forth one God as the Founder and
Maker of all things, and destroyed and laid bare their allegations; and
he shall find them agreeable to the doctrine of the apostles, and so to
maintain what they used to teach, and were persuaded of, that there is
one God, the Maker of all things. And when he shall have divested his
mind of such error, and of that blasphemy against God which it implies,
he will of himself find reason to acknowledge that both the Mosaic law
and the grace of the new covenant, as both fitted for the times \[at
which they were given\], were bestowed by one and the same God for the
benefit of the human race.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p60"></span>12. For all those who are of a perverse
mind, having been set against the Mosaic legislation, judging it to be
dissimilar and contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, have not applied
themselves to investigate the causes of the difference of each covenant.
Since, therefore, they have been deserted by the paternal love, and
puffed up by Satan, being brought over to the doctrine of Simon Magus,
they have apostatized in their opinions from Him who is God, and
imagined that they have themselves discovered more than the apostles, by
finding out another god; and \[maintained\] that the apostles preached
the Gospel still somewhat under the influence of Jewish opinions, but
that they themselves are purer \[in doctrine\], and more intelligent,
than the apostles. Wherefore also Marcion and his followers have betaken
themselves to mutilating the Scriptures, not acknowledging some books
<span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_435"></span>
at all; and, curtailing the Gospel according to Luke and the Epistles of
Paul, they assert that these are alone authentic, which they have
themselves thus shortened. In another work, <span
id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513) however, I shall, God granting \[me
strength\], refute them out of these which they still retain. But all
the rest, inflated with the false name of “knowledge,” do certainly
recognise the Scriptures; but they pervert the interpretations, as I
have shown in the first book. And, indeed, the followers of Marcion do
directly blaspheme the Creator, alleging him to be the creator of evils,
\[but\] holding a more tolerable <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514) theory as to his origin, \[and\]
maintaining that there are two beings, gods by nature, differing from
each other,—the one being good, but the other evil. Those from
Valentinus, however, while they employ names of a more honourable kind,
and set forth that He who is Creator is both Father, and Lord, and God,
do \[nevertheless\] render their theory or sect more blasphemous, by
maintaining that He was not produced from any one of those Æons within
the Pleroma, but from that defect which had been expelled beyond the
Pleroma. Ignorance of the Scriptures and of the dispensation of God has
brought all these things upon them. And in the course of this work I
shall touch upon the cause of the difference of the covenants on the one
hand, and, on the other hand, of their unity and harmony.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p63"></span>13. But that both the apostles and
their disciples thus taught as the Church preaches, and thus teaching
were perfected, wherefore also they were called away to that which is
perfect— Stephen, teaching these truths, when he was yet on earth, saw
the glory of God, and Jesus on His right hand, and exclaimed, “Behold, I
see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of
God.” <span id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) These words he said,
and was stoned; and thus did he fulfil the perfect doctrine, copying in
every respect the Leader of martyrdom, and praying for those who were
slaying him, in these words: “Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.”
Thus were they perfected who knew one and the same God, who from
beginning to end was present with mankind in the various dispensations;
as the prophet Hosea declares: “I have filled up visions, and used
similitudes by the hands of the prophets.” <span
id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) Those, therefore, who delivered up
their souls to death for Christ’s Gospel—how could they have spoken to
men in accordance with old-established opinion? If this had been the
course adopted by them, they should not have suffered; but inasmuch as
they did preach things contrary to those persons who did not assent to
the truth, for that reason they suffered. It is evident, therefore, that
they did not relinquish the truth, but with all boldness preached to the
Jews and Greeks. To the Jews, indeed, \[they proclaimed\] that the Jesus
who was crucified by them was the Son of God, the Judge of quick and
dead, and that He has received from His Father an eternal kingdom in
Israel, as I have pointed out; but to the Greeks they preached one God,
who made all things, and Jesus Christ His Son.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p66"></span>14. This is shown in a still clearer
light from the letter of the apostles, which they forwarded neither to
the Jews nor to the Greeks, but to those who from the Gentiles believed
in Christ, confirming their faith. For when certain men had come down
from Judea to Antioch—where also, first of all, the Lord’s disciples
were called Christians, because of their faith in Christ—and sought to
persuade those who had believed on the Lord to be circumcised, and to
perform other things after the observance of the law; and when Paul and
Barnabas had gone up to Jerusalem to the apostles on account of this
question, and the whole Church had convened together, Peter thus
addressed them: “Men, brethren, ye know how that from the days of old
God made choice among you, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the
word of the Gospel, and believe. And God, the Searcher of the heart,
bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as to us; and put no
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. Now
therefore why tempt ye God, to impose a yoke upon the neck of the
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? But we
believe that, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we are to be
saved, even as they.” <span id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517) After
him James spoke as follows: “Men, brethren, Simon hath declared how God
did purpose to take from among the Gentiles a people for His name. And
thus <span id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518) do the words of the
prophets agree, as it is written, After this I will return, and will
build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will
build the ruins thereof, and I will set it up: that the residue of men
may seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, among whom my name has
been invoked, saith the Lord, doing these things. <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) Known from eternity is His work to
God. Wherefore I for my part give judgment, that we trouble not them who
from among the Gentiles are turned to God: but that it be enjoined them,
that they <span id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-Page_436"></span> do abstain from the vanities of idols,
and from fornication, and from blood; and whatsoever <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) they wish not to be done to
themselves, let them not do to others.” <span
id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521) And when these things had been
said, and all had given their consent, they wrote to them after this
manner: “The apostles, and the presbyters, \[and\] the brethren, unto
those brethren from among the Gentiles who are in Antioch, and Syria,
and Cilicia, greeting: Forasmuch as we have heard that certain persons
going out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls,
saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law; to whom we gave no
such commandment: it seemed good unto us, being assembled with one
accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul;
men who have delivered up their soul for the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, that they may declare
our opinion by word of mouth. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and
to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things;
that ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from
fornication; and whatsoever ye do not wish to be done to you, do not ye
to others: from which preserving yourselves, ye shall do well,
walking <span id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522) in the Holy Spirit.”
From all these passages, then, it is evident that they did not teach the
existence of another Father, but gave the new covenant of liberty to
those who had lately believed in God by the Holy Spirit. But they
clearly indicated, from the nature of the point debated by them, as to
whether or not it were still necessary to circumcise the disciples, that
they had no idea of another god.

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p73"></span>15. Neither \[in that case\] would they
have had such a tenor with regard to the first covenant, as not even to
have been willing to eat with the Gentiles. For even Peter, although he
had been sent to instruct them, and had been constrained by a vision to
that effect, spake nevertheless with not a little hesitation, saying to
them: “Ye know how it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to
keep company with, or to come unto, one of another nation; but God hath
shown me that I should not call any man common or unclean. Therefore
came I without gainsaying;” <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523)
indicating by these words, that he would not have come to them unless he
had been commanded. Neither, for a like reason, would he have given them
baptism so readily, had he not heard them prophesying when the Holy
Ghost rested upon them. And therefore did he exclaim, “Can any man
forbid water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the
Holy Ghost as well as we?” <span id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524) He
persuaded, at the same time, those that were with him, and pointed out
that, unless the Holy Ghost had rested upon them, there might have been
some one who would have raised objections to their baptism. And the
apostles who were with James allowed the Gentiles to act freely,
yielding us up to the Spirit of God. But they themselves, while knowing
the same God, continued in the ancient observances; so that even Peter,
fearing also lest he might incur their reproof, although formerly eating
with the Gentiles, because of the vision, and of the Spirit who had
rested upon them, yet, when certain persons came from James, withdrew
himself, and did not eat with them. And Paul said that Barnabas likewise
did the same thing. <span id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525) Thus did
the apostles, whom the Lord made witnesses of every action and of every
doctrine—for upon all occasions do we find Peter, and James, and John
present with Him—scrupulously act according to the dispensation of the
Mosaic law, showing that it was from one and the same God; which they
certainly never would have done, as I have already said, if they had
learned from the Lord \[that there existed\] another Father besides Him
who appointed the dispensation of the law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3465"></span>[429:3466](0010779.htm#fr_3465) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p2"></span> [Acts i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#016)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3466"></span>[430:3467](0010779.htm#fr_3466) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p3"></span> [Ps. lxix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#025)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3467"></span>[430:3468](0010779.htm#fr_3467) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p4"></span> [Ps. cix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3468"></span>[430:3469](0010779.htm#fr_3468) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p5"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3469"></span>[430:3470](0010779.htm#fr_3469) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p7"></span> [Ps. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3470"></span>[430:3471](0010779.htm#fr_3470) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p8"></span> [Acts ii.
22-27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[430:3472](0010779.htm#fr_3471) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p9"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p9.1"></span>δῶρον</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p9.2"></span>δώρημα</span> is supposed by some to have
existed in the earliest Greek texts, although not found in any extant
now. It is thus quoted by others besides Irenæus.

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[430:3473](0010779.htm#fr_3472) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p10"></span> [Acts ii.
30-37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[430:3474](0010779.htm#fr_3473) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p11"></span> [Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[430:3475](0010779.htm#fr_3474) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p13"></span> [Acts iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p13.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[430:3476](0010779.htm#fr_3475) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p14"></span> These interpolations are also found in
the Codex Bezæ.

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[430:3477](0010779.htm#fr_3476) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p15"></span> These interpolations are also found in
the Codex Bezæ.

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[430:3478](0010779.htm#fr_3477) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p16"></span> These interpolations are also found in
the Codex Bezæ.

<span id="fn_3478"></span>[430:3479](0010779.htm#fr_3478) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p17"></span> “Et veniant” in Latin text: <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xiii-p17.1"></span>ὅπως ἂν ἔλθωσιν</span>
in Greek. The translation of these Greek words by “when … come,” is one
of the most glaring errors in the authorized English version.

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[431:3480](0010779.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p18"></span> Irenæus, like the majority of the
early authorities, manifestly read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p18.1"></span>προκεχειρισμένον</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xiii-p18.2"></span>προκεκηρυγμένον</span>,
as in *textus receptus*.

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[431:3481](0010779.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p19"></span> Dispositionis.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[431:3482](0010779.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p20"></span> [Acts iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p20.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[431:3483](0010779.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p21"></span> [Acts iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#002)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[431:3484](0010779.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p23"></span> [Acts iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p23.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[431:3485](0010779.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p25"></span> [Acts iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[431:3486](0010779.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p26"></span> These words, though not in *textus
receptus*, are found in some ancient <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p26.1"></span>mss.</span> and versions; but not the words
“our father,” which follow.

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[431:3487](0010779.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p27"></span> “In hac civitate” are words not
represented in the *textus receptus*, but have a place in all modern
critical editions of the New Testament.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[431:3488](0010779.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p28"></span> [Acts iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p28.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[431:3489](0010779.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p29"></span> [Acts iv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[431:3490](0010779.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p30"></span> The Latin is, “ut convertat se
unusquisque.”

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[431:3491](0010779.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p31"></span> [Acts iv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#033)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[431:3492](0010779.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p32"></span> This is following Grabe’s emendation
of the text. The old Latin reads “gloria sua,” the translator having
evidently mistaken<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p32.1"></span> δεξιᾴ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p32.2"></span>δόξῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[432:3493](0010779.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p33"></span> [Acts v.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[432:3494](0010779.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p34"></span> [Acts v.
42](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#042)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[432:3495](0010779.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p36"></span> These words have apparently been
omitted through inadvertence.

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[432:3496](0010779.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p38"></span> [Acts x.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[432:3497](0010779.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p39"></span> [Acts x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[432:3498](0010779.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p40"></span> [Acts
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[432:3499](0010779.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p41"></span> [Acts x.
37-44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#037)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[433:3500](0010779.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p42"></span> *Quemadmodum capiebat*; perhaps, “just
as it presented itself to him.”

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[433:3501](0010779.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p44"></span> [Acts viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#032)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p44.1"></span>;
[Isa. 53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p44.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[433:3502](0010779.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p45"></span> [Acts viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#037)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[433:3503](0010779.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p47"></span> [Acts ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[433:3504](0010779.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p48"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[433:3505](0010779.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p49"></span> Latin translation, *tractatur*; which
Harvey thinks affords a conclusive proof that Irenæus occasionally
quotes Scripture by re-translating from the Syriac.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[433:3506](0010779.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p50"></span> It will be observed that Scripture is
here very loosely quoted.

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[433:3507](0010779.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p51"></span> [Acts xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p51.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[433:3508](0010779.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p52"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p52.1"></span>
\[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[434:3509](0010779.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p53"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[434:3510](0010779.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p54"></span> [Acts xiv.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[434:3511](0010779.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p56"></span> [Acts vii.
2-8](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[434:3512](0010779.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p58"></span> Book ii. ch. xxx. 2.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[434:3513](0010779.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p59"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[435:3514](0010779.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p61"></span> No reference is made to this promised
work in the writings of his successors. Probably it never was
undertaken.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[435:3515](0010779.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p62"></span> Most of the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p62.1"></span>mss.</span> read “intolerabiliorem,” but
one reads as above, and is followed by all the editors.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[435:3516](0010779.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p64"></span> [Acts vii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[435:3517](0010779.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p65"></span> [Hos. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#010)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[435:3518](0010779.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p67"></span> [Acts xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p67.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[435:3519](0010779.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p68"></span> Irenæus manifestly read <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xiii-p68.1"></span>οὕτως</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xiii-p68.2"></span>τούτῳ</span>, and in
this he agrees with Codex Bezæ. We may remark, once for all, that in the
variations from the received text of the New Testament which occur in
our author, his quotations are very often in accordance with the
readings of the Cambridge <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p68.3"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[435:3520](0010779.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p68.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p69"></span> [Amos
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[436:3521](0010779.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p70"></span> This addition is also found in Codex
Bezæ, and in Cyprian and others.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[436:3522](0010779.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p71"></span> [Acts xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p71.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[436:3523](0010779.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p72"></span> Another addition, also found in the
Codex Bezæ, and in Tertullian.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[436:3524](0010779.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p74"></span> [Acts
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#029)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[436:3525](0010779.htm#fr_3524) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p75"></span> [Acts x.
47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047)<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[436:3526](0010779.htm#fr_3525) <span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xiii-p76"></span> [Gal.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)<span
id="ix.iv.xiii-p76.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII—Refutation of the...](0010780)
