[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010491)  [Next](0010493) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xxxi"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—If Christ’s power be now so great, how much greater at the second advent!

<span id="viii.iv.xxxi-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.xxxi-p1.2"></span>“But
if so great a power is shown to have followed and to be still following
the dispensation of His suffering, how great shall that be which shall
follow His glorious advent! For He shall come on the clouds as the Son
of man, so Daniel foretold, and His angels shall come with Him. These
are the words: ‘I beheld till the thrones were set; and the Ancient of
days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of His head
like the pure wool. His throne was like a fiery flame, His wheels as
burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before Him.
Thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before Him. The books were opened, and the judgment was
set. I beheld then the voice of the great words which the horn speaks:
and the beast was beat down, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame. And the rest of the beasts were taken away from their
dominion, and a period of life was given to the beasts until a season
and time. I saw in the vision of the night, and, behold, one like the
Son of man coming with the clouds of heaven; and He came to the Ancient
of days, and stood before Him. And they who stood by brought Him near;
and there were given Him power and kingly honour, and all nations of the
earth by their families, and all glory, serve Him. And His dominion is
an everlasting dominion, which shall not be taken away; and His kingdom
shall not be destroyed. And my spirit was chilled within my frame, and
the visions of my head troubled me. I came near unto one of them that
stood by, and inquired the precise meaning of all these things. In
answer he speaks to me, and showed me the judgment of the matters: These
great beasts are four kingdoms, which shall perish from the earth, and
shall not receive dominion for ever, even for ever and ever. Then I
wished to know exactly about the fourth beast, which destroyed all \[the
others\] and was very terrible, its teeth of iron, and its nails of
brass; which devoured, made waste, and stamped the residue with its
feet: also about the ten horns upon its head, and of the one which came
up, by means of which three of the former fell. And that horn had eyes,
and a mouth speaking great things; and its countenance excelled the
<span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="viii.iv.xxxi-Page_210"></span> rest. And I beheld that horn waging
war against the saints, and prevailing against them, until the Ancient
of days came; and He gave judgment for the saints of the Most High. And
the time came, and the saints of the Most High possessed the kingdom.
And it was told me concerning the fourth beast: There shall be a fourth
kingdom upon earth, which shall prevail over all these kingdoms, and
shall devour the whole earth, and shall destroy and make it thoroughly
waste. And the ten horns are ten kings that shall arise; and one shall
arise after them; <span id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026) and he
shall surpass the first in evil deeds, and he shall subdue three kings,
and he shall speak words against the Most High, and shall overthrow the
rest of the saints of the Most High, and shall expect to change the
seasons and the times. And it shall be delivered into his hands for a
time, and times, and half a time. And the judgment sat, and they shall
take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end. And
the kingdom, and the power, and the great places of the kingdoms under
the heavens, were given to the holy people of the Most High, to reign in
an everlasting kingdom: and all powers shall be subject to Him, and
shall obey Him. Hitherto is the end of the matter. I, Daniel, was
possessed with a very great astonishment, and my speech was changed in
me; yet I kept the matter in my heart.’ ” <span
id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[210:2027](0010492.htm#fr_2026) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxi-p2"></span> Literally, “And the ten horns, ten
kings shall arise after them.”

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[210:2028](0010492.htm#fr_2027) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxi-p3"></span> [Dan. vii.
9-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)<span
id="viii.iv.xxxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII.—Trypho objecting that...](0010493)
