[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010831)  [Next](0010833) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.—Men are possessed of free will, and endowed with the faculty of making a choice. It is not true, therefore, that some are by nature good, and others bad.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p1.2"></span><span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p1.3"></span>This
expression \[of our Lord\], “How often would I have gathered thy
children together, and thou wouldest not,” <span
id="fr_4393"></span>[4394](#fn_4393) set forth the ancient law of human
liberty, because God made man a free \[agent\] from the beginning,
possessing his own power, even as he does his own soul, to obey the
behests (*ad utendum sententia*) of God voluntarily, and not by
compulsion of God. For there is no coercion with God, but a good will
\[towards us\] is present with Him continually. And therefore does He
give good counsel to all. And in man, as well as in angels, He has
placed the power of choice (for angels are rational beings), so that
those who had yielded obedience might justly possess what is good, given
indeed by God, but preserved by themselves. On the other hand, they who
have not obeyed shall, with justice, be not found in possession of the
good, and shall receive condign punishment: for God did kindly bestow on
them what was good; but they themselves did not diligently keep it, nor
deem it something precious, but poured contempt upon His super-eminent
goodness. Rejecting therefore the good, and as it were spuing it out,
they shall all deservedly incur <span id="page_519">p. 519</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-Page_519"></span> the just judgment of God, which also
the Apostle Paul testifies in his Epistle to the Romans, where he says,
“But dost thou despise the riches of His goodness, and patience, and
long-suffering, being ignorant that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
repentance? But according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou
treasurest to thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation
of the righteous judgment of God.” “But glory and honour,” he says, “to
every one that doeth good.” <span id="fr_4394"></span>[4395](#fn_4394)
God therefore has given that which is good, as the apostle tells us in
this Epistle, and they who work it shall receive glory and honour,
because they have done that which is good when they had it in their
power not to do it; but those who do it not shall receive the just
judgment of God, because they did not work good when they had it in
their power so to do.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p4"></span>2. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>But if some had been made by nature bad,
and others good, these latter would not be deserving of praise for being
good, for such were they created; nor would the former be reprehensible,
for thus they were made \[originally\]. But since all men are of the
same nature, able both to hold fast and to do what is good; and, on the
other hand, having also the power to cast it from them and not to do
it,—some do justly receive praise even among men who are under the
control of good laws (and much more from God), and obtain deserved
testimony of their choice of good in general, and of persevering
therein; but the others are blamed, and receive a just condemnation,
because of their rejection of what is fair and good. And therefore the
prophets used to exhort men to what was good, to act justly and to work
righteousness, as I have so largely demonstrated, because it is in our
power so to do, and because by excessive negligence we might become
forgetful, and thus stand in need of that good counsel which the good
God has given us to know by means of the prophets.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p5"></span>3. For this reason the Lord also
said, “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
deeds, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_4395"></span>[4396](#fn_4395) And, “Take heed to yourselves, lest
perchance your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness,
and worldly cares.” <span id="fr_4396"></span>[4397](#fn_4396) And, “Let
your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning, and ye like unto men
that wait for their Lord, when He returns from the wedding, that when He
cometh and knocketh, they may open to Him. Blessed is that servant whom
his Lord, when He cometh, shall find so doing.” <span
id="fr_4397"></span>[4398](#fn_4397) And again, “The servant who knows
his Lord’s will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes.” <span id="fr_4398"></span>[4399](#fn_4398) And, “Why call ye
me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?” <span
id="fr_4399"></span>[4400](#fn_4399) And again, “But if the servant say
in his heart, The Lord delayeth, and begin to beat his fellow-servants,
and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken, his Lord will come in a day on
which he does not expect Him, and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint
his portion with the hypocrites.” <span
id="fr_4400"></span>[4401](#fn_4400) All such passages demonstrate the
independent will <span id="fr_4401"></span>[4402](#fn_4401) of man, and
at the same time the counsel which God conveys to him, by which He
exhorts us to submit ourselves to Him, and seeks to turn us away from
\[the sin of\] unbelief against Him, without, however, in any way
coercing us.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p13"></span>4. No doubt, if any one is unwilling
to follow the Gospel itself, it is in his power \[to reject it\], but it
is not expedient. For it is in man’s power to disobey God, and to
forfeit what is good; but \[such conduct\] brings no small amount of
injury and mischief. And on this account Paul says, “All things are
lawful to me, but all things are not expedient;” <span
id="fr_4402"></span>[4403](#fn_4402) referring both to the liberty of
man, in which respect “all things are lawful,” God exercising no
compulsion in regard to him; and \[by the expression\] “not expedient”
pointing out that we “should not use our liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness,” <span id="fr_4403"></span>[4404](#fn_4403) for this is
not expedient. And again he says, “Speak ye every man truth with his
neighbour.” <span id="fr_4404"></span>[4405](#fn_4404) And, “Let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, neither filthiness, nor
foolish talking, nor scurrility, which are not convenient, but rather
giving of thanks.” <span id="fr_4405"></span>[4406](#fn_4405) And, “For
ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord; walk
honestly as children of the light, not in rioting and drunkenness, not
in chambering and wantonness, not in anger and jealousy. And such were
some of you; but ye have been washed, but ye have been sanctified in the
name of our Lord.” <span id="fr_4406"></span>[4407](#fn_4406) If then it
were not in our power to do or not to do these things, what reason had
the apostle, and much more the Lord Himself, to give us counsel to do
some things, and to abstain from others? But because man is possessed of
free will from the beginning, and God is possessed of free will, in
whose likeness man was created, advice is always given to him to keep
fast the good, which thing is done by means of obedience to God.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p19"></span>5. And not merely in works, but also
in faith, has God preserved the will of man free and under his own
control, saying, “According to thy faith <span id="page_520">p.
520</span> <span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-Page_520"></span> be it unto
thee;” <span id="fr_4407"></span>[4408](#fn_4407) thus showing that
there is a faith specially belonging to man, since he has an opinion
specially his own. And again, “All things are possible to him that
believeth;” <span id="fr_4408"></span>[4409](#fn_4408) and, “Go thy way;
and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee.” <span
id="fr_4409"></span>[4410](#fn_4409) Now all such expressions
demonstrate that man is in his own power with respect to faith. And for
this reason, “he that believeth in Him has eternal life while he who
believeth not the Son hath not eternal life, but the wrath of God shall
remain upon him.” <span id="fr_4410"></span>[4411](#fn_4410) In the same
manner therefore the Lord, both showing His own goodness, and indicating
that man is in his own free will and his own power, said to Jerusalem,
“How often have I wished to gather thy children together, as a hen
\[gathereth\] her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Wherefore
your house shall be left unto you desolate.” <span
id="fr_4411"></span>[4412](#fn_4411)

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p25"></span>6. Those, again, who maintain the
opposite to these \[conclusions\], do themselves present the Lord as
destitute of power, as if, forsooth, He were unable to accomplish what
He willed; or, on the other hand, as being ignorant that they were by
nature “material,” as these men express it, and such as cannot receive
His immortality. “But He should not,” say they, “have created angels of
such a nature that they were capable of transgression, nor men who
immediately proved ungrateful towards Him; for they were made rational
beings, endowed with the power of examining and judging, and were not
\[formed\] as things irrational or of a \[merely\] animal nature, which
can do nothing of their own will, but are drawn by necessity and
compulsion to what is good, in which things there is one mind and one
usage, working mechanically in one groove (*inflexibiles et sine
judicio*), who are incapable of being anything else except just what
they had been created.” But upon this supposition, neither would what is
good be grateful to them, nor communion with God be precious, nor would
the good be very much to be sought after, which would present itself
without their own proper endeavour, care, or study, but would be
implanted of its own accord and without their concern. Thus it would
come to pass, that their being good would be of no consequence, because
they were so by nature rather than by will, and are possessors of good
spontaneously, not by choice; and for this reason they would not
understand this fact, that good is a comely thing, nor would they take
pleasure in it. For how can those who are ignorant of good enjoy it? Or
what credit is it to those who have not aimed at it? And what crown is
it to those who have not followed in pursuit of it, like those
victorious in the contest?

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p26"></span>7. On this account, too, did the
Lord assert that the kingdom of heaven was the portion of “the violent;”
and He says, “The violent take it by force;” <span
id="fr_4412"></span>[4413](#fn_4412) that is, those who by strength and
earnest striving are on the watch to snatch it away on the moment. On
this account also Paul the Apostle says to the Corinthians, “Know ye
not, that they who run in a racecourse, do all indeed run, but one
receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. Every one also who
engages in the contest is temperate in all things: now these men \[do
it\] that they may obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.
But I so run, not as uncertainty; I fight, not as one beating the air;
but I make my body livid, and bring it into subjection, lest by any
means, when preaching to others, I may myself be rendered a
castaway.” <span id="fr_4413"></span>[4414](#fn_4413) This able
wrestler, therefore, exhorts us to the struggle for immortality, that we
may be crowned, and may deem the crown precious, namely, that which is
acquired by our struggle, but which does not encircle us of its own
accord (*sed non ultro coalitam*). And the harder we strive, so much is
it the more valuable; while so much the more valuable it is, so much the
more should we esteem it. And indeed those things are not esteemed so
highly which come spontaneously, as those which are reached by much
anxious care. Since, then, this power has been conferred upon us, both
the Lord has taught and the apostle has enjoined us the more to love
God, that we may reach this \[prize\] for ourselves by striving after
it. For otherwise, no doubt, this our good would be \[virtually\]
irrational, because not the result of trial. Moreover, the faculty of
seeing would not appear to be so desirable, unless we had known what a
loss it were to be devoid of sight; and health, too, is rendered all the
more estimable by an acquaintance with disease; light, also, by
contrasting it with darkness; and life with death. Just in the same way
is the heavenly kingdom honourable to those who have known the earthly
one. But in proportion as it is more honourable, so much the more do we
prize it; and if we have prized it more, we shall be the more glorious
in the presence of God. The Lord has therefore endured all these things
on our behalf, in order that we, having been instructed by means of them
all, may be in all respects circumspect for the time to come, and that,
having been rationally taught to love God, we may continue in His
perfect love: for God has displayed long-suffering in the case of man’s
apostasy; while man has been instructed by means of it, as also the
prophet says, “Thine own apostasy shall heal thee;” <span
id="fr_4414"></span>[4415](#fn_4414) God thus determining all things
beforehand for the <span id="page_521">p. 521</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-Page_521"></span> bringing of man to perfection, for
his edification, and for the revelation of His dispensations, that
goodness may both be made apparent, and righteousness perfected, and
that the Church may be fashioned after the image of His Son, and that
man may finally be brought to maturity at some future time, becoming
ripe through such privileges to see and comprehend God. <span
id="fr_4415"></span>[4416](#fn_4415)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4393"></span>[518:4394](0010832.htm#fr_4393) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p2"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4394"></span>[519:4395](0010832.htm#fr_4394) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p3"></span> [Rom.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4395"></span>[519:4396](0010832.htm#fr_4395) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p6"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4396"></span>[519:4397](0010832.htm#fr_4396) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p7"></span> [Luke xxi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4397"></span>[519:4398](0010832.htm#fr_4397) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p8"></span> [Luke
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4398"></span>[519:4399](0010832.htm#fr_4398) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p9"></span> [Luke xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4399"></span>[519:4400](0010832.htm#fr_4399) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p10"></span> [Luke vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#046)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4400"></span>[519:4401](0010832.htm#fr_4400) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p11"></span> [Luke
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#045),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#046)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>; [Matt. xxiv.
48-51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4401"></span>[519:4402](0010832.htm#fr_4401) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>τὸ αὐτεξούσιον</span>.

<span id="fn_4402"></span>[519:4403](0010832.htm#fr_4402) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p14"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4403"></span>[519:4404](0010832.htm#fr_4403) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p15"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4404"></span>[519:4405](0010832.htm#fr_4404) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p16"></span> [Eph. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4405"></span>[519:4406](0010832.htm#fr_4405) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p17"></span> [Eph. iv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4406"></span>[519:4407](0010832.htm#fr_4406) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p18"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4407"></span>[520:4408](0010832.htm#fr_4407) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p20"></span> [Matt. ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4408"></span>[520:4409](0010832.htm#fr_4408) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p21"></span> [Mark ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4409"></span>[520:4410](0010832.htm#fr_4409) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p22"></span> [Matt. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#013)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4410"></span>[520:4411](0010832.htm#fr_4410) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p23"></span> [John iii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4411"></span>[520:4412](0010832.htm#fr_4411) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p24"></span> [Matt.
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4412"></span>[520:4413](0010832.htm#fr_4412) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p27"></span> [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4413"></span>[520:4414](0010832.htm#fr_4413) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p28"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4414"></span>[520:4415](0010832.htm#fr_4414) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p29"></span> [Jer. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4415"></span>[521:4416](0010832.htm#fr_4415) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxviii-p30"></span> \[If we but had the original, this
would doubtless be found in all respects a noble specimen of primitive
theology.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII.—Why man was not...](0010833)
