[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010749)  [Next](0010751) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.—Futility of the arguments adduced to demonstrate the sufferings of the twelfth Æon, from the parables, the treachery of Judas, and the passion of our Saviour.

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p1"></span>1. That they improperly and illogically
apply both the parables and the actions of the Lord to their
falsely-devised system, I prove as follows: <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxi-p1.2"></span>They
endeavour, for instance, to demonstrate that passion which, they say,
happened in the case of the twelfth Æon, from this fact, that the
passion of the Saviour was brought about by the twelfth apostle, and
happened in the twelfth month. For they hold that He preached \[only\]
for one year after His baptism. They maintain also that the same thing
was clearly set forth in the case of her who suffered from the issue of
blood. For the woman suffered during twelve years, and <span
id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxi-Page_388"></span>
through touching the hem of the Saviour’s garment she was made whole by
that power which went forth from the Saviour, and which, they affirm,
had a previous existence. For that Power who suffered was stretching
herself outwards and flowing into immensity, so that she was in danger
of being dissolved into the general substance \[of the Æons\]; but then,
touching the primary Tetrad, which is typified by the hem of the
garment, she was arrested, and ceased from her passion.

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p2"></span>2. <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p2.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxi-p2.2"></span>Then,
again, as to their assertion that the passion of the twelfth Æon was
proved through the conduct of Judas, how is it possible that Judas can
be compared \[with this Æon\] as being an emblem of her—he who was
expelled from the number of the twelve, <span
id="fr_3097"></span>[3098](#fn_3097) and never restored to his place?
For that Æon, whose type they declare Judas to be, after being separated
from her Enthymesis, was restored or recalled \[to her former
position\]; but Judas was deprived \[of his office\], and cast out,
while Matthias was ordained in his place, according to what is written,
“And his bishopric let another take.” <span
id="fr_3098"></span>[3099](#fn_3098) They ought therefore to maintain
that the twelfth Æon was cast out of the Pleroma, and that another was
produced, or sent forth to fill her place; if, that is to say, she is
pointed at in Judas. Moreover, they tell us that it was the Æon herself
who suffered, but Judas was the betrayer, \[and not the sufferer.\] Even
they themselves acknowledge that it was the suffering Christ, and not
Judas, who came to \[the endurance of\] passion. How, then, could Judas,
the betrayer of Him who had to suffer for our salvation, be the type and
image of that Æon who suffered?

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p5"></span>3. But, in truth, the passion of Christ
was neither similar to the passion of the Æon, nor did it take place in
similar circumstances. For the Æon underwent a passion of dissolution
and destruction, so that she who suffered was in danger also of being
destroyed. But the Lord, our Christ, underwent a valid, and not a
merely <span id="fr_3099"></span>[3100](#fn_3099) accidental passion;
not only was He Himself not in danger of being destroyed, but He also
established fallen man <span id="fr_3100"></span>[3101](#fn_3100) by His
own strength, and recalled him to incorruption. The Æon, again,
underwent passion while she was seeking after the Father, and was not
able to find Him; but the Lord suffered that He might bring those who
have wandered from the Father, back to knowledge and to His fellowship.
The search into the greatness of the Father became to her a passion
leading to destruction; but the Lord, having suffered, and bestowing the
knowledge of the Father, conferred on us salvation. Her passion, as they
declare, gave origin to a female offspring, weak, infirm, unformed, and
ineffective; but His passion gave rise to strength and power. For the
Lord, through means of suffering, “ascending into the lofty place, led
captivity captive, gave gifts to men,” <span
id="fr_3101"></span>[3102](#fn_3101) and conferred on those that believe
in Him the power “to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and on all the
power of the enemy,” <span id="fr_3102"></span>[3103](#fn_3102) that is,
of the leader of apostasy. Our Lord also by His passion destroyed death,
and dispersed error, and put an end to corruption, and destroyed
ignorance, while He manifested life and revealed truth, and bestowed the
gift of incorruption. But their Æon, when she had suffered,
established <span id="fr_3103"></span>[3104](#fn_3103) ignorance, and
brought forth a substance without shape, out of which all material works
have been produced—death, corruption, error, and such like.

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p11"></span>4. Judas, then, the twelfth in order of
the disciples, was not a type of the suffering Æon, nor, again, was the
passion of the Lord; for these two things have been shown to be in every
respect mutually dissimilar and inharmonious. This is the case not only
as respects the points which I have already mentioned, but with regard
to the very number. For that Judas the traitor is the twelfth in order,
is agreed upon by all, there being twelve apostles mentioned by name in
the Gospel. But this Æon is not the *twelfth*, but the *thirtieth*; for,
according to the views under consideration, there were not twelve Æons
only produced by the will of the Father, nor was she sent forth the
twelfth in order: they reckon her, \[on the contrary,\] as having been
produced in the thirtieth place. How, then, can Judas, the twelfth in
order, be the type and image of that Æon who occupies the thirtieth
place?

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p12"></span>5. But if they say that Judas in
perishing was the image of her Enthymesis, neither in this way will the
image bear any analogy to that truth which \[by hypothesis\] corresponds
to it. For the Enthymesis having been separated from the Æon, and itself
afterwards receiving a shape from Christ, <span
id="fr_3104"></span>[3105](#fn_3104) then being made a partaker of
intelligence by the Saviour, and having formed all things which are
outside of the Pleroma, after the image of those which are within the
Pleroma, is said at last to have been received by them into the Pleroma,
and, according to \[the principle of\] conjunction, to have been united
to that Saviour who was formed out of all. But Judas having been once
for all cast away, never returns <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-Page_389"></span> into the number of the disciples;
otherwise a different person would not have been chosen to fill his
place. Besides, the Lord also declared regarding him, “Woe to the man by
whom the Son of man shall be betrayed;” <span
id="fr_3105"></span>[3106](#fn_3105) and, “It were better for him if he
had never been born;” <span id="fr_3106"></span>[3107](#fn_3106) and he
was called the “son of perdition” <span
id="fr_3107"></span>[3108](#fn_3107) by Him. If, however, they say that
Judas was a type of the Enthymesis, not as separated from the Æon, but
of the passion entwined with her, neither in this way can the number
twelve be regarded as a \[fitting\] type of the number three. For in the
one case Judas was cast away, and Matthias was ordained instead of him;
but in the other case the Æon is said to have been in danger of
dissolution and destruction, and \[there are also\] her Enthymesis and
passion: for they markedly distinguish Enthymesis from the passion; and
they represent the Æon as being restored, and Enthymesis as acquiring
form, but the passion, when separated from these, as becoming matter.
Since, therefore, there are thus these three, the Æon, her Enthymesis,
and her passion, Judas and Matthias, being only two, cannot be the types
of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3097"></span>[388:3098](0010750.htm#fr_3097) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p3"></span> Or, “from the twelfth number”—the
twelfth position among the apostles.

<span id="fn_3098"></span>[388:3099](0010750.htm#fr_3098) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p4"></span> [Acts i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020)<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p4.1"></span>,
from [Ps. cix. 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)<span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3099"></span>[388:3100](0010750.htm#fr_3099) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p6"></span> The text is here uncertain. Most
editions read “et quæ non cederet,” but Harvey prefers “quæ non
accederet” (for “accideret”), and remarks that the corresponding Greek
would be<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span> καὶ οὐ
τυχόν</span>, which we have translated as above.

<span id="fn_3100"></span>[388:3101](0010750.htm#fr_3100) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p7"></span> “Corruptum hominem.”

<span id="fn_3101"></span>[388:3102](0010750.htm#fr_3101) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p8"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>;
[Eph. iv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3102"></span>[388:3103](0010750.htm#fr_3102) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p9"></span> [Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p9.1"></span>;
\[[Mark 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018)<span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p9.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3103"></span>[388:3104](0010750.htm#fr_3103) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p10"></span> Though the reading “substituit” is
found in all the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> and editions, it has been
deemed corrupt, and “sustinuit” has been proposed instead of it. Harvey
supposes it the equivalent of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p10.2"></span>ὑπέστησε</span>, and then somewhat
strangely adds “for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p10.3"></span>ἀπέστησε</span>.” There seems to us no
difficulty in the word, and consequently no necessity for change.

<span id="fn_3104"></span>[388:3105](0010750.htm#fr_3104) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p13"></span> Compare, in illustration of this
sentence, book i. 4, 1, and i. 4, 5.

<span id="fn_3105"></span>[389:3106](0010750.htm#fr_3105) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p14"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024)<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3106"></span>[389:3107](0010750.htm#fr_3106) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p15"></span> [Mark xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#021)<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3107"></span>[389:3108](0010750.htm#fr_3107) <span
id="ix.iii.xxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p16"></span> [John xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii.xxi-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.—The twelve apostles...](0010751)
