[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010850)  [Next](0010852) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xiv"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—In the dead who were raised by Christ we possess the highest proof of the resurrection; and our hearts are shown to be capable of life eternal, because they can now receive the Spirit of God.

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p1"></span>1. Let our opponents—that is, they who
speak against their own salvation—inform us \[as to this point\]: <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.xiv-p1.2"></span>The
deceased daughter of the high priest; <span
id="fr_4542"></span>[4543](#fn_4542) the widow’s dead son, who was being
carried out \[to burial\] near the gate \[of the city\]; <span
id="fr_4543"></span>[4544](#fn_4543) and Lazarus, who had lain four days
in the tomb, <span id="fr_4544"></span>[4545](#fn_4544) —in what bodies
did they rise again? In those same, no doubt, in which they had also
died. For if it were not in the very same, then certainly those same
individuals who had died did not rise again. For \[the Scripture\] says,
“The Lord took the hand of the dead man, and said to him, Young man, I
say unto thee, Arise. And the dead man sat up, and He commanded that
something should be given him to eat; and He delivered him to his
mother.” <span id="fr_4545"></span>[4546](#fn_4545) Again, He called
Lazarus “with a loud voice, saying, Lazarus, come forth; and he that was
dead came forth bound with bandages, feet and hands.” This was
symbolical of that man who had been bound in sins. And therefore the
Lord said, “Loose him, and let him depart.” As, therefore, those who
were healed were made whole in those members which had in times past
been afflicted; and the dead rose in the identical bodies, their limbs
and bodies receiving health, and that life which was granted by the
Lord, who prefigures eternal things by temporal, and shows that it is He
who is Himself able to extend both healing and life to His handiwork,
that His words concerning its \[future\] resurrection may also be
believed; so also at the end, when the Lord utters His voice “by the
last trumpet,” <span id="fr_4546"></span>[4547](#fn_4546) the dead shall
be raised, as He Himself declares: “The hour shall come, in which all
the dead which are in the tombs shall hear the voice of the Son of man,
and shall come forth; those that have done good to the resurrection of
life, and those that have done evil to the resurrection of
judgment.” <span id="fr_4547"></span>[4548](#fn_4547)

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p8"></span>2. Vain, therefore, and truly miserable,
are those who do not choose to see what is so manifest and clear, but
shun the light of truth, blinding themselves like the tragic Œdipus. And
as those who are not practised in wrestling, when they contend with
others, laying hold with a determined grasp of some part of \[their
opponent’s\] body, really fall by means of that which they grasp, yet
when they fall, imagine that they are gaining the victory, because they
have obstinately kept their hold upon that part which they seized at the
outset, and besides falling, become <span id="page_540">p. 540</span>
<span id="ix.vii.xiv-Page_540"></span> subjects of ridicule; so is it
with respect to that \[favourite\] expression of the heretics: “Flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;” while taking two
expressions of Paul’s, without having perceived the apostle’s meaning,
or examined critically the force of the terms, but keeping fast hold of
the mere expressions by themselves, they die in consequence of their
influence (<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xiv-p8.1"></span>περὶ
αὐτάς</span>), overturning as far as in them lies the entire
dispensation of God.

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p9"></span>3. For thus they will allege that this
passage refers to the flesh strictly so called, and not to fleshly
works, as I have pointed out, so representing the apostle as
contradicting himself. For immediately following, in the same Epistle,
he says conclusively, speaking thus in reference to the flesh: “For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality. So, when this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
shall be brought to pass the saying which is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory. O death, where is thy sting? O death, where is thy
victory?” <span id="fr_4548"></span>[4549](#fn_4548) Now these words
shall be appropriately said at the time when this mortal and corruptible
flesh, which is subject to death, which also is pressed down by a
certain dominion of death, rising up into life, shall put on
incorruption and immortality. For then, indeed, shall death be truly
vanquished, when that flesh which is held down by it shall go forth from
under its dominion. And again, to the Philippians he says: “But our
conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, the
Lord Jesus, who shall transfigure the body of our humiliation
conformable to the body of His glory, even as He is able (*ita ut
possit*) according to the working of His own power.” <span
id="fr_4549"></span>[4550](#fn_4549) What, then, is this “body of
humiliation” which the Lord shall transfigure, \[so as to be\] conformed
to “the body of His glory?” Plainly it is this body composed of flesh,
which is indeed humbled when it falls into the earth. Now its
transformation \[takes place thus\], that while it is mortal and
corruptible, it becomes immortal and incorruptible, not after its own
proper substance, but after the mighty working of the Lord, who is able
to invest the mortal with immortality, and the corruptible with
incorruption. And therefore he says, <span
id="fr_4550"></span>[4551](#fn_4550) “that mortality may be swallowed up
of life. He who has perfected us for this very thing is God, who also
has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.” <span
id="fr_4551"></span>[4552](#fn_4551) He uses these words most manifestly
in reference to the flesh; for the soul is not mortal, neither is the
spirit. Now, what is mortal shall be swallowed up of life, when the
flesh is dead no longer, but remains living and incorruptible, hymning
the praises of God, who has perfected us for this very thing. In order,
therefore, that we may be perfected for this, aptly does he say to the
Corinthians, “Glorify God in your body.” <span
id="fr_4552"></span>[4553](#fn_4552) Now God is He who gives rise to
immortality.

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p15"></span>4. That he uses these words with
respect to the body of flesh, and to none other, he declares to the
Corinthians manifestly, indubitably, and free from all ambiguity:
“Always bearing about in our body the dying of Jesus, <span
id="fr_4553"></span>[4554](#fn_4553) that also the life of Jesus Christ
might be manifested in our body. For if we who live are delivered unto
death for Jesus’ sake, it is that the life of Jesus may also be
manifested in our mortal flesh.” <span
id="fr_4554"></span>[4555](#fn_4554) And that the Spirit lays hold on
the flesh, he says in the same Epistle, “That ye are the epistle of
Christ, ministered by us, inscribed not with ink, but with the Spirit of
the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the
heart.” <span id="fr_4555"></span>[4556](#fn_4555) If, therefore, in the
present time, fleshly hearts are made partakers of the Spirit, what is
there astonishing if, in the resurrection, they receive that life which
is granted by the Spirit? Of which resurrection the apostle speaks in
the Epistle to the Philippians: “Having been made conformable to His
death, if by any means I might attain to the resurrection which is from
the dead.” <span id="fr_4556"></span>[4557](#fn_4556) In what other
mortal flesh, therefore, can life be understood as being manifested,
unless in that substance which is also put to death on account of that
confession which is made of God? —as he has himself declared, “If, as a
man, I have fought with beasts <span
id="fr_4557"></span>[4558](#fn_4557) at Ephesus, what advantageth it me
if the dead rise not? For if the dead rise not, neither has Christ
risen. Now, if Christ has not risen, our preaching is vain, and your
faith is vain. In that case, too, we are found false witnesses for God,
since we have testified that He raised up Christ, whom \[upon that
supposition\] He did not raise up. <span
id="fr_4558"></span>[4559](#fn_4558) For if the dead rise not, neither
has Christ risen. But if Christ be not risen, your faith is vain, since
ye are yet in your sins. Therefore those who have fallen asleep in
Christ have perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we
are more miserable than all men. But now Christ has <span
id="page_541">p. 541</span> <span id="ix.vii.xiv-Page_541"></span> risen
from the dead, the first-fruits of those that sleep; for as by man
\[came\] death, by man also \[came\] the resurrection of the
dead.” <span id="fr_4559"></span>[4560](#fn_4559)

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p23"></span>5. In all these passages, therefore, as
I have already said, these men must either allege that the apostle
expresses opinions contradicting himself, with respect to that
statement, “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God;” or, on
the other hand, they will be forced to make perverse and crooked
interpretations of all the passages, so as to overturn and alter the
sense of the words. For what sensible thing can they say, if they
endeavour to interpret otherwise this which he writes: “For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal put on
immortality;” <span id="fr_4560"></span>[4561](#fn_4560) and, “That the
life of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh;” <span
id="fr_4561"></span>[4562](#fn_4561) and all the other passages in which
the apostle does manifestly and clearly declare the resurrection and
incorruption of the flesh? And thus shall they be compelled to put a
false interpretation upon passages such as these, they who do not choose
to understand one correctly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4542"></span>[539:4543](0010851.htm#fr_4542) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p2"></span> [Mark v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#022)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>.
Irenæus confounds the ruler of the synagogue with the high priest. \[Let
not those who possess printed Bibles and concordances and commentaries,
and all manner of helps to memory, blame the Fathers for such mistakes,
until they at least equal them in their marvellous and minute
familiarity with the inspired writers.\]

<span id="fn_4543"></span>[539:4544](0010851.htm#fr_4543) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p3"></span> [Luke vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4544"></span>[539:4545](0010851.htm#fr_4544) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p4"></span> [John ix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#030)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4545"></span>[539:4546](0010851.htm#fr_4545) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p5"></span> The two miracles of raising the widow’s
son and the rabbi’s daughter are here amalgamated.

<span id="fn_4546"></span>[539:4547](0010851.htm#fr_4546) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4547"></span>[539:4548](0010851.htm#fr_4547) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p7"></span> [John v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4548"></span>[540:4549](0010851.htm#fr_4548) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p10"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4549"></span>[540:4550](0010851.htm#fr_4549) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p11"></span> [Phil. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#029)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p11.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4550"></span>[540:4551](0010851.htm#fr_4550) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p12"></span> The original Greek text is preserved
here, as above; the Latin translator inserts, “in secunda ad
Corinthios.” Harvey observes: “The interpretation of the Scriptural
reference by the translator suggests the suspicion that the greater
number of such references have come in from the margin.”

<span id="fn_4551"></span>[540:4552](0010851.htm#fr_4551) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p13"></span> [2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4552"></span>[540:4553](0010851.htm#fr_4552) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p14"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4553"></span>[540:4554](0010851.htm#fr_4553) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p16"></span> Agreeing with the Syriac version in
omitting “the Lord” before the word “Jesus,” and in reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xiv-p16.1"></span>ἀεὶ</span> as <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xiv-p16.2"></span>εἰ</span>, which Harvey
considers the true text.

<span id="fn_4554"></span>[540:4555](0010851.htm#fr_4554) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p17"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p17.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4555"></span>[540:4556](0010851.htm#fr_4555) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p18"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4556"></span>[540:4557](0010851.htm#fr_4556) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p19"></span> [Phil. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#011)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4557"></span>[540:4558](0010851.htm#fr_4557) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p20"></span> The Syriac translation seems to take a
literal meaning out of this passage: “If, as one of the men, I have been
cast forth to the wild beasts at Ephesus.”

<span id="fn_4558"></span>[540:4559](0010851.htm#fr_4558) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p21"></span> This is in accordance with the Syriac,
which omits the clause, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p21.1"></span>εἴπερ ἄρα νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται.</span>

<span id="fn_4559"></span>[541:4560](0010851.htm#fr_4559) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p22"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p22.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4560"></span>[541:4561](0010851.htm#fr_4560) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4561"></span>[541:4562](0010851.htm#fr_4561) <span
id="ix.vii.xiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p25"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)<span id="ix.vii.xiv-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.—Unless the flesh were...](0010852)
