[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bos045)  [Next](bos047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Wiccan Shamanism

#### by Selena Fox

typed by Lewis for P.A.N. 508-795-7628

Shamanism exists in tribal cultures around the world and has done so for
centuries. Yet, in reading most anthropological texts on Shamanism,
there is little, if any reference made to shamanism in Europe. However
Shamanism has existed among the peoples of Europe not only in ancient
times, but also through the present day. During the Middle Ages, the Old
Ways largely disappeared from public view because of persecution. Yet
they were not eradicated but took a more underground existence. Today,
there are some of us of European ancestry that are bringing Shamanic
ways rooted in pre-Christian Europe back into the light.

Wiccan Shamanism is a term I began using several years ago in an attempt
to describe my own path of magick and spirituality in relation to the
other forms of Shamanism on the Planet. Wiccan Shamanism draws on the
Old but it is not simply an attempt re-construction and revival of the
Old Ways of tribal Europe. Wiccan Shamanism blends both the Old and the
New to suit the modern times in which we live. Although emphasis is on
European symbology and traditions Wiccan Shamanism is multi-cultural,
incorporating ways of other healers and magick workers from many places
and eras.

What follows is a glimpse into Wiccan Shamanism as I know it and
practice it. While Jim, Dennis, and others who help with various aspects
of CIRCLES work may share many of these concepts, I speak here only for
myself - for at the heart of this spiritual approach is the idea that
each person must seek their own connection with the Divine, within their
own Self, rather than having me or anyone else do this for them. This is
not a path of a leader with followers, but a path where each becomes
their own leader.

I call to the Powers of the Four Quarters -- to Earth in the North which
is the Realm of the Physical Body and Material Plane, to Air in the East
which is the Realm of Thoughts and Intellect, to Fire in the South which
is the Realm of Will Power and Action, and Water in the West which is
the Realm of Emotions and Intuition. My Medicine Wheel is the Magick
Circle which connects the Four Quarters. The sacred places I frequent
include a high rock, a crystal clear spring fed pool n a hidden valley
and a circle of stones in a grove of Oak and Birch on a mound.

I am a channel between Planet Earth beneath my feet and the Heavens
above my head. I become the World tree when I Shamanize, linking the
transforming Dark of the Underworld with the Awakening Light of the
Upperworld.

I am the Crystal LIght that is at the Center of the Circle and is the
fifth Element Spirit. I seek always to act out of MY own Inner Self
which is at the enter of MY being, for my Inner Self in the Balance of
all the Elements, of my Female and Male sides, of my Lunar and Solar
natures of my intellect and intuition my Inner Self is my doorway into
the realm where All is One.

I see the Circle of Life from the Center. I watch the Seasons change as
the Wheel of the Year turns and I celebrate the 8 sabbats. I connect
with the dance of Night and Day, of Fair and Stormy Weathers, of the
Waxing and Waning Moon. I see the cycle of Birth, Growth, Maturity,
Death, and Rebirth in all of Nature. I examine the cycles of my own life
and of the lives of those who seek healing aid from me.

I am the traveler between the World of Daily Life and the Otherworld
which is the land of Dreams, visions and Spirits. I am a Consciousness
Explorer. the Otherworldis as real and as important to me as the
Day-to-Day World. I bridge the Worlds rather than seeking to dwell
solely in one or the other. I journey into the Otherworld for a reason
-- to bring back healing and knowledge to apply to Daily Life, helping
others, myself and the Planet.

I see the Divine in all things. My friends and allies include not only
humans but also plants, animals, rocks, winds, waters, fire, stars, and
other life forms. I commune with the Source some call "God" as both
Mother Goddess and Father God, for both aspects are necessary for the
Unity.

The main focus of my Shamanic work is Healing. I was called to this path
as a young child in dreams and Out-of-Body experiences, but I didn't
begin my work until my adult years when I started Healing myself. To do
this I journeyed alone into the Pit of my Shadow Self and came
face-to-face with my problems and hang-ups; my doubts fears,
disillusionments, rejections, angers and hurts; with all MY false self
images. Words can not begin to express the misery, the utter despair the
powerlessness I felt during this time. Yet coming apart was essential;
it enabled me to break through the barriers which I had formed and let
others form in my psyche that had kept me from being one with my True
Self. In the deepest Darkness, I felt the Light of my own Inner Self
beginning to shine through. I focused on the Light and slowly emerged
from the Pit, stronger and more integrated than ever before and with the
power to heal others as well as myself. As a result of this
transformation process, my life's work became clear. I now help others
from their own pits of negativity and become whole again.

Yet my work also extends to more than Humankind; it involves bringing
Healing to the Planet as a whole. In my communing with the Land, I have
heard the cries of the Earth Mother, sorrowing over the self-centered,
greedy, intolerant, and destructive behaviors of many of Her human
children, who are polluting the soils, water, and air; who are playing
power games with nuclear fire; and who are polluting the spiritual
atmosphere of the entire world with their narrow-mindedness and hate. I
am deeply concerned about survival -- not of the Planet Herself for all
the humans in the world can not destroy Her even with all their weapons;
She is too strong and powerful for that to happen. What I am concerned
about is the survival of the human race. -- will we annihilate ourselves
and many of the life forms around us, or will we wake up in time to see
the larger picture, find and implement creative solutions to the worlds
problems, and enter a New Age of expanded consciousness?

The Balance of Life can be restored on Planet Earth; Harmony can be
restored between humankind and other life forms; Love consciousness can
increase and be prevalent on the Earth. I, along with numerous other
healers and ministers from a variety of spiritual traditions around the
world today have responded to the upset of Mother Earth by dedicating
our lives to this Planetary Healing Work, each in our own way. It is
this Great Work that underlies all the healing and other things I do. It
is the Heart of Wiccan Shamanism.

First published in fall 1984 "Circle Network News";  
© 1984, CIRCLE, Box 219, Mt. Horeb WI 53572 USA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Healing Myth (Nihasa)](bos047.md)
