[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos059)  [Next](bos061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Women vs. Men

#### By: Michelle Hass (in conversation with Scott Szakonyi)

"Ok folks, Loki and I have been chatting, and we're ready to raise a
ruckus that might go on for months."

Chiniginish and I relish the challenge... with Coyote looking over our
shoulders and chuckling...

"Here's the question: Are women superior to men, and if so, why? I
*think* that women are superior to men in the modern world because
evolution is lagging society. Most of the evolution of the human race
(about 60 million yrs) took place in hunter/gatherer tribes, where
aggressive behavior on the part of the male hunters was a survival
trait, and relating/caring behavior was a survival trait for females.
Now, in the 20 thousand or so years since we have become agrarian, the
need for male hunter aggressiveness has gone the way of the Dodo, while
the need for relating/caring behavior has become primary. Where does
this leave us?

"Well, as I see it, women are almost ideally suited to the overcrowded,
communication-intensive environment that we call modern society. Men, on
the other hand, are like people with no arms playing handball. It's not
that we're bad folk, it's just that we were designed by evolution for an
environment that hasn't existed for *20 thousand years*, which is a real
drop in the bucket in terms of evolution. Evolution isn't going to be
giving us any help for at least a few million years; maybe never since
we are constantly screwing up the gene pool with our wars that leave the
genetically defective to breed and send the genetically preferable off
to evolutionary dead ends. So all we men can do is try to better
ourselves and ask for patience on the part of women, who must feel like
the entire male sex has completely missed the boat."

Well, you've got a nice point, but it assumes something that I believe
'taint necessarily so. Is male aggressiveness part of nature or nurture?
The jury seems to be coming back from a long period of deliberation, and
it looks like the verdict is *nurture*.

This very nicely dovetails with my own theory of what thelemites refer
to as the "procession of the aeons". In Crowley's notorious Liber Al vel
Legis, we are said to be passing from an aeon of belief in suffering
male gods and patriarchy to an aeon of belief in the value of Self and
of partnership between the sexes. Crowley called the old aeon the "Aeon
of Osiris" and the new the "Aeon of Horus, the Crowned and Conquering
Child." The enthroned Child is not masculine or feminine, but
androgynous/gynandrous. The aeon before the Osirian was that of Isis, an
aeon of Great Mother Goddesses and matriarchy.

My chronology is a little different than that which Crowley attributed
to these three epochs of human history so far. Crowley declared that the
Aeon of Horus began with the Spring Equinox of +1904 Common, just before
the writing of the Book of the Law. I maintain that the change is still
taking place, and had its roots in the +1700s Common. The writings of
the philosopher Locke were some of the first to make a very important
quantum jump, and provided ideological impetus for the vital changes
that have and are taking place.

What Locke asserted was that government did not rest on Divine Right,
but on the consent of the governed. Human beings were not born to
different castes, some fated to serve while others were fated to rule by
the grace of the gods. Human beings were born equal, and had certain
rights as a birthright: Life, Liberty, the right to pursue Happiness,
and the right to security of private property.

This assertion shows up in Liber Al as these statements:

In a little less arcane language, these statements run thusly:  
Every Individual matters.  
Every Individual has the right to live, be free and pursue Happiness
(harmony with one's life's purpose, or True Will) as they Will.  
These rights stop at the boundary of the Wills of others. Live your life
as you see fit, but mind your own business and above all, *harm nobody*.
This includes yourself in a very conditional way. You *do* have the
right to self-destruction, but if you truly believe that you matter, why
would you want to?

These assertions are usually encountered firstly in a Locke-inspired
document that has passed into the history of this country, the
Declaration of Independence. If there is any one document that is a
trigger point for the New Aeon, it's that one. The American Revolution
was the first time monarchy was cast aside in favor of democracy of a
representative sort. Democracy was tried before, but never quite this
way. And despite several course corrections that needed to be made, (the
abolishment of Slavery, the giving of Women, Blacks and Amerinds the
right to vote) and some that still need to be made (the granting of
total equality for all races and sexes, a shift to a more direct method
of participation, ie Cyber-democracy) the democratic experiment in the
United States is the most enduring of all.

Before the 1700s, government was imposed from above, not thought of as
flowing from the consent of the governed. Individuals were not accorded
rights as a birthright, but were granted rights by the king, usually on
a class-by-class basis. Human beings were dealt with as masses and
classes, on a Collective basis.

Coincidental with these developments was a surfacing of hermetic thought
in a more widespread way then ever before in history. The Rosicrucian
and Freemason movements brought hermeticism to a wide audience. Within
the ranks of Freemasonry were both common and noble, and often commoners
would be lodgemasters in lodges frequented by those of noble birth.
Hermetic orders ennobled not by birth, but by level of knowledge and
initiation and (hopefully) by level of spiritual attainment.

Now, this was fine in theory, but unfortunately in practice things
weren't so swift. It was only until the mid-1800s and groups like the
original Golden Dawn that women had the possibility of initiation. Even
now, in Masonic lodges that have lost their occult focus and are now
little more than men's clubs, men are ritually strip-searched to assure
the initiator that the candidate is indeed male and not a disguised
female.

The baggage of the old days of sexism and classism remain in a lot of
hermetic orders even today. Crowley himself had serious problems
accepting women as equals: he had a rather low opinion of them and was
quite cruel to them in numerous cases. But very explicit in the message
of the New Aeon is that people are to be dealt with, not by sex or race
or social strata but by their inborn, inalienable rights as
individuals... as Stars, to use a thelemic term.

The Neo-pagan movement was a definite evolutionary step in defining a
New Aeon mode of spirituality. Unlike the traditional hermetic order,
Wicca and other forms of Neo-paganism do not have a multiplicity of
ranks and a chain of command. Some have three degrees, some two, some
only one, that of initiate. Initiation is not a bestowal of rank, but
more a purpose-oriented process. As magickal orders continue to evolve,
they will either need to emulate more and more the informality and
non-hierarchical non-structure of Neo-paganism or choke on their bloated
hierarchies. It is funny when one considers that there is much evidence
to suggest that Neo-paganism evolved from the Astrum Argentum and the
OTO, and that much of Gardner's groundbreaking work in reconstructing
the old pre-Osirian Druidic religion was helped along with the research
help of Uncle Al himself.

Perhaps, as the knightly orders of the past were meant as guardians of
the Christian Church, there will become a symbiotic connection between
Neo-paganism and Magickal orders, especially among those whose
non-structure mimics that of the coven. Arguably this symbiosis exists
now, and hell, I'm living proof of this.

So what the deuce does this have to do with the sexes? You'll see as I
wrap this up. Ok... remember I mentioned that before the Osirian epoch
and the patriarchy, which seems to have come in with the rise of the big
cities and the transformation from a hunter/gatherer society to an
agrarian one (methinks you have placed the transformation a little too
far into the past) there was the Isian epoch and the matriarchy? Well,
before patriarchal philosophy displaced matriarchalism, women pretty
much ran things. They didn't hunt because to place women, who were the
living image of the Goddess and the ex-nihilo creatrixes of the next
generation, in bodily jeopardy was literally blasphemy. Women were the
intermediaries for men to the Goddess, who was unapproachable otherwise.
The men had their hunting cults, but they were as insignificant in
reality as the Victorian-era anthropologists misread the ancient
religion of the Goddess as merely an inferior "fertility cult."

When the transition came to the cities and to patriarchy sometime around
-10,000 to -7,500 Common, the long-suppressed males took by force what
the Goddesses of the Isian era denied them by their divine decree...
power. Male warrior deities replaced female mother deities. The
priestesses of the old religions were destroyed. (The Book of Joshua in
the Old Testament is a vivid account of one triumph of Osiris over
Isis.) And the new order began. But the old matriarchal religions
survived for several thousands of years after the turn of the aeon, and
it is painfully obvious that the old patriarchal ways will haunt us for
thousands of years into the future, even as new ways take hold and new
philosophies become more accepted. But it really is nurture rather than
nature that makes men aggressive and women passive. Men can learn to be
nurturing and loving, and women can learn to be assertive and empowered.
In order that we can truly enter this new aeon where all are leaders and
all are Stars, we each have to cultivate the "other side" of our Selves.
No, women are not superior to men, nor is it the other way around. Every
Individual matters. Everyone has the potential to be a King, in the
thelemic sense of the word. We need to learn to treat all with dignity,
be they material successes or abject material failures. We need to treat
even those still enslaved by the old *ideas fixes* with as much dignity
as those who have declared their secession from them and their embracing
of the New Law.

The evolution is really and truly in our own hands.

Beauty and balance, Will and Love,  
Michelle.

The coven that I've been working with in Denver begins its cup blessing
by a dialogue between the Priest and the Priestess. Both have a hand
each on the athame and the chalice:

Priest: "Be it known that a man is not greater than a woman.

Priestess: "Nor yet is a woman greater than a man"

Priest: "For what one lacks"

Priestess: "The other can provide"

Priest" "As the Athame is to the male"

Priestess: So is the cup to the female.

Both: And when conjoined together, they become one in truth, for there
is no greater magick in all the world than that of love.

BB Rowan

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: WHAT IS D.A.W.N.? (Denver Area Wiccan Network)](bos061)
