[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bos011)  [Next](bos013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A Mabon rite outline

#### (soon to be a major Mabon Ritual, at a terminal near you.)

General Mabon info to start with, set the mood &c...

### What is Mabon?

Mabon, sometimes known as the Harvest/Thanksgiving ritual of the Autumn
Equinox, is one of the Spokes of the Wheel of the Year. In the many
Earth or Pagan Religions, a special kinship with the passing of the
seasons is felt... this is usually due to the history of said
traditions, most of which stem from agrarian cultures where the seasons
marked the way of life. From planting to reaping to winter to summer...
the seasons were of great importance to our ancestors, for their very
existence depended upon good harvests, mild winters, enough rainfall,
and the like.

So... having shown the importance of the seasons, we shall turn to Mabon
itself. Autumn... harvest time... the reaping of what was sown and cared
thru during the year. A time of thankfulness and rejoicing. So, of
course, someone at some point in time must have said... "Now that the
work is over... LET'S PARTY!!!"

This is the essence of Mabon. Rejoicing in a bountiful harvest, thanking
the Gods for being so kind during the year, and, hopefully, helping in
winning over the Gods' favor for the coming year.

### About the Mabon rite itself:

Now, this will be a very Discordian ritual in that each participant will
be (more or less) writing his/her own part. This outline is provided to
sorta nudge (nudge, wink, wink, say no more, sir, say no more!) people
into making their individual pieces able to fit into the whole thing...
(I feel like the Green Ball outta "Heavy Metal", the movie, something
which ties things together).  
Back to the rite itself.

Basically, 6 personages will be represented: Callers or Watchers of the
East, South, West and North, High Priest (HP) and High Priestess (HPS).

Of course, since this is a generic rite, the terms "Lord" and "Lady"
will be used when referring to the Male and Female aspects of
divinity/godhood/whatever... individuals may use which ever names they
wish, for a Rose, by any other name, would still smell as sweet.

### Outline:

1.  Invocation... once everybody has arrived, a Circle shall be cast,
    more or less, and the 4 Watchers/Callers each get to do their thing
    invoking that which that direction symbolizes to come and attend the
    festivities. After which, either the HPS, HP or both would
    consecrate the circle... in our case... the circle will be around
    each person at their 'puter... with a sense of being connected to
    each other via the others' 'puters. So... what we'll do is... after
    the circle is cast, and the four Corners have done their things,
    then the HP will call upon the Lord to attend, and the HPS shall
    call upon the Lady, (or, if we want to be different, we can have the
    HP call the Lady, and the HPS call the Lord... it's not as
    traditional, but I know of some Ladies who are more likely to pay
    attention to a young, handsome HP than any HPS, if you get my
    meaning \[wink\]).

2.  Once invoked... it's time for the thanksgiving part... we all got
    things we're thankful for... now's the chance.

3.  After the thanks are over, a customary requesting of blessing for
    the coming year is asked.

4.  That done with, it's time to dismiss the summoned ones... first,
    around the circle... each corner doing it's thing... the dismissal
    consists of a Hail to the being summoned, a flattery (as I call it),
    and then a structured dismissal (eg. "Air of the East... blah, blah,
    blah,... Go if thou must, but stay if thou wilt"). The HP and HPS
    dismiss the Lord and Lady last with similar words.

5.  PARTY TIME!!!! Get out the Beer, munchies, what have you...
    celebrate... you've earned it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Midsummer Celebration (Mike Nichols)](bos013.md)
