[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos019)  [Next](bos021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Neo-Pagan Ritual

    #1619  05 Aug 85  22:48:33 (RECV'D)
    From: Curly Howard  To: Da Sysop
    See also msg # 17
    Subject: NEO-PAGANISM

Alright, I don't want to sound dumb, but I have no idea what these
rituals entail. What goes on during these, and what is their purpose?  
Curly Howard

    #1719  06 Aug 85  11:59:57 (RECV'D)
    From: Brad Hicks  REPLY To: Curly Howard
    Reply to msg # 16    See also msg # 18
    Subject: NEOPAGAN RITUAL

Boy, you don't ask the easy ones. Dr. Regardie takes 12 volumes to
answer this one; Aleister Crowley, 13 or so; Isaac Bonewits, two (and
that's only introductory).

I'll try to summarize, but if you're really interested, track down
Starhawk's THE SPIRAL DANCE for further details. Most scholars divide
ritual into two classes: 1) theurgic, and 2) thaumaturgic. In fancy
words, this means that either you are praying to make your self "a
better person" or "closer to God/dess" or "to be saved from your sins",
or you are praying for the God/dess to intervene in the world around you
- prayers for peace, for money, for health, etc.

Neopagan ritual partakes of both aspects, to some extent. In a typical
ritual, various techniques (as old as humanity) are used to "raise the
power," then the power is focused via magickal symbols to contact the
God(s) and/or Goddess(es) who are being called upon. He/She/They take
that magickal energy, augment it, and return it to the circle. The High
Priest/ess then focuses that energy on the target - the object or person
to be affected, if any - then any energies that remain (or the total
energy, if there is no magickal target) are returned to the Gods, via a
process called "grounding."

To paraphrase Uncle Isaac's wonderful book on the subject, you have the
wind-up, the pitch, and the follow-through.

The windup uses any ritual techniques that are appropriate to a) the
setting, b) the purpose of the ritual, c) the deities being contacted,
and d) the skills of the participants. The universals are chanting,
dance, and "ritual theatre." There are, of course, others.

The "pitch" uses beautiful, poetic imagery in guided meditations and
ritual movement. Occasionally (if possible), this uses music and dance.
Once the gods are contacted and the energy flows, it is concentrated in
an object - usually cakes and wine, but occasionally by other means -
and distributed, symbolically to all the participants. Having partaken
of the energy thus raised, the guided meditations direct the people in
focusing their energy on the purpose at hand.

Finally, the High Priest or Priestess goes through a "follow-through",
which involves dissolving the "group mind", reassuring people that what
we have worked is done and was effective, and then "grounding" any loose
energies, so that when the group leaves the ritual circle, they are back
in their normal minds.

As I write, it occurs to me that the real answer to your question lies
in that last sentence - "back in their normal minds." Neopagan ritual is
a collection of tools and techniques for altering your consciousness,
temporarily, to a place where the Gods and Goddesses are real and near,
where we as their children and lovers and friends can worship them, and
where the magick we work can come true. Having convinced ourselves of
this, we act on it, then return to our daily lives refreshed.

(Gods, what a bunch of gibberish! You would have been better off reading
the books!)

Anyway, I tried. Anyone else (esp. Black Dragon if he shows up again, as
he's worked at least as much ritual as I) please feel free to add or
comment. Was this the kind of answer you wanted, Curly?

Reverend Talespinner, O.S.C.  
Clan Destiny Chapel of Eris & Dionysus  
(aka Brad Hicks)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Celebration of May Day (Mike Nichols)](bos021)
