[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bos025)  [Next](bos027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# On the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram

#### by Tim Maroney

The Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram is one of the chief rituals
of Western Magick. It has been with us at least since the Golden Dawn of
the nineteenth century, and it has penetrated into all the many Golden
Dawn spinoffs, including Neo-Paganism. Yet there is still no widely
available, clear instruction. The directions of the magical orders are
mere mnemonics for those who are assumed to have personal instructors.
To formulate my personal approach to the ritual, to aid any others who
may be considering practicing the LBR, and to satisfy the idle curiosity
of any gawking onlookers, I have put together this short discussion of
the ritual and its symbolism and performance.

### A. Intent of the Ritual

The real action of a magick ritual takes place in the mind. Ritual is a
form of moving meditation. The effect is also primarily psychological.\*
The LBR is a tool to facilitate meditation.

\[\*Not all players would agree with this statement. Many would say that
the effect of the LBR is a fortified and cleansed area on the astral
plane, which they think is as real as Hoboken, if not more so. It
doesn't really matter in practice.\]

The experience of a proper LBR is pleasurable and soothing, yet
energizing and empowering. One is made at home in the mystical realm,
protected from lurkers and phantasms by strongly imagined wards. This
solace from mundane experience is a precondition for more serious works
of meditation or ritual, but it can also form a healthy part of the life
of the mind by itself.

### B. The Ritual

I'll just reprint the description of the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the
Pentagram from Liber O, a publication of the occult order A.'.A.'.

1.  Touching the forehead, say "Ateh (Unto Thee)."
2.  Touching the breast, say Malkuth (The Kingdom)."
3.  Touching the right shoulder, say "ve-Geburah (and the Power)."
4.  Touching the left shoulder, say "ve-Gedulah (and the Glory),
5.  Clasping the hands upon the breast, say "le-Olahm, Amen (To the
    Ages, Amen)."
6.  Turning to the East, make a pentagram (that of Earth) with the
    proper weapon (usually the Wand). Say (i.e. vibrate) "IHVH"
    (Ye-ho-wau\*).
7.  Turning to the South, the same, but say "ADNI" (Adonai).
8.  Turning to the West, the same, but say "AHIH" (Eheieh).
9.  Turning to the North, the same, but say "AGLA" (Agla).
10. Extending the arms in the form of a cross say:
11. "Before me Raphael;
12. Behind me Gabriel;
13. On my right hand Michael;
14. On my left hand Auriel;
15. For about me flames the Pentagram,
16. And in the Column stands the six-rayed Star."
17. until xxi. Repeat steps (i) to (v), the "Qabalistic Cross."

\[\* Modern scholarship has a different take on the pronunciation of the
Big Guy's name. I use "Yahweh" rather than the "Ye-ho-wau" of Liber O
because that's what the Catholic priests of my youth taught me to say,
and I've never been able to shake it off. Use whatever pronunciation you
prefer, or a different name altogether.\]

### C. Politics of the Ritual

With practice, you will no doubt come up with your own style of
performance, and your own different symbolism for ritual acts. Different
people do rituals as differently as actors play parts, even though the
lines and motions may be fundamentally the same. (The alternative is an
authoritarian, dogmatic horror which is alien to the deep occult
understanding of religion, but is still common in magical groups.)
Slavish imitation will get you nowhere in Magick -- except, perhaps, to
some high spiritual degree!

The Christianity -- or at least angelic monotheism -- of the ritual
symbolism may give a start to some. Many of us involved in occultism
have strongly negative feelings about Christianity. These are perhaps
justified, but there are a few saving graces here.

First, as with any ritual, you should feel free to make it yours, to
mess around with it. If you don't start to at least play with the styles
of a ritual after a while, you are probably not doing it very well. It
is perfectly legitimate to substitute cognate symbols at any time.
However, the saying in the martial arts is that one first learns
another's style, and after mastering it, moves on to create one's own.
For a beginner, it will be easiest simply to use an existing ritual form
in order to explore the meaning of a banishing ritual.

Given that experience, which transcends any mere set of symbols, one may
devise a form more in keeping with the emergence of one's personal
style. For instance, Neo-Pagans use a highly reified form of the same
basic ritual in many of their traditions, but with non-Christian
deities, spirits, and heros at the quarters. Aleister Crowley wrote a
new version which made the performance more dancelike, and used the
names of Thelemic deities and officers rather than monotheist gods and
angels. My private version, called "Opening the Threshold", is entirely
atheistic and philosophical.

In any case, of those people who so abhor Christianity, how many have
looked at some of the practices of historical pagans in Europe, Asia,
Africa and the Americas? No religion should ever be "accepted" by an
occultist. When using any religion's symbolism, the adept should cut to
its sacred poetical core and discard the political dross. By this
standard, Christianity looks about as good as any other religion.
Without this standard and by factoring in historical excesses and power
plays, almost all known religions look just about as bad as
Christianity.

In other words, someone who will happily use Norse gods, Arthurian
heroes, Taoist immortals, Voudoun loas, or what have you in rituals, but
will never touch a Christian angel, is guilty of the same narrowness he
or she probably imparts to the Christians.

## The Vibration of God-Names

In the LBR, the vibration of the god-names "charges" or "enlivens" the
pentagrams in the air. This is difficult to describe, but easy to
recognize. There is a feeling of presence in one of these charged
warding images -- though not necessarily a feeling of true externality
or separate intelligence. Weare told to "vibrate" the names. The
description and illustration of the "vibration" given in Liber O have
been known to mislead people into hilarious postures. What the picture
most resembles is the skulking monster from the movie The Mummy. To the
modern eye, it is remarkable how truly unclear a photograph can be. I
didn't learn how to vibrate a god-name until I signed up with yet
another occult order and was taught it in person. I wouldn't wish the
ensuing experience on anyone, so here is a description which I hope will
be adequate in print.

## Vibration phase i -- The Sign of the Enterer (1-4)

1\. Stand upright. Blow all the air out of your lungs. Hold your arms
straight out at your sides.

2a. Close your eyes and inhale nasally, imagining that the breath is the
name. The exact nature of this imagination differs from person to
person. Thus, you imagine yourself inhaling the name into your lungs.

2b. As you inhale, sweep your forearms smoothly and deliberately up so
that your fists rest on your temples.

3\. Imagine the breath moving down through your torso slowly, and
through your pelvis, your legs, and finally to the soles of your feet.
(Don't do this so slowly that you are hurting for air when the name
reaches your feet!)

4a. The instant the inhaled vibrational name hits the soles of your
feet, imagine it rushing back up and out.

4b. Simultaneously, throw yourself forward, thrusting your left foot
forward about twelve inches (or thirty centimeters) and catching
yourself on it. Your hands shoot forward, together, like a diver. You
bend forward at the waist so that your torso winds up parallel to the
floor.

4c. The air in your lungs should be blown out through your nose at the
same time, but imagine the name shooting out straight ahead.

Steps 3-4 are known as the Sign of the Enterer, or of Horus. This
symbolizes powerful active energy. The Enterer should be something of a
"rush". The vibrational name is projected outwards into more tangible
manifestation -- in this case, in the pentagrams of the LBR, which are
charged by the force of the projected god-names.

It is highly inadvisable to omit the portion of step(4b) which reads
"catching yourself on it." But again, I have no desire to infringe on
your freedom of choice.

## Vibration phase ii -- The Sign of Silence (5)

5\. Finally, withdraw into a standing position, left arm hanging at your
side, right forefinger on lips, left foot pointing ninety degrees out
from the body.

Step 5 is called the Sign of Silence, or of Harpocrates. This Egyptian
god was mistakenly believed (at the turn of the century) to pertain to
silence, because his finger or thumb was touching his lips. This gesture
is now believed to be a symbol of childhood; this correction appears in
the World card of Crowley's "Book of Thoth" Tarot deck. Harpocrates was
the god of the Sun at dawn, and so symbolizes wonder, beauty, potential,
growth. So, step 5 may be done in this academically corrected light
instead.

However, the "hush" gesture of the Golden Dawn Sign of Silence is
adequate for the modern occultist, even if deprived of A Divine
Identification. It is a common gesture, at least in the European
culture, meaning silence. Silence perhaps balances the ultra-active Sign
of the Enterer better than does the more scholarly positive/active "Sign
of Harpocrates the Rising Sun", and silence is surely no alien concept
to mystics.

## The Invocation

The pentagrams are given form by the drawing, life by the vibration,
identity by the four-part prayer of steps (x) to (xiv). Some people do
very elaborate visualizations of angelic guardians on each of (xi) to
(xiv). Because of my tragic personal deficiencies, I am content with
strong feelings of presence, identity, and divinity in each of the four
directions.

A horizontal cross is built up step by step as you say, "Before me
Raphael", etc, with you at the center; and the position of your arms
forms a vertical cross, a renewal of the Qabalistic Cross from the start
of the ritual. You may feel a quite peculiar rising and expansion when
both of these crosses are formulated. One has become the center of the
geometry of the space, and it is like a little world in itself, cut
adrift from the mundane currents of everyday experience.

Steps (xv) and (xvi) are when the real banishing takes place, during
"For about me flames the pentagram, and in the column stands the
six-rayed star." A great pulse of force is emitted during these steps,
imposing the personal will on the space and clearing it of all hostile
influences.

After this is done, the invoked "archangels" maintain the banishing
effect, guarding in all four directions. Of course this talk of angels
is all bullshit -- the importance lies in the psychological effect.
Whether there "really is" an archangel standing there keeping out
inimical spirits is not important. The "feeling of cleanliness" is what
matters.

## Concluding Cross

The final Qabalistic Cross is an affirmation of the completeness and
symmetry of the ritual, and also a new self-consecration. This is more
efficacious than the previous Cross because it is done in a banished
environment.

One is now ready to do a formal invocation, an evocation, a meditation,
or whatever the overall purpose may be. The LBR is a preliminary
ceremony, although it has a beneficial effect in itself. It can
profitably be done as a stand-alone ritual, but you should move on. The
LBR should keep away the horrible ickies that turn so many novices away
from Magick. Its mastery is a first step to adeptship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mystical Pentagram](bos027)
