[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bos054)  [Next](bos056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# An Introduction to Traditional Wicca

#### © 1987, Keepers of the Ancient Mysteries ( .K.A.M. )

Often Traditional Wiccans are asked to describe our religion and beliefs
for interested people, who may or may not have confused us with other
Pagan religions, with inversions of Christian/Islamic religions like
Satanism, or with purely magical traditions with no religious base.
There is a lot of flexibility in the ways that we describe ourselves,
and one characteristic of Wicca is a large degree of personal liberty to
practice as we please. Still, there is an outline that can be described
in general terms. Many traditions will depart from one particular or
another, but groups departing from all or most of these features are
probably non-Wiccan Traditions attempting to stretch or distort the
Wiccan name to cover what they want to do.

### Mysteries and Initiation

Wicca is an Initiatory religion descended from the Ancient Mystery
Religions. A mystery religion is not like Catholicism where a Priest is
the contact point between the worshiper and the Deity, nor like
Protestantism where a sacred Book provides the contact and guidelines
for being with the divine. Rather a Mystery Religion is a religion of
personal experience and responsibility, in which each worshiper is
encouraged, taught and expected to develop an ongoing and positive
direct relationship with the Gods. The religion is called a "Mystery"
because such experiences are very hard to communicate in words, and are
usually distorted in the telling. You have to have been there in person
to appreciate what is meant. Near and far-Eastern religions like
Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism and Shinto are probably Mystery traditions,
but Wicca is very western in cultural flavor and quite different than
eastern religions in many ways.

### A Blend of Pagan Roots

Most Wiccan Traditions, .K.A.M. included, have particular roots in the
British Mystery Traditions. This includes traditions of the Picts who
lived before the rise of Celtic consciousness, the early Celts, and some
selected aspects of Celtic Druidism. American Wicca is directly
descended from British Wicca, brought in the late 1950's by English and
American Initiates of Gardnerian, Alexandrian and Celtic Wicca. These
traditions are a little like the denominations in Christianity, but
hopefully far more harmonious.

While British Traditions are very strong in Wicca, or the Craft as it is
sometimes called, other Western Mystery traditions feature prominently,
including the ancient Greek Mysteries of Eleusis, Italian Mysteries of
Rome, Etruria and the general countryside, Mysteries of Egypt and Persia
before Islam, and various Babylonian, Assyrian and other mid-eastern
Mysteries that flourished before the political rise of the advocates of
"one god".

### What's In a Name?

Wicca, Witchcraft, and "The Craft" are used interchangeably at times by
many kinds of people. It is fair to say that all Wiccans are Witches,
and many of us believe we are the only people entitled to the name. It
is important to know that many people call themselves witches who are
not in the least Wiccan, and that Masons also refer to themselves as
"Craft", with good historical precedent. Carefully question people on
the particular things they do and believe as part of their religion
rather than relying on labels. Any real Wiccan would welcome such honest
inquiry.

### Traditions and Flavor

There are specific Wiccan beliefs and traditions, including worship of
an equal and mated Goddess and God who take many forms and have many
Names. Groups who worship only a Goddess or only a God are not
traditional Wicca however they may protest, although they may be
perfectly good Pagans of another sort. The Wiccan Goddess and God are
linked to nature, ordinary love and children -- Wicca is very life
affirming in flavor.

Because we have and love our own Gods, Wiccans have nothing to do with
other people's deities or devils, like the Christian God or Satan, the
Muslim Allah or the Jewish Jehovah (reputedly not his real name).
Christians often deny this fact because they think that their particular
god is the only God, and everybody else in the whole world must be
worshipping their devil. How arrogant. They're wrong on both counts.

Traditional Wicca is a religion of personal responsibility and growth.
Initiates take on a particular obligation to personal development
throughout their lives, and work hard to achieve what we call our "True
Will", which is the best possibility that we can conceive for ourselves.
Finding your Will isn't easy, and requires a lot of honesty, courage and
hard work. It is also very rewarding.

Wicca is generally a cheerful religion, and has many holidays and
festivals. In fact, most of the more pleasant holidays now on our
calendar are descended from the roots Wicca draws on, including
Christmas, May Day, Easter and Summer Vacation. Wicca is definitely not
always serious. Dancing, feasting and general merriment are a central
part of the celebrations.

### Wiccan Ethics

Wiccans have ethics which are different in nature than most "one-god"
religions, which hand out a list of "do's and don'ts". We have a single
extremely powerful ethical principal which Initiates are responsible for
applying in specific situations according to their best judgment. That
principle is called the Wiccan Rede (Old-English for rule) and reads:

Based on the earlier mention of "True Will", you will understand that
the Rede is far more complex than it sounds, and is quite different than
saying "Do whatever you want as long as nobody is hurt". Finding out
your Will is difficult sometimes, and figuring out what is harmful,
rather than just painful or unpleasant is not much easier.

### Initiation into Wicca

People become Wiccans only by Initiation, which is a process of
contacting and forming a good relationship with the Gods and Goddesses
of Wicca. Initiation is preceded by at least a year and a day of
preparation and study, and must be performed by a qualified Wiccan
Priestess and Priest. The central event of Initiation is between you and
your Gods, but the Priestess is necessary to make the Initiation a
Wiccan one, to pass some of her power onto you as a new-made Priestess
or Priest and to connect you to the Tradition you're joining.

Women hold the central place in Wicca. A Traditional Coven is always
headed by a High Priestess, a Third Degree female Witch with at least
three years and three days of specific training. A Priest is optional,
but the Priestess is essential. Similarly, a Priest may not Initiate
without a Priestess, but a Priestess alone is sufficient. Women are
primary in Wicca for many reasons, one of which is that the Goddess is
central to our religion.

### One Religion at a Time

People often ask "Can I become a Wiccan and still remain a Christian,
Muslim, practicing Jew, etc. The answer is no. The "one god" religions
reject other paths besides their own, including each other's. "One-god"
religions also do not exalt the Female as does Wicca, and mixing two
such different traditions would water them both down. Besides, you'd
have to ask how serious a person who practiced two religions was about
either one. Being Jewish is an exception, since it is a race and culture
as well as a religion. There are many Wiccan Jews, but they practice
Wicca, not Judaism.

### Magick and Science

People interested in Wicca are usually curious about the magick that
Wiccans can do. While magick (spelled with a "k" to distinguish from
stage conjuring) is not a religion in itself, it is related to our
religious beliefs. Wiccans believe that people have many more abilities
than are generally realized, and that it is a good idea to develop them.
Our magick is a way of using natural forces to change consciousness and
material conditions as an expression of our "True Wills". Part of
becoming a Wiccan is training in our methods of psychic and magickal
development.

Because we believe that everything a person does returns to them
magnified, a Wiccan will not work a magick for harm, since they would
pay too high a price. But a helpful magick is good for both the giver
and receiver! Wicca is entirely compatible with the scientific method,
and we believe all the Gods and forces we work with to be quite natural,
not supernatural at all. We do not, however, hold with the kind of
scientific dogma or pseudo religion that sees everything as dead matter
and neglects its own method by trumpeting "facts" without honest
examination of evidence.

### Priestesses at Large?

Long ago the spiritual (and sometimes physical) ancestors of Wiccans
were Priestesses and Priests to the Pagan culture as well as devotees of
their Mystery. Now that a Pagan culture is rising again, some ask if
today's Wiccans could resume that role. This seems unlikely.

Today's Pagan culture is very diverse and more interested in exploring
and creating new forms than in building on existing traditions. A public
role would either dilute our traditions or force them on an unwilling
audience. The neo-Pagan community generally prefers "media figures" and
rapid membership and growth. This is not compatible with our slow
methods of training and Initiation, the insistence that livelihood come
from work outside the Craft, or our needs for privacy. Our religion is
not accepted in the American workplace or political system, and may
never be. The most powerful Priestesses are often unknown to all but
their Coveners. While all Wiccans are Pagans, all Pagans are not Wiccan,
and it is best that it remain so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Principles of Wiccan Beliefs (American Council of Witches,
1974)](bos056.md)
