[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bos002)  [Next](bos004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A Circle for Catharsis

### Introduction:

One of my near and dear once spent an hour in a therapist's office
kicking an innocent throw pillow around the room and screaming out rage
at his abusive father. At the end of the hour, he had a broken foot --
and the first beginnings of a healed mind.

But we have learned that magic works through symbols. Calling an object
by your abuser's name and then abusing that object is sympathetic magic
used for the purpose of cursing. To throw a curse is to project one's
worst feelings out into the world of form, and to invoke upon oneself
the inevitable karmic feedback.

It is not our way to blast the crops and sour the milk. Wiccan tradition
and plain common sense both tell us to avoid the practice of baneful
magic. But, as usual, it's not quite as easy as just saying no.

Rape and child abuse, loved ones killed by muggers or drunk drivers,
emotional manipulation and betrayal, economic exploitation and dishonest
office politics -- people hurt and victimize other people in many
different ways every day. We are not immune.

At some point in our lives, probably every single one of us will feel
violated by some other human being. Often our feelings will be based in
fact. Whether they are or not, however, we need and deserve a safe way
to discharge them.

Symbolic baneful actions are also cathartic actions. They drain and
clear our poisonous feelings and allow our own emotional healing to
begin. If we deny ourselves this outlet, what happens to the grief and
pain and rage?

If projection is bad for us, introjection is even worse. Unreleased bad
feelings are a major source of stress. In a very real sense, stress
cripples and kills. Ulcers, strokes, heart attacks and more are all
heavily stress-related. A simple refusal to engage in baneful magic
could easily amount to punishing a victim by adding serious illness to
the original harm.

I am part of the All. "An it harm none" is about me too. Release of my
feelings is my right.

At first it seems like an insoluble paradox. But the same understanding
of magic that forbids projection of our bad feelings can open a safe
channel for those feelings. Here's one possible form:

### Preparation:

1.  ##### Understanding

    Think about the Alcoholics Anonymous prayer. "Grant me the serenity
    to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the
    things I can change, and the wisdom to know the difference." People
    of any religion can recognize the wisdom in those words. This ritual
    is intended to ease emotional pressure. I believe that is a step
    towards granting all three of those things to ourselves.

    If your hurt is ongoing, you must take steps to stop it -- leave the
    abusive relationship, begin searching for a new job, begin
    organizing politically to stop your oppression. What good this
    Circle does you will be temporary at best if you are not acting on
    both the magical and material planes to change the things you can
    change.

    But some of our pain comes from old, old injuries. And some of our
    feelings are not based on fact at all. The source of those hurts
    cannot be changed, but the pain can be. This particular working is
    to release any bad feelings, not to judge them.

    Don't worry about justice. You may be mistaken about who has hurt
    you, but nobody will be hurt by what we do here. All energy will be
    contained within the Circle. The object of this working is healing,
    not justice. You deserve this healing simply because you hurt, and
    even if you are mistaken.

    Prevention and healing are human tasks; to do them is to change the
    things we can change. Justice -- the evening of karmic balances --
    is the business of the Gods, and may take place across a span of
    many lifetimes. Karmic balance is a thing we cannot change.

2.  ##### Set Up

    You have some decisions to make. The first one is whether you will
    work alone or ask one or more trusted friends to witness and
    facilitate your working. Some of us can only let our feelings go in
    strict privacy. For others, the presence of people who will make
    sure we don't hurt ourselves or our homes removes a source of
    inhibition. And sometimes simply being heard is part of the release
    process.

    Next, exactly what kind of symbolic action will release your
    feelings? Will kicking a throw pillow suffice, or do you need to
    actually make a poppet? Or just screaming may be enough. If you want
    to work with a physical symbol, prepare it in advance, and be sure
    not to use anything you will want to keep after the rite or ever use
    again.

    Figure out whether you can either cast a Circle to include your
    bathroom, or leave a cast Circle for a period of time. This will
    depend on your particular training. If possible, have a warm,
    scented tub waiting for you. If not, a basin of warm, scented water
    and a washcloth within easy reach just outside of your Circle will
    suffice. Also, a ritual meal should be prepared and waiting outside
    of Circle, and this should include something green and growing -- I
    favor sprouts -- and something sweet.

### Procedure:

1.  Waning moon is a good time for this Circle, and the Dark of the Moon
    is even better. Cast the Circle and invoke the Watchers in your
    usual manner. Call on the Crone, on She who weeds and prunes and
    disposes of the obstructive and unnecessary.

2.  Just inside the Circle, like the membrane in an eggshell, cast a
    grounding shield. One possible image for this shield would be a
    black absorptive chain link fence, supported at regular intervals by
    fence posts that are lightning rods. Whatever happens within this
    space will be contained and grounded.

3.  Make clear to yourself what wound you seek to drain. Say it out
    loud, even if you are alone. Recall what happened to you in detail
    and let the feelings grow strong.

4.  Now, let go of your feelings. Do whatever will help you release what
    is in you. Beat on a pillow or rip up a doll. Scream till you cry.
    Don't stop till you are emptied. Then fling the thing you used as a
    symbol out of your Circle.

5.  When you are sure you are all done, all drained, contract the shield
    into a tight ball in the center of the Circle. As it contracts, it
    will gather all the negative energy from the Circle. Ground it.
    Affirm that you are sending this energy to the fire at the heart of
    the Earth -- to Jarnsaxe or to Pele -- to be purified in that blast
    furnace and cycled to wherever strong energy is needed. Know that
    what you now let go is gone. Affirm this out loud.

6.  Wash or bathe in a ritual manner, feeling the last traces of your
    bad feelings dissolve away. If others are present, allow them to
    wash and serve you.

7.  Rest a few minutes. Feel the peace of emptiness.

8.  Then invoke the Maiden's energy for new beginnings. Have your ritual
    feast and otherwise indulge your senses. Gentle and joyful music
    would be effective, and you may want to switch to a sweeter-smelling
    incense. This is a time to dream dreams and plan plans. You have
    removed an energy drain from your life, now you will be able to ...
    ?

9.  Thank and dismiss whatever Beings you have called on, throughout the
    whole ritual. Close your Circle as usual. Do not do any other kinds
    of working or worship within this particular Circle.

### Follow Through:

The final part of any effective magical working is "acting in
accordance" on the material plane. By doing this, we give the magic a
channel through which to manifest. For this working, there are three
forms of follow through, and all are important.

1.  Remember that painful feelings are partly habitual. Acting in
    accordance with magic to banish such feelings requires you to stop
    feeding the habit. Don't talk about the pain with anybody until at
    least the second full moon after the working. This gives the habit a
    chance to fade out. As much as you can, eliminate the topic from
    your internal dialogue as well. When you notice yourself dwelling on
    the old pain, gently and firmly change the subject.

2.  Thinking about action to change your life in the here and now is
    perfectly OK. The problem is reiteration of old feelings of
    frustration and helplessness that actually impede change.

3.  If the hurtful situation is current and ongoing, continue with any
    steps you were taking to change the things you can change. In fact,
    you will probably find you have more energy than you did before to
    devote to your projects.

4.  Be sure to use some of your newly freed emotional energy to reward
    yourself. Take time for friendship, love, and pleasure. The object
    of the exercise is to clear space for the enjoyment of life, so
    start right now.

Judy Harrow, HPs, Proteus Coven

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Opening (ending) The Circle](bos004.md)
