[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](msg0019)  [Next](bos000) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

‘He Casts the Circle’

**Melissa Seims**

 

In August 1959, Gerald Gardner received a letter from Carl Weschcke,
owner and CEO of the American occult publishing house, Llewellyn. Carl,
having read Gardner’s books, had written to ask him if he had any
knowledge about a device called the ‘witches cradle’ which he had seen
mentioned in William Seabrook’s book *Witchcraft, It’s Power and
Influence Today.* The ‘witches cradle’ was a suspended ‘cage’ that
purportedly heightened psychic sensitivity through the use of
restraints, combined with a monotonous swinging motion. Gardner replied
that he had not come across such a contraption, or its use in the Craft,
and went on to say “I have asked many of the older witches, and none of
them had ever heard of it.” After a few more letters had been exchanged,
Gardner referred Carl to several other people including Margaret Bruce
and Charles Clark, for further discussion.

 

Carl first wrote to Charles in 1961, the beginning of an exchange that
was to last about 20 years. In one letter from 1968, Charles mentioned
to Carl that he had “some copies of the late G. B. Gardner’s Rituals
that he sent me \[Charles\] for opinions from time to time,” and
wondered if Carl would be interested in them. When Gardner had still
been alive, Charles and he had discussed the publication of material and
Gerald had agreed that this may help people better understand the Craft,
and what it was about.**<sup>1</sup>** Consequently, Charles packaged
the papers up and sent them to Carl in April 1969. Extracts from them
were published in Llewellyn’s magazine *Gnostica*, but they really came
to light when Aidan Kelly obtained photocopies and subsequently wrote
about them in his book *Crafting The Art of Magic,* where the term
‘Weschcke Documents’ was first coined. *  *

 

The ‘Weschcke Documents’ are a collection of papers consisting of 38
typed pages of ‘Gardnerian’ ritual material, including all eight
Sabbats, ‘The Old Laws’, three ways of forming the circle, ‘To Gain the
Sight’, ‘The Eightfold Way’, the three degrees, consecrations, various
versions of The Charge and Amalthean Horn, as well as a copy of ‘The
Witches Chant’ (which many now know as ‘The Witches Rune’). Many of them
also have handwritten amendments on them, in what appears in most cases,
to be Gerald Gardner’s own handwriting. During the 1950s, documents like
these were sometimes sent to new initiates for them to copy into their
own personal Books of Shadows.

 

Those of you who have seen Gerald’s writing will know what a ‘scrawler’
he was, and how bad his spelling appears to have been. Aidan Kelly
suggests that he was marginally dyslexic,**<sup>2</sup>** Philip
Heselton considers Gardner’s poor English and phonetic way of spelling,
to be a consequence of his lack of formal education,**<sup>3</sup>** and
Ronald Hutton has suggested that Gardner’s ‘aberrant spelling’ was an
attempt by him to make things look more archaic.**<sup>4</sup>** I
personally think the latter is unlikely as Gardner displays similar
traits in his personal correspondence.

 

These typed documents, whilst obviously easier to read, also exhibit
similar poor spelling. A further ‘quirk’ of Gardner’s (in a time before
text messaging) was his penchant for abbreviating words. For example, he
would sometimes put ‘wd’ for ‘would’ and ‘shd’ in place of ‘should’.
Furthermore, he had a peculiar habit of using a typewriters’ small case
‘l’ instead of correctly using a capital ‘I’; in some instances he even
uses a capital ‘L’ for ‘I’, and it is not unusual to see a mix of both
in the same document. As with so many things Gardner-related, he was
never completely consistent in his lackadaisicalness, something that I
think is quite frustrating for Craft historians!

 

Of the various documents, I think one of the more interesting ones is
entitled ‘All Are Purified’ (subtitled ‘Ceremony for working with
others’).**<sup>5</sup>** This is essentially a way of casting the
circle that starts off with a conjuration of the sword. If we look at
the following passage, taken from Gardner’s 1954 book *Witchcraft
Today*, I think we can see where the slightly unusual title may hail
from: “When drawn, this circle is carefully purified, as also are all
who celebrate the rites. Witches attach great importance to this, for
within the circle is the gods' domain.”**<sup>6</sup>** With regards to
what is being implied by the subheading ‘Ceremony for working with
others’ there may be a clue in the crossed-out section which refers to
‘13 candles’. As 13 is the traditional number in a Coven, could the
reference to working with ‘others’ mean working with Coveners as opposed
to working alone, or with just a working partner? In view of Gardner’s
earlier works (which we will come to shortly) where the focus seems to
have been more on individuals as opposed to Covens, this explanation
seems to be likely. However, just to discombobulate things further, and
for the sake of completion, I should also draw attention to the fact
that the crossed-out section bears a strong resemblance to the beginning
of the Yule ritual, thus adding a further nebulous dimension to consider
in any final understanding of this document.

 

ALL ARE PURIFIED**<sup>7</sup>                       ***\[NB: **Bold**
lettering indicates G.B.G.’s handwritten additions\]*

Magus Concecrates Salt & Water ,

H Ps kneels at Altar, takes up swor**d** .says

“I conjure thee O Sword of Steel to serve me as a defence in all

Magical OperationsGuard me at alltimes against mine enemies ,both visa

ble & invisible, Grant thatI may obtain what I desire inall things

wherin I may use Thee ,wherefore do I bless Thee &  Invoke thee in the

Names of …&…

Gives Sword to Magus , who **^**kneeling**^** hands her vessel of Salt
Conscrated Water

&Aspergulas, He Casts the Circle, Three circles . She follows .

Asperging Circle & all present **&** finely herself. returns vessel

etc to Magus, who places them on Altar, or convinent place. **& hands
her**

**<u>Sword</u>** H.Ps walks slowly round Circle saying.

“I conjure Thee O Circle of Space, between the world of Men & that

of the Dread Lords of the OUTER SPACES, That THOU be clensed Purified

& strengthend to contain THAT POWER which we so ernestly desireto raise

within thy bounds this night, Wherefore di I bless thee & intreet thee

to aid me in the endevour in the names of … & … **Hands Sword to Magus**

**---** Magus then summons the Mighty Ones as usual.

H.Ps stands in front of Altar (which may be pushed back for this)

H.Ps assumes God ^Goddess^ Possition (Arms Crossed.)

Magus kneeling in front of her, draws Pentical on her body with P

Headed Wand, Invokes, (Drawing down the Moon,)

“ I Invoke and Beseach Thee ,O Mighty MOTHER ofall life and fertility

.  By seed and root, bystem and bud, by leaf and flower and fruit,

By Life & Love –do I invok Thee to decend into the body of thy servent

and H.Ps  …..  (The Moon having been drawn down,I.E. Link established

**M and** all Male Officers give 5 S, All others bow.

Asembly form a semi circle at north of Altar, (Wh shd be replaced if

it has been moved,) H.Ps in south, inserts point of Sword or Athame in

decorated bundle of 13 candles , saying *I* * \[This has been crossed
out by hand and ‘m’s have been typed over it all\]*

H,Ps in Goddess Position says  **Arms Crossed**

I the Mother, Darksome and Divine,

Mine the Scourge and Mine the Kiss,

The Five Point Star of Love and Bliss;

Here I charge ye in this Sign,     (Opens out **A**rms to Pentacle
position)

 

Bow before my Spirite Bright      (All bow)

Aphridite Airanrod;

Lover of the Horned God

Queen of Witchery & Night

*\[This looks as it if it continues although the next page is not in the
collection.\]*

 

I think that the usage of the word ‘Magus’ as opposed to ‘HP’, use of
the term ‘Dread Lords of the Outer Spaces’, the inclusion of the
conjuration of the sword, and the circle being cast three times, are
interesting ‘markers’. Identical terminology, and similar practices can
be found in Gardner’s 1949 work of fiction *High Magics Aid, * as well
as in *Ye Bok of Ye Art Magical (*aka *BAM),* which is thought to be the
oldest, extant ‘Gardnerian’ ‘Book Of Shadows.’ *Ye Bok* is currently in
the possession of Richard and Tamarra James of the ‘Wiccan Church of
Canada’ and is generally thought to have been compiled and written by
Gardner, during the 1940s. In this case, Gardner’s handwriting is
actually quite legible and displays a calligraphic style which he
appears to have reserved for his magical writings. *Ye Bok* contains
several sections which are readily identifiable as being typical of BOS
material, as well as a pastiche of rituals and notes on Ceremonial
Magic. For example, there are pages of sigils taken from The Key Of
Soloman (S.L. ‘MacGregor’ Mathers’ translation), plus passages taken
from the works of Aleister Crowley, and the Rites of Freemasonry, to
name but a few. Similarly, *High Magic’s Aid* is also a mix of
recognisably ‘Gardnerian’ material with a generous helping of ‘high
magic’. It has been asserted by W.E. Liddell that: “Gardner was
sponsored into a cunning lodge in 1941 by a New Forest male colleague
and was exposed to a quasi-Masonic organisation which combined
ceremonial magic, Freemasonry, Paganism and Witchcraft. Exposure to this
lodge reinforced his focus on the God and the magus.”**<sup>8</sup>**
Whilst this scenario seems to fit the facts, I think it is just one
possible explanation why *Ye Bok* has more of a ceremonial magic
overtone when compared to the sort of material that Gardner distributed
to initiates in the 1950s.

 

In *Ye Bok* the words ‘Magus,’ ‘Master,’ or simply ‘M,’ are frequently
used to indicate the male role. However, roughly a decade later in
Gardner’s magical writings of the 1950s, this term appears to have been
generally superseded by the term ‘HP’. This later material also
typically has the circle being cast only once, not three times, and then
asperged and censed. Additionally, the phrase ‘Dread Lords of the Outer
Spaces’ can be found ‘hidden’ in plain sight (another idiosyncrasy of
Gardner’s) in *High Magic’s Aid:***<sup>9</sup>** “Blindfold and
helpless he stood in the Triangle, outside, and cut off from the
Protecting Circle, medium between the pleasant world of man and the
Dread Lords of the Outer Spaces.” Later circle conjurations more
commonly have the phrase “…Realms of the Mighty Ones” instead. By the
late 50s, the conjuration of the sword is also something that is no
longer part of a typical circle opening, although a similar passage is
usually given for the consecration of one. This document made me wonder
if, when Gardner mentions casting the circle with a ‘duly consecrated’
sword or athame, he had perhaps intended at one point for this
consecration to be done every time. Certainly this would be
understandable in view of his love for swords and weaponry.

 

Overall, it seems to me that the use of certain terminology, the
conjuration of the sword, and the thrice cast circle, is more in keeping
with the style of Gardner’s earliest extant penned works. Due to these
similarities, I therefore consider the ‘All Are Purified’ document to be
one of the earliest papers in the Weschcke collection. However, the fact
that it ends with the quatrain verse version of ‘The Charge’, written by
Doreen Valiente, indicates that it has to be post 1953 after Doreen had
been brought in. Charles himself was initiated about a year later and so
I think the date of this document is probably contemporary with that.

 

‘All Are Purified’ is interesting not only for the textual dating clues
that it gives us, but also because it shows more of an equality, if not
an actual bias, towards the Magus, instead of the High Priestess. It is
he who first ‘casts the circle’ and he who appears solely responsible
for the consecration of the salt and water, and summoning the Mighty
Ones. Interestingly enough, the first degree initiation ritual that is
given in *Ye Bok* appears to have a Magus initiating a ‘Priest &
Witch’.**<sup>10</sup>** However, the copy of this ritual that Gardner
typed up several years later (almost certainly from *Ye Bok*) to give to
Doreen Valiente, has been amended so that the Magus is now initiating a
Priestess and Witch.**<sup>11</sup>**

* *

On reflection, I think that the ‘All Are Purified’ document can also
tell us something about the development of the Craft, and its material,
and could represent a transition point from Gardner’s earlier, more
male-orientated writings which included a lot of Ceremonial Magic, to
the more High Priestess orientated Covens that seemed to come out of the
1960s. I am not sure what may have brought about this shift but it could
have stemmed from the change in cultural ideology which was moving away
from the fear and restrictiveness caused by World War Two, to the
women’s movement and general liberation that epitomized the 1960s. I
would also wager that the ever diligent Doreen Valiente could have had
something to do with it, especially as she had, with Gardner’s
permission, already set about rewriting parts of the first BOS that he
had given her, in order to disguise traces of the Crowley material in
it.**<sup>12</sup>**

 

If this ‘All Are Purified’ document had managed to find its way into
more Books of Shadows, our Craft may have ended up with a slightly
different ‘feel’ to it. It could perhaps have been more common to see
High Priests consecrating the salt and water, and summoning the Mighty
Ones ‘as usual.’ Instead, there are at times lengthy debates on subjects
such as this. My own conversations with Charles Clark gave me the
impression that things were much more egalitarian in the 1950s, and the
Wica of that time felt free to adjust the rituals to better suit the
people in the Coven, using the rites as a basic framework and
‘springboard’. A concept that is echoed in Fred Lamond's book *Fifty
Years of Wicca,* where he quotes Gardner as saying “…as you gain
experience discard those spells that don’t work for you and substitute
those that you have thought of yourselves.”**<sup>13</sup>**

 

If we now turn to look at the eight Sabbats that are included in the
‘Weschcke Documents’, we see the seemingly ‘later’ term ‘HP’
consistently used instead of ‘Magus’. Furthermore, the similarity of all
the Sabbat documents, strongly suggests that they were all typed up at
the same time. Fred Lamond tells us in his aforementioned book, “we
\[the Bricket Wood Coven\] liked our feasts, so after Gerald’s return to
the Isle of Man in the spring of 1958 we decided to celebrate both the
cross-quarter days and the solstices and equinoxes with
feasts.”**<sup>14</sup>** With all this in mind, it would seem likely
that the Sabbats from the Weschcke Documents were written at some point
shortly after this date.

 

What I enjoy about researching and comparing these original writings of
Gerald Gardner is the insight that they can show us into the thoughts
and mind of old Gerald himself. I don’t believe that you can look at
these things in isolation, and I think it is imperative to view them as
part of a much wider puzzle that included not only Gardner’s life and
upbringing, but also the political and social climate of the time. These
things, along with the fragmentary rituals and teachings that are
thought to have come to him from the New Forest Coven, would have
affected the way Gerald, and others, wrote these rituals and developed
our practices. In turn, this has all contributed to the growing
spiritual movement that the Craft has become today.

 

<u>Footnotes</u>

<u> </u>

1: In a letter to me from Charles he writes: “I remember Carl Weschcke
said he would write about those papers given him \[the ‘Weschcke
Documents’\], GB \[Gerald Gardner\] agreed with me it would help a lot.”

2: Aidan Kelly, *Crafting the Art of Magic* (Llewellyn 1991: Page xv)

3: Philip Heselton *Gerald Gardner and the Cauldron of Inspiration*
(Capall Bann 2003: Page 281)

4: Ronald Hutton. *The Triumph of The Moon* (Oxford 1999: Page 227)

5: The subheading ‘Ceremony for working with others’ appeared in Charles
Clarks BOS, and is not given on the actual document itself.

6: Gerald Gardner *Witchcraft Today* (Arrow Books 1970: Page 28)

7: Transcription of the original document with spelling, grammar and
line structure as written on the original. Transcriptions of this
document can also be found, albeit inaccurately, in Gerald B Gardner
*Witchcraft and the Book of Shadows* (I-H-O Books 2004: Page 60) and
Aidan Kelly’s *Crafting the Art of Magic* (Llewellyn 1991: Page 109) as
well as on various websites.

8: W.E. Liddell *The Pickingill Papers* (Capall Bann 1994: Page 158)

9: Gerald Gardner *High Magic’s Aid* (Pentacle Enterprises 1993: Page 3)

10: Gerald Gardner *Ye Bok of ye Art  Magicial* Page 96 (viewable by
arrangement with Richard and Tamarra James of the ‘Wiccan Chuch of
Canada.’

11: Doreen Valiente *The Rebirth of Witchcraft* (Phoenix 1989:
Illustration 12)

12: Doreen Valiente, *The Rebirth of Witchcraft* (Phoenix 1989: Page
61-62)

13: Frederic Lamond, *Fifty Years of Wicca* (Green Magic 2004: Page 14)

14: Frederic Lamond, *Fifty Years of Wicca* (Green Magic 2004: Page 20)

Many thanks to three ‘Messengers of the Gods’ namely Paul Greenslade,
Philip Heselton and Ken Rees for their helpful comments and advice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cleansing (Rowan Moonstone)](bos000)
