[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](msg0016)  [Next](msg0018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Wiccan Fundamentalism

by Ben Gruagach  
<https://www.WitchGrotto.com>  
*This article may be reproduced for non-commercial purposes, providing
that this original copyright notice stays in place at all times.*

Religious fundamentalism is characterized by literal belief in specific
spiritual claims, often about a particular religion's history,
regardless of any available evidence. A particular dogma is promoted as
the One True and Only Way and anything that deviates is considered
heretical.

The Roman Catholic church has an office within its organization called
the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith. In previous
times this office had another name: the Holy Office of the Inquisition.
Despite the name change the office's role has remained the same. It is
responsible for keeping doctrinal discipline and confronting and
eliminating deviations in doctrinal thought. It's all about maintaining
the authority of the Vatican and the Pope and ensuring that all Roman
Catholics are following the same religion and respecting the established
hierarchy.

Wicca is a religion based on autonomy. It draws its basis from Pagan
religions of the past but primarily from lore about witches and
witchcraft. Most today consider Wicca to trace back directly or
indirectly to a single man, Gerald Gardner, who promoted the religion
starting in the 1940s or early 1950s in Britain. Gardner described Wicca
as based on covens with each coven being autonomous. If there was
dissent within a coven the rules as Gardner presented them allowed for
the dissenting parties to separate and form new covens. This way of
dealing with conflict resulted in encouraging diversity within Wicca and
reinforced the idea that there was no central authority which would
dictate that one coven was wrong and another right on matters of
philosophy or practice.

Gardner also insisted that there were other Wiccans out there that he
did not know about who had been practicing before he was initiated. He
did this partially to promote the debatable claim that he was merely
passing on an intact ancient religion. One consequence of this is that
it left the door open for others to come forward and claim they were
witches or Wiccans too from a common mythical ancestry and Gardner could
not really insist they were wrong. Even if these other Wiccans practiced
things differently, Gardner's "old laws" clearly made it acceptable for
variety in the way covens and practitioners did things. He might not
have intended to do so but Gardner's decisions regarding how to handle
things in his own group had set the stage for Wicca to become much more
than just his own teachings in his own groups.

The result of all this was that Gardner essentially gave away the right
to exclusive ownership over the label Wicca for his groups and those
directly descended from them. He might not have anticipated this
possibility but in any case it is what happened. Many groups, sometimes
with conflicting philosophies and ways of doing things, have come
forward under the banner of Wicca. New groups have been created and old
ones have splintered into other quite distinct groups. Autonomy was
there so of course it was exercised!

Not everyone has been happy about this. Some of Gardner's direct
spiritual descendants have argued that only they and a few select groups
that they approve of should have the right to call themselves Wiccan.
However the autonomous structure had already been set up and no one
group has the authority to dictate to the rest of the community. Wicca
did not have a central authority structure in the past and it does not
have one now. It is highly unlikely at this point that a central
authority could be established which the majority of Wiccans would
respect.

There have been attempts to seize power and establish a central Wiccan
authority but these have all failed. One example is when Alex Sanders
proclaimed himself the King of the Witches but it was quickly pointed
out, particularly by Gardnerian Wiccans, that he did not have any
authority outside of Alexandrian Wiccan covens. Another example is when
in 1974 at the Witchmeet gathering in Minnesota, Lady Sheba (a.k.a.
Jessie Wicker Bell) declared herself the leader of American witches and
demanded that everyone hand over their Books of Shadows to her so that
she could combine their contents and then establish a single
authoritative Book of Shadows which all American witches would be
expected to follow. She was laughed at and needless to say was not
successful in establishing the central authority she sought.

It was at that same 1974 Witchmeet where we had probably the closest
thing to a central Wiccan authority created in the declaration of the
Principles of Wiccan Belief. This set of thirteen principles attempted
to outline in a very general way the basic foundation of Wiccan
philosophy. The concept of autonomy of both groups and individuals is
clear in the document. It also specified that lineage or membership in
specific groups was not a requirement in order to be Wiccan. Many
Wiccans, both as groups and individually, consider the Principles to be
the foundation of their spiritual path. However, true to the autonomy
inherent in Wicca, there are some Wiccans who do not consider the
Principles to be part of their individual or group philosophy.

Some are not satisfied with how things are in the Wiccan community and
actively work to establish a central authority with their own particular
outlook of course identified as the One True and Only Way. They are not
satisfied with the fact that the autonomy they personally enjoy in Wicca
also means that other Wiccans are free to follow their own different
paths. These are the Wiccan fundamentalists who see variety as heresy.
As far as they are concerned, if you're not practicing things the way
they personally do, and don't believe things exactly the way they
personally do, then you must be wrong and should either correct your
ways or else stop calling yourself a Wiccan.

Perhaps these attitudes are carried over from previous religious
education where the idea of One True Way was key, such as in many
varieties of monotheism, particularly the evangelical and literalist
varieties. Often the Wiccan manifestation of the One True Way idea comes
through as a literal and absolute belief in the truth of a particular
teacher's work. Most often the teacher elevated to the status of
never-to-be-questioned guru is Gerald Gardner since he was the one who
began the Wiccan movement in the middle of the twentieth century. In the
mind of many Wiccan fundamentalists, if Gardner taught it then it must
be absolutely true!

Unfortunately for the literalists Gardner has turned out to be a mere
human being just like the rest of us. Some things he got right and some
things he got wrong. The history of Wicca that Gardner presented,
especially the part that explains what came before Gardner was
initiated, has proven to be largely speculation with very little
evidence to support many of its major claims. Historians aren't
completely ignorant of what happened prior to the 1950s in England. We
have enough evidence to know that Gardner's historical claims were not
completely accurate nor were they completely supported by the evidence.

A religion's value does not depend on the literal truth of its
historical claims. Many millions of people find Christianity to be
meaningful despite the fact its history is not absolutely settled.
Buddhists seem to still find their religion to be valuable despite the
questions regarding the provable history of the religion's founders.
Wicca too is a precious treasure for those who practice it even if they
don't believe one hundred percent of the historical claims made by
Gardner.

Some religions do consider blind obedience to authority to be a virtue
the faithful are expected to cultivate in themselves. Wicca though
cherishes autonomy and this is in direct conflict with blind obedience.
Wiccans who value blind obedience are welcome to make that a part of
their religious practice but they are out of line in expecting others to
abide by their dictates. Wicca does not have an Office of the Holy
Inquisition and many Wiccans will actively fight against the
establishment of such. And that is to be expected.

Wiccans who play the fundamentalist mind-game of proclaiming that those
who do not agree with them are not "true Wiccans" deserve the same
reaction that Lady Sheba got back in 1974 when she declared herself
Witch Queen of America - they should be laughed at and then ignored.
Wicca is not a One True Way religion and never has been. Those who would
make it over into one are in for a long hard struggle that they will
likely never win. Is it really worth it for them? After all, if they
wanted a One True Way religion there are plenty of those out there for
them to join. Wicca is for those of us who are free-thinkers, rebels,
nature-worshippers, who laugh and love and dance in the name of our Gods
and Goddesses in spite of what the stiff-shirt self-declared authorities
around us tell us is right and proper. Others can try to co-opt our
religion and turn it into yet another fossilized dogma of right and
wrong to be blindly followed on pain of excommunication or threats of
torment in other lives. The witch's cat is already out of the bag and
has been for some time now, and we're all enjoying the nighttime revels
and the daytime ignoring of arbitrary conventions too much to just
follow what someone else tells us is the One True Way.

**References**

Bonewits, Isaac. "Witchcraft: A Concise Guide." (Earth Religions Press,
2001.)

Heselton, Philip. "Gerald Gardner and the Cauldron of Inspiration."
(Capall Bann Publishing, 2003.)

Hutton, Ronald. "The Triumph of the Moon." (Oxford University Press,
1999.)

Lamond, Frederic. "Fifty Years of Wicca." (Green Magic, 2004.)

Valiente, Doreen. "The Rebirth of Witchcraft." (Phoenix Publishing,
1989.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defending Eclectic Neopaganism](msg0018.md)
