[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](msg0001)  [Next](msg0003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ethics and Etiquette

 

Hello,

I would like to contribute the attached article, written by me, to the
IBOS. This article may be reproduced for non-commercial purposes,
providing that this original copyright notice stays in place at all
times.

Thank you,

Morgaine

© Morgaine 2001

 

When we speak of ethics and etiquette in relation to pagansim what are
we referring to? Are we speaking of outdated rules and actions that no
longer have meaning and we only give lip service to? I don't believe so.
Ethics and etiquette are living, breathing codes of life, shaping our
actions in relation to each other, and ourselves. They are a guiding
force in the way we live our lives.

Let us first look at ethics. Ethics are defined as --a set of
principles; moral philosophy; rules or standards governing the conduct
of a person or the members of a profession; human duty; a particular
system of principles and rules concerning duty, whether true or false;
rules of practice in respect to a single class of human actions;
motivation based on ideas of right and wrong; the philosophical study of
moral values and rules.

When we begin to speak of ethics, we need to realize that this can be a
very touchy subject. We are human after all, and we want to think our
ethics are the correct ones. While there are generally accepted
community ethics, it is personal ethics that make up who we are. And
these are not the same for each person.

Before we begin to discuss in depth community and person ethics let us
first look at the Rede, the most common code of conduct among Wiccans.

Bide the Wiccan law ye must, in perfect love and perfect trust;

Eight words the Wiccan Rede fulfill;

'An ye harm none, do as ye will';

Lest in self-defense it be, ever mind the rule of three;

Follow this with mind and heart;

And merry ye meet and merry ye part.

Every Wiccan knows the Rede. Our passwords into the sacred circle are in
here. Our major rule of ethic is here. And the reason for breaking this
ethic, as well as the consequences of breaking it foolishly. When we
extract the line most popular --An ye harm none, do as ye will' and
begin to dissect it, we have to wonder "Is this an ethic we can every
achieve?"

I believe the Rede is a standard of living, like all ethics, and one
that is an impossibility to achieve. The goal is to live as closely to
the Rede as possible. In the attempt to do this, we begin to analyze our
actions. We follow the path of LEAST harm. Thus, we begin to live
conscious of our actions, and how they effect the world around us. And
here comes the REAL lesson of the Rede. It forces us to have personal
responsibility. Once you have acknowledged that the Rede is a goal to
work for and not a given situation, and have taken of the blinders that
let you go around smug and happy that your religion is so sweet it makes
your teeth itch, you can get down to the work of making your life an
ethical one. What this involves is considering each decision in the
light of the Rede before you decide upon a course of action. You do this
by looking at all the possible consequences of that action and whether
that will cause harm to any, choosing the path that causes the least
harm and, (THIS IS THE KEY) accepting the responsibility for the
consequences of your actions whether intentional or unintentional.
-Lark, HPS of Tangled Moon Coven.

Wicca, as well as most Pagansim, is a religion and spiritual path of
personal responsibility. We strive to live in an aware state. When we do
this, we recognize our free will, and the free will of others. If we
ignore the lesson of personal responsibility, we fail to realize our
true spiritual potential and our true spiritual will.

As we begin our path, we must develop a set of personal ethics, while
maintaining a respect for the ethics of the community we are becoming a
part of. Some community ethics are very well defined.

-Don't practice black magick, or follow the left-hand path.

-Don't attempt to harm another or interfere with their free will.

-Always act in a way that will reflect well upon your path. Never do
anything that will bring harm to the Craft.

Since Wicca, and pagansim, are very open paths and for the most part do
not seek to make anyone follow 'ONE RIGHT WAY', most of the ethics
defined by community are concerning harm to others, and harm to the
Craft.

But to begin a spiritual path, and to follow it every day of your life,
you must develop your own set of personal ethics that define the way you
live. No one can tell you what your personal ethics should be. Your
teachers, mentors, HPS, HP can all recommend both in word and deed,
ethics that work for them. You may be given a 'Book of the Law' that
governs your group or tradition. If you are a solitary, you may read on
the net, or in a book, acceptable codes of conduct, or ideals. But you
cannot take someone else's ethics and make them your own. You must do
some soul searching, and decide how you feel about things. Now I am NOT
suggesting that you ignore your HPS or HP, or your teachers and mentors.
I am suggesting that you should always temper wisdom with personal
experience. You must come to a point that you are willing to question
what you are taught, to grow in your own self. Through this, your own
sense of ethics and morals will come.

Now, here comes the biggie. What do you do when your personal ethics are
in direct conflict with accepted community ethics? For example-it has
become a phenomenon in the pagan community to love everything white and
full of light, and shun everything dark and full of shadow. It has
become unacceptable to speak of negative emotions like anger and envy.
It has become unacceptable to feel hate towards another person, wish
that a murderer would get the death penalty, which that rapist would get
castrated by a bunch of angry women. Some of us fondly refer to this a
fluffy, bunny Wicca, no offense to anything fluffy, or bunnies. We are
taught to love unconditionally because we are all brothers and sisters,
connected to each other and every living thing. We are taught that if we
experience these emotions, maybe we aren't all that spiritual, and
especially not as much as Miss crystal love and light. We are often
looked down upon if we say something like 'I am so damn mad at my ex
husband I could smack him'. The response I myself have heard to such
comment is 'my my, now THAT wasn't very positive'. Well, guess what. It
WASN'T. Now I am not saying that you should indulge in these emotions.
They can be deterrents to developing a sound spiritual identity because
they are 'negative' in the sense that they are base emotions that do not
vibrate on the spiritual plane. But they also teach us lessons that can
lead to spiritual epiphanies.

Life is a balance between light and dark. Nature is both beautifully
creative and frighteningly destructive. Inside of a single human there
is light and shadow, and to be totally balanced we must learn to face
both, experience both and therefore learn from both. So back to the
original question. Let's say you don't feel that you are evil if you
feel anger at another person or what have you. What do you do when
community ethics conflict with your personal ethics? In my opinion, as
long as what you are doing does not come into direct conflict with the
good of the general community, or does not manipulate or purposefully
harm another person, then your personal ethics should come first. You
should not do something maliciously to another person. When you do this,
you are not only harming yourself, but you are harming that person, AND
the whole of the community. It is very important that our community not
be sullied, and the reasons are obvious. But beyond this, your personal
ethics should prevail.

Do ethics change over time? Do you think that the ethics of our
ancestors of 100, 200 or even 1000 or more years ago are the same as
what they are now? I believe that ethics are a revolving and ever
changing system. Some become outdated, and some we should always keep.
For instance, it has only been in the recent resurgence of Pagansim in
the last 50-60 years or so that the belief of 'An ye harm none, do as ye
will came about'. In times past, a witch who could not curse, could not
heal. Societies have not always believed that you should not harm
another person, or that interfering with someone life was a bad thing.
The old wise woman of a village was sought out for every reason from
fertility, to love, to revenge. It has been in our time only, with the
resurgence of beliefs and the discrimination that we face, that we have
adopted some of the common ethics we now have. I am NOT saying this is
wrong, or that we should go back to the 'Old Ways'. In a society that we
now living in, and the information is available for spiritual purposes,
there is no longer a need to seek out the crone of the village and ask
her to grant you revenge on your enemy. But this is the perfect example
of how ethics change with time. At one time it was ethical for old men
to mate with young girls. In our culture, it is no longer ethical. So
ethics change, and so they should. Change is the only constant in the
universe, and without it, we grow stagnate and our lives become filled
with rot and decay. Change blows in new life to help recreate our lives,
our beliefs and yes, even out ethics.

The other common code of conduct that we hear of in the Pagan community
is 'Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. Love is the Law,
love under will.' This comes from Aleister Crowley, from his book
entitled 'The Book of the Law'. Now knowing some of the things that we
do about Crowley, it's almost humorous to think of him in a discussion
of ethics, except to point to what not to do maybe! But, this is a very
powerful outlook on developing your own set of personal ethics.

In my understanding 'Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.
Love is the law, love under will' does not mean you may do as you wish
and that is it. It is speaking of your TRUE will, your TRUE purpose in
life. And if you are following your true or higher will and purpose you
will not come into conflict with another's will so therefore you do not
have to worry about stepping on anyone else's toes. So you don't have to
worry about harming another, because you are in touch with the divine
and you are following your own spiritual path and will, which will not
cause harm or conflict with another. Of course, we still have conflicts
with people. One way to look at this is as a spiritual lesson for either
you or the other person. But if you are seeking to control another or
harm another, this is not your true will. This is based upon the belief
that every person is an individual, and as an individual you should be
true to your own nature or consciousness. You must find your true will
and make all of your actions subservient to the one great purpose. This
again leads to conscious living.

If ethics are codes of personal and community conduct, then etiquette is
a code of social conduct. Etiquette is defined as --the practices and
forms prescribed by social convention or by authority; forms of conduct
prescribed by polite society; code of correct conduct; also decorum
denotes conformity with established standards of manners or behavior;
the forms required by good breeding, or prescribed by authority, to be
observed in social or official life; observance of the proprieties of
rank and occasion; conventional decorum; ceremonial code of polite
society; rules governing acceptable behavior.

Just like Emily Post and polite society, we in the Pagan community have
behavior that is expected from us in how we interact with that
community. In my opinion, etiquette is something sorely lacking in many
Pagans. They are not taught certain things about how we interact with
each other. This could be because maybe you didn't have a teacher, or
your teacher didn't know them either. Or it could be because you or
those who taught you just didn't care, it wasn't important to them. But
I feel that etiquette is VERY important. It keeps us civilized, it aids
us in how we interact and it shows the outside world that we know how to
act.

Beyond the mundane world and it's social etiquette, lets take a look at
some things that are common among Pagan paths, especially the Wiccan
path.

1.  You should never touch someone else's magickal tools and items
    without their express permission. If you see something you like and
    want to touch, then ASK. Don't just hold out your hand for it, or
    just pick it up. A person leaves an imprint of their energy on what
    they touch, and they may not want someone else's energy on their
    magickal items. This includes athames all the way to stones and
    jewelery. And do not take offense if you ask and are told no.
2.  The way you live reflects on our whole community. You should always
    respect others, no matter their path. Inside your own religion thee
    is a certain higher respect given each other, as Children of the
    Goddess. This comes from a basic understanding of the hardships of
    the path, and the process we all go through in some way to evolve.
    It can be equated to any secret society and it's initiation process
    and path of self-discovery. This path is not for everyone, and if
    you take it seriously, will change your life in ways you could never
    imagine. Any path that causes growth can be difficult. And we link
    with others that are going through the same thing we are and take
    strength from and learn from them.
3.  We endeavor to hold ourselves to a high standard of living our
    spiritual lives that the mundane world does not. Therefor we support
    each other, lending a hand when the pitfalls of the world come
    about.
4.  When someone gives of themselves to teach or guide, we recognize
    that person's giving, and respect it. Not all of us are called to
    teach, and those who are offer a valuable service that should not be
    taken for granted.
5.  When you are called to teach or guide, you have been given a very
    serious part to play in your community. You should never abuse it in
    any way. It also does not mean that you may use it as a way to gain
    power over, or look down upon any other person. We are all where we
    should be onour path, and it does not mean a thing that you have 10
    or 20 years of service and someone else has 1. We are all equal in
    the eyes of the Gods. And if you are a teacher, you are held to an
    even higher state of conduct. You must never involve yourself in
    anything that could cause harm to your students or to the Craft. You
    should never do anything that would bring a bad light on us. For
    instance, you should never become romantically involved with one of
    your students. You should not condone the use of illegal drugs, or
    alcohol if the person is not of age. You should not use your
    position to control your students, or make them dependent on you.
    The goal is to aid a person on this path. You supply the seed as a
    teacher. You cannot take them by the hand and learn from them, or be
    easy on them when you should be honest.
6.  In that same light, those who would be considered an elder in our
    faith are given a large amount of respect. The wisdom that is gained
    from following this path for 10, 20 or 30 years is an asset to our
    community, and we should respect the Elders of the community for
    what they have learned and what they teach us.
7.  Due to the advent of the internet, there is a phenomenon growing
    among new seekers that is very disturbing. It involves not
    understanding the hard work it takes to learn the Old Ways, or the
    dedication and self sacrifice those who follow, and especially those
    who teach and guide give to the path. From this lack of
    understanding, new seekers think they can go to any page on the net,
    learn what they can and be done with it. It also leads them to think
    that they can ask for what they want, and someone will just hand it
    over. For example, I have been asked to send someone a copy of my
    BOS. This shows me that the person requesting this has no idea of
    what a BOS is, what it stands for and the process that is gone
    through to acquire it. This is flat out rude to begin with. This
    person is wanting their religion hand fed to them. They want to skip
    the hard work, the dedication, the pitfalls and the trials, and get
    right to the reward. This is simply not how it's done. This person
    wants the secrets and mysteries handed to them on a silver platter,
    without having to leave the comfort of the computer chair and work
    for them. This isn't possible. And I am here to say STOP. Be mindful
    of what you are asking. You can't go to the net, read a page or two,
    then go ask someone for their BOS, or even ask them to teach you.
    There must be effort on your part. You are not an adept after
    reading a page, or a book, or even ten books. The mysteries cannot
    be handed to you on a silver platter and you are a master of the
    universe. This is what I call lazy Wicca, and through lazy Wicca you
    will never come to experience the mysteries, because they come
    through dedication, hard work and a personal dedication to the Gods.
8.  Those who are out of the closet must NEVER give away the secrets of
    their brothers and sisters. You should never give any personal
    information. You should never tell the secrets of a coven, who it's
    leaders are, who the members are or any other information. We must
    honor our vows and protect those who for whatever reason have chosen
    to remain hidden from the eyes of the world.
9.  For those who are out of the closet, your life and your actions must
    be above reproach in the eyes of the world. As an open pagan, you
    may be the only one that a non pagan every sees. They will see every
    Pagan in you. So in all things you must be truthful. You must live
    with dignity and honor.

In our discussion of ethics and etiquette the point I was trying to
impress upon you is this. We have become a society who thinks that we
may do as we please, act as we please and there are no consequences. We
fight with the Christians. We complain about how they fight amongst
themselves. We sneer at them when they point to another of them and say
how that person is wrong and they way they practice is wrong. And yet,
WE DO THE SAME THING.

When I meet a fellow priestess, I treat her with respect as a person,
and doubly so as a priestess, since I know how hard that path can be, to
have dedicated your life and your service to the Gods and the Old Ways.
If I meet someone who has been walking the path for 20 or 30 years, I
respect that person because of the knowledge they have obtained in that
time. That is not to say my 10 years is less, or they are 'more
spiritual' than me. It is saying that this path is not an easy one all
the time, and to have lived it every day for that amount of time is
deserving of respect. I was taught as a child to respect my elders, and
I believe that is still a valid lesson. The elders of this path can
teach us things that we have never even thought of. At the same time, as
an elder, you should always remember what it was like to take your first
stumbling steps on this path, and how you may have longed for some
guidance. It is just as wrong to be an elder, and act as if you know
everything, or someone who is only 20 or whatever age could never be a
spiritual person. We all must remember our ethics and etiquette, and
encourage each other every day.

We have forgotten to practice our personal ethics, and have thrown
etiquette out the window. We have forgotten Emily Post and Miss Manners,
and have went on about our merry little way to fight like cats and dogs,
without even offering basic human respect for those with diverging
views, and this troubles me. It is a plague that is infecting our
community. The Witch Wars continue. We struggle to make our way the
right way, even if we don't realize we are doing this. We forget the
very basic teaching that we are all connected, and that all paths are
valid, as long as they fulfill our spiritual needs.

Let us remember our ethics. Let us live our lives with honor, treating
all of life with respect. Follow your own path, without interference
into another's. Work hard, study hard and receive the blessings of a
life well lived.

 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Becoming a Witch by Morgaine](msg0003.md)
