[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](msg0018)  [Next](msg0020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Thoughts on Bashing Fluffy Bunnies

by Ben Gruagach  
<https://www.WitchGrotto.com>  
*This article may be reproduced for non-commercial purposes, providing
that this original copyright notice stays in place at all times.*

One unfortunate trend which has become prominent within the online Pagan
community is known as "bashing fluffy bunnies." No, it doesn't involve
harming animals -- but it does involve verbally attacking those who are
perceived to have less scholarly opinions on modern Paganism than the
attacker. Personally I think this trend is shameful and disrespectful,
unworthy of anyone who claims to be a polytheist or Pagan. To try and
draw attention to the issue I present my **Thoughts On Bashing Fluffy
Bunnies.**

The modern Pagan community is diverse and growing. Decades ago, there
were a few distinct majority segments: Wiccans, Druids, and Asatruers.
At the start of the 21st century there is an ever-growing number of
non-Wiccan Witches, assorted Pagan groups, and Reconstructionist Pagans
who are working to revive ancient Pagan religions.

With growth comes friction between factions, sometimes escalating into
conflict. Minority groups sometimes feel offended when they are lumped
in with other groups. Individuals are annoyed when others assume that
some idea or philosophy might be common among the majority of Pagan
groups.

Instead of strengthening one's group identity by clarifying core ideas,
it is common for a group to instead spend a lot of energy saying what
it's not about. Sarah M. Pike explored this in some depth in her book
"Earthly Bodies, Magical Selves: Contemporary Pagans and the Search for
Community." Wiccan groups have worked hard to insist that they are not
Satanists. Non-Wiccan Witches insist that they are not at all like
Wiccans. Reconstructionist Pagans insist that they are not Wiccans or
Satanists, and often insist they are not following "Earth-based"
religions as Wiccans do. Within the Wiccan community, there is an
insistence by many that they are not "fluffy bunny" Wiccans which they
clearly consider to be a perversion of their religion.

It is becoming quite common, at least on the internet, for these
attempts to differentiate the "not-me" through what can only be
described as bashing. Instead of discussing the issues and sharing
different points of view and theories, those who hold whatever idea is
not politically correct for the majority in the discussion become the
target for personal insult and antagonistic behavior. In other forums,
when a participant purposefully misinterprets another's postings and
writes to antagonize, the behaviour would be labeled "trolling" and
would be dealt with appropriately. Within many Pagan forums, however,
"trolling" appears to be encouraged providing you are politically
correct about it and agree with the majority philosophy.

It has become politically correct in many Pagan forums to bash those
they label "fluffy bunnies." The term itself is intended to be insulting
-- it implies that some people are air-headed idiots more at home in a
Walt Disney cartoon than in the Pagan community. Often the label is
applied to any group one happens to disagree with. The implication is
usually that the "fluffy bunny" hasn't thought through their religious
philosophy, that they are really just concerned about shock value or
fashion rather than living a religious philosophy. It is also usually
assumed that a "fluffy bunny" has little idea about the historical past
and physical reality and accepts any claim that is made at face value.

Some groups, such as Reconstructionist Pagans, strive to match their
religions as closely as possible to a specific chosen historical model.
They feel that they are therefore immune to being labeled "fluffy,"
because they hold scholarly rigor in such high esteem. It also happens
sometimes within Reconstructionist discussions that other groups such as
Wiccans are labeled automatically as "fluffy" because of specific
discredited historical theories. The problem with these blanket labels
is that they are not always accurate. Within the Wiccan community, for
instance, there is a surge of scholarly historical research which has
thrown new light on the origins of the religion. Many resisted this
change at the start, but it is quickly changing so that now it is quite
common to find Wiccans who freely incorporate the new ideas about the
past into their philosophies. To insist that Wicca is "fluffy" is to
ignore many scholarly Wiccans.

Similarly, while there is certainly encouragement within the
Reconstructionist community towards scholarly rigor, it does happen that
blanket statements are made and assumptions proven false. Like any pet
theory, it is often hard to give up even when the evidence starts to
mount that it might not be correct. The claim that Reconstructionists
are "more scholarly" than other Pagans has lead to a growing arrogance
by Reconstructionists towards other Pagans. And as so often happens,
with arrogance frequently comes sloppy and uncritical thinking,
essentially "resting on one's laurels" from past accomplishments as a
substitute for continuing critical work.

It seems rather hypocritical that a community made up of self-professed
polytheists (whether "hard polytheists" or not) should be so intolerant
of others who have different ideas. It's not just acknowledging that
others have different ideas, or accepting that the historical landscape
is evolving. The problem is that some are being disrespectful of others
and are actively antagonistic in forums where the stated goal is
purportedly to share information and debate ideas in a civilized
fashion. Bashing is not debating. Debating involves sharing ideas and
evidence and discussing the merits of the different points of view.
Debating allows disagreements, but does not allow disrespect. When a
discussion transforms into personal insults against select participants,
or "bashing fluffy bunnies" as some gleefully call it, it is no longer
debate but shameful ego assaults.

Perhaps the conflict is a carry-over from the dominant
Judeo-Christian-Islamic culture, where it is common for religions to
work under the assumption that there is a "One True Way" that is correct
while all others are inherently wrong. When there is a "One True Way,"
individual religions are in jeopardy whenever alternatives are present.
If an alternative proves to be reasonable, it implies that others must
be inherently incorrect. When there is "One True Way," there can truly
be only one. All others must be discredited and eliminated.

Polytheists purportedly accept the idea that there are multiple deities.
"Hard polytheists" believe that the deities are all distinct, that the
Greek Hermes is most definitely not the same thing as the Egyptian
Thoth. Today there are many Pagans, commonly Wiccans, who are not "hard
polytheists" but instead accept multiple deities as being aspects or
faces of a larger deity and often as one ultimate deity. This point of
view is often expressed as "all gods are one God, all goddesses are one
Goddess." Dion Fortune popularized this idea in her works in the first
half of the twentieth century. Many early Wiccans, who admired Fortune's
work, adopted this idea into their Wiccan philosophy.

It is rather odd, then, that with the vast majority of Pagans claiming
some version of polytheism as the basis of their religious philosophy,
that they would also hold onto the idea that there is such a thing as
"One True Way." Some polytheists insist that they do not believe there
is "One True Way," yet when they start talking about other groups or
philosophies within the Pagan community they act as if they are all
pretenders while their own philosophy is the only "correct" one. The
most obvious and frequent example of this is the so-called "fluffy bunny
bashing" that occurs. Behavior in this case belies the denials.

Debate is healthy and to be encouraged. Discussion that involves
personal attack and antagonism should be discouraged. There is a
difference between debates of historical theory or the usefulness of
different ideas, and discussion that becomes a reinforcement of
disrespect. The Pagan community is varied and changing. No one group has
exclusive ownership over the labels "Pagan," "Witch," or even "Wiccan."
Arguments over who has the right to those labels within our community
are just like the arguments within the Christian community over who is a
"real Christian." The arguments are divisive and destructive. As a
self-proclaimed polytheist community, we should be above these sorts of
petty concerns.

Let's resist the shameful bashing that we are committing against each
other. Let's encourage and participate in respectful, honest debate and
discussion where we allow our evidence and theories to speak for
themselves without allowing over-inflated egos to taint the forums.
Let's act like real polytheists, respecting others' choices of deities
and philosophies. Let's leave the "One True Way" attitudes and behaviour
out of our discussions. Those who are "bashing fluffy bunnies" are not
winning the hearts, minds, and souls of the Pagan community -- they are
defeating the very ideals of polytheism that allow for a multitude of
philosophies, deities, and unique paths within our community.

It's time we grew past pointless infighting and arguments over who is
"witchier than thou." We need to retire the phrase "fluffy bunny" and
other terms meant to demean others in our communities. Issues should be
raised, discussed, and debated -- but without insults and trolling.
Scholarly criticism should be encouraged if we are to truly grow.
Instead of focusing on what we aren't, let's focus on what we are, and
respect the diversity that exists within our own community.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 'He Casts the Circle'](msg0020)
