[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](msg0014)  [Next](msg0016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="ad_bar"> <span class="google_search"> </span></span>

sacred-texts \|  Web \| *Powered by*
![Google](https://www.google.com/logos/Logo_25wht.gif.md)

<span class="google_ads"> </span>

*Sponsored Links:*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Internet Book of Shadows*, (Various Authors), \[1999\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is Progressive Witchcraft?

By Terminus

"We do not see our 'trainees' as empty vessels, waiting to be filled up,
but as individuals with a wealth of experience and ideas which they can
contribute to the craft. (Rainbird, 1993)

The use of the term progressive arose from a discussion between Ariadne
Rainbird and Tam Campbell in London in the late 1980s (\*3) They were
discussing the evolution of Wicca, and the fact that it had moved on
over the decades, beyond the labels of "Gardnerian" or "Alexandrian".
They clearly stated that the term was being used to describe a trend,
not a tradition, and that any coven that was eclectic in its approach
and not limiting itself to the Book of Shadows was being progressive.

In 1991 Ariadne Rainbird formed a network for covens who subscribed to a
more eclectic view of Wiccan practice, called the Progressive Wiccan
network (\*1). This network included covens in Wales, England, Germany
and Canada. 1991 also saw the first Grand Sabbat, at Lughnasadh, with
around 30 witches from six different covens meeting up to camp out in
the wilds of South Wales and celebrate together. This tradition was to
continue for some years, developing into an annual weekly gathering in
Cornwall for members of different covens to work together.

In 1992 David Rankine became the editor of the magazine Dragon's Brew,
which became the magazine of the Progressive Wiccan movement. Dragon's
Brew was created by Chris Breen in 1990, originally as the house
magazine for the Silver Wheel Coven (\*1).

To quote from the magazine (1992):

"Progressive Wicca is a movement which spans the traditions and
emphasises networking, closeness to nature, personal growth and
co-operative development. Personal experience of other paths is welcomed
and integrated into covens, and we do not slavishly follow a Book of
Shadows, as we see Wicca as an ever growing religion and the Book of
Shadows changes and grows with each new Witch." (\*1)

Contact details for a number of covens were given in the back of each
issue of the magazine. The editorial stance of the magazine was actively
supportive of environmental protection, detailing protests, distributing
leaflets and supporting organisations like Dragon (eco-magick
environmental network) and Friends of the Earth Cymru in their actions.
Campaigns like the ones to save Oxleas Wood and Twyford Down were
covered, as well as events in other parts of the world, like proposed
wolf culling in Canada, tiger conservation in India, and anti-nuclear
testing by the French in the Pacific. (\*1)

Dragon's Brew ran quarterly until 1997, with a circulation of several
hundred copies, and covered a wide range of subjects, from chakras and
kundalini to Enochian magick and running effective open rituals.
Different pantheons were also explored, including the Welsh, Greek,
Sumerian and Egyptian. A number of prominent academics also contributed
to the magazine, which received articles from distinguished figures such
as Professor Ronald Hutton and the Egyptologist Terry DuQuesne. (\*1)

By 1994 Progressive Witchcraft was widely known throughout Europe. David
Rankine gave a number of talks at events like the Talking Stick Meet the
Groups conference in 1994, and at various University Pagan Societies.
The growth of the movement was acknowledged by Michael Jordan, who gave
it a sizeable entry in his 1996 book Witches: An Encyclopaedia of
Paganism and Magic. (\*3)

To avoid some disharmony caused by the term "Progressive" in the Wiccan
community the term was changed from "Progressive Wicca" to Progressive
Witchcraft in 1993, as was demonstrated by the cover of Dragon's Brew
(\*1). In combination with this Ariadne Rainbird and David Rankine set
up the Progressive Witchcraft Foundation, to deal with enquiries about
Progressive Witchcraft, and also ran workshops under the banner of
Silver Wheel with other coven members on a variety of related subjects.

In 1994 Ariadne Rainbird and David Rankine started running
correspondence courses on natural magick based on much of the
(non-oathbound) Progressive Witchcraft material. This material was to
form the basis for their book Magick Without Peers: A Course in
Progressive Witchcraft for the Solitary Practitioner, published by
Capall Bann in 1997. (\*2)

Reference Material

-------------------------

(\*1) Dragon's Brew, a Magazine of Magick, Paganism & Progressive
Witchcraft, (1992 -1997)

(\*2) Magick Without Peers, A Course in Progressive Witchcraft. Capall
Bann 1997

(\*3) Witches, An Encyclopaedia of Paganism and Magic; Michael Jordon,
1996

Patchwork of Magic, Julia Day, Capall Bann, 1995

(\*4) Talking Stick Magical Directory, 1993

This article was written by Terminus, 2000 and provided for free
distribution.

--------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Making Contact with the Lord and Lady](msg0016.md)
