<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe098)  [Next](wwe100) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_11"></span>

CHAPTER 11

They Come Through the Mountains Into the Plain

On the morrow early they all fared on together, and thereafter they went
for two days more till they came into a valley amidst of the mountains
which was fair and lovely, and therein was the dwelling or town of this
Folk of the Fells. It was indeed no stronghold, save that it was not
easy to find, and that the way thither was well defensible were foemen
to try it.  The houses thereof were artless, the chiefest of them like
to the great barn of an abbey in our land, the others low and small; but
the people, both men and women, haunted mostly the big house.  As for
the folk, they were for the more part like those whom they had met
afore: strong men, but not high of stature, black-haired, with blue or
grey eyes, cheerful of countenance, and of many words. Their women were
mostly somewhat more than comely, smiling, kind of speech, but not
suffering the caresses of aliens. They saw no thralls amongst them; and
when Ralph asked hereof, how that might be, since they were
men-catchers, they told him that when they took men and women, as oft
they did, they always sold them for what they would bring to the
plain-dwellers; or else slew them, or held them to ransom, but never
brought them home to their stead.  Howbeit, when they took children, as
whiles befell, they sometimes brought them home, and made them very
children of their Folk with many uncouth prayers and worship of their
Gods, who were indeed, as they deemed, but forefathers of the Folk.

Now Ralph, he and his, being known for friends, these wild men could not
make enough of them, and as it were, compelled them to abide there three
days, feasting them, and making them all the cheer they might. And they
showed the wayfarers their manner of hunting, both of the hart and the
boar, and of wild bulls also.  At first Ralph somewhat loathed all this
(though he kept a pleasant countenance toward his host), for sorely he
desired the fields of Upmeads and his father's house. But at last when
the hunt was up in the mountains, and especially of the wild bulls, the
heart and the might in him so arose that he enforced himself to do well,
and the wild men wondered at his prowess, whereas he was untried in this
manner of sports, and they deemed him one of the Gods, and said that
their kinsman had done well to get him so good a friend. Both Ursula and
the Sage withheld them from this hunting, and Ursula abode with the
women, who told her much of their ways of life, and stories of old time;
frank and free they were, and loved her much, and she was fain of such
manly-minded women after the sleight and lies of the poor thralls of
Utterbol.

On the fourth day the wayfarers made them ready and departed; and the
chief of the Folk went with them with a chosen band of weaponed men,
partly for the love of his guests, and partly that he might see the
Goldburg men-at-arms safe back to the road unto the plain and the
Midhouse of the Mountains, for they went now by other ways, which missed
the said House. On this journey naught befell to tell of, and they all
came down safe into the plain.

There the Goldburg men took their wage, and bidding farewell, turned
back with the wild men, praising Ralph much for his frankness and open
hand. As for the wild men, they exceeded in their sorrow for the
parting, and many of them wept and howled as though they had seen him
die before their faces. But all that came to an end, and presently their
cheer was amended, and their merry speech and laughter came down from
the pass unto the wayfarers' ears as each band rode its way.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12: The Roads Sunder Again](wwe100)

</div>
