<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe077)  [Next](wwe079.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_12"></span>

CHAPTER 12

Winter Amidst of the Mountains

In all this they had enough to be busy with, so that time hung not heavy
on their hands, and the shadow of the Quest was nowise burdensome to
them, since they wotted that they had to abide the wearing of the days
till spring was come with fresh tidings. Their labour was nowise irksome
to them, since Ralph was deft in all manner of sports and crafts, such
as up-country folk follow, and though he were a king's son, he had made
a doughty yeoman: and as for Ursula, she also was country-bred, of a
lineage of field-folk, and knew all the manners of the fields.

Withal in whatsoever way it were, they loved each other dearly, and all
kind of speech flowed freely betwixt them. Sooth to say, Ralph, taking
heed of Ursula, deemed that she were fain to love him bodily, and he
wotted well by now, that, whatever had befallen, he loved her, body and
soul. Yet still was that fear of her naysay lurking in his heart, if he
should kiss her, or caress her, as a man with a maid. Therefore he
forbore, though desire of her tormented him grievously at whiles.

They wore their armour but little now, save when they were about some
journey wherein was peril of wild beasts.  Ursula had dight her some due
woman's raiment betwixt her knight's surcoat and doe-skins which they
had gotten, so that it was not unseemly of fashion.  As for their
horses, they but seldom backed them, but used them to draw stuff to
their rock-house on sledges, which they made of tree-boughs; so that the
beasts grew fat, feeding on the grass of the valley and the wild-oats
withal, which grew at the upper end of the bight of the valley, toward
the northern mountains, where the ground was sandy. No man they saw, nor
any signs of man, nor had they seen any save the Sage, since those
riders of Utterbol had vanished before them into the night.

So wore autumn into winter, and the frost came, and the snow, with
prodigious winds from out of the mountains: yet was not the weather so
hard but that they might go forth most days, and come to no hurt if they
were wary of the drifts; and forsooth needs must they go abroad to take
venison for their livelihood.

So the winter wore also amidst sweet speech and friendliness betwixt the
two, and they lived still as dear friends, and not as lovers.

Seldom they spoke of the Quest, for it seemed to them now a matter over
great for speech.  But now they were grown so familiar each to each that
Ursula took heart to tell Ralph more of the tidings of Utterbol, for now
the shame and grief of her bondage there was but as a story told of
another, so far away seemed that time from this. But so grievous was her
tale that Ralph grew grim thereover, and he said: "By St. Nicholas! it
were a good deed, once we are past the mountains again, to ride to
Utterbol and drag that swine and wittol from his hall and slay him, and
give his folk a good day.  But then there is thou, my friend, and how
shall I draw thee into deadly strife?"

"Nay," she said, "whereso thou ridest thither will I, and one fate shall
lie on us both.  We will think thereof and ask the Sage of it when we
return. Who knows what shall have befallen then?  Remember the lighting
of the candle of Utterbol that we saw from the Rock-sea, and the boding
thereof." So Ralph was appeased for that time.

Oft also they spake of the little lands whence they came, and on a time
amidst of such talk Ursula said:  "But alas, friend, why do I speak of
all this, when now save for my brother, who loveth me but after a
fashion, to wit that I must in all wise do his bidding, lad as he is, I
have no longer kith nor kin there, save again as all the folk of one
stead are somewhat akin. I think, my dear, that I have no country, nor
any house to welcome me."

Said Ralph:  "All lands, any land that thou mayst come to, shall welcome
thee, and I shall look to it that so it shall be." And in his heart he
thought of the welcome of Upmeads, and of Ursula sitting on the dais of
the hall of the High-House.

So wore the days till Candlemass, when the frost broke and the snows
began to melt, and the waters came down from the mountains, so that the
river rose over its banks and its waters covered the plain parts of the
valley, and those two could go dryshod but a little way out of their
cavern; no further than the green mound or toft which lay at the mouth
thereof: but the waters were thronged with fowl, as mallard and teal and
coots, and of these they took what they would.  Whiles also they waded
the shallows of the flood, and whiles poled a raft about it, and so had
pleasure of the waters as before they had had of the snow. But when at
last the very spring was come, and the grass began to grow after the
showers had washed the plain of the waterborne mud, and the snowdrop had
thrust up and blossomed, and the celandine had come, and then when the
blackthorn bloomed and the Lent-lilies hid the grass betwixt the great
chestnut-boles, when the sun shone betwixt the showers and the west wind
blew, and the throstles and blackbirds ceased not their song betwixt
dawn and dusk, then began Ralph to say to himself, that even if the Well
at the World's End were not, and all that the Sage had told them was but
a tale of Swevenham, yet were all better than well if Ursula were but to
him a woman beloved rather than a friend. And whiles he was pensive and
silent, even when she was by him, and she noted it and forbore somewhat
the sweetness of her glances, and the caressing of her soft speech: 
though oft when he looked on her fondly, the blood would rise to her
cheeks, and her bosom would heave with the thought of his desire, which
quickened hers so sorely, that it became a pain and grief to her.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13: Of Ursula and the Bear](wwe079.md)

</div>
