<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe048)  [Next](wwe050.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_24"></span>

CHAPTER 24

Ralph Heareth More Tidings of the Damsel

The second day, while the merchants saw to their chaffer, most of the
men-at-arms, and Ralph with them, spent their time again in those goodly
gardens; where, indeed, some of them made friends of fair women of the
place; in which there was less risk than had been for aliens in some
towns, whereas at Cheaping Knowe such women as were wedded according to
law, or damsels in the care of their kindred, or slaves who were
concubines, had not dared so much as to look on a man.

The third day time hung somewhat heavy on Ralph's hands, not but that
the Companions were well at ease, but rather because himseemed that he
was not stirring in the quest.

But the next day Clement bade him come see that thrall-merchant
aforesaid, and brought him to a corner of the market-place, where was a
throng looking on at the cheaping.  They went through the throng, and
beside a stone like a leaping-on stone saw a tall man, goodly of
presence, black bearded, clad in scarlet; and this was the merchant; and
by him were two of his knaves and certain weaponed men who had brought
their wares to the cheaping. And some of these were arrayed like those
foemen of the mountains. There was a half score and three of these
chattels to be sold, who stood up one after other on the stone, that
folk might cheapen them.  The cheaping was long about, because they that
had a mind to buy were careful to know what they were buying, like as if
they had been cheapening a horse, and most of them before they bid their
highest had the chattels away into the merchant's booth to strip them,
lest they should buy damaged or unhandsome bodies; and this more
especially if it were a woman, for the men were already well nigh naked.
Of women four of them were young and goodly, and Ralph looked at them
closely; but they were naught like to the woman of his quest.

Now this cheaping irked Ralph sorely, as was like to be, whereas, as
hath been told, he came from a land where were no thralls, none but
vavassors and good yeomen:  yet he abode till all was done, hansel paid,
and the thralls led off by their new masters. Then Clement led him up to
the merchant, to whom he gave the sele of the day, and said:  "Master,
this is the young knight of whom I told thee, who deemeth that a woman
who is his friend hath been brought to this market and sold there, and
if he might, he would ransom her."

The merchant greeted Ralph courteously, and bade him and Clement come
into his house, where they might speak more privily. So did they, and he
treated them with honour, and set wine and spices before them, and bade
Ralph say whatlike the woman was. Ralph did so, and wondered at himself
how well and closely he could tell of her, like as a picture painted. 
And, moreover, he drew forth that piece of her gown which he had come on
by the Mid-Mountain House.

So when he had done, the merchant, who was a man sober of aspect and
somewhat slow of speech, said:  "Sir, I believe surely that I have seen
this damsel, but she is not with me now, nor have I sold her ever; but
hither was she brought to be sold by a man of the mountain folk not very
many days ago. And the man's name was Bull Nosy, or the longnosed man of
the kindred of the Bull, for in such wise are named the men of that
unhappy folk. Now this was the cause why I might not sell her, that she
was so proud and stout that men feared her, what she might do if they
had her away. And when some spake to see her body naked, she denied it
utterly, saying that she would do a mischief to whomsoever tried it. So
I spake to him who owned her, and asked him if he thought it good to
take her a while and quell her with such pains as would spoil her but
little, and then bring her to market when she was meeker. But he heeded
my words little, and led her away, she riding on a horse and he going
afoot beside her; for the mountain-men be no horsemen."

Said Ralph:  "Dost thou know at all whither he will have led her?" Said
the merchant:  "By my deeming, he will have gone first of all to the
town of Whiteness, whither thy Fellowship will betake them ere long: for
he will be minded to meet there the Lord of Utterbol, who is for such
like wares; and he will either give her to him as a gift, for which he
will have a gift in return, or he will sell her to my lord at a price if
he dare to chaffer with him.  At least so will he do if he be wise. Now
if the said lord hath her, it will be somewhat more than hard for thee
to get her again, till he have altogether done with her; for money and
goods are naught to him beside the doing of his will. But there is this
for thy comfort, that whereas she is so fair a woman, she will be well
with my lord.  For I warrant me that she will not dare to be proud with
him, as she was with the folk here."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and what is this lord of Utterbol that all folk, men
and women, fear him so?"  Said the merchant: "Fair sir, thou must pardon
me if I say no more of him. Belike thou mayst fall in with him; and if
thou dost, take heed that thou make not thyself great with him."

So Ralph thanked the merchant and departed with Clement, of whom
presently he asked if he knew aught of this lord of Utterbol.  Said
Clement: "God forbid that I should ever meet him, save where I were many
and he few. I have never seen him; but he is deemed by all men as the
worst of the tyrants who vex these lands, and, maybe, the mightiest."

So was Ralph sore at heart for the damsel, and anon he spake to Bull
again of her, who deemed somewhat, that his kinsman had been minded at
the first to sell her to the lord of Utterbol. And Ralph thinks his game
a hard one, yet deems that if he could but find out where the damsel
was, he might deliver her, what by sleight, what by boldness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25: The Fellowship Comes to Whiteness](wwe050.md)

</div>
