<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe016)  [Next](wwe018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f1_16"></span>

CHAPTER 16

Ralph Rideth the Wood Perilous Again

Now Roger led up to Ralph a strong horse, red roan of hue, duly
harnessed for war, and he himself had a good grey horse, and they
mounted at once, and Ralph rode slowly away through the wood at his
horse's will, for he was pondering all that had befallen him, and
wondering what next should hap. Meanwhile those others had not loitered,
but were a-horseback at once, and went their ways from Ralph through the
wildwood.

Nought spake Ralph for a while till Roger came close up to him and said:
"Whither shall we betake us, fair lord? hast thou an inkling of the road
whereon lies thine errand?"

Now to Ralph this seemed but mockery, and he answered sharply: "I wot
not, thou wilt lead whither thou wilt, even as thou hast trained me
hitherward with lies and a forged tale.  I suppose thou wilt lead me now
by some roundabout road to the stronghold of the Dry Tree. It matters
little, since thou durst not lead me back into the Burg. Yet now I come
to think of it, it is evil to be alone with a found out traitor and
liar; and I had belike have done better to go with their company."

"Nay nay," quoth Roger, "thou art angry, and I marvel not thereat; but
let thy wrath run off thee if thou mayest; for indeed what I have told
thee of myself and my griefs is not all mere lying. Neither was it any
lie that thou wert in peril of thy life amongst those tyrants of the
Burg; thou with thy manly bearing, and free tongue, and bred, as I
judge, to hate cruel deeds and injustice. Such freedom they cannot away
with in that fellowship of hard men-at-arms; and soon hadst thou come to
harm amongst them. And further, let alone that it is not ill to be
sundered from yonder company, who mayhap will have rough work to do or
ever they win home, I have nought to do to bring thee to Hampton under
Scaur if thou hast no will to go thither: though certes I would lead
thee some whither, whereof thou shalt ask me nought as now; yet will I
say thereof this much, that there thou shalt be both safe and well at
ease. Now lastly know this, that whatever I have done, I have done it to
do thee good and not ill; and there is also another one, whom I will not
name to thee, who wisheth thee better yet, by the token of those two
strokes stricken by thee in the Wood Perilous before yesterday was a
day."

Now when Ralph heard those last words, such strong and sweet hope and
desire stirred in him to see that woman of the Want-ways of the Wood
Perilous that he forgat all else, except that he must nowise fall to
strife with Roger, lest they should sunder, and he should lose the help
of him, which he now deemed would bring him to sight of her whom he had
unwittingly come to long for more than aught else; so he spake to Roger
quietly and humbly: "Well, faring-fellow, thou seest how I am little
more than a lad, and have fallen into matters mighty and perilous, which
I may not deal with of my own strength, at least until I get nigher to
them so that I may look them in the eyes, and strike a stroke or two on
them if they be at enmity with me. So I bid thee lead me whither thou
wilt, and if thou be a traitor to me, on thine own head be it; in good
sooth, since I know nought of this wood and since I might go astray and
so come back to the Burg where be those whom thou hast now made my
foemen, I am content to take thee on thy word, and to hope the best of
thee, and ask no question of thee, save whitherward."

"Fair sir," said Roger, "away from this place at least; for we are as
yet over nigh to the Burg to be safe: but as to elsewhither we may wend,
thereof we may speak on the road as we have leisure."

Therewith he smote his horse with his heel and they went forward at a
smart trot, for the horses were unwearied, and the wood thereabouts of
beech and clear of underwood; and Roger seemed to know his way well, and
made no fumbling over it.

Four hours or more gone, the wood thinned and the beeches failed, and
they came to a country, still waste, of little low hills, stony for the
more part, beset with scraggy thorn-bushes, and here and there some
other berry-tree sown by the birds.  Then said Roger: "Now I deem us
well out of the peril of them of the Burg, who if they follow the chase
as far as the sundering of us and the others, will heed our slot
nothing, but will follow on that of the company: so we may breathe our
horses a little, though their bait will be but small in this rough
waste:  therein we are better off than they, for lo you, saddle bags on
my nag and meat and drink therein."

So they lighted down and let their horses graze what they could, while
they ate and drank; amidst which Ralph again asked Roger of whither they
were going.  Said Roger:  "I shall lead thee to a good harbour, and a
noble house of a master of mine, wherein thou mayst dwell certain days,
if thou hast a mind thereto, not without solace maybe."

"And this master," said Ralph, "is he of the Dry Tree?" Said Roger:  "I
scarce know how to answer thee without lying: but this I say, that
whether he be or not, this is true; amongst those men I have friends and
amongst them foes; but fate bindeth me to them for a while."  Said Ralph
reddening: "Be there any women amongst them?"  "Yea, yea," quoth Roger,
smiling a little, "doubt not thereof."

"And that Lady of the Dry Tree," quoth Ralph, reddening yet more, but
holding up his head, "that woman whereof the Burgher spoke so bitterly,
threatening her with torments and death if they might but lay hold of
her; what wilt thou tell me concerning her?" "But little," said Roger,
"save this, that thou desirest to see her, and that thou mayest have thy
will thereon if thou wilt be guided by me."

Ralph hearkened as if he heeded little what Roger said; but presently he
rose up and walked to and fro in short turns with knit brows as one
pondering a hard matter. He spake nought, and Roger seemed to heed him
nothing, though in sooth he looked at him askance from time to time,
till at last he came and lay down again by Roger, and in a while he
spake: "I wot not why ye of the Dry Tree want me, or what ye will do
with me; and but for one thing I would even now ride away from thee at
all adventure."

Roger said:  "All this ye shall learn later on, and shalt find it but a
simple matter; and meanwhile I tell thee again that all is for thy gain
and thy pleasure.  So now ride away if thou wilt; who hindereth thee?
certes not I."

"Nay," said Ralph, "I will ride with thee first to that fair house; and
afterwards we shall see what is to hap."  "Yea," quoth Roger, "then let
us to horse straightway, so that we may be there if not before dark
night yet at least before bright morn; for it is yet far away."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17: Ralph Cometh to the House of Abundance](wwe018)

</div>
