<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe094)  [Next](wwe096) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_07"></span>

CHAPTER 7

Of Their Riding the Waste, and of a Battle Thereon

They slept in no house that night nor for many nights after; for they
were now fairly on the waste.  They bore with them a light tent for
Ursula's lodging benights, and the rest of them slept on the field as
they might; or should they come to a thicket or shaw, they would lodge
them there softly. Victual and drink failed them not, for they bore what
they needed on sumpter-horses, and shot some venison on the way withal.
They saw but few folk; for the most part naught save a fowler of the
waste, or a peat-cutter, who stood to look on the men-at-arms going by,
and made obeisance to the token of Utterbol.

But on a time, the fifth day of their journey, they saw, in the morning,
spears not a few standing up against a thicket-side in the offing.
Redhead looked under the sharp of his hand, and laughed as though he
were glad, and said:  "I know not clearly what these may be, but it
looketh like war.  Now, knight, this is best to do: hold with thee three
of our best men, so that ye may safe guard the Lady, and I with the
others will prick on and look into this."

"Nay," said Ralph, "thou mayst yet be apaid of a man's aid; and if there
be strokes on sale in the cheaping-stead yonder, I will deal along with
thee.  Leave thy three men with the Lady, and let us on; we shall soon
be back."

"Nay once more, dear lord," quoth Ursula, "I fear to be left alone of
thee, and it is meet that thou free me from fear.  I will ride with you,
but three horse-lengths behind, so as not to hinder you. I have been
worse bestead than this shall be."

"It is good," quoth Redhead, "let her ride with us: for why should she
suffer the pain of fear in the lonely waste? But let her do on a hauberk
over her coats, and steel coif over her head, for shaft and bolt will
ofttimes go astray."

Even so they did, and rode forward, and presently they saw the spearmen
that they were somewhat more than their company, and that they were well
mounted on black horses and clad in black armour. Then they drew rein
for awhile and Redhead scanned them again and said: "Yea, these are the
men of the brother of thy hot wooer, Lady Ursula, whom I cooled in the
Ram's Bane, but a man well nigh as old as his uncle, though he hath not
made men tremble so sore, albeit he be far the better man, a good
warrior, a wise leader, a reiver and lifter well wrought at all points. 
Well, 'tis not unlike that we shall have to speak to his men again,
either out-going or home-coming: so we had best kill as many of these as
we may now. Do on thy sallet, my lord; and thou, Michael-a-green shake
out the Bull; and thou, our Noise, blow a point of war that they may be
warned. God to aid! but they be ready and speedy!"

In sooth even as the pennon of the Bull ran down the wind and the
Utterbol horn was winded, the Black men-at-arms came on at a trot, and
presently with a great screeching yell cast their spears into the rest,
and spurred on all they might, while a half score of bowmen who had come
out of the thicket bent their bows and fell a-shooting. But now the men
of Utterbol spurred to meet the foe, and as Redhead cast his spear into
the rest, he said to Ralph: "Glad am I that thy Lady is anear to see me,
for now I worship her."

Therewith the two bands met, and whereas on neither side was the armour
very stout, some men of either band were hurt or slain at once with
spearthrust; though, save for Ralph, they did not run straight on each
other; but fenced and foined with their spears deftly enough. As for
Ralph, he smote a tall man full on the breast and pierced him through
and through, and then pulled out the Upmeads blade and smote on the
right hand and the left, so that none came anigh him willingly.

Shortly to say it, in five minutes' time the Black Riders were fleeing
all over the field with them of Utterbol at their heels, and the bowmen
ran back again into the wood. But one of the foemen as he fled cast a
javelin at a venture, and who should be before it save Ursula, so that
she reeled in her saddle, and would have fallen downright but for one of
the Utterbol fellows who stayed her, and got her gently off her horse.
This Ralph saw not, for he followed far in the chase, and was coming
back somewhat slowly along with Redhead, who was hurt, but not sorely. 
So when he came up, and saw Ursula sitting on the grass with four or
five men about her, he sickened for fear; but she rose up and came
slowly and pale-faced to meet him, and said:  "Fear not, beloved, for
steel kept out steel: I have no scratch or point or edge on me."  So
therewith he kissed her, and embraced her, and was glad.

The Utterbol Riders had slain sixteen of their foemen; for they took
none to mercy, and four of their band were slain outright, and six hurt,
but not grievously. So they tarried awhile on the field of deed to rest
them and tend their wounded men, and so rode on again heedfully.

But Redhead spake:  "It is good to see thee tilting, King's Son. I doubt
me I shall never learn thy downright thrust. Dost thou remember how
sorry a job I made of it, when we met in the lists at Vale Turris that
other day?"

"Yea, yea," said Ralph.  "Thou were best let that flea stick on the
wall. For to-day, at least, I have seen thee play at sharps deftly
enough."

Quoth Redhead:  "Lord, it is naught, a five minutes' scramble. That
which trieth a man, is to fight and overcome, and straight have to fight
with fresh foemen, and yet again, till ye long for dark night to cover
you—yea, or even death."

"Warrior-like and wisely thou speakest," said Ralph; "and whoever thou
servest thou shalt serve well. And now once more I would it were me."

Redhead shook his head at that word, and said:  "I would it might be so;
but it will not be so as now."

Forth on they rode, and slept in a wood that night, keeping good watch;
but saw no more of the Black Riders for that time.

On a day thereafter when it was nigh evening, Ralph looked about, and
saw a certain wood on the edge of a plain, and he stayed Ursula, and
said: "Look round about, beloved; for this is the very field whereas I
was betrayed into the hands of the men of Utterbol."  She smiled on him
and said: "Let me light down then, that I may kiss the earth of that
kind field, where thou wert not stayed over long, but even long enough
that we might meet in the dark wood thereafter."

"Sweetling," said Ralph, "this mayst thou do and grieve no man, not even
for a little.  For lo you! the captain is staying the sumpter-beasts,
and it is his mind, belike, that we shall sleep in yonder wood
to-night." Therewith he lighted down and she in likewise: then he took
her by the hand and led her on a few yards, and said: "Lo, beloved, this
quicken-tree; hereby it was that the tent was pitched wherein I lay the
night when I was taken."

She looked on him shyly and said:  "Wilt thou not sleep here once more
to-night?"

"Yea, well-beloved," said he, "I will bid them pitch thy tent on this
same place, that I may smell the wild thyme again, as I did that other
while."

So there on the field of his ancient grief they rested that night in all
love and content.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8: Of Goldburg Again, and the Queen Thereof](wwe096)

</div>
