<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe095)  [Next](wwe097) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_08"></span>

CHAPTER 8

Of Goldburg Again, and the Queen Thereof

Next day they went forth through the country wherethrough Morfinn had
led Ralph into captivity; and Redhead rode warily; for there were many
passes which looked doubtful:  but whether the ill men feared to meddle
with them, or however it were, none waylaid them, and they all came
safely to the gate of Goldburg, the towers whereof were full of folk
looking forth on them. So they displayed their pennon, and rode into the
street, where folk pressed about them in friendly wise; for the new Lord
of Utterbol had made firm and fast peace with Goldburg. So they rode to
the hostel, and gat them victual, and rested in peace that night.  But
Ralph wondered whether the Queen would send for him when she heard of
his coming back again, and he hoped that she would let him be; for he
was ashamed when he thought of her love for him, and how that he had
clean forgotten her till he was close to Goldburg again.

But when morning was come Ralph spake to Redhead and asked him how he
should do to wage men for the homeward journey on thence; and Redhead
said:  "I have already seen the Clerk of the Porte, and he will be here
in an hour with the license for thee to wage men to go with thee to
Cheaping Knowe.  As for me, I must needs go see the King, and give him a
letter sealed by my lord's hand; and when I come back from him, I will
go round to the alehouses which be haunted of the men-at-arms to see
after strong carles for thine avail. But to the King hast thou no need
to go, save he send for thee, whereas thou art not come hither to
chaffer, and he needeth not men of war."

Ralph stared at him and said:  "The King, sayst thou? is there no Queen
of Goldburg?"  Said Redhead:  "There is the King's wedded wife, but her
they call not Queen, but Lady." "But the Queen that was," said Ralph,
"where is she then?" "Yea truly," said Redhead, "a Queen sat alone as
ruler here a while ago; but whether she died, or what befell her, I know
nothing. I had little to do with Goldburg till our lord conquered
Utterbol. Lo here the host! he may tell thee the tale thereof."

Therewith he departed, and left Ralph with the host, whom Ralph
questioned of the story, for his heart was wrung lest such a fair woman
and so friendly should have come to harm.

So the host sat down by Ralph and said:  "My master, this is a tale
which is grievous to us:  for though the saints forbid I should say a
word against my lord that is now, nor is there any need to, yet we
deemed us happy to be under so dear a lady and so good and fair as she
was. Well, she is gone so that we wot not whether she be living or dead.
For so it is that in the early spring, somewhat more than a year ago
that is, one morning when folk arose, the Queen's place was empty.
Riding and running there was about and about, but none the more was she
found.  Forsooth as time wore, tales were told of what wise she left us,
and why:  but she was gone.  Well, fair sir, many deemed that though her
lineage was known by seeming, yet she was of the fairy, and needed
neither steed nor chariot to go where she would. But her women and those
that knew her best, deemed that whatso she were, she had slain herself,
as they thought, for some unhappiness of love. For indeed she had long
gone about sad and distraught, though she neither wept, nor would say
one word of her sorrow, whatsoever it might be.

"But, fair sir, since thou art a stranger, and art presently departing
from our city, I will tell thee a thing. To wit; one month or so after
she had vanished away, I held talk with a certain old fisherman of our
water, and he told me that on that same night of her vanishing, as he
stood on the water-side handing the hawser of his barque, and the sail
was all ready to be sheeted home, there came along the shore a woman
going very swiftly, who, glancing about her, as if to see that there was
none looking on or prying, came up to him, and prayed him in a sweet
voice for instant passage down the water. Wrapped she was in a dark
cloak and a cowl over her head, but as she put forth her hand to give
him gold, he saw even by the light of his lantern that it was exceeding
fair, and that great gems flashed from the finger-rings, and that there
was a great gold ring most precious on her arm.

"He yeasaid her asking, partly because of her gold, partly (as he told
me) that he feared her, deeming her to be of the fairy. Then she stepped
over his gangway of one board on to his boat, and as he held the lantern
low down to light her, lest she should make a false step and fall into
the water, he noted (quoth he) that a golden shoe all begemmed came out
from under gown-hem and that the said hem was broidered thickly with
pearl and jewels.

"Small was his barque, and he alone with the woman, and there was a wind
in the March night, and the stream is swift betwixt the quays of our
city; so that by night and cloud they made much way down the water, and
at sunrise were sailing through the great wood which lieth hence a
twenty leagues seaward. So when the sun was risen she stood up in the
fore part of the boat, and bade him turn the barque toward the shore,
and even as the bows ran upon the sand, she leapt out and let the
thicket cover her; nor have any of Goldburg seen her since, or the
Queen.  But for my part I deem the woman to have been none other than
the Queen.  Seest thou then! she is gone: but the King Rainald her
cousin reigns in her stead, a wise man, and a mighty, and no tyrant or
skinner of the people."

Ralph heard and pondered, and was exceeding sorry, and more had he been
but for the joyousness which came of the Water of the Well. Howbeit he
might not amend it:  for even were he to seek for the Queen and find
her, it might well be worse than letting it be.  For he knew (when he
thought of her) that she loved him, and how would it be if she might not
outwear her love, or endure the days of Goldburg, and he far away? This
he said to himself, which he might not have said to any other soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9: They Come to Cheaping Knowe Once More.  Of the King
Thereof](wwe097)

</div>
