<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe029)  [Next](wwe031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_05"></span>

CHAPTER 5

Yet More of the Lady's Story

"Lo thou, beloved," she said, "thou hast seen me in the wildwood with
little good quickened in me:  doth not thine heart sink at the thought
of thy love and thy life given over to the keeping of such an one?"  He
smiled in her face, and said: "Belike thou hast done worse than all thou
hast told me: and these days past I have wondered often what there was
in the stories which they of the Burg had against thee: yet sooth to
say, they told little of what thou hast done: no more belike than being
their foe."  She sighed and said: "Well, hearken; yet shall I not tell
thee every deed that I have been partaker in.

"I sat in the Dale that next day and was happy, though I longed to see
that fair man again:  sooth to say, since my mistress was dead,
everything seemed fairer to me, yea even mine own face, as I saw it in
the pools of the stream, though whiles I wondered when I should have
another mistress, and how she would deal with me; and ever I said I
would ask the carline when she came again to me. But all that day she
came not:  nor did I marvel thereat. But when seven days passed and
still she came not, I fell to wondering what I should do:  for my bread
was all gone, and I durst not go back to the house to fetch meal; though
there was store of it there.  Howbeit, I drank of the milk of the goats,
and made curds thereof with the woodland roots, and ate of the
wood-berries like as thou hast done, friend, e'en now. And it was easier
for me to find a livelihood in the woods than it had been for most folk,
so well as I knew them. So wore the days, and she came not, and I began
to think that I should see the wise carline no more, as indeed fell out
at that time; and the days began to hang heavy on my hands, and I fell
to thinking of that way to the west and the peopled parts, whereof the
carline had told me; and whiles I went out of the Dale and went away
hither and thither through the woods, and so far, that thrice I slept
away out of the Dale: but I knew that the peopled parts would be strange
to me and I feared to face them all alone.

"Thus wore the days till July was on the wane, and on a morning early I
awoke with unwonted sounds in mine ears; and when my eyes were fairly
open I saw a man standing over me and a white horse cropping the grass
hard by.  And my heart was full and fain, and I sprang to my feet and
showed him a smiling happy face, for I saw at once that it was that fair
man come back again. But lo! his face was pale and worn, though he
looked kindly on me, and he said:  'O my beloved, I have found thee, but
I am faint with hunger and can speak but little.' And even therewith he
sank down on the grass.  But I bestirred myself, and gave him milk of my
goats, and curds and berries, and the life came into him again, and I
sat down by him and laid his head in my lap, and he slept a long while;
and when he awoke (and it was towards sunset) he kissed my hands and my
arms, and said to me:  'Fair child, perhaps thou wilt come with me now;
and even if thou art a thrall thou mayest flee with me; for my horse is
strong and fat, though I am weak, for he can make his dinner on the
grass.'

"Then he laughed and I no less; but I fed him with my poor victual
again, and as he ate I said:  'I am no mistress's thrall now; for the
evening of the day whereon I saw thee I slew her, else had she slain
me.' 'The saints be praised,' said he:  'Thou wilt come with me, then?'
'O yea,' said I. Then I felt shamefaced and I reddened; but I said: 'I
have abided here many days for a wise woman who hath taught me many
things; but withal I hoped that thou wouldst come also.'

"Then he put his arms about my shoulders and loved me much; but at last
he said:  'Yet is it now another thing than that which I looked for,
when I talked of setting thee by me on the golden throne.  For now am I
a beaten man; I have failed of that I sought, and suffered shame and
hunger and many ills. Yet ever I thought that I might find thee here or
hereby.' Then a thought came into my mind, and I said:  'Else maybe thou
hadst found what thou soughtest, and overcome the evil things.' 'Maybe,'
he said; 'it is now but a little matter.'"

"As for me, I could have no guess at what were the better things he had
meant for me, and my heart was full of joy, and all seemed better than
well.  And we talked together long till the day was gone. Then we kissed
and embraced each other in the Dale of Lore, and the darkness of summer
seemed but short for our delight."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6: The Lady Tells Somewhat of Her Doings After She Left
the Wilderness](wwe031)

</div>
