<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe026)  [Next](wwe028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_02"></span>

CHAPTER 2

They Break Their Fast in the Wildwood

Now when it was hard on noon, and they had lain long in that grassy
place, Ralph rose up and stood upon his feet, and made as one
listening.  But the Lady looked on him and said: "It is naught save a
hart and his hind running in the wood; yet mayhappen we were best on the
road, for it is yet long." "Yea," said Ralph, "and it may be that my
master will gather folk and pursue us."  "Nay, nay," she said, "that
were to wrong him, to deem that he would gather folk to follow one man;
if he come, he will be by himself alone. When he found us gone he
doubtless cast himself on Silverfax, my horse, in trust of the beast
following after my feet."

"Well," said Ralph, "and if he come alone, there is yet a sword betwixt
him and thee."

She was standing up by him now with her hand on his shoulder, "Hear now
the darling, the champion! how he trusteth well in his heart and his
right hand.  But nay, I have cared for thee well. Hearken, if thou wilt
not take it amiss that I tell thee all I do, good or evil.  I said a
word in the ear of Silverfax or ever I departed, and now the good beast
knows my mind, and will lead the fierce lord a little astray, but not
too much, lest he follow us with his eager heart and be led by his own
keen woodcraft. Indeed, I left the horse behind to that end, else hadst
thou ridden the woodland ways with me, instead of my wearying thee by
our going afoot; and thou with thy weapons and wargear."

He looked upon her tenderly, and said smiling:  "And thou, my dear, art
thou not a little wearied by what should weary a knight and one bred
afield?"  "Nay," she said, "seest thou not how I walk lightly clad,
whereas I have left behind my mantle and cote-hardie?" Thereat she
gathered up her gown into her girdle ready for the way, and smiled as
she saw his eyes embrace the loveliness of her feet; and she spake as
she moved them daintily on the flowery grass: "Sooth to say, Knight, I
am no weakling dame, who cannot move her limbs save in the dance, or to
back the white palfrey and ride the meadows, goshawk on wrist; I am both
well-knit and light-foot as the Wood-wife and Goddess of yore agone. 
Many a toil hath gone to that, whereof I may tell thee presently; but
now we were best on our way. Yet before we go, I will at least tell thee
this, that in my knowing of these woods, there is no sorcery at all; for
in the woods, though not in these woods, was I bred; and here also I am
at home, as I may say."

Hand in hand then they went lightly through the hazel copse, and soon
was the wood thick about them, but, as before, the Lady led
unfalteringly through the thicket paths.  Now Ralph spake and said: "It
is good that thou lead me whither thou wilt; but this I may say, that it
is clear to me that we are not on the way to the Castle of Abundance."
"Even so," said she; "indeed had I come to thee there, as I was minded,
I should presently have brought thee on the way which we are wending
now, or one nigh to it; and that is that which leadeth to Hampton under
Scaur, and the Fellowship of Champions who dwell on the rock."

Said Ralph:  "It is well; yet will I tell thee the truth, that a little
sojourn in that fair house had liked me better. Fain had I been to see
thee sitting in thine ivory chair in thy chamber of dais with the walls
hung round with thee woven in pictures—wilt thou not tell me in words
the story of those pictures? and also concerning the book which I read,
which was also of thee?"

"Ah," she said, "thou hast read in the book—well, I will tell thee the
story very soon, and that the more since there are matters written wrong
in the book."  Therewith she hurried him on, and her feet seemed never
tired, though now, to say sooth, he began to go somewhat heavily.

Then she stayed him, and laughed sweetly in his face, and said: "It is a
long while now since the beginning of the June day, and meseems I know
thy lack, and the slaking of it lieth somewhat nearer than Hampton under
Scaur, which we shall not reach these two days if we go afoot all the
way."

"My lack?" said he; "I lack nought now, that I may not have when I
will." And he put his arms about her shoulders and strained her to his
bosom. But she strove with him, and freed herself and laughed outright,
and said:  "Thou art a bold man, and rash, my knight, even unto me. Yet
must I see to it that thou die not of hunger."  He said merrily: "Yea,
by St. Nicholas, true it is:  a while ago I felt no hunger, and had
forgotten that men eat; for I was troubled with much longing, and in
doubt concerning my life; but now am I free and happy, and hungry
therewithal."

"Look," she said, pointing up to the heavens, "it is now past two hours
after noon; that is nigh two hours since we left the lawn amidst the
hazels, and thou longest to eat, as is but right, so lovely as thou art
and young; and I withal long to tell thee something of that whereof thou
hast asked me; and lastly, it is the hottest of the day, yea, so hot,
that even Diana, the Wood-wife of yore agone, might have fainted
somewhat, if she had been going afoot as we twain have been, and little
is the risk of our resting awhile. And hereby is a place where rest is
good as regards the place, whatever the resters may be; it is a little
aside the straightest way, but meseems we may borrow an hour or so of
our journey, and hope to pay it back ere nightfall.  Come, champion!"

Therewith she led north through a thicket of mingled trees till Ralph
heard water running, and anon they came to a little space about a brook,
grassy and clear of trees save a few big thorn-bushes, with a green
ridge or bank on the other side. There she stayed him and said:  "Do off
thy war-gear, knight. There is naught to fear here, less than there was
amidst the hazels." So did he, and she kneeled down and drank of the
clear water, and washed her face and hands therein, and then came and
kissed him and said:  "Lovely imp of Upmeads, I have some bread of last
night's meal in my scrip here, and under the bank I shall find some
woodland meat withal; abide a little and the tale and the food shall
come back to thee together." Therewith she stepped lightly into the
stream, and stood therein a minute to let her naked feet feel the cold
ripple (for she had stripped off her foot-gear as she first came to the
water), and then went hither and thither gathering strawberries about
the bank, while he watched her, blessing her, till he well nigh wept at
the thought of his happiness.

Back she came in a little while with good store of strawberries in the
lap of her gown, and they sat down on the green lip of the brook, and
she drew the bread from her scrip and they ate together, and she made
him drink from the hollow of her hands, and kissed him and wept over him
for joy, and the eagerness of her love. So at last she sat down quietly
beside him, and fell to speaking to him, as a tale is told in the ingle
nook on an even of Yule-tide.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3: The Lady Telleth Ralph of the Past Days of Her
Life](wwe028.md)

</div>
