<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe069)  [Next](wwe071) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_04"></span>

CHAPTER 4

They Ride the Wood Under the Mountains

When Ralph woke on the morrow it was broad day as far as the trees would
have it so.  He rose at once, and looked about for his fellow, but saw
her not, and for some moments of time he thought he had but dreamed of
her; but he saw that the fire had been quickened from its embers, and
close by lay the hauberk and strange-fashioned helm, and the sword of
the damsel, and presently he saw her coming through the trees barefoot,
with the green-sleeved silken surcoat hanging below the knees and her
hair floating loose about her. She stepped lightly up to Ralph with a
cheerful smiling countenance and a ruddy colour in her cheeks, but her
eyes moist as if she could scarce keep back the tears for joy of the
morning's meeting. He thought her fairer than erst, and made as if he
would put his arms about her, but she held a little aloof from him,
blushing yet more. Then she said in her sweet clear voice:  "Hail
fellow-farer! now begins the day's work.  I have been down yonder, and
have found a bright woodland pool, to wash the night off me, and if thou
wilt do in likewise and come back to me, I will dight our breakfast
meantime, and will we speedily to the road."  He did as she bade him,
thinking of her all the while till he came back to her fresh and gay.
Then he looked to their horses and gave them fodder gathered from the
pool-side, and so turned to Ursula and found her with the meat ready
dight; so they ate and were glad.

When they had broken their fast Ralph went to saddle the horses, and
coming back found Ursula binding up her long hair, and she smiled on him
and said: "Now we are for the road I must be an armed knight again: 
forsooth I unbound my hair e'en now and let my surcoat hang loose about
me in token that thou wottest my secret.  Soothly, my friend, it irks me
that now we have met after a long while, I must needs be clad thus
graceless. But need drave me to it, and withal the occasion that was
given to me to steal this gay armour from a lad at Utterbol, the nephew
of the lord; who like his eme was half my lover, half my tyrant.  Of all
which I will tell thee hereafter, and what wise I must needs steer
betwixt stripes and kisses these last days.  But now let us arm and to
horse.  Yet first lo you, here are some tools that in thine hands shall
keep us from sheer famine: as for me I am no archer; and forsooth no
man-at-arms save in seeming."

Therewith she showed him a short Turk bow and a quiver of arrows, which
he took well pleased.  So then they armed each the other, and as she
handled Ralph's wargear she said:  "How well-wrought and trusty is this
hauberk of thine, my friend; my coat is but a toy to it, with its gold
and silver rings and its gemmed collar: and thy plates be thick and wide
and well-wrought, whereas mine are little more than adornments to my
arms and legs."

He looked on her lovingly and loved her shapely hands amidst the dark
grey mail, and said:  "That is well, dear friend, for since my breast is
a shield for thee it behoves it to be well covered." She looked at him,
and her lips trembled, and she put out her hand as if to touch his
cheek, but drew it back again and said: "Come now, let us to horse, dear
fellow in arms."

So they mounted and went their ways through a close pine-wood, where the
ground was covered with the pine-tree needles, and all was still and
windless.  So as they rode said Ursula: "I seek tokens of the way to the
Sage of Swevenham. Hast thou seen a water yesterday?"  "Yea," said
Ralph, "I rode far along it, but left it because I deemed that it turned
north overmuch."  "Thou wert right," she said, "besides that thy turning
from it hath brought us together; for it would have brought thee to
Utterbol at last.  But now have we to hit upon another that runneth
straight down from the hills: not the Great Mountains, but the high
ground whereon is the Sage's dwelling.  I know not whether the ride be
long or short; but the stream is to lead us."

On they rode through the wood, wherein was little change for hours; and
as they rested Ursula gave forth a deep breath, as one who has cast off
a load of care.  And Ralph said:  "Why sighest thou, fellow-farer?" "O,"
she said, "it is for pleasure, and a thought that I had: for a while ago
I was a thrall, living amongst fears that sickened the heart; and then a
little while I was a lonely wanderer, and now...Therefore I was thinking
that if ever I come back to mine own land and my home, the scent of a
pine-wood shall make me happy."

Ralph looked on her eagerly, but said naught for a while; but at last he
spoke:  "Tell me, friend," said he, "if we be met by strong-thieves on
the way, what shall we do then?"

"It is not like to befall," she said, "for men fear the wood, therefore
is there little prey for thieves therein:  but if we chance on them, the
token of Utterbol on mine armour shall make them meek enough."  Then she
fell silent a while, and spoke again: "True it is that we may be
followed by the Utterbol riders; for though they also fear the wood,
they fear it not so much as they fear their Lord.  Howbeit, we be well
ahead, and it is little like that we shall be overtaken before we have
met the Sage; and then belike he shall provide."

"Yea," said Ralph, "but what if the chase come up with us: shall we
suffer us to be taken alive?"  She looked on him solemnly, laid her hand
on the beads about her neck, and answered: "By this token we must live
as long as we may, whatsoever may befall; for at the worst may some road
of escape be opened to us. Yet O, how far easier it were to die than to
be led back to Utterbol!"

A while they rode in silence, both of them:  but at last spake Ralph,
but slowly and in a dull and stern voice:  "Maybe it were good that thou
told me somewhat of the horrors and evil days of Utterbol?" "Maybe," she
said, "but I will not tell thee of them. Forsooth there are some things
which a man may not easily tell to a man, be he never so much his friend
as thou art to me.  But bethink thee" (and she smiled somewhat) "that
this gear belieth me, and that I am but a woman; and some things there
be which a woman may not tell to a man, nay, not even when he hath held
her long in his arms." And therewith she flushed exceedingly.  But he
said in a kind voice: "I am sorry that I asked thee, and will ask thee
no more thereof." She smiled on him friendly, and they spake of other
matters as they rode on.

But after a while Ralph said:  "If it were no misease to thee to tell me
how thou didst fall into the hands of the men of Utterbol, I were fain
to hear the tale."

She laughed outright, and said:  "Why wilt thou be forever harping on
the time of my captivity, friend?  And thou who knowest the story
somewhat already? Howbeit, I may tell thee thereof without
heart-burning, though it be a felon tale."

He said, somewhat shame-facedly: "Take it not ill that I am fain to hear
of thee and thy life-days, since we are become fellow-farers."

"Well," she said, "this befell outside Utterbol, so I will tell thee.

"After I had stood in the thrall-market at Cheaping Knowe, and not been
sold, the wild man led me away toward the mountains that are above
Goldburg; and as we drew near to them on a day, he said to me that he
was glad to the heart-root that none had cheapened me at the said
market; and when I asked him wherefore, he fell a weeping as he rode
beside me, and said: 'Yet would God that I had never taken thee.'  I
asked what ailed him, though indeed I deemed that I knew.  He said:
'This aileth me, that though thou art not of the blood wherein I am
bound to wed, I love thee sorely, and would have thee to wife; and now I
deem that thou wilt not love me again.'  I said that he guessed aright,
but that if he would do friendly with me, I would be no less than a
friend to him.  'That availeth little,' quoth he; 'I would have thee be
mine of thine own will.' I said that might not be, that I could love but
one man alone. 'Is he alive?' said he.  'Goodsooth, I hope so,' said I,
'but if he be dead, then is desire of men dead within me.'

"So we spake, and he was downcast and heavy of mood; but thenceforward
was he no worse to me than a brother. And he proffered it to lead me
back, if I would, and put me safely on the way to Whitwall; but, as thou
wottest, I had need to go forward, and no need to go back.

"Thus we entered into the mountains of Goldburg; but one morning, when
he arose, he was heavier of mood than his wont, and was restless withal,
and could be steadfast neither in staying nor going, nor aught else.  So
I asked what ailed him, and he said: 'My end draweth nigh; I have seen
my fetch, and am fey. My grave abideth me in these mountains.'  'Thou
hast been dreaming ugly dreams,' said I, 'such things are of no import.'
And I spoke lightly, and strove to comfort him.  He changed not his mood
for all that; but said:  'This is ill for thee also; for thou wilt be
worser without me than with me in these lands.' Even so I deemed, and
withal I was sorry for him, for though he were uncouth and ungainly, he
was no ill man. So against my will I tumbled into the samelike mood as
his, and we both fared along drearily.  But about sunset, as we came
round a corner of the cliffs of those mountains, or ever we were ware we
happed upon a half-score of weaponed men, who were dighting a camp under
a big rock thereby: but four there were with them who were still
a-horseback; so that when Bull Nosy (for that was his name) strove to
flee away with me, it was of no avail; for the said horsemen took us,
and brought us before an evil-looking man, who, to speak shortly, was he
whom thou hast seen, to wit, the Lord of Utterbol: he took no heed of
Bull Nosy, but looked on me closely, and handled me as a man doth with a
horse at a cheaping, so that I went nigh to smiting him, whereas I had a
knife in my bosom, but the chaplet refrained me.  To make a short tale
of it, he bade Bull sell me to him, which Bull utterly naysaid, standing
stiff and stark before the Lord, and scowling on him. But the Lord
laughed in his face and said:  'So be it, for I will take her without a
price, and thank thee for sparing my gold.' Then said Bull:  'If thou
take her as a thrall, thou wert best take me also; else shall I follow
thee as a free man and slay thee when I may.  Many are the days of the
year, and on some one of them will betide the occasion for the knife.'

"Thereat the Lord waxed very pale, and spake not, but looked at that man
of his who stood by Bull with a great sword in his fist, and lifted up
his hand twice, and let it fall twice, whereat that man stepped back one
pace, and swung his sword, and smote Bull, and clave his skull.

"Then the colour came into the Lord's face again, and he said: 'Now,
vassals, let us dine and be merry, for at least we have found something
in the mountains.'  So they fell to and ate and drank, and victual was
given to me also, but I had no will to eat, for my soul was sick and my
heart was heavy, foreboding the uttermost evil. Withal I was sorry for
Bull Nosy, for he was no ill man and had become my friend.

"So they abode there that night, leaving Bull lying like a dog unburied
in the wilderness; and on the morrow they took the road to Utterbol, and
went swiftly, having no baggage, and staying but for victual, and for
rest every night. The Lord had me brought to him on that first evening
of our journey, and he saw me privily and spake to me, bidding me do
shameful things, and I would not; wherefore he threatened me grievously;
and, I being alone with him, bade him beware lest I should slay him or
myself. Thereat he turned pale, as he had done before Bull Nosy, yet
sent for none to slay me, but only bade me back to my keepers. And so I
came to Utterbol unscathed."

"And at Utterbol," said Ralph, "what befell thee there?" Ursula smiled
on him, and held up her finger; yet she answered: "Utterbol is a very
great house in a fair land, and there are sundry roofs and many fair
chambers.  There was I brought to a goodly chamber amidst a garden; and
women servants were given me who led me to the bath and clad me in
dainty raiment, and gave me to eat and to drink, and all that I needed.
That is all my tale for this time."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5: They Come on the Sage of Swevenham](wwe071)

</div>
