<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe037)  [Next](wwe039.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f2_13"></span>

CHAPTER 13

Richard Talketh With Ralph Concerning the Well at the World's End.
Concerning Swevenham

On the morrow Blaise went to his chaffer and to visit the men of the
Port at the Guildhall:  he bade Ralph come with him, but he would not,
but abode in the hall of the hostel and sat pondering sadly while men
came and went; but he heard no word spoken of the Well at the World's
End. In like wise passed the next day and the next, save that Richard
was among those who came into the hall, and he talked long with Ralph at
whiles; that is to say that he spake, and Ralph made semblance of
listening.

Now as is aforesaid Richard was old and wise, and he loved Ralph much,
more belike than Lord Blaise his proper master, whereas he had no mind
for chaffer, or aught pertaining to it: so he took heed of Ralph and saw
that he was sad and weary-hearted; so on the sixth day of their abiding
at Whitwall, in the morning when all the chapmen were gone about their
business, and he and Ralph were left alone in the Hall, he spake to
Ralph and said: "This is no prison, lord."  "Even so," quoth Ralph.
"Nay, if thou doubtest it," said Richard, "let us go to the door and try
if they have turned the key and shot the bolt on us."  Ralph smiled
faintly and stood up, and said: "I will go with thee if thou willest it,
but sooth to say I shall be but a dull fellow of thine to-day." Said
Richard: "Wouldst thou have been better yesterday, lord, or the day
before?" "Nay," said Ralph.  "Wilt thou be better to-morrow?" said
Richard. Ralph shook his head.  Said Richard:  "Yea, but thou wilt be,
or thou mayst call me a fool else."  "Thou art kind, Richard," said
Ralph; "and I will come with thee, and do what thou biddest me; but I
must needs tell thee that my heart is sick." "Yea," quoth Richard, "and
thou needest not tell me so much, dear youngling; he who runs might read
that in thee. But come forth."

So into the street they went, and Richard brought Ralph into the
market-place, and showed him where was Blaise's booth (for he was
thriving greatly) but Ralph would not go anigh it lest his brother
should entangle him in talk; and they went into the Guildhall which was
both great and fair, and the smell of the new-shaven oak (for the roof
was not yet painted) brought back to Ralph's mind the days of his
childhood when he was hanging about the building of the water-reeve's
new house at Upmeads. Then they went into the Great Church and heard a
Mass at the altar of St. Nicholas, Ralph's very friend; and the said
church was great to the letter, and very goodly, and somewhat new also,
since the blossom-tide of Whitwall was not many years old: and the
altars of its chapels were beyond any thing for fairness that Ralph had
seen save at Higham on the Way.

But when they came forth from the church, Ralph looked on Richard with a
face that was both blank and weary, as who should say:  "What is to do
now?" And forsooth so woe-begone he looked, that Richard, despite his
sorrow and trouble for him, could scarce withhold his laughter.  But he
said: "Well, foster son (for thou art pretty much that to me), since the
good town pleasureth thee little, go we further afield."

So he led him out of the market-place, and brought him to the east gate
of the town which hight Petergate Bar, and forth they went and out into
the meadows under the walls, and stayed him at a little bridge over one
of the streams, for it was a land of many waters; there they sat down in
a nook, and spake Richard to Ralph, saying:

"Lord Ralph, ill it were if the Upmeads kindred came to naught, or even
to little.  Now as for my own master Blaise, he hath, so please you, the
makings of a noble chapman, but not of a noble knight; though he sayeth
that when he is right rich he will cast aside all chaffer; naught of
which he will do. As for the others, my lord Gregory is no better, or
indeed worse, save that he shall not be rich ever, having no mastery
over himself; while lord Hugh is like to be slain in some empty brawl,
unless he come back speedily to Upmeads."

"Yea, yea," said Ralph, "what then?  I came not hither to hear thee
missay my mother's sons."  But Richard went on: "As for thee, lord
Ralph, of thee I looked for something; but now I cannot tell; for the
heart in thee seemeth to be dead; and thou must look to it lest the body
die also." "So be it!" said Ralph.

Said Richard:  "I am old now, but I have been young, and many things
have I seen and suffered, ere I came to Upmeads. Old am I, and I cannot
feel certain hopes and griefs as a young man can; yet have I bought the
knowledge of them dear enough, and have not forgotten.  Whereby I wot
well that my drearihead is concerning a woman.  Is it not so?"  "Yea,"
quoth Ralph. Said Richard:  "Now shalt thou tell me thereof, and so
lighten thine heart a little."  "I will not tell thee," said Ralph; "or,
rather, to speak more truly, I cannot." "Yea," said Richard, "and though
it were now an easier thing for me to tell thee of the griefs of my life
than for thee to hearken to the tale, yet I believe thee.  But mayhappen
thou mayst tell me of one thing that thou desirest more than another."
Said Ralph:  "I desire to die."  And the tears started in his eyes
therewith.  But Richard spake, smiling on him kindly: "That way is open
for thee on any day of the week. Why hast thou not taken it already?" 
But Ralph answered naught. Richard said:  "Is it not because thou hopest
to desire something; if not to-day, then to-morrow, or the next day or
the next?" Still Ralph spake no word; but he wept.  Quoth Richard: 
"Maybe I may help thee to a hope, though thou mayest think my words
wild. In the land and the thorp where I was born and bred there was talk
now and again of a thing to be sought, which should cure sorrow, and
make life blossom in the old, and uphold life in the young." "Yea," said
Ralph, looking up from his tears, "and what was that? and why hast thou
never told me thereof before?" "Nay," said Richard, "and why should I
tell it to the merry lad I knew in Upmeads? but now thou art a man, and
hast seen the face of sorrow, it is meet that thou shouldest hear of THE
WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

Ralph sprang to his feet as he said the word, and cried out eagerly:
"Old friend, and where then wert thou bred and born?"  Richard laughed
and said:  "See, then, there is yet a deed and a day betwixt thee and
death! But turn about and look straight over the meadows in a line with
yonder willow-tree, and tell me what thou seest."  Said Ralph: "The fair
plain spreading wide, and a river running through it, and little hills
beyond the water, and blue mountains beyond them, and snow yet lying on
the tops of them, though the year is in young July." "Yea," quoth
Richard; "and seest thou on the first of the little hills beyond the
river, a great grey tower rising up and houses anigh it?" "Yea," said
Ralph, "the tower I see, and the houses, for I am far-sighted; but the
houses are small."  "So it is," said Richard; "now yonder tower is of
the Church of Swevenham, which is under the invocation of the Seven
Sleepers of Ephesus; and the houses are the houses of the little town.
And what has that to do with me? sayest thou:  why this, that I was born
and bred at Swevenham.  And indeed I it was who brought my lord Blaise
here to Whitwall, with tales of how good a place it was for chaffer,
that I might see the little town and the great grey tower once more.
Forsooth I lied not, for thy brother is happy here, whereas he is piling
up the coins one upon the other.  Forsooth thou shouldest go into his
booth, fair lord; it is a goodly sight."

But Ralph was walking to and fro hastily, and he turned to Richard and
said: "Well, well! but why dost thou not tell me more of the Well at the
World's End?"

Said Richard:  "I was going to tell thee somewhat which might be worth
thy noting; or might not be worth it:  hearken!  When I dwelt at
Swevenham over yonder, and was but of eighteen winters, who am now of
three score and eight, three folk of our township, two young men and one
young woman, set out thence to seek the said Well: and much lore they
had concerning it, which they had learned of an old man, a nigh kinsman
of one of them.  This ancient carle I had never seen, for he dwelt in
the mountains a way off, and these men were some five years older than
I, so that I was a boy when they were men grown; and such things I
heeded not, but rather sport and play; and above all, I longed for the
play of war and battle.  God wot I have had my bellyful of it since
those days!  Howbeit I mind me the setting forth of these three. They
had a sumpter-ass with them for their livelihood on the waste; but they
went afoot crowned with flowers, and the pipe and tabour playing before
them, and much people brought them on the way. By St. Christopher!  I
can see it all as if it were yesterday. I was sorry of the departure of
the damsel; for though I was a boy I had loved her, and she had suffered
me to kiss her and toy with her; but it was soon over.  Now I call to
mind that they had prayed our priest, Sir Cyprian, to bless them on
their departure, but he naysaid them; for he held that such a quest came
of the inspiration of the devils, and was but a memory of the customs of
the ancient gentiles and heathen. But as to me, I deemed it naught, and
was sorry that my white-bosomed, sweet-breathed friend should walk away
from me thus into the clouds."

"What came of it?" said Ralph, "did they come back, or any of them?" "I
wot not," said Richard, "for I was weary of Swevenham after that, so I
girt myself to a sword and laid a spear upon my shoulder and went my
ways to the Castle of the Waste March, sixty miles from Swevenham town,
and the Baron took me in and made me his man: and almost as little
profit were in my telling thee again of my deeds there, as there was in
my doing them:  but the grey tower of Swevenham I have never seen again
till this hour."

Said Ralph:  "Now then it behoveth me to go to Swevenham straightway:
wilt thou come with me? it seemeth to be but some four miles hence."

Richard held his peace and knit his brows as if pondering the matter,
and Ralph abided till he spake:  so he said: "Foster-son, so to call
thee, thou knowest the manner of up-country carles, that tales flow
forth from them the better if they come without over much digging and
hoeing of the ground; that is, without questioning; so meseems better it
will be if I go to Swevenham alone, and better if I be asked to go, than
if I go of myself. Now to-morrow is Saturday, and high market in
Whitwall; and I am not so old but that it is likeliest that there will
be some of my fellows alive and on their legs in Swevenham: and if such
there be, there will be one at the least in the market to-morrow, and I
will be there to find him out: and then it will go hard if he bring me
not to Swevenham as a well-beloved guest; and when I am there, and
telling my tidings, and asking them of theirs, if there be any tales
concerning the Well at the World's End working in their bellies, then
shall I be the midwife to bring them to birth.  Ha?  Will it do?"

"Yea," said Ralph, "but how long wilt thou be?"  Said Richard: "I shall
come back speedily if I find the land barren; but if the field be in ear
I shall tarry to harvest it. So keep thou thy soul in patience."  "And
what shall I do now?" said Ralph.  "Wear away the hours," said Richard.
"And to begin with, come back within the gates with me and let us go
look at thy brother's booth in the market-place: it is the nethermost of
a goodly house which he is minded to dwell in; and he will marry a wife
and sit down in Whitwall, so well he seemeth like to thrive; for they
have already bidden him to the freedom of the city, and to a brother of
the Faring-Knights, whereas he is not only a stirring man, but of good
lineage also: for now he hideth not that he is of the Upmeads kindred."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14: Ralph Falleth in With Another Old Friend](wwe039.md)

</div>
