<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe085)  [Next](wwe087.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_20"></span>

CHAPTER 20

They Come to the Ocean Sea

Being come to the wood they went not very far into it that day, for they
were minded to rest them after the weariness of the wilderness: they
feasted on a hare which Ralph shot, and made a big fire to keep off evil
beasts, but none came nigh them, though they heard the voices of certain
beasts as the night grew still. To be short, they slept far into the
morrow's morn, and then, being refreshed, and their horses also, they
rode strongly all day, and found the wood to be not very great; for
before sunset they were come to its outskirts, and the mountains lay
before them. These were but little like to that huge wall they had
passed through on their way to Chestnut-dale, being rather great hills
than mountains, grass-grown, and at their feet somewhat wooded, and by
seeming not over hard to pass over.

The next day they entered them by a pass marked with the token, which
led them about by a winding way till they were on the side of the
biggest fell of all; so there they rested that night in a fair little
hollow or dell in the mountain-side. There in the stillness of the night
both Ursula, as well as Ralph, heard that roaring of a great water, and
they said to each other that it must be the voice of the Sea, and they
rejoiced thereat, for they had learned by the Sage and his books that
they must needs come to the verge of the Ocean-Sea, which girdles the
earth about. So they arose betimes on the morrow, and set to work to
climb the mountain, going mostly a-foot; and the way was long, but not
craggy or exceeding steep, so that in five hours' time they were at the
mountain-top, and coming over the brow beheld beneath them fair green
slopes besprinkled with trees, and beyond them, some three or four miles
away, the blue landless sea and on either hand of them was the sea also,
so that they were nigh-hand at the ending of a great ness, and there was
naught beyond it; and naught to do if they missed the Well, but to turn
back by the way they had come.

Now when they saw this they were exceedingly moved and they looked on
one another, and each saw that the other was pale, with glistening eyes,
since they were to come to the very point of their doom, and that it
should be seen whether there were no such thing as the Well in all the
earth, but that they had been chasing a fair-hued cloud; or else their
Quest should be achieved and they should have the world before them, and
they happy and mighty, and of great worship amidst all men.

Little they tarried, but gat them down the steep of the mountain, and so
lower and lower till they were come to ground nigh level; and then at
last it was but thus, that without any great rock-wall or girdle of
marvellous and strange land, there was an end of earth, with its grass
and trees and streams, and a beginning of the ocean, which stretched
away changeless, and it might be for ever. Where the land ended there
was but a cliff of less than an hundred feet above the eddying of the
sea; and on the very point of the ness was a low green toft with a
square stone set atop of it, whereon as they drew nigh they saw the
token graven, yea on each face thereof.

Then they went along the edge of the cliff a mile on each side of the
said toft, and then finding naught else to note, naught save the grass
and the sea, they came back to that place of the token, and sat down on
the grass of the toft.

It was now evening, and the sun was setting beyond them, but they could
behold a kind of stair cut in the side of the cliff, and on the first
step whereof was the token done; wherefore they knew that they were
bidden to go down by the said stair; but it seemed to lead no whither,
save straight into the sea. And whiles it came into Ralph's mind that
this was naught but a mock, as if to bid the hapless seekers cast
themselves down from the earth, and be done with it for ever. But in any
case they might not try the adventure of that stair by the failing
light, and with the night long before them. So when they had hoppled
their horses, and left them to graze at their will on the sweet grass of
the meadow, they laid them down behind the green toft, and, being
forwearied, it was no long time ere they twain slept fast at the
uttermost end of the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21: Now They Drink of the Well at the World's
End](wwe087.md)

</div>
