<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe067)  [Next](wwe069) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_02"></span>

CHAPTER 2

Ralph Rides the Wood Under the Mountains

A long way now rode Ralph, and naught befell him but the fashion of the
wood. And as he rode, the heart within him was lightened that he had
escaped from all the confusion and the lying of those aliens, who knew
him not, nor his kindred, and yet would all use him each for his own
ends: and withal he was glad that he was riding all alone upon his
quest, but free, unwounded, and well weaponed.

The wood was not very thick whereas he rode, so that he could see the
whereabouts of the sun, and rode east as far as he could judge it. Some
little victual he had with him, and he found woodland fruit ripening
here and there, and eked out his bread therewith; neither did water fail
him, for he rode a good way up along a woodland stream that cleft the
thicket, coming down as he deemed from the mountains, and thereby he
made the more way:  but at last he deemed that he must needs leave it,
as it turned overmuch to the north. The light was failing when he came
into a woodlawn amidst of which was a pool of water, and all that day he
had had no adventure with beast or man, since he had sundered from
Agatha. So he lay down and slept there with his naked sword by his side,
and awoke not till the sun was high in the heavens next morning. Then he
arose at once and went on his way after he had washed him, and eaten a
morsel.

After a little the thick of the wood gave out, and the land was no
longer flat, as it had been, but was of dales and of hills, not blinded
by trees.  In this land he saw much deer, as hart and wild swine; and he
happened also on a bear, who was about a honey tree, and had taken much
comb from the wild bees. On him Ralph drew his sword and drave him
exceeding loth from his purchase, so that the knight dined off the
bear's thieving. Another time he came across a bent where on the south
side grew vines well fruited, and the grapes a-ripening; and he ate well
thereof before he went on his way.

Before nightfall he came on that same stream again, and it was now
running straight from the east; so he slept that night on the bank
thereof. On the morrow he rode up along it a great way, till again it
seemed to be coming overmuch from the north; and then he left it, and
made on east as near as he could guess it by the sun.

Now he passed through thickets at whiles not very great, and betwixt
them rode hilly land grassed mostly with long coarse grass, and with
whin and thorn-trees scattered about. Thence he saw again from time to
time the huge wall of the mountains rising up into the air like a great
black cloud that would swallow up the sky, and though the sight was
terrible, yet it gladdened him, since he knew that he was on the right
way. So far he rode, going on the whole up-hill, till at last there was
a great pine-wood before him, so that he could see no ending to it
either north or south.

It was now late in the afternoon, and Ralph pondered whether he should
abide the night where he was and sleep the night there, or whether he
should press on in hope of winning to some clear place before dark. So
whereas he was in a place both rough and waterless, he deemed it better
to go on, after he had rested his horse and let him bite the herbage a
while. Then he rode his ways, and entered the wood and made the most of
the way.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3: Ralph Meeteth With Another Adventure in the Wood Under
the Mountain](wwe069)

</div>
