<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe081)  [Next](wwe083) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f3_16"></span>

CHAPTER 16

They Come to the House of the Sorceress

On the morrow the kind people delayed them little, though they sorrowed
for their departure, and before noon were their old way-leaders ready
for them; and the old man and his two grandsons (for such they were)
were much honoured of the simple people for their way-leading of the
Heavenly Folk; for so they called Ralph and Ursula. So they gat them to
the way in suchlike guise as before, only they had with them five
sumpter oxen instead of two; for the old man told them that not only was
their way longer, but also they must needs pass through a terrible
waste, wherein was naught for their avail, neither man, nor beast, nor
herb. Even so they found it as he said; for after the first day's ride
from the town they came to the edge of this same waste, and on the
fourth day were deep in the heart of it: a desert it was, rather rocky
and stony and sandy than mountainous, though they had hills to cross
also: withal there was but little water there, and that foul and
stinking. Long lasted this waste, and Ralph thought indeed that it had
been hard to cross, had not their way-leaders been; therefore he made
marks and signs by the wayside, and took note of the bearings of rocks
and mounds against the day of return.

Twelve days they rode this waste, and on the thirteenth it began to mend
somewhat, and there was a little grass, and sweet waters, and they saw
ahead the swelling hills of a great woodland, albeit they had to
struggle through marshland and low scrubby thicket for a day longer, or
ever they got to the aforesaid trees, which at first were naught but
pines; but these failed in a while, and they rode a grass waste nearly
treeless, but somewhat well watered, where they gat them good store of
venison. Thereafter they came on woods of oak and sweet-chestnut, with
here and there a beech-wood.

Long and long they rode the woodland, but it was hard on May when they
entered it, and it was pleasant therein, and what with one thing, what
with another, they had abundant livelihood there. Yet was June at its
full when at last they came within sight of the House of the Sorceress,
on the hottest of a fair afternoon. And it was even as Ralph had seen it
pictured in the arras of the hall of the Castle of Abundance; a little
house built after the fashion of houses in his own land of the west; the
thatch was trim, and the windows and doors were unbroken, and the garth
was whole, and the goats feeding therein, and the wheat was tall and
blossoming in the little closes, where as he had looked to see all
broken down and wild, and as to the house, a mere grass-grown heap, or
at the most a broken gable fast crumbling away.

Then waxed his heart sore with the memory of that passed time, and the
sweetness of his short-lived love, though he refrained him all he
might:  yet forsooth Ursula looked on him anxiously, so much his face
was changed by the thoughts of his heart.

But the elder of the way-leaders saw that he was moved, and deemed that
he was wondering at that house so trim and orderly amidst the wildwood,
so he said:  "Here also do we after our behest to that marvellous and
lovely Lady, that we suffer not this house to go to ruin: ever are some
of our folk here, and every year about this season we send two or more
to take the places of those who have dwelt in the House year-long: so
ever is there someone to keep all things trim. But as to strangers, I
have never in my life seen any Seeker of the Well herein, save once, and
that was an old hoar man like to me, save that he was feebler in all
wise than I be."

Now Ralph heard him talking, yet noted his words but little; for it was
with him as if all the grief of heart which he had penned back for so
long a while swelled up within him and burst its bounds; and he turned
toward Ursula and their eyes met, and she looked shy and anxious on him
and he might no longer refrain himself, but put his hands to his face
(for they had now drawn rein at the garth-gate) and brake out a weeping,
and wept long for the friend whose feet had worn that path so often, and
whose heart, though she were dead, had brought them thither for their
thriving; and for love and sorrow of him Ursula wept also.

But the old man and his grandsons turned their heads away from his
weeping, and got off their horses, and went up to the house-door,
whereby were now standing a carle and a quean of their people. But Ralph
slowly gat off his horse and stood by Ursula who was on the ground
already, but would not touch her, for he was ashamed. But she looked on
him kindly and said:  "Dear friend, there is no need for shame; for
though I be young, I know how grievous it is when the dead that we have
loved come across our ways, and we may not speak to them, nor they to
us.  So I will but bid thee be comforted and abide in thy love for the
living and the dead." His tears brake out again at that word, for he was
but young, and for a while there was a lull in the strife that had beset
his days. But after a little he looked up, and dashed the tears from his
eyes and smiled on Ursula and said:  "The tale she told me of this
place, the sweetness of it came back upon me, and I might not forbear."
She said:  "O friend, thou art kind, and I love thee."

So then they joined hands and went through the garth together, and up to
the door, where stood the wardens, who, when they saw them turning
thither, came speedily down the path to them, and would have knelt in
worship to them; but they would not suffer it, but embraced and kissed
them, and thanked them many times for their welcome.  The said wardens,
both carle and quean, were goodly folk of middle age, stalwart, and kind
of face.

So then they went into the house together, and entered into the
self-same chamber, where of old the Lady of Abundance had sickened for
fear of the Sorceress sitting naked at her spell-work.

Great joy they made together, and the wardens set meat and drink before
the guests, and they ate and drank and were of good cheer. But the elder
who had brought them from Chestnut-dale said: "Dear friends, I have told
you that these two young men are my grand-children, and they are the
sons of this man and woman whom ye see; for the man is my son.  And so
it is, that amongst us the care of the Quest of the Well at the World's
End hath for long been the heritage of our blood, going with us from
father to son. Therefore is it naught wonderful, though I have been
sundry times at this house, and have learned about the place all that
may be learned.  For my father brought me hither when I was yet a boy;
that time it was that I saw the last man of whom we know for sure that
he drank of the Water of the Well, and he was that old hoar man like
unto me, but, as I said, far weaker in all wise; but when he came back
to us from the Well he was strong and stalwart, and a better man than I
am now; and I heard him tell his name to my father, that he was called
the Sage of Swevenham."

Ralph looked on Ursula and said:  "Yea, father, and it was through him
that we had our lore concerning the way hither; and it was he that bade
us abide your coming in the rock-house of the Vale of Sweet-chestnuts."

"Then he is alive still," said the elder.  Said Ralph: "Yea, and as fair
and strong an old man as ye may lightly see." "Yea, yea," said the
elder, "and yet fifty years ago his course seemed run."

Then said Ralph:  "Tell me, father, have none of your own folk sought to
the Well at the World's End?"  "Nay, none," said the elder. Said Ralph: 
"That is strange, whereas ye are so nigh thereto, and have such abundant
lore concerning the way."

"Son," said the elder, "true it is that the water of that Well shall
cause a man to thrive in all ways, and to live through many generations
of men, maybe, in honour and good-liking; but it may not keep any man
alive for ever; for so have the Gods given us the gift of death lest we
weary of life. Now our folk live well and hale, and without the sickness
and pestilence, such as I have heard oft befall folk in other lands:
even as I heard the Sage of Swevenham say, and I wondered at his words. 
Of strife and of war also we know naught: nor do we desire aught which
we may not easily attain to. Therefore we live long, and we fear the
Gods if we should strive to live longer, lest they should bring upon us
war and sickness, and over-weening desire, and weariness of life.
Moreover it is little that all of us should seek to the Well at the
World's End; and those few that sought and drank should be stronger and
wiser than the others, and should make themselves earthly gods, and,
maybe, should torment the others of us and make their lives a very
burden to be borne. Of such matters are there tales current amongst us
that so it hath been of yore and in other lands; and ill it were if such
times came back upon us."

Ralph hung his head and was silent; for the joy of the Quest seemed
dying out as the old man's words dropped slowly from his mouth. But he
smiled upon Ralph and went on:  "But for you, guests, it is otherwise,
for ye of the World beyond the Mountains are stronger and more godlike
than we, as all tales tell; and ye wear away your lives desiring that
which ye may scarce get; and ye set your hearts on high things, desiring
to be masters of the very Gods.  Therefore ye know sickness and sorrow,
and oft ye die before your time, so that ye must depart and leave undone
things which ye deem ye were born to do; which to all men is grievous. 
And because of all this ye desire healing and thriving, whether good
come of it, or ill. Therefore ye do but right to seek to the Well at the
World's End, that ye may the better accomplish that which behoveth you,
and that ye may serve your fellows and deliver them from the thralldom
of those that be strong and unwise and unkind, of whom we have heard
strange tales."

Ralph reddened as he spake, and Ursula looked on him anxiously, but that
talk dropped for the present, and they fell to talking of lighter and
more familiar matters.

Thereafter they wandered about the woods with the wardens and the
way-leaders, and the elder brought them to the ancient altar in the wood
whereon the Sorceress had offered up the goat; and the howe of the woman
dight with the necklace of the Quest whom the Lady found dead in the
snow; and the place nigh the house where the Sorceress used to torment
her thrall that was afterwards the Lady of Abundance; yea, and they went
further afield till they came to the Vale of Lore, and the Heath above
it where they met, the King's Son and the Lady. All these and other
places were now become as hallowed ground to the Innocent People, and to
Ralph no less. In the house, moreover, was a fair ark wherein they kept
matters which had belonged to the Lady, as her shoes and her smock,
wrapped in goodly cloth amidst well-smelling herbs; and these things
they worshipped as folk do with relics of the saints. In another ark
also they showed the seekers a book wherein was written lore concerning
the Well, and the way thereto. But of this book had the Sage forewarned
Ralph and his mate, and had bidden them look to it that they should read
in it, and no otherwhere than at that ancient altar in the wood, they
two alone, and clad in such-like gear as they wore when they hearkened
to his reading by his hermitage. And so it was that they found the due
raiment in the ark along with the book.  Therefore day after day betimes
in the morning they bore the said book to the altar and read therein,
till they had learned much wisdom.

Thus they did for eight days, and on the ninth they rested and were
merry with their hosts:  but on the tenth day they mounted their horses
and said farewell, and departed by the ways they had learned of, they
two alone. And they had with them bread and meal, as much as they might
bear, and water-skins moreover, that they might fill them at the last
sweet water before they came to the waterless desert.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17: They Come Through the Woodland to the Thirsty
Desert](wwe083)

</div>
