<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe001)  [Next](wwe003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f1_01"></span>

BOOK ONE

The Road Unto Love

CHAPTER 1

The Sundering of the Ways

Long ago there was a little land, over which ruled a regulus or kinglet,
who was called King Peter, though his kingdom was but little. He had
four sons whose names were Blaise, Hugh, Gregory and Ralph: of these
Ralph was the youngest, whereas he was but of twenty winters and one;
and Blaise was the oldest and had seen thirty winters.

Now it came to this at last, that to these young men the kingdom of
their father seemed strait; and they longed to see the ways of other
men, and to strive for life. For though they were king's sons, they had
but little world's wealth; save and except good meat and drink, and
enough or too much thereof; house-room of the best; friends to be merry
with, and maidens to kiss, and these also as good as might be; freedom
withal to come and go as they would; the heavens above them, the earth
to bear them up, and the meadows and acres, the woods and fair streams,
and the little hills of Upmeads, for that was the name of their country
and the kingdom of King Peter.

So having nought but this little they longed for much; and that the more
because, king's sons as they were, they had but scant dominion save over
their horses and dogs: for the men of that country were stubborn and
sturdy vavassors, and might not away with masterful doings, but were
like to pay back a blow with a blow, and a foul word with a buffet. So
that, all things considered, it was little wonder if King Peter's sons
found themselves straitened in their little land: wherein was no great
merchant city; no mighty castle, or noble abbey of monks:  nought but
fair little halls of yeomen, with here and there a franklin's court or a
shield-knight's manor-house; with many a goodly church, and whiles a
house of good canons, who knew not the road to Rome, nor how to find the
door of the Chancellor's house.

So these young men wearied their father and mother a long while with
telling them of their weariness, and their longing to be gone: till at
last on a fair and hot afternoon of June King Peter rose up from the
carpet which the Prior of St. John's by the Bridge had given him (for he
had been sleeping thereon amidst the grass of his orchard after his
dinner) and he went into the hall of his house, which was called the
High House of Upmeads, and sent for his four sons to come to him. And
they came and stood before his high-seat and he said:

"Sons, ye have long wearied me with words concerning your longing for
travel on the roads; now if ye verily wish to be gone, tell me when
would ye take your departure if ye had your choice?"

They looked at one another, and the three younger ones nodded at Blaise
the eldest:  so he began, and said:  "Saving the love and honour that we
have for thee, and also for our mother, we would be gone at once, even
with the noon's meat still in our bellies. But thou art the lord in this
land, and thou must rule. Have I said well, brethren?"  And they all
said "Yea, yea." Then said the king; "Good! now is the sun high and hot;
yet if ye ride softly ye may come to some good harbour before nightfall
without foundering your horses. So come ye in an hour's space to the
Four-want-way, and there and then will I order your departure."

The young men were full of joy when they heard his word; and they
departed and went this way and that, gathering such small matters as
each deemed that he needed, and which he might lightly carry with him;
then they armed themselves, and would bid the squires bring them their
horses; but men told them that the said squires had gone their ways
already to the Want-way by the king's commandment: so thither they went
at once a-foot all four in company, laughing and talking together
merrily.

It must be told that this Want-way aforesaid was but four furlongs from
the House, which lay in an ingle of the river called Upmeads Water
amongst very fair meadows at the end of the upland tillage; and the land
sloped gently up toward the hill-country and the unseen mountains on the
north; but to the south was a low ridge which ran along the water, as it
wound along from west to east.  Beyond the said ridge, at a place whence
you could see the higher hills to the south, that stretched mainly east
and west also, there was presently an end of the Kingdom of Upmeads,
though the neighbours on that side were peaceable and friendly, and were
wont to send gifts to King Peter.  But toward the north beyond the
Want-way King Peter was lord over a good stretch of land, and that of
the best; yet was he never a rich man, for he had no freedom to tax and
tail his folk, nor forsooth would he have used it if he had; for he was
no ill man, but kindly and of measure.  On these northern marches there
was war at whiles, whereas they ended in a great forest well furnished
of trees; and this wood was debateable, and King Peter and his sons rode
therein at their peril: but great plenty was therein of all wild deer,
as hart, and buck, and roe, and swine, and bears and wolves withal. The
lord on the other side thereof was a mightier man than King Peter,
albeit he was a bishop, and a baron of Holy Church. To say sooth he was
a close-fist and a manslayer; though he did his manslaying through his
vicars, the knights and men-at-arms who held their manors of him, or
whom he waged.

In that forest had King Peter's father died in battle, and his eldest
son also; therefore, being a man of peace, he rode therein but seldom,
though his sons, the three eldest of them, had both ridden therein and
ran therefrom valiantly. As for Ralph the youngest, his father would not
have him ride the Wood Debateable as yet.

So came those young men to the Want-ways, and found their father sitting
there on a heap of stones, and over against him eight horses, four
destriers, and four hackneys, and four squires withal. So they came and
stood before their father, waiting for his word, and wondering what it
would be.

Now spake King Peter:  "Fair sons, ye would go on all adventure to seek
a wider land, and a more stirring life than ye may get of me at home: so
be it!  But I have bethought me, that, since I am growing old and past
the age of getting children, one of you, my sons, must abide at home to
cherish me and your mother, and to lead our carles in war if trouble
falleth upon us.  Now I know not how to choose by mine own wit which of
you shall ride and which abide.  For so it is that ye are diverse of
your conditions; but the evil conditions which one of you lacks the
other hath, and the valiancy which one hath, the other lacks. Blaise is
wise and prudent, but no great man of his hands. Hugh is a stout rider
and lifter, but headstrong and foolhardy, and over bounteous a skinker;
and Gregory is courteous and many worded, but sluggish in deed; though I
will not call him a dastard.  As for Ralph, he is fair to look on, and
peradventure he may be as wise as Blaise, as valiant as Hugh, and as
smooth-tongued as Gregory; but of all this we know little or nothing,
whereas he is but young and untried. Yet may he do better than you
others, and I deem that he will do so. All things considered, then, I
say, I know not how to choose between you, my sons; so let luck choose
for me, and ye shall draw cuts for your roads; and he that draweth
longest shall go north, and the next longest shall go east, and the
third straw shall send the drawer west; but as to him who draweth the
shortest cut, he shall go no whither but back again to my house, there
to abide with me the chances and changes of life; and it is most like
that this one shall sit in my chair when I am gone, and be called King
of Upmeads.

"Now, my sons, doth this ordinance please you?  For if so be it doth
not, then may ye all abide at home, and eat of my meat, and drink of my
cup, but little chided either for sloth or misdoing, even as it hath
been aforetime."

The young men looked at one another, and Blaise answered and said: "Sir,
as for me I say we will do after your commandment, to take what road
luck may show us, or to turn back home again." They all yeasaid this one
after the other; and then King Peter said: "Now before I draw the cuts,
I shall tell you that I have appointed the squires to go with each one
of you.  Richard the Red shall go with Blaise; for though he be somewhat
stricken in years, and wise, yet is he a fierce carle and a doughty, and
knoweth well all feats of arms.

"Lancelot Longtongue shall be squire to Hugh; for he is good of seeming
and can compass all courtesy, and knoweth logic (though it be of the law
and not of the schools), yet is he a proper man of his hands; as needs
must he be who followeth Hugh; for where is Hugh, there is trouble and
debate.

"Clement the Black shall serve Gregory:  for he is a careful carle, and
speaketh one word to every ten deeds that he doeth; whether they be done
with point and edge, or with the hammer in the smithy.

"Lastly, I have none left to follow thee, Ralph, save Nicholas
Longshanks; but though he hath more words than I have, yet hath he more
wisdom, and is a man lettered and far-travelled, and loveth our house
right well.

"How say ye, sons, is this to your liking?"

They all said "yea."  Then quoth the king; "Nicholas, bring hither the
straws ready dight, and I will give them my sons to draw."

So each young man came up in turn and drew; and King Peter laid the
straws together and looked at them, and said:

"Thus it is, Hugh goeth north with Lancelot, Gregory westward with
Clement." He stayed a moment and then said:  "Blaise fareth eastward and
Richard with him.  As for thee, Ralph my dear son, thou shalt back with
me and abide in my house and I shall see thee day by day; and thou shalt
help me to live my last years happily in all honour; and thy love shall
be my hope, and thy valiancy my stay."

Therewith he arose and threw his arm about the young man's neck; but he
shrank away a little from his father, and his face grew troubled; and
King Peter noted that, and his countenance fell, and he said:

"Nay nay, my son; grudge not thy brethren the chances of the road, and
the ill-hap of the battle.  Here at least for thee is the bounteous
board and the full cup, and the love of kindred and well-willers, and
the fellowship of the folk. O well is thee, my son, and happy shalt thou
be!"

But the young man knit his brows and said no word in answer.

Then came forward those three brethren who were to fare at all
adventure, and they stood before the old man saying nought.  Then he
laughed and said: "O ho, my sons!  Here in Upmeads have ye all ye need
without money, but when ye fare in the outlands ye need money; is it not
a lack of yours that your pouches be bare?  Abide, for I have seen to
it."

Therewith he drew out of his pouch three little bags, and said; "Take ye
each one of these; for therein is all that my treasury may shed as now.
In each of these is there coined money, both white and red, and some
deal of gold uncoined, and of rings and brooches a few, and by
estimation there is in each bag the same value reckoned in lawful silver
of Upmeads and the Wolds and the Overhill-Countries. Take up each what
there is, and do the best ye may therewith."

Then each took his bag, and kissed and embraced his father; and they
kissed Ralph and each other, and so got to horse and departed with their
squires, going softly because of the hot sun. But Nicholas slowly
mounted his hackney and led Ralph's war-horse with him home again to
King Peter's House.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2: Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House](wwe003)

</div>
