<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe104)  [Next](wwe106) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_17"></span>

CHAPTER 17

They Fall in With That Hermit

So much had they tarried over this greeting and feasting, that though
they had hoped to have come to the hermit's house that night, he of whom
that folk had told them, it fell not so, whereas the day had aged so
much ere they left the Plain of Abundance that it began to dusk before
they had gone far, and they must needs stay and await the dawn there; so
they dight their lodging as well as they might, and lay down and slept
under the thick boughs.

Ralph woke about sunrise, and looking up saw a man standing over him,
and deemed at first that it would be Richard or the Sage; but as his
vision cleared, he saw that it was neither of them, but a new comer; a
stout carle clad in russet, with a great staff in his hand and a
short-sword girt to his side.  Ralph sprang up, still not utterly awake,
and cried out, "Who art thou, carle?"  The man laughed, and said: "Yea,
thou art still the same brisk lad, only filled out to something more
warrior-like than of old.  But it is unmeet to forget old friends. Why
dost thou not hail me?"

"Because I know thee not, good fellow," said Ralph. But even as he
spoke, he looked into the man's face again, and cried out:  "By St.
Nicholas! but it is Roger of the Ropewalk. But look you, fellow, if I
have somewhat filled out, thou, who wast always black-muzzled, art now
become as hairy as a wodehouse. What dost thou in the wilds?"  Said
Roger:  "Did they not tell thee of a hermit new come to these shaws?" 
"Yea," said Ralph. "I am that holy man," quoth Roger, grinning; "not
that I am so much of that, either.  I have not come hither to pray or
fast overmuch, but to rest my soul and be out of the way of men. For all
things have changed since my Lady passed away."

He looked about, and saw Ursula just rising up from the ground and the
Sage stirring, while Richard yet hugged his bracken bed, snoring. So he
said:  "And who be these, and why hast thou taken to the wildwood? Yea
lad, I see of thee, that thou hast gotten another Lady; and if mine eyes
do not fail me she is fair enough.  But there be others as fair; while
the like to our Lady that was, there is none such."

He fell silent a while, and Ralph turned about to the others, for by
this time Richard also was awake, and said: "This man is the hermit of
whom we were told."

Roger said:  "Yea, I am the hermit and the holy man; and withal I have a
thing to hear and a thing to tell. Ye were best to come with me, all of
you, to my house in the woods; a poor one, forsooth, but there is
somewhat of victual here, and we can tell and hearken therein well
sheltered and at peace. So to horse, fair folk."

They would not be bidden twice, but mounted and went along with him, who
led them by a thicket path about a mile, till they came to a lawn
where-through ran a stream; and there was a little house in it, simple
enough, of one hall, built with rough tree-limbs and reed thatch. He
brought them in, and bade them sit on such stools or bundles of stuff as
were there.  But withal he brought out victual nowise ill, though it
were but simple also, of venison of the wildwood, with some little deal
of cakes baked on the hearth, and he poured for them also both milk and
wine.

They were well content with the banquet, and when they were full, Roger
said: "Now, my Lord, like as oft befalleth minstrels, ye have had your
wages before your work.  Fall to, then, and pay me the scot by telling
me all that hath befallen you since (woe worth the while!) my Lady
died,—I must needs say, for thy sake."

"'All' is a big word," said Ralph, "but I will tell thee somewhat. Yet I
bid thee take note that I and this ancient wise one, and my Lady withal,
deem that I am drawn by my kindred to come to their help, and that time
presses."

Roger scowled somewhat on Ursula; but he said:  "Lord and master, let
not that fly trouble thy lip.  For so I deem of it, that whatsoever time
ye may lose by falling in with me, ye may gain twice as much again by
hearkening my tale and the rede that shall go with it. And I do thee to
wit that the telling of thy tale shall unfreeze mine; so tarry not, if
ye be in haste to be gone, but let thy tongue wag."

Ralph smiled, and without more ado told him all that had befallen him;
and of Swevenham and Utterbol, and of his captivity and flight; and of
the meeting in the wood, and of the Sage (who there was), and of the
journey to the Well, and what betid there and since, and of the death of
the Champion of the Dry Tree.

But when he had made an end, Roger said:  "There it is, then, as I said
when she first spake to me of thee and bade me bring about that meeting
with her, drawing thee first to the Burg and after to the Castle of
Abundance, I have forgotten mostly by what lies; but I said to her that
she had set her heart on a man over lucky, and that thou wouldst take
her luck from her and make it thine. But now I will let all that pass,
and will bid thee ask what thou wilt; and I promise thee that I will
help thee to come thy ways to thy kindred, that thou mayst put forth thy
luck in their behalf."

Said Ralph:  "First of all, tell me what shall I do to pass unhindered
through the Burg of the Four Friths?"  Said Roger: "Thou shalt go in at
one gate and out at the other, and none shall hinder thee."

Said Ralph:  "And shall I have any hindrance from them of the Dry Tree?"

Roger made as if he were swallowing down something, and answered: "Nay,
none."

"And the folk of Higham by the Way, and the Brethren and their Abbot?"
said Ralph.

"I know but little of them," quoth Roger, "but I deem that they will
make a push to have thee for captain; because they have had war on their
hands of late. But this shall be at thine own will to say yea or nay to
them. But for the rest on this side of the shepherds' country ye will
pass by peaceful folk."

"Yea," said Ralph, "what then hath become of the pride and cruelty of
the Burg of the Four Friths, and the eagerness and fierceness of the Dry
Tree?"

Quoth Roger:  "This is the tale of it:  After the champions of the Dry
Tree had lost their queen and beloved, the Lady of Abundance, they were
both restless and fierce, for the days of sorrow hung heavy on their
hands.  So on a time a great company of them had ado with the Burgers
somewhat recklessly and came to the worse; wherefore some drew back into
their fastness of the Scaur and the others still rode on, and further
west than their wont had been; but warily when they had the Wood
Perilous behind them, for they had learned wisdom again.  Thus riding
they had tidings of an host of the Burg of the Four Friths who were
resting in a valley hard by with a great train of captives and beasts
and other spoil: for they had been raising the fray against the
Wheat-wearers, and had slain many carles there, and were bringing home
to the Burg many young women and women-children, after their custom. So
they of the Dry Tree advised them of these tidings, and deemed that it
would ease the sorrow of their hearts for their Lady if they could deal
with these sons of whores and make a mark upon the Burg: so they lay hid
while the daylight lasted, and by night and cloud fell upon these
faineants of the Burg, and won them good cheap, as was like to be,
though the Burg-dwellers were many the more. Whereof a many were slain,
but many escaped and gat home to the Burg, even as will lightly happen
even in the worst of overthrows, that not all, or even the more part be
slain.

"Well, there were the champions and their prey, which was very great,
and especially of women, of whom the more part were young and fair: for
the women of the Wheat-wearers be goodly, and these had been picked out
by the rutters of the Burg for their youth and strength and beauty. And
whereas the men of the Dry Tree were scant of women at home, and
sore-hearted because of our Lady, they forbore not these women, but fell
to talking with them and loving them; howbeit in courteous and manly
fashion, so that the women deemed themselves in heaven and were ready to
do anything to please their lovers. So the end of it was that the
Champions sent messengers to Hampton and the Castle of the Scaur to tell
what had betid, and they themselves took the road to the land of the
Wheat-wearers, having those women with them not as captives but as free
damsels.

"Now the road to the Wheat-wearing country was long, and on the way the
damsels told their new men many things of their land and their unhappy
wars with them of the Burg and the griefs and torments which they
endured of them. And this amongst other things, that wherever they came,
they slew all the males even to the sucking babe, but spared the women,
even when they bore them not into captivity.

"'Whereof,' said these poor damsels, 'it cometh that our land is
ill-furnished of carles, so that we women, high and low, go afield and
do many things, as crafts and the like, which in other lands are done by
carles.' In sooth it seemed of them that they were both of stouter
fashion, and defter than women are wont to be.  So the champions, part
in jest, part in earnest, bade them do on the armour of the slain
Burgers, and take their weapons, and fell to teaching them how to handle
staff and sword and bow; and the women took heart from the valiant
countenance of their new lovers, and deemed it all bitter earnest
enough, and learned their part speedily; and yet none too soon. For when
the fleers of the Burg came home the Porte lost no time, but sent out
another host to follow after the Champions and their spoil; for they had
learned that those men had not turned about to Hampton after their
victory, but had gone on to the Wheat-wearers.

"So it befell that the host of the Burg came up with the Champions on
the eve of a summer day when there were yet three hours of daylight. But
whereas they had looked to have an easy bargain of their foemen, since
they knew the Champions to be but a few, lo! there was the hillside
covered with a goodly array of spears and glaives and shining helms.
They marvelled; but now for very shame, and because they scarce could
help it, they fell on, and before sunset were scattered to the winds
again, and the fleers had to bear back the tale that the more part of
their foes were women of the Wheat-wearers; but this time few were those
that came back alive to the Burg of the Four Friths; for the freed
captives were hot and eager in the chase, casting aside their shields
and hauberks that they might speed the better, and valuing their lives
at naught if they might but slay a man or two of the tyrants before they
died.

"Thus was the Burg wounded with its own sword:  but the matter stopped
not there:  for when that victorious host of men and women came into the
land of the Wheat-wearers, all men fled away in terror at first,
thinking that it was a new onset of the men of the Burg; and that all
the more, as so many of them bore their weapons and armour. But when
they found out how matters had gone, then, as ye may deem, was the
greatest joy and exultation, and carles and queans both ran to arms and
bade their deliverers learn them all that belonged to war, and said that
one thing should not be lacking, to wit, the gift of their bodies, that
should either lie dead in the fields, or bear about henceforth the souls
of free men. Nothing lothe, the Champions became their doctors and
teachers of battle, and a great host was drawn together; and meanwhile
the Champions had sent messengers again to Hampton telling them what was
befallen, and asking for more men if they might be had. But the
Burg-abiders were not like to sit down under their foil. Another host
they sent against the Wheat-wearers, not so huge, as well arrayed and
wise in war.  The Champions espied its goings, and knew well that they
had to deal with the best men of the Burg, and they met them in like
wise; for they chose the very best of the men and the women, and pitched
on a place whence they might ward them well, and abode the foemen there;
who failed not to come upon them, stout and stern and cold, and
well-learned in all feats of war.

"Long and bitter was the battle, and the Burgers were fierce without
head-strong folly, and the Wheat-wearers deemed that if they blenched
now, they had something worse than death to look to. But in the end when
both sides were grown weary and worn out, and yet neither would flee, on
a sudden came into the field the help from the Dry Tree, a valiant
company of riders to whom battle was but game and play.  Then indeed the
men of the Burg gave back and drew out of the battle as best they might:
yet were they little chased, save by the new-comers of the Dry Tree, for
the others were over weary, and moreover the leaders had no mind to let
the new-made warriors leave their vantage-ground lest the old and tried
men-at-arms of the Burg should turn upon them and put them to the worse.

"Men looked for battle again the next day; but it fell not out so; for
the host of the Burg saw that there was more to lose than to gain, so
they drew back towards their own place. Neither did they waste the land
much; for the riders of the Dry Tree followed hard at heel, and cut off
all who tarried, or strayed from the main battle.

"When they were gone, then at last did the Wheat-wearers give themselves
up to the joy of their deliverance and the pleasure of their new lives:
and one of their old men that I have spoken with told me this; that
before when they were little better than the thralls of the Burg, and
durst scarce raise a hand against the foemen, the carles were but slow
to love, and the queans, for all their fairness, cold and but little
kind. However, now in the fields of the wheat-wearers themselves all
this was changed, and men and maids took to arraying themselves gaily as
occasion served, and there was singing and dancing on every green, and
straying of couples amongst the greenery of the summer night; and in
short the god of love was busy in the land, and made the eyes seem
bright, and the lips sweet, and the bosom fair, and the arms sleek and
the feet trim:  so that every hour was full of allurement; and ever the
nigher that war and peril was, the more delight had man and maid of each
other's bodies.

"Well, within a while the Wheat-wearers were grown so full of hope that
they bade the men of the Dry Tree lead them against the Burg of the Four
Friths, and the Champions were ready thereto; because they wotted well,
that, Hampton being disgarnished of men, the men of the Burg might fall
on it; and even if they took it not, they would beset all ways and make
riding a hard matter for their fellowship. So they fell to, wisely and
deliberately, and led an host of the best of the carles with them, and
bade the women keep their land surely, so that their host was not a
great many. But so wisely they led them that they came before the Burg
well-nigh unawares; and though it seemed little likely that they should
take so strong a place, yet nought less befell. For the Burg-dwellers
beset with cruelty and bitter anger cried out that now at last they
would make an end of this cursed people, and the whoreson strong-thieves
their friends: so they went out a-gates a great multitude, but in worser
order than their wont was; and there befell that marvel which sometimes
befalleth even to very valiant men, that now at the pinch all their
valour flowed from them, and they fled before the spears had met, and in
such evil order that the gates could not be shut, and their foemen
entered with them slaying and slaying even as they would. So that in an
hour's space the pride and the estate of the Burg of the Four Friths was
utterly fallen.  Huge was the slaughter; for the Wheat-wearers deemed
they had many a grief whereof to avenge them; nor were the men of the
Dry Tree either sluggards or saints to be careless of their foemen, or
to be merciful in the battle:  but at last the murder was stayed: and
then the men of the Wheat-wearers went from house to house in the town
to find the women of their folk who had been made thralls by the
Burgers.  There then was many a joyful meeting betwixt those poor women
and the men of their kindred: all was forgotten now of the days of their
thralldom, their toil and mocking and stripes; and within certain days
all the sort of them came before the host clad in green raiment, and
garlanded with flowers for the joy of their deliverance; and great feast
was made to them.

"As for them of the Burg, the battle and chase over, no more were slain,
save that certain of the great ones were made shorter by the head. But
the Champions and the Wheat-wearers both, said that none of that bitter
and cruel folk should abide any longer in the town; so that after a
delay long enough for them to provide stuff for their wayfaring, they
were all thrust out a-gates, rich and poor, old and young, man, woman
and child.  Proudly and with a stout countenance they went, for now was
their valour come again to them. And it is like that we shall hear of
them oft again; for though they had but a few weapons amongst them when
they were driven out of their old home, and neither hauberk nor shield
nor helm, yet so learned in war be they and so marvellous great of
pride, that they will somehow get them weapons; and even armed but with
headless staves, and cudgels of the thicket, woe betide the peaceful
folk whom they shall first fall on.  Yea, fair sir, the day shall come
meseemeth when folk shall call on thee to lead the hunt after these
famished wolves, and when thou dost so, call on me to tell thee tales of
their doings which shall make thine heart hard, and thine hand heavy
against them."

"Meantime," said Ralph, "what has betid to the Fellowship of the Dry
Tree? for I see that thou hast some grief on thy mind because of them."

Roger kept silence a little and then he said:  "I grieve because Hampton
is no more a strong place of warriors; two or three carles and a dozen
of women dwell now in the halls and chambers of the Scaur.  Here on
earth, all endeth. God send us to find the world without end!"

"What then," said Ralph, "have they then had another great overthrow,
worse than that other?"  "Nay," said Roger doggedly, "it is not so."
"But where is the Fellowship?" said Ralph.  "It is scattered abroad,"
quoth Roger.  "For some of the Dry Tree had no heart to leave the women
whom they had wooed in the Wheat-wearer's land: and some, and a great
many, have taken their dears to dwell in the Burg of the Four Friths,
whereas a many of the Wheat-wearers have gone to beget children on the
old bondwomen of the Burgers; of whom there were some two thousand alive
after the Burg was taken; besides that many women also came with the
carles from their own land.

"So that now a mixed folk are dwelling in the Burg, partly of those
women-thralls, partly of carles and queans come newly from the
Wheat-wearers, partly of men of our Fellowship the more part of whom are
wedded to queans of the Wheat-wearers, and partly of men, chapmen and
craftsmen and others who have drifted into the town, having heard that
there is no lack of wealth there, and many fair women unmated."

"Yea," said Ralph, "and is all this so ill?"  Said Roger, "Meseems it is
ill enough that there is no longer, rightly said, a Fellowship of the
Dry Tree, though the men be alive who were once of that fellowship."
"Nay," said Ralph, "and why should they not make a new fellowship in the
Burg, whereas they may well be peaceful, since they have come to their
above of their foemen?"

"Yea," said Roger slowly, "that is sooth; and so is this, that there in
the Burg they are a strong band, with a captain of their own, and much
worshipped of the peaceful folk; and moreover, though they be not cruel
to torment helpless folk, or hard to make an end of all joy to-day, lest
they lose their joy to-morrow, they now array all men in good order
within the Burg, so that it shall be no easier for a foeman to win that
erst it was."

"What, man!" said Ralph, "then be of better cheer, and come thou with
us, and may be the old steel of the champions may look on the sun down
in Upmeads. Come thou with me, I say, and show me and my luck to some of
thy fellows who are dwelling in the Burg, and it may be when thou hast
told my tale to them, that some of them shall be content to leave their
beds cold for a while, that they may come help a Friend of the Well in
his need."

Roger sat silent as if he were pondering the matter, while Richard and
the Sage, both of them, took up the word one after the other, and urged
him to it.

At last he said:  "Well, so be it for this adventure.  Only I say not
that I shall give up this hermitage and my holiness for ever. Come thou
aside, wise man of Swevenham, and I shall tell thee wherefore." "Yea,"
said Ralph, laughing, "and when he hath told thee, tell me not again;
for sure I am that he is right to go with us, and belike shall be wrong
in his reason therefore."

Roger looked a little askance at him, and he went without doors with the
Sage, and when they were out of earshot, he said to him: "Hearken, I
would have gone with my lord at the first word, and have been fain
thereof; but there is this woman that followeth him. At every turn she
shall mind me of our Lady that was; and I shall loath her, and her
fairness and the allurements of her body, because I see of her, that she
it is that hath gotten my Lady's luck, and that but for her my Lady
might yet have been alive."

Said the Sage:  "Well quoth my lord that thou wouldst give me a fool's
reason!  What! dost not thou know, thou that knowest so much of the Lady
of Abundance, that she it was who ordained this Ursula to be Ralph's
bedmate, when she herself should be gone from him, were she dead or
alive, and that she also should be a Friend of the Well, so that he
might not lack a fellow his life long? But this thou sayest, not knowing
the mind of our Lady, and how she loved him in her inmost heart."

Roger hung his head and spake not for a while, and then he said: "Well,
wise man, I have said that I will go on this adventure, and I will
smooth my tongue for this while at least, and for what may come
hereafter, let it be.  And now we were best get to horse; for what with
meat and minstrelsy, we have worn away the day till it wants but a
little of noon.  Go tell thy lord that I am ready. Farewell peace, and
welcome war and grudging!"

So the Sage went within, and came out with the others, and they mounted
their horses anon, and Roger went ahead on foot, and led them through
the thicket-ways without fumbling; and they lay down that night on the
farther side of the Swelling Flood.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18: A Change of Days in the Burg of the Four
Friths](wwe106)

</div>
