<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe114)  [Next](wwe116.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_27"></span>

CHAPTER 27

Ralph Holds Converse With Katherine His Gossip

Ralph went straight from St. Austin's to Clement's house, and found much
people about the door thereof, what of the townsmen, what of the men of
his own host. He passed through these, and found Clement in his chamber,
and with him a half score of such company as was without, and amongst
them Roger and the Sage; but Stephen and Richard both were amongst their
men doing what was needful. All men arose when Ralph entered; but he
looked around, and could see nought of his gossip amongst them. Then he
sat down by Clement and asked if he had any fresh tidings; and Clement
did him to wit that there had come in a carle from out of Upmeads, who
had told them by sure tokens that the foe were come into the
Upmeads-land at noon that day, and between then and sunset had
skirmished with Nicholas and them that were holding the High House, but
had gotten nought thereby. This man, said Clement, being both bold and
of good sleight had mingled with the foe; and had heard the talk of
them, and he said that they had no inkling of the Shepherds or the Dry
Tree coming against them; but they looked to have aid from their own
folk from the lands of Higham; wherefore they made a mock of the defence
of the Upmeads' men; and said that since, when they were all joined
together in Upmeads, they might enter where they would without the loss
of a half-score men, therefore they would risk nought now; nor would
they burn either the High House or the other steadings, since, said
they, they were minded to keep them sound and whole for their own.

These tidings seemed good to Ralph; so he took a cup of wine and pledged
the company, and said:  "My masters, such of you as list to sleep long
to-night had best be abed presently, for I warn you that the trumpets
will blow for departure before the sun riseth to-morrow; and he that
faileth to see to-morrow's battle will be sorry for his lack all his
life long."

When he had thus spoken they all cried hail to him, and anon arose and
went their ways.  Then Ralph bade Clement come with him that he might
visit the quarters of his men-at-arms, and see that all the leaders knew
of the muster, and of the order of departing on the morrow; and Clement
arose and went with him.

As they were on the way Ralph asked Clement what ailed his gossip
Katherine that she had not come to meet him already; and Clement laughed
and said:  "Nought, nought; she is somewhat shamefaced to meet thee
first amongst a many folk, and she not able belike to refrain her kisses
and caresses to thee. Fear not, she is in her bower-aloft, and we shall
find her there when we come back from our errand; fear not! she will not
sleep till she hath had her arms about thee." "Good is that," said
Ralph; "I had looked to see her ere now; but when we meet apart from
folk, something we shall be able to say to each other, which belike
neither she nor I had liked to leave unsaid till we meet again."

So came they to the chief quarters of the fighting men, and Ralph had
all the leaders called to him, and he spake to them of how they should
do on the morrow, both footmen and horsemen, whatwise they should stand
together, and how they should fall on; and he told them all as clearly
as if he were already in the field with the foe before him; so that they
wondered at him, so young in years, being so old in the wisdom of war.
Withal they saw of him that he had no doubt but that they should come to
their above on the morrow; and all men, not only of the tried
men-at-arms of the Dry Tree, but they of the Shepherds also, even those
of them who had never stricken a stroke in anger, were of high heart and
feared not what should befall.

So when all this business was over, they turned about and came their
ways home to Clement's house again.

They saw lights in the chamber or ever they entered, and when they came
to the door, lo! there within was Katherine walking up and down the
floor as if she knew not how to contain herself.  She turned and saw
Ralph at the door, and she cried aloud and ran towards him with arms
outspread. But when she drew nigh to him and beheld him closely, she
withheld her, and falling down on her knees before him took his hand and
fell to kissing it and weeping and crying out, "O my lord, my lord, thou
art come again to us!" But Ralph stooped down to her, and lifted her up,
and embraced her and kissed her on the cheeks and the mouth, and led her
to the settle and sat down beside her and put his arm about her; and
Clement looked on smiling, and sat him down over against them.

Then spake Katherine:  "O my lord! how great and masterful hast thou
grown; never did I hope to see thee come back so mighty a man." And
again she wept for joy; but Ralph kissed her again, and she said,
laughing through her tears:  "Master Clement, this lord and warrior hath
brought back with him something that I have not seen; and belike he hath
had one fair woman in his arms, or more it may be, since I saw him last.
For though he but kisses me as his gossip and foster-mother, yet are his
kisses closer and kinder than they were aforetime."

Said Clement:  "Sooth is the Sage's guess; yet verily, fair sir, I have
told her somewhat of thy journeys, so far as I knew of them."

Said Katherine:  "Dear lord and gossip, wilt thou not tell me more
thereof now?"

"What!" said Ralph; "shall I not sleep to-night?"

"Dear gossip," she said, "thou art over-mighty to need sleep.  And ah! I
had forgotten in the joy of our meeting that to-morrow thou goest to
battle; and how if thou come not again?"

"Fear nought," said Ralph; "art thou not somewhat foreseeing? Dost thou
not know that to-morrow or the day after I shall come back unhurt and
victorious; and then shall both thou and Clement come to Upmeads and
abide there as long as ye will; and then shall I tell thee a many tales
of my wanderings; and Ursula my beloved, she also shall tell thee."

Katherine reddened somewhat, but she said:  "Would I might kiss her
feet, dear lord.  But now, I pray thee, tell me somewhat, now at once."

"So shall it be," said Ralph, "since thou wilt have it, dear gossip; but
when I have done I shall ask thee to tell me somewhat, whereof hath long
been wonder in my mind; and meseemeth that by the time we are both done
with tales, I shall needs be putting on my helm again.—Nay, again I tell
thee it is but a show of battle that I go to!"

So then he went and sat by Clement's side, and began and told over as
shortly as might be the tidings of his journeys. And oft she wept for
pity thereat.

But when he was done and he had sat beholding her, and saw how goodly a
woman she was, and how straight and well knit of body, he said: "Gossip,
I wonder now, if thou also hast drunk of the Well; for thou art too fair
and goodly to be of the age that we call thee. How is this!  Also tell
me how thou camest by this pair of beads that seem to have led me to the
Well at the World's End? For as I said e'en now, I have long marvelled
how thou hadst them and where."

"Fair sir," said Clement, "as for her drinking of the Well at the
World's End, it is not so; but this is a good woman, and a valiant, and
of great wisdom; and such women wear well, even as a well-wrought piece
of armour that hath borne many strokes of the craftsman's hand, and hath
in it some deal of his very mind and the wisdom of him. But now let her
tell thee her tale (which forsooth I know not), for night is growing
old."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28: Dame Katherine Tells of the Pair of Beads, and Whence
She Had Them](wwe116.md)

</div>
