<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe099)  [Next](wwe101.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_12"></span>

CHAPTER 12

The Roads Sunder Again

Ralph and Ursula, with the Sage and Michael-a-dale went their ways, and
all was smooth with them, and they saw but few folk, and those mild and
lowly. At last, of an afternoon, they saw before them afar off the
towers and pinnacles of Whitwall, and Ralph's heart rose within him, so
that he scarce knew how to contain himself; but Ursula was shy and
silent, and her colour came and went, as though some fear had hold of
her. Now they two were riding on somewhat ahead of the others, so Ralph
turned to Ursula, and asked what ailed her.  She smiled on him and said:
"A simple sickness.  I am drawing nigh to thy home, and I am ashamed.
Beyond the mountains, who knew what and whence I was?  I was fair, and
for a woman not unvaliant, and that was enough.  But now when I am
coming amongst the baronages and the lineages, what shall I do to hold
up my head before the fools and the dastards of these high kindreds? And
that all the more, my knight, because thou art changed since
yester-year, and since we met on the want-way of the Wood Perilous, when
I bade thee remember that thou wert a King's son and I a yeoman's
daughter; for then thou wert but a lad, high-born and beautiful, but
simple maybe, and untried; whereas now thou art meet to sit in the
Kaiser's throne and rule the world from the Holy City."

He laughed gaily and said:  "What! is it all so soon forgotten, our
deeds beyond the Mountains?  Belike because we had no minstrel to rhyme
it for us.  Or is it all but a dream? and has the last pass of the
mountains changed all that for us?  What then! hast thou never become my
beloved, nor lain in one bed with me? Thou whom I looked to deliver from
the shame and the torment of Utterbol, never didst thou free thyself
without my helping, and meet me in the dark wood, and lead me to the
Sage who rideth yonder behind us!  No, nor didst thou ride fearless with
me, leaving the world behind; nor didst thou comfort me when my heart
went nigh to breaking in the wilderness!  Nor thee did I deliver as I
saw thee running naked from the jaws of death. Nor were we wedded in the
wilderness far from our own folk. Nor didst thou deliver me from the
venom of the Dry Tree. Yea verily, nor did we drink together of the
Water of the Well! It is all but tales of Swevenham, a blue vapour
hanging on the mountains yonder!  So be it then!  And here we ride
together, deedless, a man and a maid of whom no tale may be told. What
next then, and who shall sunder us?"

Therewith he drew his sword from the sheath, and tossed it into the air,
and caught it by the hilts as it came down, and he cried out: "Hearken,
Ursula!  By my sword I swear it, that when I come home to the little
land, if my father and my mother and all my kindred fall not down before
thee and worship thee, then will I be a man without kindred, and I will
turn my back on the land I love, and the House wherein I was born, and
will win for thee and me a new kindred that all the world shall tell of.
So help me Saint Nicholas, and all Hallows, and the Mother of God!"

She looked on him with exceeding love, and said:  "Ah, beloved, how fair
thou art!  Is it not as I said, yea, and more, that now lieth the world
at thy feet, if thou wilt stoop to pick it up? Believe me, sweet, all
folk shall see this as I see it, and shall judge betwixt thee and me,
and deem me naught."

"Beloved," he said, "thou dost not wholly know thyself; and I deem that
the mirrors of steel serve thee but ill; and now must thou have somewhat
else for a mirror, to wit, the uprising and increase of trouble
concerning thee and thy fairness, and the strife of them that love thee
overmuch, who shall strive to take thee from me; and then the blade that
hath seen the Well at the World's End shall come out of his sheath and
take me and thee from the hubbub, and into the quiet fields of my
father's home, and then shalt thou be learned of thyself, when thou
seest that thou art the desire of all hearts."

"Ah, the wisdom of thee," she said, "and thy valiancy, and I am become
feeble and foolish before thee! What shall I do then?"

He said:  "Many a time shall it be shown what thou shalt do; but here
and now is the highway dry and long, and the plain meads and acres on
either hand, and a glimmer of Whitwall afar off, and the little cloud of
dust about us two in the late spring weather; and the Sage and Michael
riding behind us, and smiting dust from the hard road. And now if this
also be a dream, let it speedily begone, and let us wake up in the
ancient House at Upmeads, which thou hast never seen— and thou and I in
each other's arms."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13: They Come to Whitwall Again](wwe101.md)

</div>
