<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wwe112)  [Next](wwe114.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_25"></span>

CHAPTER 25

They Come to Wulstead

Thus went they, and nought befell them to tell of till they came anigh
the gates of Wulstead hard on sunset. The gates, it has been said; for
whereas Ralph left Wulstead a town unwalled, he now found it fenced with
pales, and with two towers strongly framed of timber, one on either side
the gate, and on the battlements of the said towers they saw spears
glittering; before the gate they saw a barrier of big beams also, and
the gleaming of armour therein. Ralph was glad when he saw that they
meant some defence; for though Wulstead was not in the lands of Upmeads,
yet it was always a friendly neighbour, and he looked to eke out his
host therein.

Wulstead standeth on a little hill or swelling of the earth, and the
road that the company of Ralph took went up to the gate across the plain
meadows, which had but here and there a tree upon them, so that the
going of the company was beheld clearly from the gate; as was well seen,
because anon came the sound of the blowing of great horns, and the
spears thickened in the towers. Then Ralph stayed his company two
bowshots from the barriers, while he himself, with his sword in his
sheath, took Ursula's hand and set forth an easy pace toward the gate. 
Some of his company, and specially Roger and Stephen, would have letted
him; but he laughed and said, "Why, lads, why? these be friends." "Yea,"
quoth Roger, "but an arrow knoweth no kindred nor well-willers: have a
care, lord."  Said the Sage of Swevenham: "Ye speak but after the folly
of men of war; the hands and the eyes that be behind the bows have other
hands and eyes behind them which shall not suffer that a Friend of the
Well shall be hurt."

So Ralph and Ursula went forth, and came within a stone's cast of the
barrier, when Ralph lifted up his voice and said: "Is there a captain of
the townsfolk within the timber there?" A cheery voice answered him: 
"Yea, yea, lad; spare thy breath; I am coming to thee."

And therewith a man came from out the barrier and did off his headpiece
and ran straight toward Ralph, who saw at once that it was Clement
Chapman; he made no more ado, but coming up to Ralph fell to clipping
him in his arms, while the tears ran down his face. Then he stood aloof
and gazed upon him speechless a little while, and then spake:  "Hail,
and a hundred times hail! but now I look on thee I see what hath betid,
and that thou art too noble and high that I should have cast mine arms
about thee. But now as for this one, I will be better mannered with
her."

Therewith he knelt down before Ursula, and kissed her feet, but
reverently. And she stooped down and raised him up, with a merry
countenance kissed his face, and stroked his cheeks with her hand and
said: "Hail, friend of my lord!  Was it not rather thou than he who
delivered me from the pain and shame of Utterbol, whereas thou didst
bring him safe through the mountains unto Goldburg? And but for that
there had been no Well, either for him or for me."

But Clement stood with his head hanging down, and his face reddening.
Till Ralph said to him:  "Hail, friend! many a time we thought of this
meeting when we were far away and hard bestead; but this is better than
all we thought of.  But now, Clement, hold up thine head and be a stout
man of war, for thou seest that we are not alone."

Said Clement:  "Yea, fair lord, and timely ye come, both thou and thy
company; and now that I have my speech again which joy hath taken away
from me at the first, I shall tell thee this, that if ye go further than
the good town ye shall be met and fought withal by men who are over-many
and over-fierce for us." "Yea," said Ralph, "and how many be they?" 
Quoth Clement: "How many men may be amongst them I wot not, but I deem
there be some two thousand devils."

Now Ralph reddened, and he took Clement by the shoulder, and said: "Tell
me, Clement, are they yet in Upmeads?"  "Sooth to say," said Clement,
"by this while they may be therein; but this morn it was yet free of
them; but when thou art home in our house, thy gossip shall belike tell
thee much more than I can; for she is foreseeing, and hath told us much
in this matter also that hath come to pass." Then spake Ralph:  "Where
are my father and my mother; and shall I go after them at once without
resting, through the dark night and all?"

Said Clement, and therewith his face brightened:  "Nay, thou needest go
no further to look for them than the House of Black Canons within our
walls: there are they dwelling in all honour and dignity these two days
past." "What!" said Ralph, "have they fled from Upmeads, and left the
High House empty?  I pray thee, Clement, bring me to them as speedily as
may be."

"Verily," said Clement, "they have fled, with many another, women and
children and old men, who should but hinder the carles who have abided
behind. Nicholas Longshanks is the leader of them down there, and the
High House is their stronghold in a way; though forsooth their stout
heads and strong hands are better defence."

Here Ralph brake in:  "Sweetling Ursula, though thy feet have worn a
many miles to-day, I bid thee hasten back to the company and tell
Richard that it is as I said, to wit, that friends, and good guesting
await them; so let them hasten hither and come within gates at once. For
as for me, I have sworn it that I will not go one step back till I have
seen my father and mother in their house of Upmeads. Is it well said,
Clement?"  "Yea, forsooth," said Clement; but he could not take his eyes
off Ursula's loveliness, as she kilted her skirts and ran her ways like
one of Diana's ladies in the wildwood. At last he said, "Thou shalt wot,
fair sir, that ye will have a little band to go with thee from us of
Wulstead; forsooth we had gone to-morrow morn in any case, but since
thou art here, all is well." Even as he spake a great shout broke out
from the company as Ursula had given her message, and then came the
tramp of men and horses and the clash of weapons as they set forward;
and Clement looked and beheld how first of all the array came Ursula,
bearing the hallowed staff in her hand; for her heart also was set on
what was to come.  Then cried out Clement: "Happy art thou, lord, and
happy shalt thou be, and who shall withstand thee? Lo! what a war-duke
it is! and what a leader that marches with fate in her hands before
thine host!"

Therewith were they all joined together, and Ursula gave the guisarme
into Ralph's hand, and with his other hand he took hers, and the bar of
the barrier was lifted and the gates thrown open, and they all streamed
into the street, the champions coming last and towering over the footmen
as they sat, big men on their big horses, as if they were very
bodyguards of the God of War.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26: Ralph Sees His Father and Mother Again](wwe114.md)

</div>
