<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wwe110)  [Next](wwe112) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Well at the World's End*, by William Morris, \[1896\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f4_23"></span>

CHAPTER 23

They Ride to Bear Castle

But while they spake thus and were merry, the dawn had wellnigh passed
into daylight.  Then Ralph bade old Giles sleep for an hour, and went
forth and called Roger and Richard and went to the great barn. There he
bade the watch wake up Stephen and all men, and they gat to horse as
speedily as they might, and were on the road ere the sun was fully up.
The spearmen of the thorp did not fail them, and numbered twenty and
three all told.  Giles had a horse given him and rode the way by Ralph.

They rode up and down the hills and dales, but went across country and
not by the Greenway, for thuswise the road was shorter.

But when they had gone some two leagues, and were nigh on top of a
certain low green ridge, they deemed that they heard men's voices anigh
and the clash of arms; and it must be said that by Ralph's rede they
journeyed somewhat silently. So Ralph, who was riding first with Giles,
bid all stay and let the crown of the ridge cover them.  So did they,
and Giles gat off his horse and crept on to the top of the ridge till he
could see down to the dale below.  Presently he came down again the old
face of him puckered with mirth, and said softly to Ralph: "Did I not
say thou wert lucky? here is the first fruits thereof. Ride over the
ridge, lord, at once, and ye shall have what there is of them as safe as
a sheep in a penfold."

So Ralph drew sword and beckoned his men up, and they all handled their
weapons and rode over the brow, and tarried not one moment there, not
even to cry their cries; for down in the bottom were a sort of men, two
score and six (as they counted them afterward) sitting or lying about a
cooking fire, or loitering here and there, with their horses standing
behind them, and they mostly unhelmed. The Champions knew them at once
for men of their old foes, and there was scarce time for a word ere the
full half of them had passed by the sword of the Dry Tree; then Ralph
cried out to spare the rest, unless they offered to run; so the foemen
cast down their weapons and stood still, and were presently brought
before Ralph, who sat on the grass amidst of the ring of the Champions. 
He looked on them a while and remembered the favour of those whom he had
seen erewhile in the Burg; but ere he could speak Giles said softly in
his ear: "These be of the Burg, forsooth, as ye may see by their dogs'
faces; but they be not clad nor armed as those whom we have met
heretofore. Ask them whence they be, lord."

Ralph spake and said:  "Whence and whither are ye, ye manslayers?" But
no man of them answered.  Then said Ralph:  "Pass these murderers by the
edge of the sword, Stephen; unless some one of them will save his life
and the life of his fellows by speaking."

As he spake, one of the youngest of the men hung down his head a little,
and then raised it up:  "Wilt thou spare our lives if I speak?" "Yea,"
said Ralph.  "Wilt thou swear it by the edge of the blade?" said the
man.  Ralph drew forth his sword and said:  "Lo then! I swear it."  The
man nodded his head, and said:  "Few words are best; and whereas I wot
not if my words will avail thee aught, and since they will save our
lives, I will tell thee truly. We are men of the Burg whom these
green-coated thieves drave out of the Burg on an unlucky day.  Well,
some of us, of whom I was one, fetched a compass and crossed the water
that runneth through Upmeads by the Red Bridge, and so gat us into the
Wood Debateable through the Uplands.  There we struck a bargain with the
main band of strong-thieves of the wood, that we and they together would
get us a new home in Upmeads, which is a fat and pleasant land. So we
got us ready; but the Woodmen told us that the Upmeads carles, though
they be not many, are strong and dauntless, and since we now had
pleasant life before us, with good thralls to work for us, and with
plenty of fair women for our bed-mates, we deemed it best to have the
most numbers we might, so that we might over-whelm the said carles at
one blow, and get as few of ourselves slain as might be. Now we knew
that another band of us had entered the lands of the Abbot of Higham,
and had taken hold of some of his castles; wherefore the captains
considered and thought, and sent us to give bidding to our folk south
here to march at once toward us in Upmeads, that our bands might meet
there, and scatter all before us. There is our story, lord."

Ralph knitted his brow, and said:  "Tell me (and thy life lieth on thy
giving true answers), do thy folk in these strongholds know of your
purpose of falling upon Upmeads?" "Nay," said the Burger.  Said Ralph: 
"And will they know otherwise if ye do them not to wit?"  "Nay," again
said the man. Said Ralph:  "Are thy folk already in Upmeads?"  "Nay,"
said the captive, "but by this time they will be on the road thither."
"How many all told?" said Ralph The man reddened and stammered: "A
thousand—two—two thousand—A thousand, lord," said he. "Get thy sword
ready, Stephen," said Ralph.  "How many, on thy life, Burger?"  "Two
thousand, lord," said the man. "And how many do ye look to have from
Higham-land?" Said the Burger, "Somewhat more than a thousand."  Withal
he looked uneasily at his fellows, some of whom were scowling on him
felly. "Tell me now," said Ralph, "where be the other bands of the
Burgers?"

Ere the captive could speak, he who stood next him snatched an
unsheathed knife from the girdle of one of the Dry Tree, and quick as
lightning thrust it into his fellow's belly, so that he fell dead at
once amongst them. Then Stephen, who had his sword naked in his hand,
straightway hewed down the slayer, and swords came out of the scabbards
everywhere; and it went but a little but that all the Burgers were slain
at once. But Ralph cried out:  "Put up your swords, Champions!  Stephen
slew yonder man for slaying his fellow, who was under my ward, and that
was but his due. But I have given life to these others, and so it must
be held to. Tie their hands behind them and let us on to Bear Castle. 
For this tide brooks no delay."

So they gat to horse, and the footmen from Garton mounted the horses of
the slain Burgers, and had the charge of guarding the twenty that were
left. So they rode off all of them toward Bear Castle, and shortly to
say it, came within sight of its rampart two hours before noon.  Sooner
had they came thither; but divers times they caught up with small
companies of weaponed men, whose heads were turned the same way; and
Giles told Ralph each time that they were of the Shepherd-folk going to
the mote. But now when they were come so nigh to the castle they saw a
very stream of men setting that way, and winding up the hill to the
rampart. And Giles said:  "It is not to be doubted but that Martha hath
sent round the war-brand, and thou wilt presently have an host that will
meet thy foemen without delay; and what there lacks in number shall be
made good by thy luck, which once again was shown by our falling in with
that company e'en now."

"Yea truly," said Ralph, "but wilt thou now tell me how I shall guide
myself amongst thy folk, and if they will grant me the aid I ask?"

"Look, look," said Giles, "already some one hath made clear thine asking
to our folk; and hearken! up there they are naming the ancient Father of
our Race, without whom we may do nought, even with the blessed saints to
aid. There then is thine answer, lord."

Indeed as he spoke came down on the wind the voice of a chant, sung by
many folk, the words whereof he well remembered: SMITE ASIDE AXE, O
BEAR-FATHER. And therewith rose up into the air a column of smoke
intermingled with fire from each of the four corners of that stronghold
of the Ancient Folk. Ralph rejoiced when he saw it, and the heart rose
within him and fluttered in his bosom, and Ursula, who rode close behind
him, looked up into his face well pleased and happy.

Thus rode they up the bent and over the turf bridge into the plain of
the garth, and whatso of people were there flocked about to behold the
new-come warriors; sooth to say, there were but some two hundreds, who
looked but few indeed in the great square place, but more were streaming
in every minute. Giles led him and his men into the north-east corner of
the castle, and there they gat off their horses and lay down on the
grass awaiting what should betide.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24: The Folkmote of the Shepherds](wwe112)

</div>
