<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope22)  [Next](gope24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f21"></span>

KABOK THE PROPHET

When Alhireth-Hotep was among the Things that Were, and still men sought
to know, they said unto Kabok: "Be thou as wise as was Alhireth-Hotep."

And Kabok grew wise in his own sight and in the sight of men.

And Kabok said: "Mung maketh his signs against men or withholdeth it by
the advice of Kabok."

And he said unto one: "Thou hast sinned against Kabok, therefore will
Mung make the sign of Mung against thee." And to another: "Thou has
brought Kabok gifts, therefore shall Mung forbear to make against thee
the sign of Mung."

One night as Kabok fattened upon the gifts that men had brought him he
heard the tread of Mung treading in the garden of Kabok about his house
at night.

And because the night was very still it seemed most evil to Kabok that
Mung should be treading in his garden, without the advice of Kabok,
about his house at night.

And Kabok, who knew All Things, grew afraid, for the treading was very
loud and the night still, and he knew not what lay behind the back of
Mung, which none had ever seen.

But when the morning grew to brightness, and there was light upon the
Worlds, and Mung trod no longer in the garden, Kabok forgot his fears,
and said: "Perhaps it was but a herd of cattle that stampeded in the
garden of Kabok."

And Kabok went about his business, which was that of knowing All Things,
and telling All Things unto men, and making light of Mung.

But that night Mung trod again in the garden of Kabok, about his house
at night, and stood before the window of the house like a shadow
standing erect, so that Kabok knew indeed that it was Mung.

And a great fear fell upon the throat of Kabok, so that his speech was
hoarse; and he cried out: "Thou art Mung!"

And Mung slightly inclined his head, and went on to tread in the garden
of Kabok, about his house at night.

And Kabok lay and listened with horror at his heart.

But when the second morning grew to brightness, and there was light upon
the Worlds, Mung went from treading in the garden of Kabok; and for a
little while Kabok hoped, but looked with great dread for the coming of
the third night.

And when the third night was come, and the bat had gone to his home, and
the wind had sank, the night was very still.

And Kabok lay and listened, to whom the wings of the night flew very
slow.

But, ere night met the morning upon the highway between Pegana and the
Worlds, there came the tread of Mung in the garden of Kabok towards
Kabok's door.

And Kabok fled out of his house as flees a hunted beast and flung
himself before Mung.

And Mung made the sign of Mung, pointing towards THE END.

And the fears of Kabok had rest from troubling Kabok any more, for they
and he were among accomplished things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Calamity that Befel Yun-Ilara by the Sea, and of the
Building of the Tower of the Ending of Days](gope24)

</div>
