<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope23)  [Next](gope25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f22"></span>

OF THE CALAMITY THAT BEFEL YUN-ILARA BY THE SEA, AND OF THE BUILDING OF
THE TOWER OF THE ENDING OF DAYS

When Kabok and his fears had rest the people sought a prophet who should
have no fear of Mung, whose hand was against the prophets.

And at last they found Yun-Ilara, who tended sheep and had no fear of
Mung, and the people brought him to the town that he might be their
prophet.

And Yun-Ilara builded a tower towards the sea that looked upon the
setting of the Sun. And he called it the Tower of the Ending of Days.

And about the ending of the day would Yun-Ilara go up to his tower's top
and look towards the setting of the Sun to cry his curses against Mung,
crying: "O Mung! whose hand is against the Sun, whom men abhor but
worship because they fear thee, here stands and speaks a man who fears
thee not. Assassin lord of murder and dark things, abhorrent, merciless,
make thou the sign of Mung against me when thou wilt, but until silence
settles upon my lips, because of the sign of Mung, I will curse Mung to
his face." And the people in the street below would gaze up with wonder
towards Yun-Ilara, who had no fear of Mung, and brought him gifts; only
in their homes after the falling of the night would they pray again with
reverence to Mung. But Mung said: "Shall a man curse a god?"

And still Mung came not nigh to Yun-Ilara as he cried his curses against
Mung from his tower towards the sea.

And Sish throughout the Worlds hurled Time away, and slew the Hours that
had served him well, and called up more out of the timeless waste that
lieth beyond the Worlds, and drave them forth to assail all things. And
Sish cast a whiteness over the hairs of Yun-Ilara, and ivy about his
tower, and weariness over his limbs, for Mung passed by him still.

And when Sish became a god less durable to Yun-Ilara than ever Mung hath
been he ceased at last to cry from his tower's top his curses against
Mung whenever the sun went down, till there came the day when weariness
of the gift of Kib fell heavily upon Yun-Ilara.

Then from the tower of the Ending of Days did Yun-Ilara cry out thus to
Mung, crying: "O Mung! O loveliest of the gods! O Mung, most dearly to
be desired! thy gift of Death is the heritage of Man, with ease and rest
and silence and returning to the Earth. Kib giveth but toil and trouble;
and Sish, he sendeth regrets with each of his hours wherewith he assails
the World. Yoharneth-Lahai cometh nigh no more. I can no longer be glad
with Limpang-Tung. When the other gods forsake him a man hath only
Mung."

But Mung said: "Shall a man curse a god?"

And every day and all night long did Yun-Ilara cry aloud: "Ah, now for
the hour of the mourning of many, and the pleasant garlands of flowers
and the tears, and the moist, dark earth. Ah, for repose down underneath
the grass, where the firm feet of the trees grip hold upon the world,
where never shall come the wind that now blows through my bones, and the
rain shall come warm and trickling, not driven by storm, where is the
easeful falling asunder of bone from bone in the dark." Thus prayed
Yun-Ilara, who had cursed in his folly and youth, while never heeded
Mung.

Still from a heap of bones that are Yun-Ilara still, lying about the
ruined base of the tower that once he builded, goes up a shrill voice
with the wind crying out for the mercy of Mung, if any such there be.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of How the Gods Whelmed Sidith](gope25)

</div>
