<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope31)  [Next](gope33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f30"></span>

THE RIVER

There arises a river in Pegana that is neither a river of water nor yet
a river of fire, and it flows through the skies and the Worlds to the
Rim of the Worlds, a river of silence. Through all the Worlds are
sounds, the noises of moving, and the echoes of voices and song; but
upon the River is no sound ever heard, for there all echoes die.

The River arises out of the drumming of Skarl, and flows for ever
between banks of thunder, until it comes to the waste beyond the Worlds,
behind the farthest star, down to the Sea of Silence.

I lay in the desert beyond all cities and sounds, and above me flowed
the River of Silence through the sky; and on the desert's edge night
fought against the Sun, and suddenly conquered.

Then on the River I saw the dream-built ship of the god Yoharneth-Lahai,
whose great prow lifted grey into the air above the River of Silence.

Her timbers were olden dreams dreamed long ago, and poets' fancies made
her tall, straight masts, and her rigging was wrought out of the
people's hopes.

Upon her deck were rowers with dream-made oars, and the rowers were the
people of men's fancies, and princes of old story and people who had
died, and people who had never been.

These swung forward and swung back to row Yoharneth-Lahai through the
Worlds with never a sound of rowing. For ever on every wind float up to
Pegana the hopes and the fancies of the people which have no home in the
Worlds, and there Yoharneth-Lahai weaves them into dreams, to take them
to the people again.

And every night in his dream-built ship Yoharneth-Lahai setteth forth,
with all his dreams on board, to take again their old hopes back to the
people and all forgotten fancies.

But ere the day comes back to her own again, and all the conquering
armies of the dawn hurl their red lances in the face of the night,
Yoharneth-Lahai leaves the sleeping Worlds, and rows back up the River
of Silence, that flows from Pegana into the Sea of Silence that lies
beyond the Worlds.

And the name of the River is Imrana the River of Silence. All they that
be weary of the sound of cities and very tired of clamour creep down in
the night-time to Yoharneth-Lahai's ship, and going aboard it, among the
dreams and the fancies of old times, lie down upon the deck, and pass
from sleeping to the River, while Mung, behind them, makes the sign of
Mung because they would have it so. And, lying there upon the deck among
their own remembered fancies, and songs that were never sung, and they
drift up Imrana ere the dawn, where the sound of the cities comes not,
nor the voice of the thunder is heard, nor the midnight howl of Pain as
he gnaws at the bodies of men, and far away and forgotten bleat the
small sorrows that trouble all the Worlds.

But where the River flows through Pegana's gates, between the great twin
constellations Yum and Gothum, where Yum stands sentinel upon the left
and Gothum upon the right, there sits Sirami, the lord of All
Forgetting. And, when the ship draws near, Sirami looketh with his
sapphire eyes into the faces and beyond them of those that were weary of
cities, and as he gazes, as one that looketh before him remembering
naught, he gently waves his hands. And amid the waving of Sirami's hands
there fall from all that behold him all their memories, save certain
things that may not be forgotten even beyond the Worlds.

It hath been said that when Skarl ceases to drum, and MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI
awakes, and the gods of Pegana know that it is THE END, that then the
gods will enter galleons of gold, and with dream-born rowers glide down
Imrana (who knows whither or why?) till they come where the River enters
the Silent Sea, and shall there be gods of nothing, where nothing is,
and never a sound shall come. And far away upon the River's banks shall
bay their old hound Time, that shall seek to rend his masters; while
MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI shall think some other plan concerning gods and worlds.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bird of Doom and the End](gope33)

</div>
