<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope18)  [Next](gope20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f17"></span>

OF THE THING THAT IS NEITHER GOD NOR BEAST

Seeing that wisdom is not in cities nor happiness in wisdom, and because
Yadin the prophet was doomed by the gods ere he was born to go in search
of wisdom, he followed the caravans to Bodrahan. There in the evening,
where the camels rest, when the wind of the day ebbs out into the desert
sighing amid the palms its last farewells and leaving the caravans
still, he sent his prayer with the wind to drift into the desert calling
to Hoodrazai.

And down the wind his prayer went calling: "Why do the gods endure, and
play their game with men? Why doth not Skarl forsake his drumming, and
MANA cease to rest?" and the echo of seven deserts answered: "Who knows?
Who knows?"

But out in the waste, beyond the seven deserts where Ranorada looms
enormous in the dusk, at evening his prayer was heard; and from the rim
of the waste whither had gone his prayer, came three flamingoes flying,
and their voices said: "Going South, Going South" at every stroke of
their wings.

But as they passed by the prophet they seemed so cool and free and the
desert so blinding and hot that he stretched up his arms towards them.
Then it seemed happy to fly and pleasant to follow behind great white
wings, and he was with the three flamingoes up in the cool above the
desert, and their voices cried before him: "Going South, Going South,"
and the desert below him mumbled: "Who knows? Who knows?"

Sometimes the earth stretched up towards them with peaks of mountains,
sometimes it fell away in steep ravines, blue rivers sang to them as
they passed above them, or very faintly came the song of breezes in lone
orchards, and far away the sea sang mighty dirges of old forsaken isles.
But it seemed that in all the world there was nothing only to be going
South.

It seemed that somewhere the South was calling to her own, and that they
were going South.

But when the prophet saw that they had passed above the edge of Earth,
and that far away to the North of them lay the Moon, he perceived that
he was following no mortal birds but some strange messengers of
Hoodrazai whose nest had lain in one of Pegana's vales below the
mountains whereon sit the gods.

Still they went South, passing by all the Worlds and leaving them to the
North, till only Araxes, Zadres, and Hyraglion lay still to the South of
them, where great Ingazi seemed only a point of light, and Yo and Mindo
could be seen no more.

Still they went South till they passed below the South and came to the
Rim of the Worlds.

There there is neither South nor East nor West, but only North and
Beyond; there is only North of it where lie the Worlds, and Beyond it
where lies the Silence, and the Rim is a mass of rocks that were never
used by the gods when They made the Worlds, and on it sat Trogool.
Trogool is the Thing that is neither god nor beast, who neither howls
nor breathes, only *It* turns over the leaves of a great book, black and
white, black and white for ever until THE END.

And all that is to be is written in the book is also all that was.

When *It* turneth a black page it is night, and when *It* turneth a
white page it is day.

Because it is written that there are gods—there are the gods.

Also there is writing about thee and me until the page where our names
no more are written.

Then as the prophet watched *It*, Trogool turned a page—a black one, and
night was over, and day shone on the Worlds.

Trogool is the Thing that men in many countries have called by many
names, *It* is the Thing that sits behind the gods, whose book is the
Scheme of Things.

But when Yadin saw that old remembered days were hidden away with the
part that *It* had turned, and knew that upon one whose name is writ no
more the last page had turned for ever a thousand pages back. Then did
he utter his prayer in the fact of Trogool who only turns the pages and
never answers prayer. He prayed in the face of Trogool: "Only turn back
thy pages to the name of one which is writ no more, and far away upon a
place named Earth shall rise the prayers of a little people that acclaim
the name of Trogool, for there is indeed far off a place called Earth
where men shall pray to Trogool."

Then spake Trogool who turns the pages and never answers prayer, and his
voice was like the murmurs of the waste at night when echoes have been
lost: "Though the whirlwind of the South should tug with his claws at a
page that hath been turned yet shall he not be able to ever turn it
back."

Then because of words in the book that said that it should be so, Yadin
found himself lying in the desert where one gave him water, and
afterwards carried him on a camel into Bodrahan.

There some said that he had but dreamed when thirst seized him while he
wandered among the rocks in the desert. But certain aged men of Bodrahan
say that indeed there sitteth somewhere a Thing that is called Trogool,
that is neither god nor beast, that turneth the leaves of a book, black
and white, black and white, until he come to the words: *Mai Doon
Izahn*, which means The End For Ever, and book and gods and worlds shall
be no more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yonath the Prophet](gope20)

</div>
