<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gope15)  [Next](gope17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f14"></span>

THE REVOLT OF THE HOME GODS

There be three broad rivers of the plain, born before memory or fable,
whose mothers are three grey peaks and whose father was the storm. There
names be Eimës, Zänës, and Segástrion.

And Eimës is the joy of lowing herds; and Zänës hath bowed his neck to
the yoke of man, and carries the timber from the forest far up below the
mountain; and Segástrion sings old songs to shepherd boys, singing of
his childhood in a lone ravine and of how he once sprang down the
mountain sides and far away into the plain to see the world, and of how
one day at last he will find the sea. These be the rivers of the plain,
wherein the plain rejoices. But old men tell, whose fathers heard it
from the ancients, how once the lords of the three rivers of the plain
rebelled against the law of the Worlds, and passed beyond their
boundaries, and joined together and whelmed cities and slew men, saying:
"We now play the game of the gods and slay men for our pleasure, and we
be greater than the gods of Pegana."

And all the plain was flooded to the hills.

And Eimës, Zänës, and Segástrion sat upon the mountains, and spread
their hands over their rivers that rebelled by their command.

But the prayer of men going upward found Pegana, and cried in the ear of
the gods: "There be three home gods who slay us for their pleasure, and
say that they be mightier than Pegana's gods, and play Their game with
men."

Then were all the gods of Pegana very wroth; but They could not whelm
the lords of the three rivers, because being home gods, though small,
they were immortal.

And still the home gods spread their hands across their rivers, with
their fingers wide apart, and the waters rose and rose, and the voice of
their torrent grew louder, crying: "Are we not Eimës, Zänës, and
Segástrion?"

Then Mung went down into a waste of Afrik, and came upon the drought
Umbool as he sat in the desert upon iron rocks, clawing with miserly
grasp at the bones of men and breathing hot.

And Mung stood before him as his dry sides heaved, and ever as they sank
his hot breath blasted dry sticks and bones.

Then Mung said: "Friend of Mung! Go, thou and grin before the faces of
Eimës, Zänës, and Segástrion till they see whether it be wise to rebel
against the gods of Pegana."

And Umbool answered: "I am the beast of Mung."

And Umbool came and crouched upon a hill upon the other side of the
waters and grinned across them at the rebellious home gods.

And whenever Eimës, Zänës, and Segástrion stretched out their hands over
their rivers they saw before their faces the grinning of Umbool; and
because the grinning was like death in a hot and hideous land therefore
they turned away and spread their hands no more over their rivers, and
the waters sank and sank.

But when Umbool had grinned for thirty days the waters fell back into
the river beds and the lords of the rivers slunk away back again to
their homes: still Umbool sat and grinned.

Then Eimës sought to hide himself in a great pool beneath a rock, and
Zänës crept into the middle of a wood, and Segástrion lay and panted on
the sand—still Umbool sat and grinned.

And Eimës grew lean, and was forgotten, so that the men of the plain
would say: "Here once was Eimës"; and Zänës scarce had strength to lead
his river to the sea; and as Segástrion lay and panted a man stepped
over his stream, and Segástrion said: "It is the foot of a man that has
passed across my neck, and I have sought to be greater than the gods of
Pegana."

Then said the gods of Pegana: "It is enough. We are the gods of Pegana,
and none are equal."

Then Mung sent Umbool back to his waste in Afrik to breathe again upon
the rocks, and parch the desert, and to sear the memory of Afrik into
the brains of all who ever bring their bones away.

And Eimës, Zänës, and Segástrion sang again, and walked once more in
their accustomed haunts, and played the game of Life and Death with
fishes and frogs, but never essayed to play it any more with men, as do
the gods of Pegana.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Dorozhand](gope17.md)

</div>
