<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gope27)  [Next](gope29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f26"></span>

PEGANA

The prophet of the gods cried out to the gods: "O! All the gods save
One" for none may pray to MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, "where shall the life of a
man abide when Mung hath made against his body the sign of Mung?—for the
people with whom ye play have sought to know."

But the gods answered, speaking through the mist:

"Though thou shouldst tell thy secrets to the beasts, even that the
beasts should understand, yet will not the gods divulge the secret of
the gods to thee, that gods and beasts and men shall be all the same,
all knowing the same things."

That night Yoharneth-Lahai same to Aradec, and said unto Imbaun:
"Wherefore wouldst thou know the secret of the gods that not the gods
may tell thee?

"When the wind blows not, where, then, is the wind?

"Or when thou art not living, where art thou?

"What should the wind care for the hours of calm or thou for death?

"Thy life is long, Eternity is short.

"So short that, shouldst thou die and Eternity should pass, and after
the passing of Eternity thou shouldst live again, thou wouldst say: 'I
closed mine eyes but for an instant.'

"There is an eternity behind thee as well as one before. Hast thou
bewailed the aeons that passed without thee, who art so much afraid of
the aeons that shall pass?"

Then said the prophet: "How shall I tell the people that the gods have
not spoken and their prophet doth not know? For then should I be prophet
no longer, and another would take the people's gifts instead of me."

Then said Imbaun to the people: "The gods have spoken, saying: 'O
Imbaun, Our prophet, it is as the people believe whose wisdom hath
discovered the secret of the gods, and the people when they die shall
come to Pegana, and there live with the gods, and there have pleasure
without toil. And Pegana is a place all white with the peaks of
mountains, on each of them a god, and the people shall lie upon the
slopes of the mountains each under the god that he hath worshipped most
when his lot was in the Worlds. And there shall music beyond thy
dreaming come drifting through the scent of all the orchards in the
Worlds, with somewhere someone singing an old song that shall be as a
half-remembered thing. And there shall be gardens that have always
sunlight, and streams that are lost in no sea beneath skies for ever
blue. And there shall be no rain nor no regrets. Only the roses that in
highest Pegana have achieved their prime shall shed their petals in
showers at thy feet, and only far away on the forgotten earth shall
voices drift up to thee that cheered thee in thy childhood about the
gardens of thy youth. And if thou sighest for any memory of earth
because thou hearest unforgotten voices, then will the gods send
messengers on wings to soothe thee in Pegana, saying to them: "There one
sigheth who hath remembered Earth." And they shall make Pegana more
seductive for thee still, and they shall take thee by the hand and
whisper in thine ear till the old voices are forgot.

"'And besides the flowers of Pegana there shall have climbed by then
until it hath reached to Pegana the rose that clambered about the house
where thou wast born. Thither shall also come the wandering echoes of
all such music as charmed thee long ago.

"'Moreover, as thou sittest on the orchard lawns that clothe Pegana's
mountains, and as thou hearkenest to melody that sways the souls of the
gods, there shall stretch away far down beneath thee the great unhappy
Earth, till gazing from rapture upon sorrows thou shalt be glad that
thou wert dead.

"'And from the three great mountains that stand aloof and over all the
others—Grimbol, Zeebol, and Trehagobol—shall blow the wind of the
morning and the wind of all the day, borne upon the wings of all the
butterflies that have died upon the Worlds, to cool the gods and Pegana.

"'Far through Pegana a silvery fountain, lured upward by the gods from
the Central Sea, shall fling its waters aloft, and over the highest of
Pegana's peaks, above Trehagobol, shall burst into gleaming mists, to
cover Highest Pegana, and make a curtain about the resting-place of
MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.

"'Alone, still and remote below the base of one of the inner mountains,
lieth a great blue pool.

"'Whoever looketh down into its waters may behold all his life that was
upon the Worlds and all the deeds that he hath done.

"'None walk by the pool and none regard its depths, for all in Pegana
have suffered and all have sinned some sin, and it lieth in the pool.

"'And there is no darkness in Pegana, for when night hath conquered the
sun and stilled the Worlds and turned the white peaks of Pegana into
grey then shine the blue eyes of the gods like sunlight on the sea,
where each god sits upon his mountain.

"'And at the Last, upon some afternoon, perhaps in summer, shall the
gods say, speaking to the gods: "What is the likeness of
MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI and what THE END?"

"'And then shall MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI draw back with his hand the mists that
cover his resting, saying: "This is the Face of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI and
this THE END."'"

Then said the people to the prophet: "Shall not black hills draw round
in some forsaken land, to make a vale-wide cauldron wherein the molten
rock shall seethe and roar, and where the crags of mountains shall be
hurled upward to the surface and bubble and go down again, that there
our enemies may boil for ever?"  And the prophet answered: "It is writ
large about the bases of Pegana's mountains, upon which sit the gods:
'Thine Enemies Are Forgiven."'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sayings of Imbaun](gope29.md)

</div>
