<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope04)  [Next](gope06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f03"></span>

OF THE MAKING OF THE WORLDS

When MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI had made the gods there were only the gods, and
They sat in the middle of Time, for there was as much Time before them
as behind them, which having no end had neither a beginning.

And Pegana was without heat or light or sound, save for the drumming of
Skarl; moreover Pegana was The Middle of All, for there was below Pegana
what there was above it, and there lay before it that which lay beyond.

Then said the gods, making the signs of the gods and speaking with Their
hands lest the silence of Pegana should blush; then said the gods to one
another, speaking with Their hands; "Let Us make worlds to amuse
Ourselves while MANA rests. Let Us make worlds and Life and Death, and
colours in the sky; only let Us not break the silence upon Pegana."

Then raising Their hands, each god according to his sign, They made the
worlds and the suns, and put a light in the houses of the sky.

Then said the gods: "Let Us make one to seek, to seek and never to find
out concerning the wherefore of the making of the gods."

And They made by the lifting of Their hands, each god according to his
sign, the Bright One with the flaring tail to seek from the end of the
Worlds to the end of them again, to return again after a hundred years.

Man, when thou seest the comet, know that another seeketh besides thee
nor ever findeth out.

Then said the gods, still speaking with Their hands: "Let there be now a
Watcher to regard."

And They made the Moon, with his face wrinkled with many mountains and
worn with a thousand valleys, to regard with pale eyes the games of the
small gods, and to watch throughout the resting time of
MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI; to watch, to regard all things, and be silent.

Then said the gods: "Let Us make one to rest. One not to move among the
moving. One not to seek like the comet, nor to go round like the worlds;
to rest while MANA rests."

And They made the Star of the Abiding and set it in the North.

Man, when thou seest the Star of the Abiding to the North, know that one
resteth as doth MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, and know that somewhere among the
Worlds is rest.

Lastly the gods said: "We have made worlds and suns, and one to seek and
another to regard, let Us now make one to wonder."

And They made Earth to wonder, each god by the uplifting of his hand
according to his sign.

And Earth was.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Game of the Gods](gope06)

</div>
