<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gope28)  [Next](gope30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3SXVG/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gods of Pegana*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1905\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f27"></span>

THE SAYINGS OF IMBAUN

The Prophet of the gods said: "Yonder beside the road there sitteth a
false prophet; and to all who seek to know the hidden days he saith:
'Upon the morrow the King shall speak to thee as his chariot goeth by.'"

Moreover, all the people bring him gifts, and the false prophet hath
more to listen to his words than hath the Prophet of the gods.

Then said Imbaun: "What knoweth the Prophet of the gods? I know only
that I and men know naught concerning the gods or aught concerning men.
Shall I, who am their prophet, tell the people this?

"For wherefore have the people chosen prophets but that they should
speak the hopes of the people, and tell the people that their hopes be
true?"

The false prophet saith: "Upon the morrow the king shall speak to thee."

Shall not I say: "Upon The Morrow the gods shall speak with thee as thou
restest upon Pegana?"

So shall the people be happy, and know that their hopes be true who have
believed the words that they have chosen a prophet to say.

But what shall know the Prophet of the gods, to whom none may come to
say: "Thy hopes are true," for whom none may make strange signs before
his eyes to quench his fear of death, for whom alone the chaunt of his
priests availeth naught?

The Prophet of the gods hath sold his happiness for wisdom, and hath
given his hopes for the people.

Said also Imbaun: "When thou art angry at night observe how calm be the
stars; and shall small ones rail when there is such a calm among the
great ones? Or when thou art angry by day regard the distant hills, and
see the calm that doth adorn their faces. Shalt thou be angry while they
stand so serene?

"Be not angry with men, for they are driven as thou art by Dorozhand. Do
bullocks goad one another on whom the same yoke rests?

"And be not angry with Dorozhand, for then thou beatest thy bare fingers
against iron cliffs.

"All that is is so because it was to be. Rail not, therefore, against
what is, for it was all to be."

And Imbaun said: "The Sun ariseth and maketh a glory about all the
things that he seeth, and drop by drop he turneth the common dew to
every kind of gem. And he maketh a splendour in the hills.

"And also man is born. And there rests a glory about the gardens of his
youth. Both travel afar to do what Dorozhand would have them do.

"Soon now the sun will set, and very softly come twinkling in the
stillness all the stars.

"Also man dieth. And quietly about his grave will all the mourners weep.

"Will not his life arise again somewhere in all the worlds? Shall he not
again behold the gardens of his youth? Or does he set to end?"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of How Imbaun Spake of Death to the King](gope30)

</div>
