[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft04)  [Next](tft06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

#### TWO

## The Tiger and the Frog

<span class="small">The tall strong pine is a great help, for with its
support the weak vine may climb as high.  
                        *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

ONCE upon a time, in the days when the world was young and all animals
understood each other's languages, an old, old tiger named Tsuden went
out hunting for some food. As he was creeping quietly along the banks of
a stream a frog saw him and was badly scared. He thought, "This tiger is
coming to eat me up." He climbed up on a little bunch of sod and when
the tiger came near, called out, "Hello, where are you going?"

The tiger answered, "I am going up into the forest to hunt something to
eat. I haven't had any food for two or three days and I am very weak and
hungry. I guess I'll eat you up. You're awfully small, but I can't find
anything else. Who are you, anyway?"

The frog replied, swelling up as big as he could, "I am the king of the
frogs. I can jump any distance and can do anything. Here's a river,
let's see who can jump across."

The tiger answered, "All right," and as he crouched ready to jump, the
frog slipped up and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

got hold of the end of his tail with his mouth, and when the tiger
jumped he was thrown away up the bank across the river. After Tsuden got
across he turned around and looked and looked into the river for the
frog. But as the tiger turned, the frog let loose of his tail and said,
"What are you looking for, old tiger, down there?"

The tiger whirled quickly, very much surprised to see the frog away up
the bank behind him.

Said the frog, "Now I beat you in that test, let's try another. Suppose
we both vomit." The tiger being empty could only throw up a little
water, but the frog spit up some tiger hair. The tiger much astonished
asked, "How do you happen to be able to do that?" The frog replied, "Oh,
yesterday I killed a tiger and ate him, and these are just a few of the
hairs that aren't yet digested."

The tiger began to think to himself, "He must be very strong. Yesterday
he killed and ate a tiger, and now he has jumped farther than I did over
the river. Guess I'd better slip away before he eats me." Then he sidled
away a little piece, quickly turned and began to run away as fast as he
could, up the mountain.

He met a fox coming down who asked, "What's the matter, why are you
running away so fast?"

"Say," the old tiger said, "I met the king of all the frogs, who is very
strong. Why, he has been eating tigers and he jumped across the river
and landed farther up the bank than I did."

The fox laughed at him and said, "What, are you running away from that
little frog? He is

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

 

<span id="img_02300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FROG CLIMBED
UP ON A LITTLE BUNCH OF SOD AND WHEN THE TIGER CAME NEAR, CALLED OUT:
''HELLO, WHERE ARE YOU GOING?''](tn/02300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02300.jpg)  
THE FROG CLIMBED UP ON A LITTLE BUNCH OF SOD AND WHEN THE TIGER CAME
NEAR, CALLED OUT: ''HELLO, WHERE ARE YOU GOING?''  
</span>

 

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

nothing at all. I am only a little fox, but I could put my foot on him
and kill him."

The tiger answered, "I know what this frog can do, but if you think you
can kill him, I'll go back with you. I am afraid you will get frightened
and run away, however, so we must tie our tails together."

So they tied their tails fast in a lot of knots and went down to see the
frog, who still sat on his piece of sod, looking as important as he
could. He saw them coming and called out to the fox, "You're a great
fox. You haven't paid your toll to the king to-day nor brought any meat
either. Is that a dog you've got tied to your tail and are you bringing
him for my dinner?"

Then the tiger was frightened, for he thought the fox was taking him to
the king to be eaten. So he turned and ran and ran as fast as he could
go, dragging the poor fox with him, and if they are not dead, they are
still running to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Three: The Cony Who Got into Bad Company](tft06)
