[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft07)  [Next](tft09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

#### FIVE

## Story of the Foolish Head-Man

<span class="small">Do not brag of your family--without fame they may
be--the strain on the string of an arrow soon makes it useless. The
horse traveling fast comes to the end of his strength very
quickly.--*Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

ONCE upon a time, away among the mountains, were located two little
villages. One was called Jangdo and the other Jangmeh. One head-man
ruled over these two villages. He was a very wise man, but had an only
son who was foolish, with a wife that was very wise. After a while the
old man died, and his place had to be filled by the son, who was an
idiot. A river ran alongside of the village and a takin died and fell
into the water. The upper village claimed it and the lower village
claimed it, so both villages came with the request that it belonged to
them.

His wife said to him, "Now you do not know to which place this animal
belongs, but you must go and decide about it. Decide in this way: say
that the upper half above the ribs belongs to the upper village and the
lower part belongs to the lower village and the middle part is yours
because you are a middle man." He did as his wife said, and when the
people heard this decision they

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

thought, "Why, we have always thought this man to be foolish, but he is
a very wise man," and his fame spread abroad.

After two or three months had passed, a leopard died and floated down
the river, stopping in the same place as the takin, and the villagers
quarreled again. Only this time they did not want it, so the upper
village said, It is yours, and the lower village said, It is yours. They
finally took it to the head-man, who thought to himself, "I will not ask
my wife this time, I will do it myself. I know how it ought to be done
and I will do it just as I did the takin." So he divided it just as he
had done before. But one village said, "Well, we don't want this part,"
and the other village said, "We don't want ours either." So they gave it
all to the head-man, who put it all on a horse and took it home. His
reputation for wisdom was done and the people said he had turned again
into a foolish man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Six: How the Fox Fell a Victim to His Own Deceit](tft09)
