[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft36)  [Next](tft38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

#### THIRTY-FOUR

## The Pewter Vase

<span class="small">If good words come--listen. If good food--eat.  
                                *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

ONCE upon a time there were two men who were friends. They went out one
day for a fine time together, and as they were walking around on the top
of the mountain, they found a golden vase. One of them began to scheme
in his heart how he could get it away from the other; but the other
chap, who was a good fellow, proposed (as it did not cost anything) that
they take and divide it and use the money for charitable purposes,
giving it to the poor and to the lamas.

The first one said he didn't believe it was a real vase, that it was
only an imaginary one, and that the gods had made it appear real to
them. It was only an illusion. If they attempted to do anything with it,
it would vanish entirely. They discussed the matter for a while and
finally went down to the home of the man who desired it all for himself.

After a while he said to his friend, "You leave this vase here with me
for a while; you want to go home now, and when you return we will divide
it, each take his half and use it as he desires."

So the man went on to his home, remaining

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

there for three or four days. When he came back he met the man who had
taken care of the vase and he was crying and beating his breast and
tearing his hair. He exclaimed, "What is the matter with you and why are
you carrying on in this manner?"

He replied, "Oh, I dare not tell you, it is too dreadful." But his
friend said, "Tell me what it is, perhaps I can help you." For a long
time he refused, but was finally persuaded and told him the trouble.
"You know that golden vase we found, well, when I cut it it was only
pewter." His friend replied, "That does not matter, we did not pay
anything for it, we only found it, so we have lost nothing." Then the
man stopped crying and felt wonderfully well satisfied with himself,
thinking his friend had given up very easily and now he could keep the
vase all for himself.

So the good man started home, but as he was leaving he said, "Your place
here on the mountain is not a very pleasant spot, here it is cold and
damp, while my place is fresh and green and warm, with plenty of grass
for the cattle and fruit in abundance. You have two sons, let them take
your cattle, go home with me and stay for a while." The man agreed and
said it would be a nice trip for the boys, so they were allowed to
accompany the good man. On the road as they were going home they saw two
monkeys and caught them, taking them along. The man began to teach the
monkeys tricks, taught them to dance when he sang for them, to come when
he called

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

them by name, and gave to them the names of his friend's two sons.

In a month or two he got a letter from his friend saying he was coming
down for his boys. When he arrived he found the man crying and beating
his breast and going on in a terrible manner. (Just before the arrival
of the boy's father, he had taken the two boys and tied them up tight in
a cave on the mountain.) As his friend came in he said, "What is the
matter?" "Oh, I don't dare tell you," he answered, and went on crying
and beating his breast. But his friend insisted and said, "It does not
matter, perhaps I can help you." He finally consented and told him,
"Well, you know, those two boys of yours that came home with me have
changed into monkeys. If you don't believe it, call them and see." He
called his sons' names and the monkeys came to him at once. The father
looked at them for a little while and remarked, "Well, you are a smarter
man than I, that vase is gold all right. You bring out the boys and I
will divide the vase with you." So their trouble was peacefully settled
and they were friends forever afterward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirty-Five: A Rabbit Story](tft38)
