[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft43)  [Next](tft45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

#### FORTY-ONE

## The Story of the Man with the Goitre

<span class="small">A man without wickedness needs no
punishment--without an ax no tree can be cut down.  
                                              *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

A LONG time ago, in a lonely country among the mountains, there lived a
man with a big goitre on his neck, and he owned a cow. One day the cow
wandered away. The man went out to find her, but had to go so far from
home that he could not get back that night. Looking around he found two
caves, one big one and one little one, and decided to spend the night in
the little one.

As he went in and sat down cross-legged on the ground, he began talking
the affair over with himself, saying, "My cow is lost and I can not find
her, and I have nothing to eat. I am far away from home and can't get
back, and I have to stay out here, and I am very much afraid."

Now the big cave was the place where all the ghosts met, but in the
small cave only one ghost had his home. This ghost went over to the big
cave to the assembly of ghosts and told them there was a man in his
cave. They told him to go back and bring him over to them and they would
eat him, but he pleaded with them and said, "Please don't kill the man,
for I am his landlord, and it

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

wouldn't be good for me if you did so." He told them, too, that the man
had a big goitre on his throat. Then they said to him, "Go and cut that
goitre off his neck and bring it over here, and we will eat that."

"All right, that will do," he said, and slipped back into his own cave.
He cut the goitre off and took it to them, but when they saw it they
said it was too big, it wasn't fit to eat, and they left it in the cave.
When the man wakened in the morning he had no goitre and was pleased as
could be. He soon found his cow and started down the mountain.

When he got home without his goitre, another man who had one came and
asked him how he got rid of his. He told all of his adventures and the
mysterious disappearance of the thing. The other man thought he would do
the same and get rid of his. He drove his cow up on the mountain and
then went to find her, hid in a cave and talked to himself about the cow
that was lost, saying that he could not find her and that he would have
to stay there all night. The ghosts assembled again in the big cave and
the one who dwelt in the small cave told them again he had a guest, and
they of course wanted to eat him. But he begged them not to, saying that
he would cut off the goitre and bring that over. "Pouf, who wants to eat
goitre; we have already got one we don't like. Take that and stick it on
the back of his neck." When the man wakened in the morning he thought
something nice had happened to him, but when he

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

felt his neck there was his goitre just the same; then the back of his
neck felt queer and he put his hand there and found another one. Then he
was very angry and took his cow and went home and never came out again
where people could see him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Forty-Two: The Story of the Beggar](tft45)
