[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft47)  [Next](tft49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

#### FORTY-FIVE

## The Frugal Woman

<span class="small">If the yak is blind he will tumble off the road.  
                                 *Tibetan Proverb*.</span>

ONCE upon a time, a long, long time ago, in a little mud village, lost
somewhere now in the mountains of Tibet, lived a group of people. A tiny
stream of water from underground, perhaps from a magic horse's head or a
magic cow's head, flowed and never went dry. This stream gave them all
the water they needed.

Ruling over this village was a chief whom they called the head-man of
the village. He settled all their small quarrels, punished offenders and
his word was law up to the matter of life and death. He had a very
handsome son, who had no wife. The middleman had made a marriage, all
sides agreeing, between this son and the daughter of a prince who ruled
over a slightly bigger territory. This prince, with a hundred men and
their musical instruments, dancers and singers, gifts for the family,
milk money for the mother and wedding gifts of jewels to the bride, went
down to claim his wife. The head-man feasted and kept them exchanging
gifts for about three days, then they started to return, taking the
bride with them.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The mother
followed her to the door, as she was leaving, and said, "Do not grieve
because you are leaving home. In one month you can come back and visit
us."

Her father and big brother and little sister all said, "Don't be sorry,
for now you are the wife of this big prince, and will have plenty to eat
and nice clothes to wear," and her mother said, "You must keep as clean
as if you were looking in a mirror all the time. You must be good to
your own servants and kind to your husband's parents, and also be
charitable and give to the poor. You mustn't say bad things, as that's
just as silly as a billy-goat trying to butt down a stone wall with his
horns."

So they tried to comfort her as she went away weeping, and told her to
be happy and contented.

Now the greater part of the caravan had gone on before and only she and
a few of the maid servants were left behind. Those in advance went on
and on and when night came, they stopped in a fine valley and prepared
to camp for the night.

By and by when she came up to them she said, "This won't do. This is a
bad place, for if it should rain everything, including ourselves, would
be washed away."

She went on a little bit farther, found another spot and sent back word
to them to come up there where she had stopped. As the loads were
already off the yak and all was prepared for the night they were very
angry because all the loads had to be tied on again, the ponies gathered
in from

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

where they were grazing, and only to go such a little distance!

They said to one another, "This woman is unspeakable. She comes from a
very common home, but now she is the wife of this prince she thinks she
can make us do as she likes." So grumbling a great deal, they unloaded
and made camp again for the night. But sure enough that night a big rain
came and washed everything out of the valley where they had first
stopped. When they saw that they said, "If we had been there everything
would have been lost and we would have been dead. She is a prophetess
and knows all things. We owe our lives to her."

So they journeyed on and came to her husband's home, where they feasted
again for three days. Now it was time for the servants her father had
sent with her to return. She gave them all gifts, told them good-by and
sent them back to her father's house.

Now some of her husband's servants had heard her mother tell her she was
to keep as clean as if she were looking in a mirror all the time. So
they went to the prince and asked him what it meant, that they didn't
understand that saying at all. When she got up in the morning, she swept
the house and combed her hair and saw that every-body had food before
she would eat anything. One day her husband said to her, "What did your
mother mean by that saying?"

She answered, "My mother's meaning was this: that I wasn't to be greedy
and eat good things all

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

 

<span id="img_18100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ONE DAY A BIG
CRANE FLYING OVER THE PALACE, CARRYING A FEW HEADS OF RICE FOR HIS OWN
FOOD, DROPPED SOME GRAINS INTO THE PALACE GARDEN.](tn/18100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18100.jpg)  
ONE DAY A BIG CRANE FLYING OVER THE PALACE, CARRYING A FEW HEADS OF RICE
FOR HIS OWN FOOD, DROPPED SOME GRAINS INTO THE PALACE GARDEN.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

the time, but if I waited on others I'd be hungry and things would taste
good to me. And looking in the looking glass meant I was to keep myself
clean and the house clean so I'd never be ashamed of it."

One day a big crane coming from near the sea was carrying a few heads of
rice for his own food; as he flew over the palace, he dropped a few of
the grains, which the servants gathered up and took to the mistress of
the house. She said to them, "We must plant a few of these seeds and be
careful with them, for they make fine medicine for fevers."

They divided the grains among the different families, who took them home
and planted them. After a while the king's wife took sick with the fever
and he called all his chief head-men of the surrounding villages and all
the lamas, who told him that if she didn't have some rice from near the
sea she would die. Then he sent out to all the people he knew, asking if
they had any rice, but none of them had a grain. Finally he sent to this
woman, the wife of the prince, and asked if she had any rice, and she
said, "Of course I have. Not only for her but for all the sick people in
the country."

So she sent some to the king's wife, who got well, and she gave it also
to all the other sick folks, and from this time on the people worshiped
her and always went to her in times of trouble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Forty-Six: The Story of Yugpacan, the Brahman. From
Jaschke](tft49)
