[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tft41)  [Next](tft43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0025VKZPM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tibetan Folk Tales*, by A.L. Shelton, \[1925\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

#### THIRTY-NINE

## The Man and the Monkeys

The male deer from the top of the hill can see afar off. But the goose
on her nest thinks only of the egg she covers.  
                                  *Tibetan Proverb*.

ONCE upon a time when the garden of Eden was in the world, a man
traveling around the country found the garden and went in through the
gateway. He thought it a very beautiful place. There was everything good
to eat, cakes and candies and fruits of all kinds. He said to himself,
"Here I'll stay. I won't have to work any more, for everything I need is
here, so here I'll remain." He thought he would take a nap, and crawled
up one of the big trees and went to sleep among the branches. But he
slept too soundly and forgot he was up the tree, and went to turn over
and tumbled into a lake. One of the monkeys in the forest saw him fall
into the water and tried in every way to help him out, and finally said,
"I'm too little. I can't pull you out, but if I can grow big and strong
I'll be able to help you out." So he began to exercise every day by
picking up small stones, and then every day a little larger one, until
finally he grew strong enough to lift a big stone, and so was able to
get the man out of

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the water. After the man was rescued he didn't feel very well and the
monkey proposed that he exercise a while with the stones. He threw the
stones about a while until he felt quite warm, then thought he'd go to
sleep again, but this time he'd lie down on the ground. The monkeys were
all in the trees talking and chattering, so he didn't sleep very
soundly. When he roused up he thought, "This is a beautiful place if
there just wasn't so many monkeys." (I guess he forgot how much one of
them had just helped him.) "If these monkeys would all die, I'd go home
and get my family and stay here, because we wouldn't have to work at
all."

By this time it was evening and the monkeys were all asleep in the
trees. So he shook all the trees until the monkeys fell out on the
ground and were killed by the fall. Then, quite well satisfied with
himself, he started home to bring his family back to the garden to live.
But on the way the monkey god, who looks after monkeys, good and bad,
and knew the man had been mean to the monkeys when they had been kind to
him, turned himself into a big snake, met him on the path and swallowed
him.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

 

<span id="img_15700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ONE OF THE MONKEYS
SAW HIM FALL INTO THE WATER AND HASTENED TO HELP HIM
OUT.](tn/15700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15700.jpg)  
ONE OF THE MONKEYS SAW HIM FALL INTO THE WATER AND HASTENED TO HELP HIM
OUT.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Forty: The Story of the Tree of Life](tft43)
