[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33021)  [Next](cc33023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 24:43-51; MARK 13:34-37;  
LUKE 12:35-50

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
24:43-51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043)<span id="ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
13:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#034)<span id="ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
12:35-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035)<span id="ii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p5"></span>**43.** But know this, that if the
householder had known at what hour the thief would come, he would
certainly have watched, and would not have permitted his house to be
broken into. **44.** Therefore, be you also ready; because the Son of
man will come at an hour when you are not aware. **45.** Who is the
faithful and wise servant, whom his master hath appointed over his
household, to give them food in due season? **46.** Blessed is that
servant, whom his master, when he cometh, shall find acting in this
manner. **47.** Verily I say to you, He will appoint him  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) over all his property. **48.** But if
that wicked servant shall say in his heart, My master delayeth to come;
**49.** And shall begin to beat his fellow-servants, and even to eat and
drink with drunkards; **50.** The master of that servant will come on a
day when he doth not look for him, and at an hour when he is not aware;
**51.** And shall cut him off; and assign his portion with hypocrites:
weeping and gnashing of teeth shall be there.

<span id="ii.xxi-p7"></span>**34.** As a man  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) who is going abroad, and hath left his
house, and hath given it in charge to his servants, and hath assigned to
every man his work, and hath commanded the porter to watch.
**35.** Watch, therefore; (for you know not when your Lord will come,
 <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) whether in the evening, or at
midnight, or at the cock crowing, or in the morning;) **36.** Lest, when
he shall come suddenly, he will find you sleeping. **37.** But what I
say to you I say to all, Watch.

<span id="ii.xxi-p10"></span>**35.** Let your loins be girt, and your
lamps burning; **36.** And yourselves like men who wait for their
master, till he shall return from the marriage, that, when he shall come
and knock,  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) they may open to him
immediately. **37.** Blessed are those servants whom their lord, when he
cometh shall find watching. Verily I tell you, that he will gird
himself, and make them sit down at table, and will come forward and
serve them. **38.** And if he shall come in the second watch, or if he
shall come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those
servants. **39.** But know this, that if the householder had known at
what hour the thief would come, he would certainly have watched, and
would not have permitted his house to be broken into. **40.** And
therefore be you also ready; for the Son of man will come at an hour
when you are not expecting him. **41.** And Peter saith to him, Lord,
sayest thou this parable to us, or likewise to all? **42.** And the Lord
said, Who is a faithful and wise steward, whom his master will appoint
over his household, to give them their allowance of food at the proper
time? **43.** Blessed is that servant, whom his master, when he cometh,
shall find acting in this manner. **44.** Verily I tell you, that he
will appoint him over all that he possesses. **45.** But if that servant
shall say in his heart, My master delayeth his coming, and shall begin
to beat the men-servants, and maids, and to eat and drink, and to be
drunken; **46.** The master of that servant will come on a day when he
doth not expect him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut
him off, and assign his portion with the unfaithful. **47.** But that
servant, who knew his master’s will, and did not make himself ready, nor
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
**48.** But he who knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes. And to whomsoever much hath been given, much
will be demanded from him, and to whom men have entrusted much, from him
they will exact more. **49.** I came to send a fire on the earth, and
what do I wish if it be already be kindled?  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) **50.** But I have to be baptized with
a baptism, and how am I distressed till it be accomplished!

<span id="ii.xxi-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p15"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p15.2"></span>[Matthew
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043)<span
id="ii.xxi-p15.2"></span>.** *If the householder had known.* Luke
relates this discourse of Christ at a different place from Matthew; and
we need not wonder at this, for in the twelfth chapter, where (as we
have formerly explained) he collects out of various discourses a summary
of doctrine, he inserts also this parable. Besides, he introduces a
general preface that the disciples should *wait for their master,* with
their *loins girt,* and carrying *burning lamps* in their hands. To this
statement corresponds the parable, which we shall soon afterwards find
in <span id="ii.xxi-p15.3"></span>[Mt
25:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxi-p15.3"></span>
about the *wise and foolish virgins.*

<span id="ii.xxi-p16"></span>In a few words Christ glances rapidly at
the manner in which believers ought to conduct their pilgrimage in the
world; for first he contrasts the *girding of the loins* with sloth, and
*burning lamps* with the darkness of ignorance. First, then, Christ
enjoins the disciples to be ready and equipped for the journey, that
they may pass rapidly through the world, and may seek no fixed abode or
resting-place but in heaven. The warning is highly useful; for though
ungodly men have likewise in their mouth this form of expression, “the
course of life,” yet we see how they lay themselves down in the world,
and remain unmoved in their attachment to it. But God does not bestow
the honorable title of his children on any but those who acknowledge
that they are strangers on the earth, and who not only are at all times
prepared to leave it, but likewise move forward, in an uninterrupted
“course,” towards the heavenly life. Again, as they are surrounded on
all sides by darkness, so long as they remain in the world, he furnishes
them with *lamps,* as persons who are to perform a journey during the
night. The first recommendation is, to run vigorously; and the next is,
to have clear information as to the road, that believers may not weary
themselves to no purpose by going astray; for otherwise it would be
better to stumble in the way, than to perform a journey in uncertainty
and mistake. As to the expression, *girding the loins,* it is borrowed
from the ordinary custom of Eastern nations in wearing long garments.

<span id="ii.xxi-p17"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p18"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p18.2"></span>[Luke
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036)<span
id="ii.xxi-p18.2"></span>.** *And you yourselves like men that wait for
their master.* He uses another parable not mentioned by Matthew, who
writes more briefly on this subject; for he compares himself to *a
householder* who, while he is joining in the festivities of the marriage
feast, or in other respects indulging in pleasure, out of his own house,
wishes *his servants* to conduct themselves with modesty and sobriety at
home, attending to their lawful occupations, and diligently waiting for
his return. Now though the Son of God has departed to the blessed rest
of heaven, and is absent from us, yet as he has assigned to every one
his duty, it would be improper for us to give way to indolent repose.
Besides, as he has promised that he will return to us, we ought to hold
ourselves prepared, at every moment, to receive him, that he may not
find *us sleeping.* For if a mortal man looks upon it as a duty which
*his servants* owe him, that, *at whatever hour he returns home,* they
shall be prepared to receive him, how much more has he a right to demand
from his followers that they shall be sober and vigilant, and always
wait for his coming? To excite them to greater alacrity, he mentions
that earthly masters are so delighted with such promptitude on the part
of their servants, that they even *serve them;* not that all *masters*
are accustomed to act in this manner, but because it does sometimes
happen that a *master,* who is kind and gentle, admits his *servants* to
his own table, as if they were his companions.

<span id="ii.xxi-p19"></span>Yet it may be asked, Since Scripture calls
us in many passages *children of light,* (<span
id="ii.xxi-p19.1"></span>[Eph 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span
id="ii.xxi-p19.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xxi-p19.2"></span>[1Th
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005)<span id="ii.xxi-p19.2"></span>,)
and since the Lord also shines upon us by his word, so that we walk as
at noon, how does the Lord compare our life to the watches of tire
night? But we ought to seek the solution of this difficulty from the
words of Peter, who tells us, that the word of God shines like a burning
lamp, to enable us distinctly to see our road in a dark place. We ought
therefore to attend. to both statements, that our journey must be
performed amidst the thick darkness of the world, and yet we are
protected from the risk of going astray, while the torch of heavenly
doctrine goes before us, more especially when we have Christ himself for
a sun.

<span id="ii.xxi-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p21"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p21.2"></span>[Matthew
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)<span
id="ii.xxi-p21.2"></span>.** *But know this.* Another similitude is now
employed by Christ, in exhorting his disciples *to keep* diligent watch;
for if any person shall hear that robbers are prowling in the night,
fear and suspicion will not allow him to sleep. Since, therefore, we are
informed that Christ’s coming will be sudden and unexpected, like that
of a robber, and since we are expressly forewarned that we must always
watch, lest he come upon us when asleep, and we be swallowed up with the
ungodly, there is no excuse for our indolence; more especially since
there is reason to dread not only a breach of the wall, and a loss of
our property, but a deadly wound to ruin our soul, unless we are on our
guard. The tendency of these words therefore is, that the warning of
Christ should arouse us; for, though the last judgment be delayed for a
long time, yet it hangs over us every hour; and, therefore, when there
is ground for alarm, and when danger is near, it is unreasonable that we
should be sluggish.

<span id="ii.xxi-p22"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p23"></span>**45.** *Who is the faithful and wise
servant?* This passage is more distinctly explained by Luke, who inserts
*Peter’s* question, which gave rise to a new parable. Christ having
declared that the suddenness and uncertainty of his coming led to such
danger as left no room for sloth, *Peter* asked, if this doctrine was
general, or if it belonged to the twelve alone. For the disciples—as we
have formerly seen—were always in the habit of thinking that they were
unjustly treated, unless they were exempted from the common lot, and
greatly excelled all others. When our Lord now represents to them a
condition which is far from being pleasant or desirable, they look
around them on every hand, like persons astonished. But the object of
Christ’s reply is, to show that, if each of the common people ought to
watch, much less ought it to be endured that the apostles should be
asleep. As Christ had formerly exhorted the whole family in general to
watch for his coming, so now he demands extraordinary care from the
principal servants, who had been appointed over others for the purpose
of pointing out, by their example, the path of sobriety, watchfulness,
and strict temperance. By these words he reminds them that they were not
elevated to high rank for the purpose of indulging in ease, indolence,
and pleasure; but that, the higher the rank of honor which they had
obtained, the heavier was the burden which was laid on them; and
therefore he declares that it is especially demanded from such persons
that they exercise fidelity and wisdom.

<span id="ii.xxi-p24"></span>Let all who are called to an honorable
office learn from this, that they are so much the more strongly bound,
not only to bestow their labor faithfully, but to strive with their
utmost zeal and industry to discharge their duty. For while it is enough
for ordinary servants to go through their daily toil, stewards, whose
office embraces the care of the whole family, ought to go much farther.
Otherwise Christ charges them with ingratitude, because, while they have
been chosen before others, they do not answer to their honor; for why
does our Lord prefer them to the rest, but in order that they may excel
all by extraordinary fidelity and wisdom? True, indeed, all are
enjoined, without exception, to be sober, and to give earnest attention,
but drowsiness would be peculiarly disgraceful and inexcusable in
pastors. He next holds out even the hope of a reward to encourage them
to diligence.

<span id="ii.xxi-p25"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p26"></span>**48.** *But if that wicked servant shall
say in his heart.* By these words, Christ briefly points out the source
of that carelessness which creeps upon wicked servants. It is because
they trust to a longer delay, and thus of their own accord involve
themselves in darkness. They imagine that the day when they must render
an account will never come; and, under the pretext of Christ’s absence,
they promise themselves that they will remain unpunished. For it is
impossible but that the expectation of him, when it does occur to our
minds, shall shake off sleep, and still more, that it shall restrain us
from being carried away by wicked sensuality. No excitement of
exhortation, therefore, can be more powerful or efficacious, than to
represent to us that rigid tribunal which no man will be able to escape.
That each of us may be careful to discharge his duty earnestly, and keep
himself strictly and modestly within his own limits, let us constantly
make our minds familiar with the thought of that last and sudden coming
of the Lord, the neglect of which leads the reprobate to indulge in
wickedness.

<span id="ii.xxi-p27"></span>At the same time, Christ takes a passing
glance at the ease with which insolence grows, when a man has once
shaken off the bridle, and given himself up to sinning. For Christ does
not represent to us a servant who is merely dissolute and worthless, but
one who rises up in an outrageous manner to disturb the whole house, who
wickedly abuses the power committed to him, exercises cruelty on his
fellow-servants, and wastefully spends the property of his master, whom
he treats with open ridicule. Lastly, to excite terror, he adds the
punishment, which is of no ordinary degree; for severe punishment is due
to such unbounded wickedness.

<span id="ii.xxi-p28"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p29"></span>**<span id="ii.xxi-p29.2"></span>[Luke
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="ii.xxi-p29.2"></span>.** *But that servant.* There is great weight
in this circumstance, which is mentioned by Luke alone, that, in
proportion as any man knowingly and willingly takes pleasure in
despising the Lord, he deserves severer punishment. A comparison is made
between the greater and the less to this effect: If punishment does not
fail to be inflicted on a *servant* who errs through mistake, what shall
become of the *wicked* and rebellious *servant,* who purposely, as it
were, tramples under foot the authority of his master? It ought to be
remembered, however, that those who are appointed to govern the Church
do not err through ignorance, but basely and wickedly defraud their
Master of his right.

<span id="ii.xxi-p30"></span>Yet we ought to gather from this passage a
general doctrine, that it is in vain for men to betake themselves to the
plea of ignorance, in order to be freed from condemnation. For if a
mortal man claims the right of demanding from his servants that they
shall inquire into his will, so that nothing may be done in his house in
a heedless or confused manner; how much greater authority belongs to the
Son of God, that they who serve him should be earnestly desirous to be
informed about his injunctions, and not rush forward, at their own
pleasure, to act in a state of uncertainty, but depend wholly on the
intimations of his will; particularly when he has prescribed what we
ought to do, and always gives us a gracious answer, when we ask his
direction? It is certain, that our ignorance is always accompanied by
gross and shameful negligence. We see, indeed, that it is in vain to
resort to this subterfuge, that he who has gone wrong through ignorance
is not in fault; for, on the contrary, the Heavenly Judge declares, that
though such offenders are visited by lighter chastisement, yet they will
not be altogether unpunished. And if even ignorance does not excuse men,
how dreadful is the vengeance that awaits deliberate transgressors, who
with outrageous violence provoke God, in opposition to the dictates of
their conscience? The more abundant the instruction, therefore, which
any man has received, so much the greater is the ground for punishment,
if he be not obedient and submissive. Hence it appears how trifling and
worthless is the excuse of those who, now rejecting the plain doctrine
of the Gospel, endeavor to screen such obstinacy by the ignorance of
their fathers; as if ignorance were an adequate shield to ward off the
judgment of God. But granting that faults committed through mistake were
pardoned, it would be highly unreasonable that the same favor should be
extended to those who sin willfully, since with deliberate malice they
rage against God.

<span id="ii.xxi-p31"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p32"></span>**48.** *To whomsoever much hath been
given.* Christ shows by another circumstance, that the more highly
favored disciples ought to be visited with severer punishment, if they
despise their calling, and abandon themselves without reserve to every
kind of licentiousness; because the more eminent a man is, he ought to
consider that so much the more has been entrusted to him, and on the
express condition that he shall one day render an account of it. In the
same proportion, therefore, as any of us is endued with higher gifts, if
he does not, like a field which has been cultivated at greater expense,
yield to the Lord more abundant produce, the abuse of that grace which
he has profaned, or uselessly withheld, will cost him dear.

<span id="ii.xxi-p33"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p34"></span>**49.** *I am come to send fire on the
earth.* From these concluding words it may easily be inferred, that this
was one of Christ’s latest discourses, and is not related by Luke at the
proper place. But the meaning is, that Christ has introduced into the
world the utmost confusion, as if he had intended to mingle heaven and
earth. The gospel is metaphorically compared to *fire,* because it
violently changes the face of things. The disciples having falsely
imagined that, while they were at ease and asleep, the kingdom of God
would come, Christ declares, on the contrary, that there must first be a
dreadful conflagration to kindle the world. And as some beginnings of it
were even then making their appearance, Christ encourages the disciples
by this very consideration, that they already feel the power of the
gospel. “When great commotions,” says he, “shall already begin to
kindle, this is so far from being a reason why you should tremble, that
it is rather a ground of strong confidence; and, for my own part, I
rejoice that this fruit of my labors is visible.” In like manner, all
the ministers of the gospel ought to apply this to themselves, that,
when there are troubles in the world, they may be more diligently
employed in their duty. It is proper to observe, also, that the same
fire of doctrine, when it burns on all sides, consumes chaff and straw,
but purifies silver and gold.

<span id="ii.xxi-p35"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p36"></span>**50.** *But I have a baptism to be
baptized with.* By these words our Lord asserts that there remains
nothing but his last act, that by his death he may consecrate the
renovation of the world. For since the shaking which he mentioned was
appalling, and since that conflagration of the human race was terrific,
he is about to show that the first-fruits must be offered in his own
person, after which the disciples ought not to be displeased at feeling
some portion of it. He compares death—as in other passages—to *baptism,*
(<span id="ii.xxi-p36.1"></span>[Ro
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxi-p36.1"></span>,)
because the children of God, after having been immersed for a time by
the death of the body, shortly afterwards rise again to life, so that
death is nothing else than a passage through the midst of the waters. He
says that he is *sorely pressed till that baptism has been
accomplished,* that he may encourage every one of us, by his example,
both to bear the cross and to prefer death. Not that any man can have a
natural preference for death, or for any abatement of present happiness,
but because, when we contemplate on the farther bank the glory, and the
blessed and immortal rest of heaven, we not only suffer death with
patience, but are even carried forward by eager desire where faith and
hope lead us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc33022.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p6.1"></span>Il le
constituera, *ou, luy donnera en charge;*” — “he will appoint him, *or,
will commit to his charge.*”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc33022.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>*C’est
ainsi* comme si un homme, &c.; *ou, Le Fils de l’homme est tout un*
comme si un homme,” &c.—”*It is* as if a man, &c.; *or, The Son of Man
is all one* as if a man,” &c.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc33022.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ii.xxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p9.1"></span>Quand le
Seigneur de la maison viendra;” — “when the Lord of the house will
come.”

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc33022.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p11.1"></span>Et
frappera à la porte;” — “and shall knock at the gate.”

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc33022.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ii.xxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xxi-p12.1"></span>Et que
veux-je *plus* s’il est ja allumé? *ou, sinon qu’il soit allumé?”* —
*“*And what do I wish *more,* if it be already kindled? *or,* And what
do I wish *more than that* it be kindled?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 25:1-13](cc33023)
