[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33023)  [Next](cc33025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 25:31-46; LUKE 21:37-38

<span id="ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
25:31-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
21:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p4"></span>**31. **Now when the Son of man shall come
in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory: **32. **And all the nations shall be assembled
before him; and he shall separate them from one another, as a shepherd
separateth the sheep from the goats. **33. **And he shall place the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left. **34. **Then will
the King say to those who shall be on his right hand, Come, you blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world: **35. **For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was
thirsty, and you gave me to drink; I was a stranger, and you received me
kindly; **36. **I was naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you
visited me; I was in prison, and you came to me. **37. **Then shall the
righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungry, and fed
thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? **38. **And when did e see thee a
stranger, and received thee kindly? or naked, and clothed thee?
**39. **Or when did we see thee sick, or in prison, and came to thee?
**40. **And the King answering will say to them, Verily I tell you, So
far as you did it to one of these my brethren, you did it to me.
**41. **Then will he say also to those who shall be on the left hand,
Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for
the devil and his angels: **42. **For I was hungry, and you gave me no
food; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink. **43. **I was a stranger,
and you did not receive me kindly; I was naked, and you did not clothe
me; I was sick, and in prison, and you did not visit me. **44. **Then
will they also answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungry, or
thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not
assist thee? **45. **Then will he answer them, saying, Verily I tell
you, So far as you did it not to any of the least of these, you did it
not to me. **46. **And these shall go away into everlasting punishment,
and the righteous into everlasting life.  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p6"></span>**37. **And he taught in the temple by
day; but at night he went out, and lodged in the mountain, which is
called the mountain of Olives. **38. **And early in the morning all the
people came to him, to hear him in the temple.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p8"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p9"></span>**<span id="ii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>[Matthew
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>.** *Now* *when the Son of man shall come in
his glory.* Christ follows out the same doctrine, and what he formerly
described under parables, he now explains clearly and without figures.
The sum of what is said is, that believers, in order to encourage
themselves to a holy and upright conduct, ought to contemplate with the
eyes of faith the heavenly life, which, though it is now concealed, will
at length be manifested at the last coming of Christ. For, when he
declares that, *when he shall come with the angels, then will he sit on
the throne of his glory,* he contrasts this last revelation with the
disorders and agitations of earthly warfare; as if he had said, that he
did not appear for the purpose of immediately setting up his kingdom,
and therefore that there was need of hope and patience, lest the
disciples might be discouraged by long delay. Hence we infer that this
was again added, in order that the disciples, being freed from mistake
about immediate and sudden happiness, might keep their minds in warfare
till Christ’s second coming, and might not give way, or be discouraged,
on account of his absence.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p10"></span>This is the reason why he says that he
will then assume the title of King; for though he commenced his reign on
the earth, and now sits at the right hand of the Father, so as to
exercise the supreme government of heaven and earth; yet he has not yet
erected before the eyes of men that *throne,* from which his divine
majesty will be far more fully displayed than it now is at the last day;
for that*,* of which we now obtain by faith nothing more than a taste,
will then have its full effect. So then Christ now sits on his heavenly
throne, as fir as it is necessary that he shall reign for restraining
his enemies and protecting the Church; but *then* he will appear openly,
to establish perfect order in heaven and earth, to crush his enemies
under his feet, to assemble his believing people to partake of an
everlasting and blessed life, to ascend his judgment-seat; and, in a
word, there will be a visible manifestation of the reason why the
kingdom was given to him by the Father. He says that he *will come in
his glory;* because, while he dwelt in this world as a mortal man, he
appeared in the despised form of a servant. And he calls it his *glory,*
though he elsewhere ascribes it to *his Father,* but the meaning is the
same; for he means simply the divine glory, which at that time shone in
the Father only, for in himself it was concealed.  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p13"></span>**32.** *And all nations shall be
assembled before him.* He employs large and splendid titles for
extolling his kingdom, that the disciples may learn to expect a
different kind of happiness from what they had imagined. For they were
satisfied with this single consideration, that their nation was
delivered from the miseries with which it was then oppressed, so that it
would be manifest that God had not in vain established his covenant with
Abraham and his posterity. But Christ extends much farther the benefit
of the redemption brought by him, for he will be the Judge of the whole
world. Again, in *order* to persuade believers to holiness of life, he
assures them that the good and the bad will not share alike; because he
will bring with him the reward which is laid up for both. In short, he
declares that his kingdom will be fully established, when the righteous
shall have obtained a crown of glory, and when the wicked shall have
received the reward which they deserved.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p14"></span>*As a shepherd separateth the sheep from
the goats.* When our Lord says that the *separation of the sheep from
the goats* is delayed till that day, he means that the wicked are now
mixed with the good and holy, so that they live together in the same
flock of God. The comparison appears to be borrowed from <span
id="ii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>[Eze
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#018)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>, where the Lord complains of the fierceness
of *the goats,* which attack with their horns the poor *sheep,* and
destroy the pastures, and pollute the water; and where the Lord
expressly declares that he will take vengeance. And therefore Christ’s
discourse amounts to this, that believers ought not to think their
condition too hard, if they are now compelled to live with *the goats,*
and even to sustain many serious attacks and annoyances from them;
secondly, that they ought to beware of being themselves infected by the
contagion of their vices; and, thirdly, to inform them that in a holy
and innocent life their labor is not thrown away, for the difference
will one day appear.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p15"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p16"></span>**34.** *Come, you blessed of my Father.*
We must remember Christ’s design; for he bids his disciples rest
satisfied now with hope, that they may with patience and tranquillity of
mind look for the enjoyment of the heavenly kingdom; and next, he bids
them strive earnestly, and not become wearied in the right course. To
this latter clause he refers, when he promises the inheritance of the
heavens to none but those who by good works aim at the prize of the
heavenly calling. But before speaking of the reward of good works, he
points out, in passing, that the commencement of salvation flows from a
higher source; for by calling them *blessed of the Father,* he reminds
them, that their salvation proceeded from the undeserved favor of God.
Among the Hebrews the phrase *blessed of God* means one who is *dear to
God,* or *beloved by God.* Besides, this form of expression was not only
employed by believers to extol the grace of God towards men, but those
who had degenerated from true godliness still held this principle.
*Enter, thou blessed of God,* said Laban to Abraham’s servant, (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>[Ge
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#031)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>.) We see that nature suggested to them this
expression, by which they ascribed to God the praise of all that they
possessed. There can be no doubt, therefore, that Christ, in describing
the salvation of the godly, begins with the undeserved love of God, by
which those who, under the guidance of the Spirit in this life, aim at
righteousness, were predestined to life.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p17"></span>To this also relates what he says shortly
afterwards, that *the kingdom,* to the possession of which they will be
appointed at the last day, *had been prepared for them from the
beginning of the world.* For though it may be easy to object, that the
reward was laid up with a view to their future merits, any person who
will candidly examine the words must acknowledge that there is an
implied commendation of the grace of God. Nay more, Christ does not
simply invite believers to possess *the kingdom,* as if they had
obtained it by their merits, but expressly says that it is bestowed on
them as heirs.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p18"></span>Yet we must observe another object which
our Lord had in view. For though the life of the godly be nothing else
than a sad and wretched banishment, so that the earth scarcely bears
them; though they groan under hard poverty, and reproaches, and other
afflictions; yet, that they may with fortitude and cheerfulness surmount
these obstacles, the Lord declares that a *kingdom* is elsewhere
*prepared for them.* It is no slight persuasive to patience, when men
are fully convinced that they do not run in vain; and therefore, lest
our minds should be east, down by the pride of the ungodly, in which
they give themselves unrestrained indulgences—lest our hope should even
be weakened by our own afflictions, let us always remember the
inheritance which awaits us in heaven; for it depends on no uncertain
event, but was *prepared for us* by God before we were
born*,*—*prepared,* I say, for each of the elect, for the persons here
addressed by Christ are the *blessed of the Father.*

<span id="ii.xxiii-p19"></span>When it is here said only that *the
kingdom was prepared from the beginning of the world,* while it is said,
in another passage, that it was prepared before the creation of heaven
and of earth, (<span id="ii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>)
this involves no inconsistency. For Christ does not here fix the precise
time when the inheritance of eternal life was appointed for the sons of
God, but only reminds us of God’s fatherly care, with which he embraced
us before we were born; and confirms the certainty of our hope by this
consideration, that our life can sustain no injury from the commotions
and agitations of the world.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p21"></span>**35.** *For I was hungry.* If Christ
were now speaking of the cause of our salvation, the Papists could not
be blamed for inferring that we merit eternal life by good works; but as
Christ had no other design than to exhort his people to holy and upright
conduct, it is improper to conclude from his words what is the value of
the merits of works. With regard to the stress which they lay on the
word *for*, as if it pointed out the *cause,* it is a weak argument; for
we know that, when eternal life is promised to the righteous, the word
*for* does not always denote a cause, but rather the order of procedure.
 <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) But we have another reply to
offer, which is still more clear; for we do not deny that a reward is
promised to good works, but maintain that it is a reward of grace,
because it depends on adoption. Paul boasts (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p22.2"></span>[2Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxiii-p22.2"></span>)
that a crown of righteousness is laid up for him; but whence did he
derive that confidence but because he was a member of Christ, who alone
is *heir* of the heavenly kingdom? He openly avows that *the righteous
Judge will give to him that crown;* but whence did he obtain that prize
but because by grace he was adopted, and received that justification of
which we are all destitute? We must therefore hold these two principles,
first, that believers are called to the possession of the kingdom of
heaven, so far as relates to good works, not because they deserved them
through the righteousness of works, or because their own minds prompted
them to obtain that righteousness, but because God justifies those whom
he previously elected, (<span id="ii.xxiii-p22.3"></span>[Ro
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p22.3"></span>.) Secondly, although by the guidance of the
Spirit they aim at the practice of righteousness, yet as they never
fulfill the law of God, no reward is due to them, but the term *reward*
is applied to that which is bestowed by grace.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p23"></span>Christ does not here specify every thing
that belongs to a pious and holy life, but only, by way of example,
refers to some of the duties of charity, by which we give evidence that
we fear God. For though the worship of God is more important than
charity towards men, and though, in like manner, faith and supplication
are more valuable than alms, yet Christ had good reasons for bringing
forward those evidences of true righteousness which are more obvious. If
a man were to take no thought about God, and were only to be beneficent
towards men, such compassion would be of no avail to him for appeasing
God, who had all the while been defrauded of his right. Accordingly,
Christ does not make the chief part of righteousness to consist in alms,
but, by means of what may be called more evident signs, shows what it is
to live a holy and righteous life; as unquestionably believers not only
profess with the mouth, but prove by actual performances, that they
serve God.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p24"></span>Most improperly, therefore, do fanatics,
under the pretext of this passage, withdraw from hearing the word, and
from observing the Holy Supper, and from other spiritual exercises; for
with equal plausibility might they set aside faith, and bearing the
cross, and prayer, and chastity. But nothing was farther from the design
of Christ than to confine to a portion of the second table of the Law
that rule of life which is contained in the two tables. The monks and
other noisy talkers had as little reason to imagine that there are only
six works of *mercy,* because Christ does not mention any more; as if it
were not obvious, even to children, that he commends, by means of a
*synacdoche,* all the duties of charity. For to comfort mourners, to
relieve those who are unjustly oppressed, to aid simple-minded men by
advice, to deliver wretched persons from the jaws of wolves, are deeds
of *mercy* not less worthy of commendation than to clothe the naked or
to feed the hungry.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p25"></span>But while Christ, in recommending to us
the exercise of charity, does not exclude those duties which belong to
the worship of God, he reminds his disciples that it will be an
authentic evidence of a holy life, if they practice charity, agreeably
to those words of the prophet,

<span id="ii.xxiii-p26"></span>I choose mercy, and not sacrifice, (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>[Ho
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p27"></span>the import of which is, that hypocrites,
while they are avaricious, and cruel, and deceitful, and extortioners,
and haughty, still counterfeit holiness by an imposing array of
ceremonies. Hence also we infer, that if we desire to have our life
approved by the Supreme Judge, we must not go astray after our own
inventions, but must rather consider what it is that He chiefly requires
from us. For all who shall depart from his commandments, though they
toil and wear themselves out in works of their own contrivance, will
hear it said to them at the last day, Who

<span id="ii.xxiii-p28"></span>hath required those things at your hands?
(<span id="ii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>[Isa
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p29"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p30"></span>**37.** *Then wilt the righteous answer
him.* Christ represents the righteous as doubting—what they know
well—his willingness to form a just estimate of what is done to men.
 <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) But as this was not so deeply
impressed on their minds as it ought to have been, he holds out to them
this lively representation.  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)
*For* how comes it that we are so slow and reluctant to acts of
beneficence, but because that promise is not truly engraven on our
hearts, that God will one day repay with usury what we bestow on the
poor? The admiration which Christ here expresses is intended to instruct
us to rise above the apprehension of our flesh, whenever afflicted
brethren ask our confidence and aid, that the aspect of a despised man
may not hinder us from treating him with kindness.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p33"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p34"></span>**40.** *Verily I tell you.* As Christ
has just now told us, by a figure, that our senses do not yet comprehend
how highly he values deeds of charity, so now he openly declares, that
he will reckon as done to himself whatever we have bestowed on his
people. We must be prodigiously sluggish, if compassion be not drawn
from our bowels by this statement, that Christ is either neglected or
honored in the person of those who need our assistance. So then,
whenever we are reluctant to assist the poor, let us place before our
eyes the Son of God, to whom it would be base sacrilege to refuse any
thing. By these words he likewise shows, that he acknowledges those acts
of kindness which have been performed gratuitously, and without any
expectation of a reward. And certainly, when he enjoins us to do good to
the *hungry* and *naked,* to *strangers* and *prisoners,* from whom
nothing can be expected in return, we must look to him, who freely lays
himself under obligation to us, and allows us to place to his account
what might otherwise appear to have been lost.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p35"></span>*So far as you have done it to one of the
least of my brethren.* Believers only are expressly recommended to our
notice; not that he bids us altogether despise others, but because the
more nearly a man approaches to God, he ought to be the more highly
esteemed by us; for though there is a common tie that binds all the
children of Adam, there is a still more sacred union among the children
of God. So then, as those, who belong to the household of faith ought to
be preferred to strangers, Christ makes special mention of them. And
though his design was, to encourage those whose wealth and resources are
abundant to relieve the poverty of brethren, yet it affords no ordinary
consolation to the poor and distressed, that, though shame and contempt
follow them in the eyes of the world, yet the Son of God holds them as
dear as his own members. And certainly, by calling them *brethren,* he
confers on them inestimable honor.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p36"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p37"></span>**41.** *Depart from me, you cursed.* He
now comes to the reprobate, who are so intoxicated by their fading
prosperity, that they imagine they will always be happy. He threatens,
therefore, that he will come as their Judge, and that he will make them
forget those luxurious enjoyments to which they are now so entirely
devoted; not that the coming of Christ will strike them with terror—for
they think that they

<span id="ii.xxiii-p38"></span>have made a covenant with death, (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p38.1"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p38.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p39"></span>and harden themselves in wicked
indifference—but that believers, warned of their dreadful ruin, may not
envy their present lot. For as promises are necessary for us, to excite
and encourage us to holiness of life, so threatenings are likewise
necessary to restrain us by anxiety and fear. We are therefore taught
how desirable it is to be united to the Son of God; because everlasting
destruction and the torment of the flesh await all those whom he will
drive from his presence at the last day. He will then order the wicked
to *depart* from him, because many hypocrites are now mixed with the
righteous, as if they were closely allied to Christ.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p40"></span>*Into everlasting fire.* We have stated
formerly, that the term fire represents metaphorically that dreadful
punishment which our senses are unable to comprehend. It is therefore
unnecessary to enter into subtle inquiries, as the sophists do, into the
materials or form of this *fire;* for there would be equally good reason
to inquire about the *worm,* which Isaiah connects with the

<span id="ii.xxiii-p41"></span>fire for their worm shall not die,  
either shall their fire be quenched, (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p41.2"></span>[Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p41.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p42"></span>Besides, the same prophet shows plainly
enough in another passage that the expression is metaphorical; for he
compares *the Spirit of God* to a blast by which the *fire* is kindled,
and adds a mixture of *brimstone,* (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p42.1"></span>[Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p42.1"></span>.) Under these words, therefore, we ought to
represent to our minds the future vengeance of God against the wicked,
which, being more grievous than all earthly torments, ought rather to
excite horror than a desire to know it. But we must observe the
*eternity* of this *fire,* as well as of the glory which, a little
before, was promised to believers.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p43"></span>*Which is prepared for the devil.* Christ
contrasts with himself *the devil,* as the head of all the reprobate.
For though all the *devils* are apostate angels, yet many passages of
Scripture assign thee highest authority to one who assembles under him,
as in one body, all the wicked to perdition; in the same manner as
believers assemble to life under Christ, and *grow* under him, till,
having reached *perfection,* they are entirely united by him to God,
(<span id="ii.xxiii-p43.1"></span>[Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxiii-p43.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xxiii-p43.2"></span>[Col
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p43.2"></span>.) But now Christ says, that hell is
*prepared for the devil,* that wicked men may not entertain the belief
that they will be able to escape it, when they hear that they are
involved in the same punishment with *the devil,* who, it is certain,
was long ago sentenced and condemned to hell, without any hope of
deliverance.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p44"></span>*And his angels.* By *the devil's angels*
some understand wicked men, but it is more probable that Christ speaks
only of devils. And so these words convey an indirect reproach, that
men, who had been called to the hope of salvation through the Gospel,
chose to perish with Satan, and, rejecting the Author of salvation,
voluntarily threw themselves into this wretched condition; not that they
were not appointed to destruction as well as *the devil,* but because in
their crime is plainly seen the cause of their destruction, when they
reject the grace of their calling. And thus, though the reprobate were
devoted to death, by a secret judgment of God, before they were born,
yet, so long as life is offered to them, they are not reckoned heirs of
death or companions of Satan, but their perdition, which had been
formerly concealed, is discovered and made evident by their unbelief.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p45"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p46"></span>**44.** *Then shall they also answer
him.* The same kind of striking delineation which Christ had formerly
employed is now repeated, in order to inform the reprobate, that their
vain excuses, by which they now deceive themselves, will be of no avail
to them at the last day. For whence comes the great cruelty of their
pride towards the poor, but because they think that they will not be
punished for despising them? To destroy this self-complacency, our Lord
gives them warning, that they will one day feel—but when it will be too
late—what they do not now deign to consider, that those who are now so
greatly despised are not less esteemed by Christ than his own members.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc33024.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p5"></span> *“*<span id="ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>*Mais
les justes* iront;” — “*but the righteous* will go.”

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc33024.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>Pource
qu’en Christ elle estoit cachee et ne se monstroit;” — “because in
Christ it was concealed, and was not exhibited.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc33024.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>Elle
ne touche pas tousjours la cause et le fondement de salut, mais plustost
l’ordre et la procedure que Dieu y tient;” — “it does not always refer
to the cause and foundation of salvation, but rather to the order and
procedure which God observes in regard to it.”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc33024.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>La
charit, qu’on exerce envers les hommes;” — “the charity which is
exercised towards men.”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc33024.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p32.1"></span>Il
leur represente au vif, tout ainsi que si la chose se faisoit devant
lcurs yeux;” — “he represents it to them in a lively manner, quite as if
the thing were done before their eyes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:1-13; Mark 14:1-9; Luke 22:1-2](cc33025)
