[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33024)  [Next](cc33026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:1-13; MARK 14:1-9; LUKE 22:1-2

<span id="ii.xxiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p5"></span>**1. **And it happened when Jesus had
finished all these discourses, he said to his disciples, **2. **You know
that after two days is the passover; and the Son of man is betrayed to
be crucified. **3. **Then were assembled the chief priests, and scribes,
and elders of the people, in the palace of the high priest, who was
called Caiaphas, **4. **And entered into consultation how they would
take Jesus by stratagem, and kill him. **5. **But they said, Not during
the festival, lest there be a commotion among the people. **6. **And
when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, **7. **A
woman came to him, having ointment, and poured it on his head, while he
sat at table. **8. **And his disciples, when they saw it, were angry,
saying, Why is this waste? **9. **For this ointment might have been sold
for a great price, and given to the poor. **10. **But Jesus, knowing
this, said to them, Why do you trouble the woman? for she hath performed
a good action towards me. **11. **For you have the poor always with you,
but me you have not always.  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)
**12. **For as to this ointment which this woman hath poured on my body,
she did it to bury me. **13. **Verily I tell you, Wheresoever this
gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also which she
hath done will be told in remembrance of her.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p7"></span>**1. **And after two days was the passover,
and the feast of unleavened bread; and the chief priests and scribes
sought how they would seize him by craft, and kill him. **2. **But they
said, Not during the festival, lest there be a commotion among the
people. **3. **And while he was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the
leper, while he sat at table, a woman came, having an alabaster box of
ointment of spikenard, very precious; and she broke the box, and poured
it on his head. **4. **And there were some who were angry within
themselves, and said, Why is this waste of the ointment? **5. **For this
might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii,  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) and given to the poor. And they
murmured against her. **6. **But Jesus said, Let her alone: why do you
trouble her? she hath performed a good action towards me. **7. **For you
have the poor always with you, and whenever you choose, you may do good
to them; but me you have not always.  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) **8. **She hath done what she could;
she hath come beforehand, to anoint my body to the burying.
**9. **Verily I tell you, Wheresoever this gospel hath been preached
throughout the whole world, this also which she hath done shall be told
in remembrance of her.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p10"></span>**1. **Now the feast of unleavened bread,
which is called the Passover, was at hand. **2. **And the chief priests
and scribes sought how they might kill him; for they dreaded the people.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiv-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p13"></span>Christ now confirms again what we have
seen that he had sometimes predicted to his disciples; but this last
prediction clearly shows how willingly he offered himself to die; and it
was necessary that he should do so, because God could not be appeased
but by a sacrifice of obedience. He intended, at the same time, to
prevent the disciples from taking offense, lest they might be altogether
discouraged by the thought that he was dragged to death by necessity.
Two purposes were thus served by this statement: to testify, first, that
the Son of God willingly surrendered himself to die, in order to
reconcile the world to the Father, (for in no other way could the guilt
of sins have been expiated, or righteousness obtained for us;) and,
secondly, that he did not die like one oppressed by violence which he
could not escape, but because he voluntarily offered himself to die. He
therefore declares that he comes to Jerusalem with the express intention
of suffering death there; for while he was at liberty to withdraw and to
dwell in a safe retreat till that time was come, he knowingly and
willfully comes forward at the exact time. And though it was of no
advantage to the disciples to be informed, at that time, of the
obedience which he was rendering to the Father, yet afterwards this
doctrine tended in no small degree to the edification of their faith. In
like manner, it is of singular utility to us at the present day, because
we behold, as in a bright mirror, the voluntary sacrifice, by which all
the transgressions of the world were blotted out, and, contemplating the
Son of God advancing with cheerfulness and courage to death, we already
behold him victorious over death.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p15"></span>**<span id="ii.xxiv-p15.2"></span>[Matthew
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003)<span
id="ii.xxiv-p15.2"></span>.** *Then were assembled the chief priests.
Matthew* does not mean that they assembled during the *two days,* but
introduces this narrative to show, that Christ was not led by any
opinion of man to fix the day of his death; for by what conjectures
could he have been led to it, since his enemies themselves had resolved
to delay for a time? The meaning therefore is, that by the spirit of
prophecy he spoke of his own death, which no man could have suspected to
be so near at hand. John explains the reason why the scribes and priests
held this meeting: it was because, from day to day, the people flocked
to Christ in greater multitudes, (<span id="ii.xxiv-p15.3"></span>[Joh
11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)<span
id="ii.xxiv-p15.3"></span>.) And at that time it was decided, at the
instigation of *Caiaphas,* that he should be put to death, because they
could not succeed against him in any other way.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p16"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p17"></span>**5.** *But they said, Not during the
festival.* They did not think it a fit season, till *the festival* was
past, and the crowd was dispersed. Hence we infer that, although those
hungry dogs eagerly opened their mouths to devour Christ, or rather,
rushed furiously upon him, still God withheld them, by a secret
restraint, from doing any thing by their deliberation or at their
pleasure. So far as lies in their power, they delay till another time;
but, contrary to their wish, God hastens the hour. And it is of great
importance for us to hold, that Christ was not unexpectedly dragged to
death by the violence of his enemies, but was led to it by the
providence of God; for our confidence in the propitiation is founded on
the conviction that he was offered to God as that sacrifice which God
had appointed from the beginning. And therefore he determined that; his
Son should be sacrificed on the very day of *the passover,* that the
ancient figure might give place to the only sacrifice of eternal
redemption. Those who had no other design in view than to ruin Christ
thought that another time would be more appropriate; but God, who had
appointed him to be a sacrifice for the expiation of sins, selected a
suitable day for contrasting the body with its shadow, by placing them
together. Hence also we obtain a brighter display of the fruit of
Christ’s suffering.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p19"></span>**6.** *And when Jesus was in Bethany.*
What the Evangelist now relates had happened a little before Christ came
to Jerusalem, but is here introduced seasonably, in order to inform us
what was the occasion that suddenly drove the priests to make haste.
They did not venture to attack Christ by open violence, and to oppress
him by stratagem was no easy matter; but now that Judas suggests to them
a plan of which they had not thought, the very facility of execution
leads them to adopt a different opinion. As to some slight diversity
between John’s narrative and that of Matthew and Mark, it is easy to
remove the apparent inconsistency, which has led some commentators
erroneously to imagine that it is a different narrative. <span
id="ii.xxiv-p19.2"></span>[Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxiv-p19.2"></span>
expresses the name of the woman who anointed Christ, which is omitted by
the other two Evangelists; but he does not mention the person who
received Christ as a guest, while <span id="ii.xxiv-p19.3"></span>[Mt
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxiv-p19.3"></span>
and <span id="ii.xxiv-p19.4"></span>[Mr
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxiv-p19.4"></span>
expressly state that he was then at supper *in the house of Simon the
leper.* As to its being said by John that his *feet* were *anointed,*
while the other two Evangelists say that she *anointed his head,* this
involves no contradiction. Unquestionably we know that *anointments*
were not poured on the *feet;* but as it was then poured in greater
abundance than usual, John, by way of amplification, informs us that
Christ’s very *feet* were moistened with the oil. Mark too relates, that
*she broke the alabaster-box, and poured* the whole of the ointment on
*his head;* and it agrees very well with this to say that it flowed down
to his *feet.* Let us therefore hold it to be a settled point, that all
the three Evangelists relate the same narrative.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p21"></span>**8.** *And when the disciples saw it.*
This also is not unusual with the Evangelists, when a thing has been
done by one, to attribute it to many persons, if they give their consent
to it. John says that the *murmur* proceeded from *Judas, who betrayed
Christ,* (<span id="ii.xxiv-p21.2"></span>[Joh
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxiv-p21.2"></span>.)
Matthew and Mark include all the disciples along with him. The reason
is, that none of the others would ever have dared to *murmur* if the
wicked slander of Judas had not served for a torch to kindle them. But
when he began, under a plausible pretext, to condemn the expense as
superfluous, all of them easily caught the contagion. And this example
shows what danger arises from malignant and envenomed tongues; for even
those who are naturally reasonable, and candid, and modest, if they do
not exercise prudence and caution, are easily deceived by unfavorable
speeches, and led to adopt false judgments. But if light and foolish
credulity induced the disciples of Christ to take part with *Judas,*
what shall become of us, if we are too easy in admitting *murmurers,*
who are in the habit of carping wickedly at the best actions?

<span id="ii.xxiv-p22"></span>We ought to draw from it another warning,
not to pronounce rashly on a matter which is not sufficiently known. The
disciples seize on what *Judas* said, and, as it has some show of
plausibility, they are too harsh in forming a judgment. They ought, on
the contrary, to have inquired more fully if the action deserved
reproof; more especially when their Master was present, by whose
decision it was their duty to abide. Let us know, therefore, that we act
improperly, when we form our opinion without paying regard to the word
of God; for, as Paul informs us,

<span id="ii.xxiv-p23"></span>None of us liveth or dieth to himself, but
all must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, where we must give
our account,  
(<span id="ii.xxiv-p23.2"></span>[Rom.
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxiv-p23.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.xxiv-p23.3"></span>[2Co
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="ii.xxiv-p23.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxiv-p24"></span>And though there was a wide difference
between *Judas* and the others — because he wickedly held out a
plausible cloak for his theft, while the rest were actuated by foolish
simplicity — still we see how their imprudence withdrew them from
Christ, and made them the companions of *Judas.*

<span id="ii.xxiv-p25"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p26"></span>**10.** *Why do you trouble the woman?* It
is wonderful that Christ, whose whole life was a rule and pattern of
temperance and frugality, now approves of immoderate expense, which
appears to have been closely allied to luxury and superfluous
indulgence. But we must observe the kind of defense which he employs;
for he does not maintain that the woman did right, in such a manner as
if he wished that the same thing should be done every day, but maintains
that what she had done in a single instance was agreeable to God,
because it must have been done for a good reason. Though Christ had no
desire for the use of the *ointment,* yet this *anointing* pleased him
on account of the circumstances in which it happened. Hence we infer
that certain extraordinary ways of acting are sometimes approved by God,
and yet that it would be improper to make them an example. Nor have we
any reason to doubt that *Mary* was led by a secret movement of the
Spirit to anoint Christ; as it is certain that, whenever the saints were
called to any extraordinary performance, they were led by an unusual
movement, so as not to attempt any thing without the guidance and
authority of God. There was no precept in existence enjoining on *Mary*
this *anointing,* nor was it necessary that a law should be laid down
for every single action; but as the heavenly calling is the only origin
and principle of proper conduct, and as God rejects every thing which
men undertake at their own suggestion, *Mary* was directed by the
inspiration of the Spirit, so that this duty, which she performed to
Christ, was founded on assured confidence.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p27"></span>*For she hath performed a good action
towards me.* By this reply, Christ not merely defended the cause of one
woman, but likewise maintained the holy boasting of all who rest
satisfied with having themselves and their works approved by God. It
will often happen that not only censure, but open condemnation, is
pronounced on godly men, who are convinced in their own consciences that
what they do is agreeable to the command of God; and it is ascribed to
pride, if they set at naught the false judgments of the world, and rest
satisfied with being approved by God alone. Since this is a hard
temptation, and since it is scarcely possible not to be shaken by the
agreement of many people against us, even when they are in the wrong, we
ought to hold this doctrine, that none will ever be courageous and
steady in acting properly, unless they depend solely on the will of God.
And therefore Christ settles here the distinction between what is good
and evil by his own solitary decision: for by affirming that what the
woman has done is *a good action,* when that action had been already
condemned by the disciples, he represses by this word the rashness of
men, who freely allow themselves to pronounce judgment.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p28"></span>Relying on this testimony, let us learn to
set little value on any reports concerning us that are spread abroad in
the world, provided we know that what men condemn God approves. In this
manner Isaiah, when oppressed by wicked calumnies, makes reference to
God as his voucher, (<span id="ii.xxiv-p28.1"></span>[Isa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxiv-p28.1"></span>,)
and Paul likewise appeals to the day of the Lord, (<span
id="ii.xxiv-p28.2"></span>[1 Cor. 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxiv-p28.2"></span>.)
Let us therefore learn to pay no deference to the opinions of men
farther than that they may be edified by our example in obedience to
God, and when the world rises against us with a loud noise, let us
satisfy ourselves with this consolation, that what is reckoned bad on
earth is pronounced to be good in heaven.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p29"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p30"></span>**11.** *For you have the poor always with
you.* Christ does not simply defend the anointing, so that we may
imitate it, but assures us that it pleases God on some particular
account. This must be carefully weighed, that we may not fall into the
error of contriving expensive modes of worshipping God, as the Papists
do; for, hearing it said that Christ was pleased with being anointed by
Mary, they supposed that he took delight in incense, wax-tapers,
splendid decorations, and pompous exhibitions of that nature. Hence
arises the great display which is to be found in their ceremonies; and
they do not believe that they will worship God in a proper manner, if
they are not immoderate in expense. But Christ plainly makes this
exception, that what he wished to be done once would not be agreeable to
him in future. For by saying that *the poor* will *always* be in the
world, he distinguishes between the ordinary service, which ought to be
maintained among believers, and that extraordinary service, which ceased
after his ascension to heaven.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p31"></span>Do we wish to lay out our money properly
on true sacrifices? Let us bestow it on *the poor,* for Christ says that
he is not with us, to be served by outward display. True, indeed, we
know and fed by the experience of faith, that he is present with us by
power and spiritual grace; but he is not visibly with us, so as to
receive from us earthly honors. How utterly mad, therefore, is the
obstinacy of those who press upon him foolish expenses which he does not
choose, and which he absolutely refuses! Again, when he says that *the
poor will always be with us,* we infer from it, that if many are in
poverty, this does not arise from accident, but that, by a fixed
purpose, God presents to us those on whom our charity may be exercised.
In short, this passage teaches us that, though the Lord commands us to
dedicate to him ourselves and all our property, yet, with respect to
himself, lie demands no worship but that which is spiritual, and which
is attended by no expense, but rather desires us to bestow on *the poor*
what superstition foolishly expends on the worship of God.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p32"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p33"></span>**12** *She hath done it to bury me.* By
these words Christ confirms what we have said, that the *precious
ointment* was not valued by him on account of its odor, but solely in
reference to his *burial.* It was because he wished to testify by this
symbol, that his grave would yield a sweet odor, as it breathed life and
salvation through the whole world. Accordingly, we are told by John
(<span id="ii.xxiv-p33.2"></span>[Joh
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxiv-p33.2"></span>)
that Christ praised Mary *for having reserved that anointing till the
day of his burial.* But since the truth of this figure has been made
fully apparent, and since Christ, in departing from the sepulcher,
perfumed not one house, but the whole world, by the quickening odor of
his death, it would be childish to repeat an action for which no reason
and no advantage could be assigned.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p34"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p35"></span>**13.** *Wheresoever this gospel shall be
preached.* He says that this action will do honor to *Mary,* because it
will be praised by the doctrine of the gospel. Hence we infer, that we
ought to estimate our works not by the opinion of men, but by the
testimony of the word of God. When he says that she will be held in
honorable *remembrance throughout the whole world,* by this comparison
he indirectly censures his disciples; for among strangers, and in
distant parts of the world, all nations, with one consent, will applaud
this action, which the members of his own household condemned with such
bitterness. Christ gently reproves the disciples also, for not
entertaining sufficiently honorable views of his future reign; but at
the same time, by this expression he bears testimony to the calling of
the Gentiles, on which our salvation is founded. In what sense *the
gospel must be preached throughout the whole world,* we have explained
under <span id="ii.xxiv-p35.2"></span>[Mt
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxiv-p35.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc33025.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>Mais vous
ne m’aurez point tousjours;” — “but you will not have me always.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc33025.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p8"></span> Reckoning silver at five shillings an
ounce, a *denarius,* which weighed *a drachm,* was worth
*sevenpence-halfpenny;* and *three hundred denarii* were equal to *nine*
pounds, seven shillings, and sixpence, of our money. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc33025.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>Mais vous
ne m’aurez point tousjours;” — “but you will not have me always.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:14-20; Mark 14:10-17; Luke 22:3-14](cc33026)
