[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33008)  [Next](cc33010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 22:41-46; MARK 12:35-37;  
LUKE 20:41-44

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span>Matthew  
22:41-46

<span id="ii.viii-p3"></span><span id="ii.viii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
12:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p4"></span><span id="ii.viii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
20:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#041.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p5"></span>**41.** And when the Pharisees were
assembled, Jesus asked them, **42.** Saying, What think you of Christ?
whose son is he? They say to him, David’s. **43.** He saith to them, How
then doth David by the Spirit call him Lord, saying, **44.** The Lord
said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, till I have made thy enemies thy
footstool?  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) **45.** If David then
calleth him Lord, how is he his son? **46.** And no man could make any
reply to him;  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) nor did any man from
that day venture to put any more questions to him.

<span id="ii.viii-p8"></span>**35.** And Jesus answering said, while he
was teaching in the temple, How do the scribes say that Christ is the
son of David? **36.** For David himself by the Holy “Spirit said, The
Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy
footstool.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) **37.** David himself
therefore calleth him Lord; and whence is he his son? And a vast
multitude heard him gladly.

<span id="ii.viii-p10"></span>**41.** And he said to them, How do they
say that Christ is the son of David? **42.** And David himself saith in
the Book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand,
**43.** Till I make thy enemies thy footstool.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) **44.** David therefore calleth him Lord;
and how is he his son?

<span id="ii.viii-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p13"></span><span id="ii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.viii-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p14.2"></span>.** *What think you of Christ?* Mark and Luke
express more clearly the reason why Christ put this question. It was
because there prevailed among *the scribes* an erroneous opinion, that
the promised Redeemer would be one of *David’s* sons and successors, who
would bring along with him nothing more elevated than human nature. For
from the very commencement Satan endeavored, by all the arts which he
could devise, to put forward some pretended Christ, who was not the true
Mediator between God and men. God having so frequently promised that
Christ would proceed from the *seed,* or from the *loins of David,* this
conviction was so deeply rooted in their minds, that they could not
endure to have him stripped of human nature. Satan therefore permitted
Christ to be acknowledged as a true man and a *son of David,* for he
would in vain have attempted to overturn this article of faith; but—what
was worse—he stripped him of his Divinity, as if he had been only one of
the ordinary descendants of Adam. But in this manner the hope of future
and eternal life, as well as spiritual righteousness, was abolished. And
ever since Christ was manifested to the world, heretics have attempted
by various contrivances—and as it were under ground—to overturn
sometimes his human, and sometimes his Divine nature, that either he
might not have full power to save us, or we might not have ready access
to him. Now as the hour of his death was already approaching, the Lord
himself intended to attest his divinity, that all the godly might boldly
rely on him; for if he had been only man, we would have had no right
either to glory in him, or to expect salvation from him.

<span id="ii.viii-p15"></span>We now perceive his design, which was, to
assert that he was the Son of God, not so much on his own account, as to
make our faith rest on his heavenly power. For as the weakness of the
flesh, by which he approached to us, gives us confidence, that we may
not hesitate to draw near to him, so if that weakness alone were before
our eyes, it would rather fill us with fear and despair than excite
proper confidence. Yet it must be observed, that *the scribes* are not
reproved for teaching that *Christ would be the Son of David,* but for
imagining that he was a mere man, who would come from heaven, to assume
the nature and person of a man. Nor does our Lord make a direct
assertion about himself, but simply shows that *the scribes* hold a
wicked error in expecting that the Redeemer will proceed only from the
earth and from human lineage. But though this doctrine was well known to
be held by them, we learn from Matthew, that he interrogated them in
presence of the people what their sentiments were.

<span id="ii.viii-p16"></span><span id="ii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p17"></span>**43.** *How then does David by the Spirit
call him Lord.* The assertion made by Christ, that *David* spoke *by the
Spirit,* is emphatic; for he contrasts the prediction of a future event
with the testimony of a present event. By this phrase he anticipates the
sophistry by which the Jews of the present day attempt to escape. They
allege that this prediction celebrates the reign of *David,* as if,
representing God to be the Author of his reign, *David* would rise above
the mad attempts of his enemies, and affirmed that they would gain
nothing by opposing the will of God. That *the scribes* might not
shelter themselves under such an objection, Christ began with stating
that the psalm was not composed in reference to the person of *David,*
but was dictated *by the* prophetic *Spirit* to describe the future
reign of Christ; as it may easily be learned even from the passage
itself, that what we read there does not apply either to *David,* or to
any other earthly king; for there *David* introduces a king clothed with
a new priesthood, by which the ancient shadows of the Law must be
abolished, (<span id="ii.viii-p17.2"></span>[Ps
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)<span id="ii.viii-p17.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ii.viii-p18"></span>We must now see how he proves that Christ
will hold a higher rank than to be merely descended from the seed of
*David.* It is because *David,* who was king and head of the people,
*calls him Lord;* from which it follows, that there is something in him
greater than man. But the argument appears to be feeble and
inconclusive; for it may be objected that, when *David* gave the psalm
to the people to sing, without having any view to his own person, he
assigned to Christ dominion over others. But to this I reply that, as he
was one of the members of the Church, nothing would have been more
improper than to shut himself out from the common doctrine. Here he
enjoins all the children of God to boast, as with one voice, that they
are safe through the protection of a heavenly and invincible King. If he
be separated from the body of the Church, he will not partake of the
salvation promised through Christ. If this were the voice of a few
persons, the dominion of Christ would not extend even to *David.* But
now neither he, nor any other person, can be excluded from subjection to
him, without cutting himself off from the hope of eternal salvation.
Since then there was nothing better for *David* than to be included in
the Church, it was not less for himself than for the rest of the people
that *David* composed this psalm. In short, by this title Christ is
pronounced to be supreme and sole King, who holds the preeminence among
all believers; and no exception ought to be allowed to ranking all in
one class, when he is appointed to be the Redeemer of the Church. There
can be no doubt, therefore, that David represents himself also as a
subject of his government, so as to be reckoned one of the number of the
people of God.

<span id="ii.viii-p19"></span>But now another question arises: Might not
God have raised up one whom he appointed from among mankind to be a
Redeemer, so as to be *David’s Lord,* though *he was his son?* For here
it is not the essential name of God, but only *Adonai*  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) that is employed, and this term is
frequently applied to men. I reply: Christ takes for granted that he who
is taken out of the number of men, and raised to such a rank of honor,
as to be the supreme Head of the whole Church, is not a mere man, but
possesses also the majesty of God. For the eternal God, who by an oath
makes this claim for himself, that

<span id="ii.viii-p21"></span>before him every knee shall bow, (<span
id="ii.viii-p21.1"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.viii-p21.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.viii-p22"></span>at the same time swears that

<span id="ii.viii-p23"></span>he will not give his glory to another,
(<span id="ii.viii-p23.1"></span>[Isa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)<span id="ii.viii-p23.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.viii-p24"></span>But, according to the testimony of Paul,
when Christ was raised to kingly power,

<span id="ii.viii-p25"></span>there was given to him a name which is
above every name, that before him every knee should bow, (<span
id="ii.viii-p25.1"></span>[Ro
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.viii-p25.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.viii-p25.2"></span>[Php
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="ii.viii-p25.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.viii-p26"></span>And though Paul had never said this, yet
such is the fact, that Christ is above *David* and other holy kings,
because he also ranks higher than angels; which would not apply to a
created man, unless he were also

<span id="ii.viii-p27"></span>God manifested in the flesh, (<span
id="ii.viii-p27.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="ii.viii-p27.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.viii-p28"></span>I do acknowledge that his divine essence
is not expressed directly and in so many words; but it may easily be
inferred that He is God, who is placed above all creatures.

<span id="ii.viii-p29"></span><span id="ii.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p30"></span>**44.** *The* Lord *said to my Lord.* Here
the Holy Spirit puts into the mouth of all the godly a song of triumph,
that they may boldly defy Satan and all the ungodly, and mock at their
rage, when they endeavor to drive Christ from his throne. That they may
not hesitate or tremble, when they perceive great emotions produced in
the earth, they are commanded to place the holy and inviolable decree of
God in opposition to all the exertions of adversaries. The meaning
therefore is: whatever may be the madness of men, all that they shall
dare to contrive will be of no avail for destroying the kingdom of
Christ, which has been set up, not by the will of men, but by the
appointment of God, and therefore is supported by everlasting strength.
Whenever this kingdom is violently attacked, let us call to remembrance
this revelation from heaven; for undoubtedly this promise was put into
the hand of Christ, that every believer may apply it to his own use. But
God never changes or deceives, so as to retract what has once gone out
of his mouth.

<span id="ii.viii-p31"></span>*Sit at my right hand.* This phrase is
used metaphorically for the second or next rank, which is occupied by
God’s deputy. And therefore it signifies, to hold the highest government
and power in the name of God, as we know that God has committed his
authority to his only-begotten Son, so as to govern his Church by his
agency. This mode of expression, therefore, does not denote any
particular place, but, on the contrary, embraces heaven and earth under
the government of Christ. And God declares that Christ will *sit till
his enemies* be subdued, in order to inform us that his kingdom will
remain invincible against every attack; not that, when *his enemies*
have been subdued, he will be deprived of the power which had been
granted to him, but that, while the whole multitude of his enemies shall
be laid low, his power will remain for ever unimpaired. In the meantime,
it points out that condition of his kingdom which we perceive in the
present day, that we may not be uneasy when we see it attacked on all
sides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc33009.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p6.1"></span>Jusques a
tant que je mettray tes ennemis pour le marchepied de tes pieds;” —
“till I shall place thy enemies as the footstool for thy feet.”

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc33009.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p7.1"></span>Et nul ne
luy pouvoit respondre une parolle;” — “and none could answer a word to
him.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc33009.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p9.1"></span>Jusques a
tant que je mettray tes ennemis pour le marchepied de tes pieds;” —
“till I shall place thy enemies as the footstool for thy feet.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc33009.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.viii-p11.1"></span>Jusques
a tant que je mettray tes ennemis pour le marchepied de tes pieds;” —
“till I shall place thy enemies as the footstool for thy feet.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc33009.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="ii.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p20"></span> Our authorized version of <span
id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>
runs thus: The Lord said unto my Lord. While the word Lord occurs twice
in this clause, the Translators have followed their ordinary method of
printing the first in small capitals, to present it to the eye of the
reader as standing for the Hebrew word <span
id="ii.viii-p20.2"></span>יהוה, (*Jehovah*,) which our Author calls “the
essential name of God,” while the second stands for (<span
id="ii.viii-p20.3"></span>אדני), (*Adonai*,) *my Lord,* which, as he
also mentions, “is frequently applied to men.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 23:1-12; Mark 12:38-39; Luke 11:43, 45-46;
20:45-46](cc33010.md)
