[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33002)  [Next](cc33004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 21:23-27; MARK 11:27-33; LUKE 20:1-8

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span><span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
21:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span><span id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
11:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#027.md)<span id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span><span id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
20:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**23.** And when he was come into the temple,
the chief priests and elders of the people came to him, saying By what
authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee that authority?
 <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) **24.** And Jesus answering said
to them, I also will ask you something, which if you shall tell me, I
also will tell you by what authority I do these things. **25.** Whence
was the baptism of John? From heaven, or from men? But they thought
within themselves saying, If we shall say, From heaven, he will say to
us, Why then did you not believe him? **26.** But if we shall say, From
men, we dread the multitude, for they all hold John for a prophet.
**27.** And answering Jesus, they said, We do not know. And he saith to
them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>**27.** And they come again to Jerusalem; and
while he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, and scribes, and
elders, come to him. **28.** And they say to him, By what authority
doest thou these things? and who gave thee that authority  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) to do these things? **29.** And Jesus
answering said to them, I will also ask you something, and answer me,
and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. **30.** Whether
was the baptism of John from heaven or from men? Answer me. **31.** And
they thought within themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven, he
will say, Why then did you not believe him? **32.** But if we say, From
men, they dreaded the people;  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) for
all reckoned John that he was truly a prophet. **33.** And they
answering say to Jesus, We do not know. And Jesus answering saith to
them, Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>**1.** And it happened on one of those days,
while he was teaching the people in the temple, and preaching the
gospel, the chief priests, and scribes, with the elders, came upon him,
**2.** And spoke to him saying, Tell us, by what authority doest thou
these things? or who is he that gave thee that authority? **3.** And
Jesus answering said to them, I will also ask you something, and answer
me. **4.** Was the baptism of John from heaven, or from men? **5.** But
they reasoned within themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven,
he will say, Why then did you not believe him? **6.** But if we shall
say, From men, all the people will stone us; for they are convinced that
John is a prophet. **7.** And they answered, That they did not know
whence it was. **8.** And Jesus said to them, Neither do I tell you by
what authority I do these things.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.ii-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.ii-p13.2"></span>.**
*By what authority doest thou these things.* As the other schemes and
open attempts to attack Christ had not succeeded, the *priests and
scribes* now attempt, by indirect methods, if they may possibly cause
him to desist from the practice of teaching. They do not debate with him
as to the doctrine itself, whether it was true or not—for already had
they often enough attacked him in vain on that question—but they raise a
dispute as to his calling and commission. And, indeed, there were
plausible grounds; for since a man ought not, of his own accord, to
intermeddle either with the honor of priesthood, or with the prophetical
office, but ought to wait for the calling of God, much less would any
man be at liberty to claim for himself the title of Messiah, unless it
were evident that he had been chosen by God; for he must have been
appointed, not only by the voice of God, but likewise by *an oath,* as
it is written, (<span id="ii.ii-p13.3"></span>[Ps
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.ii-p13.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii-p13.4"></span>[Heb
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021)<span id="ii.ii-p13.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span>But when the divine majesty of Christ had
been attested by so many miracles, they act maliciously and wickedly in
inquiring whence he came, as if they had been ignorant of all that he
had done. For what could be more unreasonable than that., after seeing
the hand of God openly displayed in curing the lame and blind, they
should doubt if he were a private individual who had rashly assumed this
authority? Besides, more than enough of evidence had been already laid
before them., that Christ was sent from heaven., so that nothing was
farther from their wish than to approve of the performances of Christ,
after having learned that God was the Author of them. They therefore
insist on this., that he is not a lawful minister of God, because he had
not been chosen by their votes, as if the power had dwelt solely with
them. But though they had been the lawful guardians of the Church, still
it was monstrous to rise up against God. We now understand why Christ
did not make a direct reply to them. It was because they wickedly and
shamelessly interrogated him about a matter which was well known.

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span><span id="ii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>**25** *Whence was the baptism of John?*
Christ interrogates them about *the baptism of John,* not only to show
that they were unworthy of any authority, because they had despised a
holy prophet of God, but also to convict them, by their own reply, of
having impudently pretended ignorance of a matter with which they were
well acquainted. For we must bear in mind why *John* was sent, what was
his commission, and on what subject he most of all insisted. He had been
sent as Christ’s herald. He was not deficient in his duty, and claims
nothing more for himself than to

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span>prepare the way of the Lord.  
(<span id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.ii-p17.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>[Lu
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#027)<span id="ii.ii-p17.3"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span>In short., he had pointed out Christ with
the finger, and had declared him to be the only Son of God. From what
source then do the scribes mean that the new authority of Christ should
be proved, since it had been fully attested by the preaching *of John?*

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span>We now see that Christ employed no cunning
stratagem in order to escape, but fully and perfectly answered the
question which had been proposed; for it was impossible to acknowledge
that *John* was a servant of God, without acknowledging that he was
Himself the Lord. He did not therefore shelter arrogant men,  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) who without any commission, but out of
their own hardihood, take upon themselves a public office; nor did he
countenance, by his example, the art of suppressing the truth, as many
crafty men falsely plead his authority. I do acknowledge that, if wicked
men lay snares for us, we ought not always to reply in the same way, but
ought to be prudently on our guard against their malice, yet in such a
manner that truth may not be left without a proper defense.

<span id="ii.ii-p21"></span>*Baptism* denotes here not only the sign of
washing, but the whole ministry of *John;* for Christ intended to draw
out a reply, Was *John a* true and lawful prophet of God, or an
impostor? Yet this mode of expression contains a useful doctrine, *Is
the of John from God, or from men?* For hence we infer, that no doctrine
and no sacrament ought to be received among the godly, unless it be
evident that it has come from God; and that men are not at liberty to
make any invention of this nature. The discourse relates to *John,* whom
our Lord, in another passage, raises, by a remarkable commendation,
above all the prophets, (<span id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Luke
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#026.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028)<span id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>..md)
Yet Christ declares that his *baptism* ought not to be received, unless
it had been enjoined by God. What, then, must we say of the pretended
sacraments, which men of no authority have foolishly introduced without
any command from God? For Christ plainly declares by these words, that
the whole government of the Church depends on the will of God in such a
manner, that men have no right to introduce any thing from themselves.

<span id="ii.ii-p22"></span>*But they thought within themselves.* Here
we perceive the impiety of the priests. They do not inquire what is
true, nor do they put the question to their own conscience;  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) and they are so base as to choose rather
to shuffle than to acknowledge what they know to be true, that their
tyranny may not be impaired. In this manner, all wicked men, though they
pretend to be desirous of learning, shut the gate of truth, if they feel
it to be opposed to their wicked desires. So then Christ does not allow
those men to go without a reply, but sends them away ashamed and
confounded, and, by bringing forward the testimony of *John,*
sufficiently proves that he is furnished with divine power.  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc33003.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Et qui est
celuy qui t’a donné ceste authorité?” — “And who is he that gave thee
that authority?”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc33003.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p8.1"></span>Et qui est
celuy qui t’a donné ceste authorité?” — “And who is he that gave thee
that authority?”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc33003.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="ii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>Nous craignous
le peuple;” — “we dread the people.”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc33003.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p20.1"></span>Ainsi done
Christ n’a point voulu yei armer de response des glorieux et
outrecuidez;” — “so then Christ did not intend here to arm, by his
reply, haughty and presumptuous men.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc33003.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p23.1"></span>Et
n’examinent point la chose selon leur conscience;”—” and do not examine
the thing according to their conscience.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc33003.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="ii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p24.1"></span>Qu’il est
muni et authorizé d’une puissance divine;” — “that he is furnished and
authorized by a divine power.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 21:28-32](cc33004.md)
