[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33022)  [Next](cc33024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 25:1-13

<span id="ii.xxii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
25:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p3"></span>**1.** Then shall the kingdom of heaven be
like ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went out to meet the
bridegroom. **2.** And five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
**3.** They that were foolish, while they took their lamps, took no oil
with them: **4.** But the wise took oil in their vessels along with
their lamps. **5.** And while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered
and slept. **6.** And at midnight a cry arose, Behold, the bridegroom
cometh; go you out to meet him. **7.** Then all those virgins arose, and
trimmed their lamps. **8.** And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of
your oil; for our lamps are going out. **9.** But the wise answered,
saying, By no means, lest there be not enough for you and for us;  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) but go you rather to them that sell,
and buy for yourselves. **10.** And while they went to buy, the
bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the
marriage, and the door was shut. **11.** And afterwards came also the
other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. **12.** But he answering
said, Verily I tell you, I know you not. **13.** Watch, therefore, for
you know not the day nor the hour in which the Son of man shall come.

<span id="ii.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxii-p6"></span>Though this exhortation — as will appear
from the conclusion of it—has nearly the same object with the former,
yet it is properly added, in order to confirm believers in perseverance.
Our Lord knew how strongly the nature of men is inclined to idleness,
and how, for the most part, they not only grow weary after a great lapse
of time, but give way through sudden dislike. To remedy this disease, he
taught his disciples that they were not duly fortified, unless they had
sufficient perseverance for a long period. When this is ascertained to
be the design of the parable, we ought not to trouble ourselves much
with minute investigations, which have nothing to do with what Christ
intended. Some people give themselves a good deal of uneasiness about
*the lamps, the vessels, and the oil;* but the plain and natural meaning
of the whole is, that it is not enough to have ardent zeal for a short
time, if we have not also a constancy that never tires. And Christ
employs a very appropriate parable to express this. A little before, he
had exhorted the disciples, that as they had a journey to perform
through dark and dreary places, they should provide themselves with
*lamps;* but as the wick of the lamp, if it be not supplied with oil,
gradually dries up, and loses its brightness, Christ now says, that
believers need to have incessant supplies of courage, to support the
flame which is kindled in their hearts, otherwise their zeal will fail
ere they have completed the journey.

<span id="ii.xxii-p7"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p8"></span>**<span id="ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>[Matthew
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>.**
*Then shall the kingdom of heaven.* By this term is meant the condition
of the future Church, which was to be collected by the authority and
direction of Christ. He employs this remarkable title, that believers
may not deceive themselves by an erroneous opinion that they have
arrived at absolute perfection. The parable is borrowed from the
ordinary custom of life; for it was a childish speculation of *Jerome*
and others, to adduce this passage in praise of *virginity;* while
Christ had no other object in view than to lessen the uneasiness which
they might be apt to feel in consequence of the delay of his coming. He
says, therefore, that he asks nothing more from us than is usually done
for friends at a marriage-feast. The custom was, that *virgins,* who are
tender and delicate—should, by way of respect, accompany *the
bridegroom* to his chamber. But the general instruction of the parable
consists in this, that it is not enough to have been once ready and
prepared for the discharge of duty, if we do not persevere to the end.

<span id="ii.xxii-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p10"></span>**2.** *Five were wise.* Towards the close
of the former chapter, our Lord specially required *steward* to be
*wise,* (<span id="ii.xxii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045)<span id="ii.xxii-p10.1"></span>)
for it is reasonable, that the heavier the charge which any man
sustains, and the more important the matters in which he is employed,
the *wisdom* with which he conducts himself should be the greater. But
now he demands *wisdom* from all the children of God in general, that
they may not, through inconsiderate rashness, expose themselves to be
the prey of Satan. Now this kind of *wisdom* he describes by saying,
that they are to provide themselves with the supplies necessary for
completing the course of their life. For the warmth of our impatience
makes us look upon the time, however short, as far too long protracted;
and next, our poverty is such, that we need supplies for every hour.

<span id="ii.xxii-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p12"></span>**5.** *And while the bridegroom tarried,
they all slumbered and slept.* Some interpret this slumbering in a bad
sense, as if believers, along with others, abandoned themselves to
sloth, and were asleep amidst the vanities of the world; but this is
altogether inconsistent with the intention of Christ, and with the
structure of the parable. There would be greater probability in
explaining it to denote death, which overtakes believers before the
coming of Christ; for it is not at that time only that we must look for
salvation, but also when we have left the world and are sleeping in
Christ. But I take it more simply as denoting earthly occupations, in
which believers must be engaged, so long as they dwell in the body; and,
though forgetfulness of the kingdom of God ought never to steal upon
them, yet the distracting influence of the occupations of this world is
not inappropriately compared to *sleep.* For they cannot be so
constantly occupied with the thought of meeting Christ, as not to be
distracted, or retarded, or entangled by a variety of cares, in
consequence of which, while they watch, they are partly asleep.

<span id="ii.xxii-p13"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p14"></span>**6.** *At midnight a cry arose.* With
respect to the *cry* I view it as taken metaphorically for his sudden
arrival; for we know, that when any thing new and unexpected happens,
men are wont to make a loud noise. True, indeed, our Lord *cries* daily,
that *he will come quickly,* (<span id="ii.xxii-p14.1"></span>[Re
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#020)<span
id="ii.xxii-p14.1"></span>;) but at that, time, the whole frame of the
world will resound with the *cry,* and his dreadful majesty will fill
heaven and earth in such a manner, as not only to awaken those who are
*asleep,* but to bring the dead *out of their graves,* (<span
id="ii.xxii-p14.2"></span>[Joh
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxii-p15"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p16"></span>**8.** *And the foolish said to the wise.*
This is a reproof of the late repentance of those who never think of
what they are in want of, till *the door is shut* against every remedy.
For those who do not make provision for a long period are charged with
folly, because they are careless, and flatter themselves amidst their
poverty, and allow the season of mutual intercourse to pass in such a
way as to despise the aids which were offered to them. As they do not,
in proper time, bethink themselves about procuring oil, Christ, mocking
the knowledge which they have acquired when it is too late, shows how
their stupidity will be punished, when they shall see themselves to be
empty and unprovided, while there is no remedy.

<span id="ii.xxii-p17"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p18"></span>**9.** *Lest there be not enough for you
and us.* We know that the Lord distributes his gifts so variously to
each, according to his measure, in order that they may give mutual aid
to each other, and may employ for the general advantage what has been
entrusted to each individual; and that in this way is preserved the
sacred connection which exists among the members of the Church. But
Christ here points out the time when he shall summon all men to his
tribunal, each carrying his bundle, that he may bring with him according
as he has done in his body. That portion of grace received, which every
man has laid up for himself, is, therefore, justly compared to a stock
of provisions for a journey, which *would not be enough* for a greater
number of persons.

<span id="ii.xxii-p19"></span>*But rather go to them that sell, and buy
for yourselves.* These words immediately follow, and are not intended as
an admonition, but a reproof; and the meaning is: “There once was a time
for *buying,* which you ought not to have neglected; for *oil* was at
that time offered for sale, but the means of obtaining it are now
withdrawn.” And yet it is foolish in the Papists to infer from this,
that by our own virtues or industry we obtain the gift of perseverance.
For the word *buy* does not at all imply that a price has been given; as
appears clearly from the passage in Isaiah, (55:1) where the Lord, while
he invites us *to buy,* demands no price, but informs us, that he has
*wine and milk in abundance,* to be gratuitously bestowed. There is no
other way of obtaining it, therefore, but to receive by faith what is
offered to us.

<span id="ii.xxii-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p21"></span>**10.** *And the door was shut.* At length
it follows that *the door* of the heavenly kingdom *will be shut*
against all who have not made provision, because they failed in the
middle of the course. We must not enter here into minute inquiries, how
it is that Christ says that *the foolish virgins* went to buy for it
means nothing else than that all who shall not be ready at the very
moment when they shall be called will be *shut out* from entering into
heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc33023.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxii-p4.1"></span>De peur
que nous n’en ayons point assez pour nous et pour vous;” — “lest we have
not enough of it for us and for you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 25:31-46; Luke 21:37-38](cc33024)
