[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33050)  [Next](cc33052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.l"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p1"></span>LUKE 24:41-49

<span id="ii.l-p2"></span><span id="ii.l-p2.1"></span>[Luke
24:41-49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041)<span id="ii.l-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p3"></span>**41. **But while they yet believed not for
joy, and wondered, he said to them, Have you here any thing to eat?
**42. **And they presented to him a piece of a broiled fish, and some
honeycomb. **43. **And he took, and ate, in their presence. **44. **And
he said to them, These are the words which I spoke to you, while I was
still with you; that all things which are written in the law Moses, and
in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me, are fulfilled.
**45. **Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand
the Scriptures. **46. **And he said to them, Thus it is written, and
thus it was proper that Christ should suffer, and rise from the dead on
the third day; **47. **And that repentance and forgiveness of sins
should be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
**48. **And you are witnesses of those things. **49. **And, lo, send the
promise of my Father upon you; but remain you in the city of Jerusalem,
till you are endued with power from on high.

<span id="ii.l-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.l-p5"></span><span id="ii.l-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p6"></span>**<span id="ii.l-p6.1"></span>[Luke
24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041)<span id="ii.l-p6.1"></span>.**
*But while they yet believed not for joy.* This passage shows also that
they were not purposely incredulous, like persons who deliberately
resolve not to believe; but while their will led them to believe
eagerly, they were held bound by the vehemence of their feelings, so
that they could not rest satisfied. For certainly the *joy* which Luke
mentions arose from nothing but faith; and yet it hindered their faith
from gaining the victory. Let us therefore observe with what suspicion
we ought to regard the vehemence of our feelings, which, though it may
have good beginnings, hurries us out of the right path. We are also
reminded how earnestly we ought to struggle against every thing that
retards faith, since the *joy* which sprung up in the minds of the
apostles from the presence of Christ was the cause of their unbelief.

<span id="ii.l-p7"></span><span id="ii.l-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p8"></span>**43.** *And he took, and ate it in their
presence.* Here we perceive, on the other hand, how kindly and gently
Christ bears with the weakness of his followers, since he does not fail
to give them this new support when they are falling. And, indeed, though
he has obtained a new and heavenly life, and has no more need of meat
and drink than angels have, still he voluntarily condescends to join in
the common usages of mortals. During the whole course of his life, he
had subjected himself to the necessity of eating and drinking; and now,
though relieved from that necessity, he eats for the purpose of
convincing his disciples of the certainty of his resurrection. Thus we
see how he disregarded himself, and chose always to be devoted to our
interests. This is the true and pious meditation on this narrative, in
which believers may advantageously rest, dismissing questions of mere
curiosity, such as, “Was this corruptible food digested?” “What sort of
nourishment did the body of Christ derive from it?” and, “What became of
what did not go to nourishment?” As if it had not been in the power of
Him who created all things out of nothing to reduce to nothing a small
portion of food, whenever he thought fit. As Christ really tasted *the
fish and the honeycomb,* in order to *show* that he was a man, so we
cannot doubt that by his divine power he consumed what was not needed to
pass into nourishment. Thus the angels, at the table of Abraham, (<span
id="ii.l-p8.1"></span>[Ge 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)<span
id="ii.l-p8.1"></span>,) having been clothed with real bodies, did
actually, I have no doubt, eat and drink; but yet I do not therefore
admit that the meat and drink yielded them that refreshment which the
weakness of the flesh demands; but as they were clothed with a human
form for the sake of Abraham, so the Lord granted this favor to his
servant, that those heavenly visitors ate before his tent. Now if we
acknowledge that the bodies which they assumed for a time were reduced
to nothing after they had discharged their embassy, who will deny that
the same thing happened as to the food?

<span id="ii.l-p9"></span><span id="ii.l-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p10"></span>**44.** *These are the words.* Though it will
afterwards appear from Matthew and Mark that a discourse similar to this
was delivered in Galilee, yet I think it probable that Luke now relates
what happened on the day after his resurrection. For what John says of
that day, that *he breathed on them, that they might receive the Holy
Ghost,* (<span id="ii.l-p10.1"></span>[Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="ii.l-p10.1"></span>)
agrees with the words of Luke which here immediately follow, that *he
opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.*
By these words Christ indirectly reproves their gross and shameful
forgetfulness, that, though they had long ago been fully informed of his
future resurrection, they were as much astonished as if it had never
been mentioned to them. The import of his words is: “Why do you hesitate
as if this had been a new and unexpected occurrence, while it is only
what I frequently predicted to you? Why do you not rather remember my
words? For if hitherto you have reckoned me worthy of credit, this ought
to have been known to you from my instructions before it happened.” In
short, Christ tacitly complains that his labor has been thrown away on
the apostles, since his instruction has been forgotten.

<span id="ii.l-p11"></span>*All things which are written concerning me.*
He now rebukes them more sharply for their slowness, by declaring that
he brought forward nothing that was new but that he only reminded them
of what had been declared by *the Law and the Prophets,* with which they
ought to have been familiar from their childhood. But though they had
been ignorant of the whole doctrine of religion, nothing could have been
more unreasonable than not to embrace readily what they knew to have
undoubtedly proceeded from God; for it was a principle admitted by the
whole nation, that there was no religion but what was contained in *the
Law and the Prophets.* The present division of the Scriptures is more
copious than what we find in other passages; for besides *the Law and
the Prophets,* he adds, in the third place, *the Psalms,* which, though
they might with propriety have been reckoned among *the Prophets,* have,
something distinct and peculiar to themselves. Yet the division into two
par which we have seen elsewhere, (<span id="ii.l-p11.1"></span>[Lu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span id="ii.l-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.l-p11.2"></span>[Joh
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045)<span id="ii.l-p11.2"></span>,)
embraces notwithstanding the whole of Scripture.

<span id="ii.l-p12"></span><span id="ii.l-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p13"></span>**45.** *Then he opened their understanding.*
As the Lord had formerly discharged the office of Teacher, with little
or no improvement on the part of the disciples, he now begins to teach
them inwardly by his Spirit; for words are icily wasted on the air,
until the minds are enlightened by the gift of understanding. It is
true, indeed, that

<span id="ii.l-p14"></span>the word of God is like a lamp,  
(<span id="ii.l-p14.2"></span>[Ps
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)<span id="ii.l-p14.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.l-p15"></span>but it shines in darkness and amidst the
blind, until the inward light is given by the Lord, to whom it
peculiarly belongs to *enlighten the blind,* (<span
id="ii.l-p15.1"></span>[Ps 146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008)<span
id="ii.l-p15.1"></span>.) And hence it is evident how great is the
corruption of our nature, since the light of life exhibited to us in the
heavenly oracles is of no avail to us. Now if we do not perceive by *the
understanding* what is right, how would the will be sufficient for
yielding obedience? We ought, therefore, to acknowledge that we come
short in every respect, so that the heavenly doctrine proves to be
useful and efficacious to us, only so far as the Spirit both forms our
minds to understand it, and our hearts to submit to its yoke; and,
therefore, that in order to our being properly qualified for becoming
his disciples, we must lay aside all confidence in our own abilities,
and seek light from heaven; and, abandoning the foolish opinion of
free-will, must give ourselves up to be governed by God. Nor is it
without reason that Paul bids men

<span id="ii.l-p16"></span>become fools, that they may be wise to God,  
(<span id="ii.l-p16.2"></span>[1Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="ii.l-p16.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.l-p17"></span>for no darkness is more dangerous for
quenching the light of the Spirit than reliance on our own sagacity.

<span id="ii.l-p18"></span>*That they might understand the Scriptures.*
Let the reader next observe, that the disciples had not the eyes of
their mind opened, so as to comprehend the mysteries of God without any
assistance, but so far as they are contained in *the Scriptures;* and
thus was fulfilled what is said,

<span id="ii.l-p19"></span>(<span id="ii.l-p19.1"></span>[Ps
119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018)<span id="ii.l-p19.1"></span>,)
Enlighten mine eyes,  
that I may behold the wonders of thy law.

<span id="ii.l-p20"></span>For *God* does not bestow the Spirit on his
people, in order to set aside the use of his word, but rather to render
it fruitful. It is highly improper, therefore, in fanatics, under the
pretense of revelations, to take upon themselves the liberty of
despising *the Scriptures;* for what we now read in reference to the
apostles is daily accomplished by Christ in all his people, namely, that
by his Spirit he guides us *to understand the Scriptures,* and does not
hurry us away into the idle raptures of enthusiasm.

<span id="ii.l-p21"></span>But it may be asked, Why did Christ choose to
lose his labor, during the entire period of three years, in teaching
them, rather than to *open their understandings* from the very outset? I
reply, first, though the fruit of his labor did not immediately appear,
still it was not useless; for when the new light was given to them, they
likewise perceived the advantage of the former period. For I regard
these words as meaning, not only that *he opened their understandings,*
that, in future they might be ready to receive instruction, if any thing
were stated to them, but that they might call to remembrance his
doctrine, which they had formerly heard without any advantage. Next, let
us learn that this ignorance, which lasted during three years, was of
great use for informing them that from no other source than from the
heavenly light did they obtain their new discernment. Besides, by this
fact Christ gave an undoubted proof of his Divinity; for he not only was
the minister of the outward voice, which sounded in their ears, but by
his hidden power he penetrated into their minds, and thus showed that
what, Paul tells us, does not belong to the teachers of the Church is
the prerogative of Him alone, (<span id="ii.l-p21.1"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="ii.l-p21.1"></span>.) Yet
it ought to be observed, that the apostles were not so destitute of the
light of understanding as not to hold certain elementary principles; but
as it was only a slight taste, it is reckoned to be a commencement of
true *understanding* when the veil is removed, and they behold Christ in
*the Law and the Prophets.*

<span id="ii.l-p22"></span><span id="ii.l-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p23"></span>**46.** *And he said to them, Thus it is
written.* The connection of these words refutes the calumny of those who
allege that outward doctrine would be superfluous, if we did not
naturally possess some power of understanding. “Why,” say they, “would
the Lord speak to the deaf?” But we see that, when the Spirit of Christ,
who is the inward Teacher, performs his office, the labor of the
minister who speaks is not thrown away; for Christ, after having
bestowed on his followers the gift of *understanding,* instructs them
out of *the Scriptures* with real advantage. With the reprobate, indeed,
though the outward word passes away as if it were dead, still it renders
them inexcusable.

<span id="ii.l-p24"></span>As to the words of Christ, they are founded
on this principle: *Whatever is written must be fulfilled,* for God
declared nothing by his prophets but what he will undoubtedly
accomplish.” But by these words we are likewise taught what it is that
we ought chiefly to learn from *the Law and the Prophets;* namely, that
since Christ is *the end* and the soul of *the law,* (<span
id="ii.l-p24.1"></span>[Ro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="ii.l-p24.1"></span>,) whatever we learn without him, and apart from
him, is idle and unprofitable. Whoever then desires to make great
proficiency *in the Scriptures* ought always to keep this end in view.
Now Christ here places first in order his death and resurrection, and
afterwards the fruit which we derive from both. For whence come
repentance and forgiveness of sins, but because *our old man is
crucified with Christ,* (<span id="ii.l-p24.2"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="ii.l-p24.2"></span>,)
that by his grace we may rise to *newness of life;* and because our sins
have been expiated by the sacrifice of his death, our pollution has been
washed away by his blood, and we have, obtained righteousness through
his resurrection? He teaches, therefore, that in his death and
resurrection we ought to seek the cause and grounds of our salvation;
because hence arise reconciliation to God, and regeneration to a new and
spiritual life. Thus it is expressly stated that neither forgiveness of
sins nor repentance can be preached but in his name; for, on the one
hand, we have no right to expect the imputation of righteousness, and,
on the other hand, we do not obtain self-denial and newness of life,
except so far as

<span id="ii.l-p25"></span>he is made to us righteousness and
sanctification,  
(<span id="ii.l-p25.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="ii.l-p25.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.l-p26"></span>But as we have elsewhere treated copiously of
this summary of the Gospel, it is better to refer my readers to those
passages for what they happen not to remember, than to load them with
repetitions.

<span id="ii.l-p27"></span><span id="ii.l-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p28"></span>**47.** *To all nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.* Christ now discovers clearly what he had formerly
concealed—that the grace of the redemption brought by him extends alike
*to all nations.* For though the prophets had frequently predicted the
calling of the Gentiles, still it was not revealed in such a manner that
the Jews could willingly admit the Gentiles to share with them in the
hope of salvation. Till his resurrection, therefore, Christ was not
acknowledged to be any thing more than the Redeemer of the chosen people
alone; and then, for the first time, was *the wall of partition* (<span
id="ii.l-p28.1"></span>[Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="ii.l-p28.1"></span>) thrown down, that they who had been
*strangers,* (<span id="ii.l-p28.2"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="ii.l-p28.2"></span>,)
and who had formerly been scattered, might be gathered into the fold of
the Lord. In the meantime, however, that the covenant of God might not
seem to be made void, Christ has assigned to the Jews the first rank,
enjoining the apostles to *begin at Jerusalem.* For since God had
peculiarly adopted the posterity of Abraham, they must have been
preferred to the rest of the world. This is the privilege of the
firstborn which Jeremiah ascribes to them, when Jehovah says, *I am a
father to Israel, and Ephraim is first-born,* (<span
id="ii.l-p28.3"></span>[Jer 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)<span
id="ii.l-p28.3"></span>.) This order, too, Paul everywhere observes with
the greatest care, telling us that Christ *came and proclaimed peace to
those who were near,* and afterwards to strangers who were *at a
distance,* (<span id="ii.l-p28.4"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="ii.l-p28.4"></span>.)

<span id="ii.l-p29"></span><span id="ii.l-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p30"></span>**48.** *And you are witnesses of those
things.* He does not yet commission them to preach the gospel, but only
reminds them to what service he has appointed them, that they may
prepare themselves for it in due time. He holds out this, partly as a
consolation to soothe their grief, and partly as a spur to correct their
sloth. Conscious of their recent departure from their Master, they must
have been in a state of dejection and here, contrary to all expectation,
Christ bestows on them incredible honor, enjoining them to publish to
the whole world the message of eternal salvation. In this manner he not
only restores them to their former condition, but by the extent of this
new favor he utterly obliterates the recollection of their heinous
crimes; but at the same time, as I have said, he stimulates them, that
they may not be so slow and dilatory in reference to the faith of which
they were appointed to be preachers.

<span id="ii.l-p31"></span><span id="ii.l-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.l-p32"></span>**49.** *And, lo, I send.* That the apostles
may not be terrified by their weakness, he invites them to expect new
and extraordinary grace; as if he had said, though you feel yourselves
to be unfit for such a charge, there is no reason why you should
despond, because I will send you from heaven that power which I know
that you do not possess. The more fully to confirm them in this
confidence, he mentions that *the Father had promised to them the Holy
Spirit;* for, in order that they might prepare themselves with greater
alacrity for the work, God had already encouraged them by his *promise,*
as a remedy for their distrust. Christ now puts himself in the place of
the Father, and undertakes to perform the promise; in which he again
claims for himself divine power. To invest feeble men with heavenly
power, is a part of that *glory* which God swears that *he will not give
to another:* and, therefore, if it belongs to Christ, it follows that he
is that God who formerly spoke by the mouth of the prophet, (<span
id="ii.l-p32.1"></span>[Isa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)<span
id="ii.l-p32.1"></span>.) And though God promised special grace to the
apostles, and Christ bestowed it on them, we ought to hold universally
that no mortal is of himself qualified for preaching the gospel, except
so far as God clothes him with his Spirit, to supply his nakedness and
poverty. And certainly, as it is not in reference to the apostles alone
that Paul exclaims,

<span id="ii.l-p33"></span>(<span id="ii.l-p33.1"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.l-p33.1"></span>,)  
And who shall be found sufficient for these things?

<span id="ii.l-p34"></span>so all whom God raises up to be ministers of
the gospel must be endued with the heavenly Spirit; and, therefore, in
every part of Scripture he is promised to all the teachers of the Church
without exception.

<span id="ii.l-p35"></span>*But remain you in the city of Jerusalem.*
That they may not advance to teach before the proper time, Christ
enjoins on them silence and repose, until, sending them out according to
his pleasure, he may make a seasonable use of their labors. And this was
a useful trial of their obedience, that, after having been endued with
the understanding of the Scripture, and after having had the grace of
the Spirit *breathed on them,* (<span id="ii.l-p35.1"></span>[Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="ii.l-p35.1"></span>;)
yet because the Lord had forbidden them to speak, they were silent as if
they had been dumb. For we know that those who expect to gain applause
and admiration from their hearers are very desirous to appear in public.
Perhaps, too, by this delay, Christ intended to punish them for
indolence, because they did not, in compliance with his injunction, set
out immediately, on the same day, for Galilee. However that may be, we
are taught by their example, that we ought to attempt nothing but as the
Lord calls us to it; and, therefore, though they may possess some
ability to teach in public, let men remain in silence and retirement,
until the Lord lead them by the hand into the public assembly. When they
are commanded to *remain at Jerusalem,* we must understand this to mean,
after they had returned from Galilee. For, as we shortly afterwards
learn from Matthew, though he gave them an opportunity of seeing him at
Jerusalem, still he did not change his original intention *to go to
Galilee,* (<span id="ii.l-p35.2"></span>[Matt.
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#032), [Matt.
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010)<span id="ii.l-p35.2"></span>.)
The meaning of the word, therefore, is, that after having given them
injunctions at the appointed place, he wishes them to remain silent for
a time, until he supplies them with new rigor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 28:16-20; Mark 16:15-18](cc33052)
