[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33029)  [Next](cc33031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p1"></span>LUKE 22:35-38

<span id="ii.xxix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p2.1"></span>[Luke
22:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span
id="ii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p3"></span>**35. **And he said to them, When I sent
you without purse, or scrip, or shoes, did you want any thing? And they
said, Nothing. **36. **He therefore said to them, But now let him who
hath a purse take it, and, in like manner, a scrip; and let him who hath
not a sword sell his garment and buy one. **37. **For I tell you, that
this also which is written must be accomplished in me, And he was
reckoned with the transgressors. For those things which relate to me
have an end.  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) **38. **And they
said, Lord, lo, here are two swords. And he said to them, It is enough.

<span id="ii.xxix-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxix-p6"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p7"></span>**<span id="ii.xxix-p7.1"></span>[Luke
22:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span
id="ii.xxix-p7.1"></span>.** *And he said to them.* The whole object of
this discourse of Christ is to show, that hitherto he spared his
disciples, so as to lay on them no heavier burden than they were able to
bear. He reminds them of the indulgence exercised during the past time,
that they may now prepare themselves with greater alacrity for severer
warfare. For why did he, while they were altogether destitute of skill
and training, keep them in the shade and in repose, at a distance from
the darts of the enemy, except that, by gradually gathering courage and
strength during the interval of leisure, they might be better prepared
for fighting? The meaning is: “Hitherto you have had an easy and
prosperous condition, because I wished to treat you gently, like
children; the full time is now come, when I must employ you in labor,
like men.” But the comparison which he makes between the two periods is
still more extensive; for if they wanted nothing, when they proceeded to
discharge their office without taking with them a stock of provisions,
when a state of peace allowed them leisure to provide for their
necessities, much more now, in the midst of tumult and excitement, ought
they to lay aside anxiety about the present life, and run wherever
necessity calls them. And although Christ makes special mention of what
he had done in reference to the twelve apostles, he shows likewise, that
while we are still beginners and weak in faith, he continues to indulge
us till we grow up to be men; and, therefore, that they act improperly
who devote their leisure to the pursuit of luxuries, which abate the
rigor of their faith. And let us not doubt that Christ has regard to us
in the present day, since he does not hurry us into the battle while we
are still untrained and inexperienced, but, before sending us to the
field, supplies us with arms and courage.

<span id="ii.xxix-p8"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p9"></span>**36.** *But now let him who hath a purse
take it.* In metaphorical language he threatens that they will soon meet
with great troubles and fierce attacks; just as when a general,
intending to lead the soldiers into the field of battle, calls them to
arms, and orders them to lay aside every other care, and think of
nothing else than fighting, not even to take any thought about procuring
food. For he shows them—as is usually done in cases of extreme
danger—that every thing must be sold, even to the *scrip* and the
*purse,* in order to supply them with arms. And yet he does not call
them to an outward conflict, but only, under the comparison of fighting,
he warns them of the severe struggles of temptations which they must
undergo, and of the fierce attacks which they must sustain in spiritual
contests. That they might more willingly throw themselves on the
providence of God, he first reminded them, as I have said, that God took
care to supply them with what was necessary, even when they carried with
them no supplies of food and raiment. Having experienced so large and
seasonable supplies from God, they ought not, for the future, to
entertain any doubt that he would provide for every one of their
necessities.

<span id="ii.xxix-p10"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p11"></span>**37.** *That this also which is written
must be accomplished in me.* This adverb *also* is emphatic; for Christ
means, that he had not *yet* discharged every part of his office, till
he had been ranked with ungodly and wicked men, as if he had been one of
their class. But that their minds might not be too much disturbed by the
baseness of such a transaction, he quotes a prediction of Isaiah, (<span
id="ii.xxix-p11.1"></span>[Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxix-p11.1"></span>)
which, it is certain, cannot be explained but as referring to the
Messiah. Now since it is there said that he was to be *reckoned among
transgressors,* such a spectacle, however atrocious, ought not to alarm
believers, or to alienate them from Christ, who could not have been
their Redeemer in any other way than by taking upon himself the shame
and disgrace of a wicked man. For nothing is better adapted to remove
grounds of offense, when we are alarmed by any strange occurrence, than
to acknowledge that it so pleases God, and that whatever takes place by
his appointment is not done rashly, or without a good reason; more
especially when that which is made evident by the event itself was
anciently predicted. Since, then, the disciples ought to expect a
Redeemer such as God had formerly promised, and since Isaiah had
expressly declared, that in order that he might deliver us from the
guilt of offenses the punishment must be *laid on him,* (<span
id="ii.xxix-p11.2"></span>[Isa. 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)<span id="ii.xxix-p11.2"></span>,)
this ought to be sufficient for abating the horror of the disciples, and
for preventing them from entertaining less esteem for Christ.

<span id="ii.xxix-p12"></span>*For those things which relate to me have
an end.* By these words, immediately added, he means that the prophets
spoke nothing in vain. For this Greek phrase, <span
id="ii.xxix-p12.1"></span>τέλος ἔχει, *have an end;* means that they are
accomplished, or put in effect. Now when every thing that the prophets
spoke is verified by the event, it ought rather to contribute to
strengthen our faith, than to strike us with alarm or anxiety. But while
Christ encourages and comforts the disciples by this single argument,
that all the predictions *must be accomplished,* the very procedure of
the divine purpose contains within itself no ordinary ground of
confidence, which is, that Christ was subjected to the condemnation
which we deserved, and *was reconciled among transgressors,* that we,
who are *transgressors,* and loaded with crimes, might be presented by
him to the Father as righteous. For we are reckoned pure and free from
sins before God, because the Lamb, who was pure and free from every
blemish, was placed in our room, as we shah have occasion to state again
under the next chapter.

<span id="ii.xxix-p13"></span><span id="ii.xxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p14"></span>**38.** *Lord, lo, here are two swords.*
It was truly shameful and stupid ignorance, that the disciples, after
having been so often informed about bearing the cross, imagine that they
must fight with *swords* of iron. When they say that they have *two
swords,* it is uncertain whether they mean that they are well prepared
against their enemies, or complain that they are ill provided with arms.
It is evident, at least, that they were so stupid as not to think of a
spiritual enemy. As to the inference which the Doctors of Canon Law draw
from these words — that their mitered bishops have a double jurisdiction
— it is not only an offensive allegory, but a detestable mockery, by
which they ridicule the word of God. And it was necessary that the
slaves of Antichrist should fall into such madness, of openly trampling
under feet, by sacrilegious contempt, the sacred oracles of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc33030.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ii.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxix-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxix-p4.1"></span>Prenent
fin, *ou, ont accomplissement;*” — “take end, *or, have their
fulfillment.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:36-44; Mark 14:32-40; Luke 22:39-46](cc33031)
