[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33043)  [Next](cc33045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 27:57-61; MARK 15:42-47;  
LUKE 23:50-56

<span id="ii.xliii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
27:57-61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
15:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
23:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p5"></span>**57.** And when the evening was come,
there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who himself was a
disciple of Jesus. **58.** He went to Pilate, and requested the body of
Jesus; then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. **59.** And
Joseph, having received the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth.
**60.** And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the
rock, and having rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, he
departed. **61.** And Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were there,
sitting opposite to the sepulcher. 

<span id="ii.xliii-p6"></span>**42.** And when it was now evening,
(because it was the preparation,  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) which goes before the Sabbath,.md)
**43.** Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable counselor, who was also
himself waiting for the kingdom of God, came and boldly went in to
Pilate, and asked the body of Jesus. **44.** And Pilate wondered if he
were already dead; and having called to him the centurion, he asked him
if he had been long dead. **45.** And having ascertained it from the
centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. **46.** And he, having brought a
linen cloth, took him down (from the cross,  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) .md) and wrapped him in the linen cloth,
and laid him in the tomb which had been hewn out of the rock; and rolled
a stone to the door of the tomb. **47.** And Mary Magdalene, and Mary
the mother of Joses, saw where he was laid.

<span id="ii.xliii-p9"></span>**50.** And, lo, a man named Joseph, a
counselor, a good and righteous man, **51.** Who had not consented to
their decision, and to their deed; a native of Arimathea, a city of the
Jews, who also himself waited for the kingdom of God. **52.** He came to
Pilate, and requested the body of Jesus. **53.** And he took him down,
and wrapped him in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb which had been
hewn out in the rock, in which no man had ever been laid. **54.** And it
was the day of the preparation, and the Sabbath was approaching.
**55.** And the women who had come with him from Galilee followed, and
saw the tomb, and how the body was laid. **56.** And they returned, and
prepared spices and ointments, and rested on the Sabbath, according to
the commandment.

<span id="ii.xliii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xliii-p11"></span>The burial of Christ is now added, as an
intermediate transition from the ignominy of the cross to the glory of
the resurrection. *True,* indeed, God determined, for another reason,
that Christ should be buried, that it might be more fully attested that
he suffered real death on our account. But yet it ought to be regarded
as the principal design, that in this manner the cursing, which he had
endured for a short time, began to be removed; for his body was not
thrown into a ditch in the ordinary way, but honorably laid in a *hewn
sepulcher.* Although at that time the weakness of the flesh was still
visible, and the divine power of the Spirit was not clearly seen before
his resurrection; yet God determined by this, as a sort of preparation,
to shadow out what he was shortly afterwards to do, that he might exalt
gloriously above the heavens his Son, the conqueror of death.

<span id="ii.xliii-p12"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p13"></span>**<span
id="ii.xliii-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p13.2"></span>.** *And when the evening was come.* Let it
be understood that *Joseph* did not come in the dusk of *the evening,*
but before sunset, that he might perform this office of kindness to his
Master, without violating *the Sabbath;* for the *Sabbath* commenced in
the evening, and therefore it was necessary that Christ should be laid
in the grave before night came on. Now from the time that Christ died
until *the Sabbath* began to be observed, there were three free days.
And though John does not mention *Joseph* only, but joins *Nicodemus* as
his companion, (<span id="ii.xliii-p13.3"></span>[Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p13.3"></span>;) yet as he alone undertook the business at
first, and as *Nicodemus* did no more than follow and join him, the
three: Evangelists satisfied themselves with relating in a brief
narrative what was done by Joseph alone.

<span id="ii.xliii-p14"></span>Now though this affection of *Joseph*
deserved uncommon praise, still we ought first to consider the
providence of God, in subduing a man of high and honorable rank among
his countrymen, to wipe away the reproach of the cross by the honor of
burial. And, indeed, as he exposed himself to the dislike and hatred of
the whole nation, and to great dangers, there can be no doubt that this
singular courage arose from a secret movement of the Spirit; for though
he had formerly been one of Christ’s *disciples,* yet he had never
ventured to make a frank and open profession of his faith. When the
death of Christ now presents to him a spectacle full of despair, and
fitted to break the strongest minds, how comes he suddenly to acquire
such noble courage that, amidst the greatest terrors, he feels no dread,
and hesitates not to advance farther than he had ever done, when all was
in peace? Let us know then that, when the Son of God was buried by the
hand of Joseph, it was the work of God.

<span id="ii.xliii-p15"></span>To the same purpose must also be referred
the circumstances which are here detailed. *Joseph’s* piety and
integrity of life are commended, that in the servant of God we may learn
to recognize the work of God. The Evangelists relate that he was *rich,*
in order to inform us that his amazing magnanimity of mind enabled him
to rise superior to the obstruction which would otherwise have compelled
him to retire. For *rich men,* being naturally proud, find nothing more
difficult than to expose themselves voluntarily to the contempt of the
people. Now we know how mean and disgraceful an act it was to receive
from the hand of the executioner the body of a crucified man. Besides,
as men devoted to riches are wont to avoid everything fitted to excite
prejudice, the more eminent he was for wealth, the more cautious and
timid he would have been, unless a holy boldness  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) had been imparted to him from heaven.
The dignity of his rank is likewise mentioned, that he was a
*counselor,* or *senator,* that in this respect also the power of God
may be displayed; for it was not one of the lowest of the people that
was employed to bury the body of Christ in haste and in concealment, but
from a high rank of honor he was raised up to discharge this office. For
the less credible it was that such an office of kindness should be
performed towards Christ, the more clearly did it appear that the whole
of this transaction was regulated by the purpose and hand of God.

<span id="ii.xliii-p17"></span>We are taught by this example, that the
rich are so far from being excusable, when they deprive Christ of the
honor due to him: that they must be held to be doubly criminal, for
turning into obstructions those circumstances which ought to have been
excitements to activity. It is too frequent and customary, I
acknowledge, for those who think themselves superior to others, to
withdraw from the yoke, and to become soft and effeminate through
excessive timidity and solicitude about their affairs. But we ought to
view it in a totally different light; for if riches and honors do not
aid us in the worship of God, we utterly abuse them. The present
occurrence shows how easy it is for God to correct wicked fears by
hindering us from doing our duty; since formerly *Joseph* did not
venture to make an open profession of being a disciple of Christ, when
matters were doubtful, but now, when the rage of enemies is at its
height, and when their cruelty abounds, he gathers courage, and does not
hesitate to incur manifest danger. We see then how the Lord in a moment
forms the hearts to new feelings, and raises up by a spirit of fortitude
those who had previously fainted. But if, through a holy desire to honor
Christ, Joseph assumed such courage, while Christ was hanging on the
cross, woe to our slothfulness,  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295.md)
if, now that he has risen from the dead, an equal zeal, at least, to
glorify him do not burn in our hearts.

<span id="ii.xliii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p20"></span>**<span id="ii.xliii-p20.2"></span>[Mark
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p20.2"></span>, and <span id="ii.xliii-p20.3"></span>[Luke
23:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#051.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p20.3"></span>.** Who also himself was waiting for the
kingdom of God. The highest commendation bestowed on Joseph is, that he
waited for the kingdom of God. He is likewise praised, no doubt, for
righteousness, but this waiting for the kingdom of God was the root and
source of his righteousness. By the kingdom of God, we must understand
the renovation promised through Christ; for the perfection of order
which, the prophets had every where promised, would exist at the coming
of Christ, cannot exist, unless God assembles under his government those
men who had gone astray. It is therefore pointed out in commendation of
Joseph’s piety, that, during the disorder which then prevailed, he
cherished the hope of that redemption which God had promised. Hence,
too, arises the fear of God, and the desire of holiness and uprightness;
for it is impossible for any one to dedicated himself to God, unless he
expects that God will be his deliverer.

<span id="ii.xliii-p21"></span>Yet let us observe, that while salvation
through Christ was promised indiscriminately to all the Jews, and while
the promise of it was common to them all, it is only of a very few that
the Holy Spirit testifies what we are here told of Joseph. Hence it is
evident, that nearly the whole of the people had buried in base
forgetfulness the inestimable grace of God. All of them, indeed, had on
their lips the language of boasting in reference to the coming of
Christ, which was approaching; but few had the covenant of God fixed in
their minds, so as to rise by faith to spiritual renovation. That was
indeed an awful insensibility; and therefore we need not wonder if pure
religion fell into decay, when the faith of salvation was extinguished.
Would to God that a similar corruption did not prevail in this unhappy
age! Christ once appeared as a Redeemer to the Jews and to the whole
world, as had been declared in the predictions of the prophets. He set
up *the kingdom of God,* by restoring affairs from confusion and
disorder to a regular and proper condition. He has assigned to us a
period of warfare, to exercise our patience till he come again from
heaven to complete his reign which he has commenced. How many are there
who aspire to this hope, even in a moderate degree? Do not almost all
cleave to the earth, as if there had been no promise of a resurrection?
But while the greater part of men, forgetful of their end, fall off on
all sides, let us remember that it is a virtue peculiar to believers, to
*seek the things which are above,* (<span
id="ii.xliii-p21.1"></span>[Col
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="ii.xliii-p21.1"></span>;.md)
and especially since the grace of God has shone upon us through the
Gospel,

<span id="ii.xliii-p22"></span>teaching us, that, denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, justly, and piously, in the
present world, looking for the blessed hope and manifestation of the
glory of the great God,  
(<span id="ii.xliii-p22.2"></span>Titus 2:11-13.)

<span id="ii.xliii-p23"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p24"></span>**<span
id="ii.xliii-p24.2"></span>[Matthew
27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p24.2"></span>.** *And having taken the body.* The three
Evangelists glance briefly at the burial; and therefore they say nothing
about the aromatic ointments which John alone mentions, (<span
id="ii.xliii-p24.3"></span>[Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p24.3"></span>) only they relate that *Joseph purchased a
clean linen cloth;* from which we infer, that Christ was honorably
buried. And, indeed, there could be no doubt that *a rich man,* when he
gave up his *sepulcher* to our Lord, made provision also, in other
respects, for suitable magnificence and splendor. And this, too, was
brought about by the secret providence of God, rather than by the
premeditated design of men, that a new sepulcher, *in which no man had
ever yet been laid,* was obtained by our Lord, who is *the first-born
from the dead,* (<span id="ii.xliii-p24.4"></span>[Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p24.4"></span>,) and *the first-fruits of them that rise,*
(<span id="ii.xliii-p24.5"></span>[1Co
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.xliii-p24.5"></span>.) God intended, therefore, by this Mark to
distinguish his Son from the remainder of the human race, and to point
out by the *sepulcher* itself his newness of life.

<span id="ii.xliii-p25"></span><span id="ii.xliii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p26"></span>**61.** *And Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary, were there.* Matthew and Mark relate only that *the women
looked at what was done, and marked the place where the body was laid.*
But Luke states, at the same time, their resolution, which was, that
*they returned* to the city, *and prepared spices and ointments,* that
two days afterwards they might render due honor to the burial. Hence we
learn that their minds were filled with a better odor, which the Lord
breathed into his death, that he might bring them to his grave, and
exalt them higher.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc33044.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="ii.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xliii-p7.1"></span>Le jour
de la preparation:” — “the day of the preparation.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc33044.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="ii.xliii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xliii-p8.1"></span>De la
croix.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc33044.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="ii.xliii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xliii-p16.1"></span>Une
saincte hardiesse.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc33044.htm#fr_295.md) <span
id="ii.xliii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xliii-p18"></span> “<span
id="ii.xliii-p18.1"></span>Mandite soit nostre lascheté;” — “accursed be
our sloth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 27:62-66](cc33045.md)
