[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33001)  [Next](cc33003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span>MATTHEW 21:10-22; MARK 11:11-24;  
LUKE 19:39-48

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
21:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span><span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>[Mark
11:11-24](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span><span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>[Luke
19:39-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#039.md)<span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>**10. **And when he entered into Jerusalem,
the whole city was moved, saying, Who is this? **11. **And the
multitudes said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth in Galilee.
**12. **And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and drove out all that
sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the tables of the
money-changers, and the seats of those who sold doves; **13. **And said
to them, It is written, My house shall be called a house of prayer; but
you have made it a den of robbers. **14. **And the blind and lame came
to him in the temple, and he cured them. **15. **When the chief priests
and the scribes saw the wonderful works which he did, and the children
crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David! They were
enraged,  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) **16. **And said to him,
Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith to them, Yes; and have you
never read, Out of the mouth  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) of
infants and sucklings thou hast perfected praise? **17. **And, leaving
them, he went out of the city into Bethany, and lodged there.
**18. **And in the morning, returning to the city, he was hungry.
**19. **And when he saw a fig tree near the road, he came to it, and
found nothing on it but leaves only. And he said to it, Let no fruit
grow on thee henceforth forever; and immediately the fig tree withered.
**20. **And when his disciples saw it, they wondered, saying, How
quickly is the fig tree withered! **21. **And Jesus answering said to
them, Verily I say to you, If you have faith, and do not doubt, not only
will you do what has taken place in the fig tree, but also, if you shall
say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and thrown into the sea, it shall
be done. **22. **And all things, whatsoever you shall ask in prayer,
believing,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) you shall receive.

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>**11. **And the Lord entered  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) into Jerusalem, and into the temple; and
when he had looked around on all things, and it was now evening, he went
out to Bethany with the twelve. **12. **And the next day, when they
departed from Bethany, he was hungry. **13. **And when he saw at a
distance a fig tree having leaves, he came, if perhaps he would find
anything on it.  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) And when he came to
it, he found nothing but leaves; for it was not the season for figs.
**14. **And Jesus answering said o the fig tree, Let no man eat fruit
from thee henceforth forever. And his disciples heard it. **15. **And
they come to Jerusalem. And Jesus entered into the temple, and began to
drive out those who sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the
tables of the money changers, and the seats of those who sold doves;
**16. **And did not suffer any man to carry a vessel through the temple.
**17** And taught, saying to them, Is it not written, My house shall be
called by all nations a house of prayer? But you have made it a den of
robbers. **18. **And the scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought
how they would put him to death; for they dreaded him, because the whole
multitude admired his doctrine. **19. **And when it was evening, he went
out of the city. **20. **And in the morning, passing by the fig tree,
they saw that it was dried up from the root.  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) **21. **And Peter, remembering, saith to
him, Rabbi,  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) lo, that fig tree which
thou cursedst is dried up! **22. **And Jesus answering saith to them,
Have faith in God. **23. **Verily I say to you, Whoever shall say to
this mountain, Be thou removed, and thrown into the sea, and shall not
doubt in his heart, but shall believe that what he saith shall be, he
shall have whatever he saith. **24. **Therefore I say to you, Whatever
you ask, praying, believe that you will receive it, and you shall have
it.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>**39. **And some of the Pharisees out of the
multitude said to him, Master, rebuke thy disciples. **40. **To whom he
said, I say to you, that if these be silent, the stones will cry out.
 <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) (A little after..md) **45. **And having
entered into the temple, he began to drive out those who sold and bought
in it, **46. **Saying to them, It is written, My house is a house of
prayer; but you have made it a den of robbers. **47. **And he taught
daily in the temple. And the chief priests, and scribes, and rulers of
the people, sought to put him to death, **48. **And did not find what to
do; for all the people hung upon his lips, while they were hearing him.

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span><span id="ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span>There is a difference between Matthew and
Mark in their narrative of the *withering of the fig tree*; for Matthew
says that it was on the day after that Christ made a public appearance
as King, while Mark appears to throw it back to the following day.
 <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) But the solution is easy; for they
agree in this respect, that Christ, on the day after that he made his
solemn entrance into the city, cursed the tree; only Mark states what
Matthew had omitted, that the occurrence was observed by the disciples
on the following day., So then, though Mark has stated more distinctly
the order of time, he makes no contradiction.

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span>He appears to differ more openly both from
Matthew and from Luke in the narrative of chastising the traders;  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) for while both of them declare that Christ,
as soon as he *entered into the city and temple, drove out those who
sold and bought*, Mark simply says that he looked around on all things,
but has thrown back the driving of them out till another day.  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) But I reconcile them in this way, that
Mark, not having spoken about the purifying of the temple, afterwards
inserts it, though not in its proper place. He relates that, on the
first day, Christ came into the temple, and there looked round on all
things.  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) Now why did he look so
earnestly, except for the purpose of correcting something that was
wrong? For, having been formerly accustomed to pay frequent visits to
the temple, it was not the novelty of the sight that affected him. Now
as Mark ought immediately to have added, that those who sold and bought
in the temple were driven out of it, he says that Christ went out of the
city; but, having omitted what was worthy of being related, he inserts
it afterwards.

<span id="ii.i-p24"></span>But perhaps some will be more inclined to
believe that, in this narrative also, Mark observed the order of time,
which the other two Evangelists had disregarded; for though they appear
to indicate an uninterrupted succession of events, yet as they do not
name a particular day, there would be no impropriety in dividing what we
find to be connected in their writings. For my own part, however, I
prefer the conjecture which I stated first; for it is probable that this
demonstration of his power was made by Christ in presence of a large
multitude. But any one who will consider how little care the Evangelists
bestowed on pointing out dates will not stumble at this diversity in the
narrative.

<span id="ii.i-p25"></span><span id="ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p26"></span>**<span id="ii.i-p26.2"></span>[Matthew
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.i-p26.2"></span>.**
*When he entered into Jerusalem.* Matthew says that *the city was
moved,* in order to inform us that the transaction did not take place
secretly, or by stealth, but in the presence of all the people, and that
the priests and scribes were not ignorant of it. Under this despicable
aspect of the flesh the majesty of the Spirit was apparent; for how
would they have endured that Christ should be conducted into the city,
attended by the splendor of royalty, with so great danger to themselves,
if they had not been seized with astonishment? The substance of it
therefore is, that Christ’s entrance was not made in a private manner,
and that his enemies abstained from opposing it, not because they
treated him with contempt, but rather because they were restrained by
secret fear; for God had struck them with such alarm, that they dare not
make any attempt. At the same time, the Evangelist glances at the
careless indifference of the city, and commends the piety of those who
have just reached it; for when the inhabitants, on hearing the noise,
inquire, *Who is this?* it is manifest that they do not belong to the
number of Christ’s followers.

<span id="ii.i-p27"></span><span id="ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p28"></span>**12.** *And Jesus entered into the temple.*
Though Christ frequently ascended *into the temple,* and though this
abuse continually met his eye, twice only did he stretch out his hand to
correct it; once, at the commencement of his embassy,  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) and now again, when he was near the end
of his course. But though disgraceful and ungodly confusion reigned
throughout, and though the temple, with its sacrifices, was devoted to
destruction, Christ reckoned it enough to administer twice an open
reproof of the profanation of it. Accordingly, when he made himself
known as a Teacher and Prophet sent by God, he took upon himself the
office of purifying the temple, in order to arouse the Jews, and make
them more attentive; and this first narrative is given by John only in
the second chapter of his Gospel. But now, towards the end of his
course, claiming again for himself the same power, he warns the Jews of
the pollutions of the temple, and at the same time points out that a new
restoration is at hand.

<span id="ii.i-p30"></span>And yet there is no reason to doubt that he
declared himself to be both King and High Priest, who presided over the
temple and the worship of God. This ought to be observed, lest any
private individual should think himself entitled to act in the same
manner. That zeal, indeed, by which Christ was animated to do this,
ought to be held in common by all the godly; but lest any one, under the
pretense of imitation, should rush forward without authority, we ought
to see what our calling demands, and how far we may proceed according to
the commandment of God. If the Church of God have contracted any
pollutions, all the children of God ought to burn with grief; but as God
has not put arms into the hands of all, let private individuals groan,
till God bring the remedy. I do acknowledge that they are worse than
stupid who are not displeased at the pollution of the temple of God, and
that it is not enough for them to be inwardly distressed, if they do not
avoid the contagion, and testify with their mouth, whenever an
opportunity presents itself, that they desire to see a change for the
better. But let those who do not possess public authority oppose by
their tongue, which they have at liberty, those vices which they cannot
remedy with their hands.

<span id="ii.i-p31"></span>But it is asked, Since Christ saw the temple
filled with gross superstitions, why did he only correct one that was
light, or, at least, more tolerable than others? I reply, Christ did not
intend to restore to the ancient custom all the sacred rites, and did
not select greater or smaller abuses for correction, but had only this
object in view, to show by one visible token, that God had committed to
him the office of purifying the temple, and, at the same time, to point
out that the worship of God had been corrupted by a disgraceful and
manifest abuse. Pretexts, indeed, were not wanting for that custom of
keeping a market, which relieved the people from trouble, that they
might not have far to go to find sacrifices; and next, that they might
have at hand those pieces of money which any man might choose to offer.
Nor was it within the holy place that the *money-changers* sat, or that
animals intended for sacrifice were exposed to sale, but only within the
court, to which the designation of *the temple* is sometimes applied;
but as nothing was more at variance with the majesty of *the temple,*
than that a market should be erected there for selling goods, or that
bankers should sit there for matters connected with exchange, this
profanation was not to be endured. And Christ inveighed against it the
more sharply, because it was well known that this custom had been
introduced by the avarice of the priests for the sake of dishonest gain.
For as one who enters a market well-stocked with various kinds of
merchandise, though he does not intend to make a purchase, yet, in
consequence of being attracted by what he sees, changes his mind, so the
priests spread nets in order to obtain offerings, that they might trick
every person out of some gain.

<span id="ii.i-p32"></span><span id="ii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p33"></span>**13.** *It is written.* Christ quotes two
passages taken out of two Prophets; the one from <span
id="ii.i-p33.1"></span>[Isa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.i-p33.1"></span>, and the other from <span
id="ii.i-p33.2"></span>[Jer 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.i-p33.2"></span>. What *was written* by Isaiah agreed with the
circumstances of the time; for in that passage is predicted the calling
of the Gentiles. Isaiah, therefore, promises that God will grant, not
only that the temple shall recover its original splendor, but likewise
that *all nations shall flow to it,* and that the whole world shall
agree in true and sincere piety.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)
He speaks, no doubt, metaphorically; for the spiritual worship of God,
which was to exist under the reign of Christ, is shadowed out by the
prophets under the figures of the law. Certainly this was never
fulfilled, that all nations went up to Jerusalem to worship God; and
therefore, when he declares that the temple will be *a place of prayer
for all nations,* this mode of expression is equivalent to saying, that
the nations must be gathered into the Church of God, that with one voice
they may worship the true God, along with the children of Abraham. But
since he mentions *the temple,* so far as it then was the visible abode
of religion, Christ justly reproaches the Jews with having applied it to
totally different purposes from those to which it had been dedicated.
The meaning therefore is: God intended that this temple should exist
till no as a sign on which all his worshippers should fix their eyes;
and how base and wicked is it to profane it by thus turning it into a
market?

<span id="ii.i-p35"></span>Besides, in the time of Christ, that *temple*
was actually a *house of prayer;* that is, so long as the Law, with its
shadows, remained in force. But it began to be *a house of prayer for
all nations,* when out of it resounded the doctrine of the Gospel, by
which the whole world was to be united in one common faith. And though
shortly afterwards it was totally overthrown, yet even in the present
day the fulfillment of this prophecy is manifest; for, since

<span id="ii.i-p36"></span>out of Zion, went forth the law,  
(<span id="ii.i-p36.2"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.i-p36.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.i-p36.3"></span>[Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p36.3"></span>,.md)

<span id="ii.i-p37"></span>those who wish to pray aright must look to
that beginning. I do acknowledge that there is no distinction of places,
for it is the will of the Lord that men should call upon Him everywhere;
but as believers, who profess to worship the God of Israel, are said to

<span id="ii.i-p38"></span>speak in the language of Canaan, (<span
id="ii.i-p38.1"></span>[Isa 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.i-p38.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.i-p39"></span>so they are also said to come *into the
temple,* because out of it flowed the true religion. It is likewise the
fountain of the waters, which, enlarged to an astonishing degree within
a short period, flow in great abundance, and give life to those that
drink them, as Ezekiel (<span id="ii.i-p39.1"></span>[Eze
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#009)<span id="ii.i-p39.1"></span>.md)
mentions,  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) which, going out from
the temple, spread, as Zechariah (<span id="ii.i-p40.5"></span>[Zec
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008)<span id="ii.i-p40.5"></span>.md)
says, from the rising to the setting sun. Though in the present day we
make use of *temples* (or *churches*) for holding the holy assemblies,
yet it is for a different reason; for, since Christ was manifested, no
outward representation of him under shadows is held out to us, such as
the fathers anciently had under the Law.

<span id="ii.i-p41"></span>It must also be observed, that by the word
*prayer* the prophet expresses the whole worship of God; for, though
there was at that time a great variety and abundance of religious rites,
yet God intended briefly to show what was the object of all those rites;
namely, that they might worship him spiritually, as is more clearly
expressed in the fiftieth psalm, where also God comprehends under
*prayer* all the exercises of religion.

<span id="ii.i-p42"></span>*But you have made it a den of robbers.*
Christ means that the complaint of Jeremiah (<span
id="ii.i-p42.1"></span>[Jer 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.i-p42.1"></span>) applied equally well to his own time, in which
the temple was not less corrupted. The prophet directs his reproof
against hypocrites, who, through confidence in *the temple,* allowed
themselves greater liberty in sinning. For, as it was the design of God
to employ outward symbols, as a sort of rudiments, for instructing the
Jews in true religion, so they satisfied themselves with the empty
pretense of *the temple,* as if it were enough to give their attention
to outward ceremonies; just as it is customary with hypocrites to

<span id="ii.i-p43"></span>change the truth of God into a lie (<span
id="ii.i-p43.1"></span>[Ro 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span
id="ii.i-p43.1"></span>.).

<span id="ii.i-p44"></span>But the prophet exclaims that God is not
bound to *the temple,* or tied to ceremonies, and therefore that they
falsely boast of the name of *the temple,* which they *had made a den of
robbers.* For as *robbers* in their *dens* sin with greater hardihood,
because they trust that they will escape punishment, so by means of a
false covering of godliness hypocrites grow more bold, so that they
almost hope to deceive God. Now as the metaphor of *a den* includes all
corruptions, Christ properly applies the passage of the prophet to the
present occasion.

<span id="ii.i-p45"></span>Mark adds, that Christ gave orders *that no
man should carry a vessel through the temple;* that is, he did not
permit any thing to be seen there that was inconsistent with religious
services; for by the word *vessel* the Hebrews denote any kind of
utensil. In short, Christ took away whatever was at variance with the
reverence and majesty of the temple.

<span id="ii.i-p46"></span><span id="ii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p47"></span>**14.** *And the blind and lame came to him.*
That the authority which Christ had claimed for himself out of the usual
course might not be suspected of rashness, he supported it by miracles.
He therefore *cured the blind and lame in the temple,* in order to
proclaim that the rights and honor of Messiah truly belonged to him; for
by these marks the prophets describe him. Hence we again perceive what I
hinted a little ago that it is not every one of the people who is called
to imitate this action of Christ lest he inconsiderately raise himself
to the throne of the Messiah. We ought indeed to believe that the *lame
and blind,* who were *cured,* were witnesses of the divine power of
Christ, as if God, by his voice from heaven, approved what had been
proclaimed by the multitude.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)

<span id="ii.i-p49"></span><span id="ii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p50"></span>**15.** *When the chief priests and scribes
saw.* Luke relates that the Pharisees began to grumble, while he was
still on the road.  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) It was the
disciples that were then crying out: the others wished to have them
silenced. Christ replied, that it was in vain for them to make
opposition; because God would rather make *the* *stones cry out* than
permit the reign of His Son to be forgotten. It is probable that, as the
*crying out* was not diminished, and as even *the children* now joined
in it, *the scribes and priests* were roused to still fiercer
indignation, and then commenced a new attack on Christ. They appear
indirectly to reproach him by alleging that he is desirous to obtain the
praises of *children.*

<span id="ii.i-p52"></span>But we must observe whence their displeasure
arose. That it was connected with ungodly malice and outrageous contempt
of God is evident from the fact, that his miracles gave them not less
uneasiness than the shouts of applause. But I now inquire about some
more special reason. What was it that chiefly vexed them? Now we know
how eagerly they contended for their authority; for the object to which
their zeal carried them was, that the tyranny, which they had once
claimed, might continue to be enjoyed by them; and it was no slight
diminution of their power, if the people were at liberty to bestow on
Christ the title of King. Even in trifling matters they wished their
decisions to be regarded as oracles,  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) so that it might not be permitted to
approve or reject any thing but according to their pleasure. They
therefore reckon it to be foolish and unreasonable, that the people
should confer the title of Messiah on one whom they do not treat with
any respect. And certainly, if they had done their duty, it would have
been proper for them to direct the whole people, and to go before them
as their leaders. For the priests had been appointed, that *from their
lips* all might seek the knowledge of *the Law,* and, in short, that
they might be the *messengers* and interpreters *of the God of armies,*
(<span id="ii.i-p53.2"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="ii.i-p53.2"></span>..md) But
as they had basely extinguished the light of truth, Christ appropriately
replies, that they gain nothing by endeavoring to suppress the doctrine
of salvation, for it will rather break out from *the stones.*

<span id="ii.i-p54"></span>There is likewise an implied admission; for
Christ does not deny that it is an unnatural order for the uneducated
multitude and *children* to be the first to magnify with their voice the
coming of the Messiah, but as the truth is wickedly suppressed by those
who ought to have been its lawful witnesses, it is not wonderful if God
raise up others, and — to their shame — make choice of *children.* Hence
we derive no slight consolation; for though wicked men leave no stone
unturned for concealing the reign of Christ, we learn from this passage
that their efforts are in vain. They hope that, when some of the
multitude, that is carrying forward the kingdom of Christ, shall have
been put to death, and others shall be silenced by fear, they will gain
their object. But God will disappoint them; for He will sooner give
mouths and tongues to *stones* than allow the kingdom of His Son to be
without witnesses.

<span id="ii.i-p55"></span><span id="ii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p56"></span>**16.** *And have you never read?* The
scribes and priests seize on this as an opportunity of calumniating
Christ, that he allows himself to be called a King by *children;* as it
is always the custom of wicked people haughtily to despise the mean
condition of the disciples of Christ. This malicious design Christ
checks by a quotation from David, who makes even *infants* to be the
heralds of the glory of God. Literally the words run,

<span id="ii.i-p57"></span>Out of the mouth of infants and sucklings
thou hast founded strength, (<span id="ii.i-p57.1"></span>[Ps
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p57.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="ii.i-p58"></span>by which David means that, though every
tongue were silent,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) God needs no
other orators to proclaim his power than mere *infants,* who are still
hanging on their mothers’ breasts. In themselves, no doubt, they are
silent; but the wonderful providence of God, which shines in them,
serves the purpose of splendid and powerful eloquence. For he who
considers with himself how the child is formed in the mother’s womb, is
nourished there for nine months, afterwards comes into the world, and
finds nourishment provided as soon as it is born, must not only
acknowledge that God is the Creator of the world, but will be altogether
carried away into admiration of Him.  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) Thus the sun and moon, though they are
dumb creatures, are said to have a loud and distinct voice for singing
the praises of God, (<span id="ii.i-p60.2"></span>[Ps.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p60.2"></span>..md) But
since the praises of God are heard from the tongue of *infants,* Christ
infers from this, that it is not strange if He cause them to be uttered
by *children* who have already acquired the use of speech.

<span id="ii.i-p61"></span><span id="ii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p62"></span>**18.** *And returning in the morning.*
Between that solemn entrance of Christ, of which we have spoken, and the
day of the Passover, he had passed the night in Bethany; and during the
day he appeared in the temple for the purpose of teaching. Matthew and
Mark relate what happened during that interval, that Christ, when
*coming into the city, was hungry,* approached *a fig-tree,* and,
*having found nothing on it but leaves, cursed it;* and that the tree,
which had been *cursed* by his voice, *immediately withered.* I take for
granted that Christ did not pretend hunger, but *was* actually *hungry;*
for we know that he voluntarily became subject to the infirmities of the
flesh, though by nature he was free and exempt from them.

<span id="ii.i-p63"></span>But here lies the difficulty. How was he
mistaken in seeking fruit on a tree that had none; more especially, when
the season of fruit had not yet arrived? And again, Why was he so
fiercely enraged against a harmless tree? But there would be no
absurdity in saying, that as man, he did not know  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) the kind of tree; though it is possible
that he approached it on purpose, with full knowledge of the result.
Certainly it was not the fury of passion that led him to curse the tree,
(for that would not only have been an unjust, but even a childish and
ridiculous revenge;) but as hunger was troublesome to him according to
the feeling of the flesh, he determined to overcome it by an opposite
affection; that is, by a desire to promote the glory of the Father, as
he elsewhere says,

<span id="ii.i-p65"></span>My meat is to do the will of my Father,
(<span id="ii.i-p65.1"></span>[Joh
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)<span id="ii.i-p65.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="ii.i-p66"></span>for at that time he was contending both with
fatigue and with hunger. I am the more inclined to this conjecture,
because hunger gave him an opportunity of performing a miracle and of
teaching his disciples. So when he was pressed by hunger, and there was
no food at hand, he finds a repast in another way; that is, by promoting
the glory of God. He intended, however, to present in this tree an
outward sign of the end which awaits hypocrites, and at the same time to
expose the emptiness and folly of their ostentation.

<span id="ii.i-p67"></span><span id="ii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p68"></span>**19** *Let no fruit grow on thee
henceforth.* Let us learn from this what is the meaning of the word
*curse,* namely, that the tree should be condemned to barrenness; as, on
the other hand, God *blesses,* when by his voice he bestows fertility.
It appears more clearly from <span id="ii.i-p68.1"></span>Mark*,* that
the fig-tree did not instantly wither, or, at least, that it was not
observed by his disciples, until they saw it next day stripped of
*leaves.* <span id="ii.i-p68.2"></span>Mark*,* too, attributes to
*Peter* what Matthew attributes equally to all the disciples; but as
Christ replies in the plural number, it may naturally be inferred that
one put the question in the name of all.

<span id="ii.i-p69"></span><span id="ii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p70"></span>**21** *And Jesus answering.* The use of the
miracle is still farther extended by Christ, in order to excite his
disciples to faith and confidence. By <span
id="ii.i-p70.1"></span>Mark*,* the general exhortation is placed first,
*to have faith in God;* and then follows the promise, that they would
obtain by faith whatever they asked from God. *To have faith in God*
means, to expect, and to be fully assured of obtaining, from God
whatever we need. But as faith, if we have any, breaks out immediately
into prayer, and penetrates into the treasures of the grace of God,
which are held out to us in the word, in order to enjoy them, so Christ
adds *prayer* to *faith;* for if he had only said that we shall have
whatever we wish, some would have thought *that faith* was presumptuous
or too careless. And therefore Christ shows that those only are
believers who, relying on his goodness and promises, betake themselves
to him with humility.

<span id="ii.i-p71"></span>This passage is exceedingly adapted to point
out the power and nature of *faith;* that it is a certainty, relying on
the goodness of God, which does not admit of doubt. For Christ does not
acknowledge as believers any but those who are fully convinced that God
is reconciled to them, and do not doubt that he will give what they ask.
Hence we perceive by what a diabolical contrivance the Papists are
bewitched, who mingle *faith* with *doubt,* and even charge us with
foolish presumption, if we venture to appear before God under the
conviction of His fatherly regard toward us. But this benefit derived
from Christ is that on which Paul chiefly dwells, when he says that

<span id="ii.i-p72"></span>by the faith of him we have boldness  
to approach to God with confidence (<span id="ii.i-p72.2"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="ii.i-p72.2"></span>.md).

<span id="ii.i-p73"></span>This passage shows also that the true test of
*faith* lies in *prayer.* If it be objected, that those prayers are
never heard, *that mountains should be thrown into the sea,* the answer
is easy. Christ does not give a loose rein to the wishes of men, that
they should desire any thing at their pleasure, when he places *prayer*
after the rule of faith;  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) for in
this way the Spirit must of necessity hold all our affections by the
bridle of the word of God, and bring them into obedience. Christ demands
a firm and undoubting confidence of obtaining an answer; and whence does
the human mind obtain that confidence but from the word of God? We now
see then that Christ promises nothing to his disciples, unless they keep
themselves within the limits of the good pleasure of God.

<span id="ii.i-p75"></span><span id="ii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p76"></span>**<span id="ii.i-p76.2"></span>[Luke
19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047.md)<span id="ii.i-p76.2"></span>.**
*And he taught daily in the temple.* Mark and Luke point out, *first,*
what was the class of men of which the Church consisted, namely, of the
despised multitude; and again, what enemies Christ had, namely, *the
priests and scribes,* and all the *rulers.* Now this is a part of the
folly of the cross, that God, passing by the excellence of the world,
chooses what is foolish, weak, and despised. *Secondly,* they relate
that those worthy guardians of the Church of God sought an occasion of
putting Christ to death, by which their wicked impiety was discovered;
for though there had been good grounds for pursuing Christ, yet they had
no right to proceed to murder after the manner of robbers, or secretly
to hire assassins. *Thirdly,* they show that the wicked conspiracy of
those men was frustrated, because, by the secret purpose of God, Christ
was appointed to the death of the cross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc33002.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="ii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>Ils en furent
indignez;” — “they were enraged at it.”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc33002.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>Par la bouche;”
— “by the mouth.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc33002.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="ii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>Ayans foy;” —
“having faith.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc33002.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>Ainsi le
Seigneur entra;” — “thus the Lord entered.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc33002.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p11.1"></span>Il y alla pour
veoir s’il y trouveroit quelque chose;” — “he went to it to see if he
would find anything on it.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc33002.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="ii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p12.1"></span>Estoit seché
jusq’aux racines;” — “was withered even to the roots.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc33002.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="ii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p13.1"></span>Maistre;” —
“Master.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc33002.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>Les pierres
soudain crieront;” — “the stones will suddenly cry out.”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc33002.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p19.1"></span>Que le jour
ensuyvant les disciples prindrent garde à ce qui estoit advenu à
l’arbre;”— “that, on the following day, the disciples took notice of
what had happened the tree.”

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc33002.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p21.1"></span>En l’histoire
des marchans chassez hors du temple;” — “in the narrative of the
merchants driven out of the temple.”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc33002.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p22.1"></span>Et puis il
remet à l’autre jour ensuyvant ceste reformation du temple;” — “and then
he throws back to the other following day that reformation of the
temple.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc33002.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p23.1"></span>Et là regarda
tout autour ce qui s’y faisoit;” — “and there looked all around at what
was done in it.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc33002.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p29.1"></span>Quand il
commença à exercr son office d’ambassadeur;” — “when he began to
discharge his office as ambassador.”

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc33002.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii.i-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p34.1"></span>A la vraye et
droiet cognoissanc de Dieu;” — “in the true and right knowledge of God.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc33002.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p40.1"></span>Et aussi c’est
ceste source des quatre fleuves desquels Ezekiel (<span
id="ii.i-p40.2"></span>[Eze 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.i-p40.2"></span>) <span id="ii.i-p40.3"></span>parle, qui doyvent
arrouser les quatre coins du monde;” — “and this is also the source of
the four rivers of which Ezekiel (<span id="ii.i-p40.4"></span>[Eze
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p40.4"></span>.md)
speaks, which are to water the four quarters of the world.”

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc33002.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p48"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p48.1"></span>Comme si Dieu
eust d’enhaut approuvé par sa voix les louanges que le peuple avoit
proclamees en l’honneur de Christ;” — “as if God had from on high
approved by his voice the praises which the people had proclaimed in
honor of Christ.”

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc33002.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="ii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p51"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p51.1"></span>Christ estant
encore en chemin;” — “Christ being still on the road.”

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc33002.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="ii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p53"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p53.1"></span>Pour arrests
ou revelations celestes;” — “as decisions or revelations from heaven.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc33002.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="ii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p59"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p59.1"></span>Quand toutes
bouches seroyent closes, et toutes langues se tairoyent;” — “though
every mouth were closed, and every tongue were silent.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc33002.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="ii.i-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p60"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p60.1"></span>Mais aussi il
entrera en une grande admiration de sa puissance et sagesse infinie;” —
“but also will greatly admire His infinite power and wisdom.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc33002.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="ii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p64"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p64.1"></span>Il n’a pas
cognu de loin;” — “he did not know at a distance.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc33002.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="ii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p74"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p74.1"></span>Veu qu’il met
les prieres apres la regle de foy, et veut qu’elles soyent conduites par
icelle;” — “since he places prayers after the rule of faith, and wishes
that they should be regulated by it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 21:23-27; Mark 11:27-33; Luke 20:1-8](cc33003.md)
