[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33047)  [Next](cc33049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 28:11-15

<span id="ii.xlvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
28:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p3"></span>**11. **And while they were departing, lo,
some of the guards came into the city, and told the chief priests all
things which had happened. **12. **And having assembled with the eiders,
and entered into consultation, they gave a large sum of money to the
soldiers, **13. **Saying, Say that his disciples came by night, and
stole him, while you were asleep. **14. **And if this come to the ears
of the governor, we will persuade him, and ensure your safety.
**15. **And they took the money, and did as they had been instructed:
and this statement is currently reported among the Jews till the present
day.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p6"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>[Matthew
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>.** *And while they were departing.* It is not
only credible, but the fact is manifest, that the soldiers, to whom had
been entrusted the charge of the sepulcher, were corrupted by a bribe,
so that they were prepared to tell a lie at the bidding of the priests.
They knew well that there was nothing which the priests dreaded more
than that a report should gain credit that Christ rose on the third day
after his death; and they knew that they had been sent there, that, by
guarding the body, they might suppress that report. Those men,
therefore, being addicted to making gain, and seizing on opportunities
of making it from every quarter, after having found that their diligence
was of no service to them, contrive a new method of cheating their
employers out of their money. The words of Matthew — *some of them came*
— leave it uncertain if a few cunning men adopted this resolution
without communicating with the rest, or if they were sent, by a general
agreement, in the name of all. The latter supposition appears to be more
probable; for Matthew afterwards says that *money was given,* not to one
or two, but generally *to the soldiers,* to induce them to commit
perjury. It is at all events certain that, whether they all plotted
together, or only a part of them, they sought to make profit of the
cruel and implacable hatred which the priests bore towards Christ; and
that, looking upon them as convicted of a crime. they abused their evil
conscience to extort money from them. For, as usually happens with all
wicked men, the priests, conscious of having done wrong, in order to
cover their disgrace, were compelled to bribe the soldiers by a *large
reward.* Thus it is evident that the reprobate, after having once given
themselves up to a course of sinning, are continually entangled in new
crimes; and this arises out of their desire to conceal their shame
before men, while they give themselves no concern about the offense
committed against God. Those wretched men not only bribe the soldiers by
a *large sum of money,* but expose their own reputation and life to
serious danger, should cognizance be taken of the crime. And what
constrains them, in addition to the expense which they have laid out, to
incur so serious a risk, but because inveterate rage does not permit
them to withdraw until they have added sin to sin?

<span id="ii.xlvii-p7"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p8"></span>**15.** *And this statement is currently
reported.* It was the finishing stroke of the vengeance of God to blind
the *Jews,* that the resurrection of Christ was buried by the perjury of
the soldiers, and that so gross a falsehood was believed. And hence it
is evident that those who did not believe that Christ was risen were
deceived by a voluntary error, as the world voluntarily gives itself up
to be deceived by the snares of Satan. For if a man had but opened his
eyes, it was unnecessary that he should make a long inquiry. Armed
soldiers say that *the body of Christ was stolen from them* by a feeble,
timid, small, and unarmed body of men. What plausible grounds have they
for saying so? They add that this was done *while they were asleep.* How
then do they come to know that *it was stolen?* And if they had any
suspicion of the disciples, why did they not track their footsteps? Why
did they not, at least, make a noise? It was therefore a childish
subterfuge, which would not have screened them from punishment, if they
had had to deal with an honest and upright governor; but through the
connivance of Pilate, that enormous wickedness was allowed to pass
unnoticed, In like manner, we see it happen every day, that irreligious
judges give themselves little trouble, when truth is oppressed by fraud
and malice; but, on the contrary, if they are not afraid of suffering
damage, they appear to enter into collusion with base and infamous men.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p9"></span>Though it may appear strange that God
should permit this false report to gain currency to extinguish the glory
of his Son, we ought to render the honor which is due to his just
vengeance. For we perceive that this nation deserved to have its light
taken away by clouds, because it so eagerly seizes hold on an idle and
childish falsehood; next, because almost all have struck on *the stone
of stumbling,* it was proper that their eyes should be darkened, that
they might not see that the cup of giddiness was presented to them; and,
in short, that they were abandoned to every kind of madness, as Isaiah
had foretold, (<span id="ii.xlvii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span id="ii.xlvii-p9.1"></span>..md)
For God would never have permitted them to be deceived by such a foolish
credulity, but in order that those who had despised the Redeemer might
be shut out from the hope of salvation; as he now inflicts a similar
punishment on the ingratitude of the world, by giving loose reins to the
reprobate, that they may go from bad to worse. But though this falsehood
obtained currency among the Jews, this did not prevent the truth of the
Gospel from flying at liberty to the very ends of the earth, as it
always rises victorious over all the obstacles in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark 16:12; Luke 24:13-30](cc33049.md)
