[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33026)  [Next](cc33028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:21-25; MARK 14:18-21;  
LUKE 22:15-16, 21-23

<span id="ii.xxvi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#018)<span
id="ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>,21-23

<span id="ii.xxvi-p5"></span>**21.** And while they were eating, he
said, Verily I tell you, That one of you will betray me. **22.** And
they became exceedingly sorrowful, and began every one of them to say to
him, Lord, is it I? **23.** But he answering said, He who hath dipped
his hand with me in the dish will betray me. **24.** The Son of man
indeed goeth, as it is written of him; but woe to that man by whom the
Son of man is betrayed! It would have been good for that man if he had
not been born. **25.** And Judas, who betrayed him, answering, said,
Rabbi is it I?  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) He said to him,
Thou hast said it.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p7"></span>**18.** And while they were sitting at
table and eating, Jesus said, Verily I tell you,  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) One of you that eateth with me will
betray me. **19.** And they began to be sorrowful, and every one of them
to say to him, Is it I? And another said, Is it I? **20.** And he
answering said to them, It is one of the twelve, who dippeth with me in
the dish. **21.** The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him;
but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It had been good
for that man if he had not been born.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p9"></span>**15.** And he said to them, With desire I
have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. **16.** For
I tell you, henceforth I will not eat of it anymore, till it be
fulfilled in the kingdom of God. (And a little after.) **21.** But yet,
lo, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me at the table.
**22.** And the Son of man indeed goeth, according to what hath been
determined; but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed! **23.** And they
began to inquire among themselves,  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) which of them it was that would do
this.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxvi-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>.** *One of you will betray me.* To render the
treachery of Judas more detestable, he points out the aggravated
baseness of it by this circumstance, that he was meditating the act of
*betraying* him while he *sat with him at the* holy *table.* For if a
stranger had done this, it would have been more easily endured; but that
one of his intimate friends should form such a design, and — what is
more — that, after having entered into an infamous bargain, he should be
present at the sacred banquet, was incredibly monstrous. And therefore
Luke employs a connecting particle which marks a contrast: *but yet*,
(<span id="ii.xxvi-p13.3"></span>πλὴν) *lo, the hand of him that
betrayeth me.* And though Luke adds this saying of Christ after the
supper was finished, we cannot obtain from it any certainty as to the
order of time, which, we know, was often disregarded by the Evangelists.
Yet I do not deny that it is probable that Judas was present, when
Christ distributed to his disciples the symbols of his flesh and blood.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p15"></span>**22.** *They began every one of them to
say to him.* I do not think that the disciples were alarmed, as persons
struck with terror are wont to give themselves uneasiness without any
reason; but, abhorring the crime, they are desirous to clear themselves
from the suspicion of it. It is, indeed, a mark of reverence, that when
indirectly blamed, they do not reply angrily to their Master, but each
person constitutes himself his own judge, (as the object which we ought
chiefly to aim at is, to be acquitted by his own mouth;) but, relying on
a good conscience, they wish to declare frankly how far they are from
meditating such a crime.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p16"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p17"></span>**23.** *But he answering said.* Christ,
by his reply, neither removes their doubt, nor points out the person of
Judas, but only confirms what he said a little before, that *one of his
friends sitting at the table* is the traitor. And though they thought it
hard to be left in suspense and perplexity for a time, that they might
employ themselves in contemplating the atrocity of the crime, it was
afterwards followed by another advantage, when they perceived that the
prediction of the psalm was fulfilled,

<span id="ii.xxvi-p18"></span>He that ate pleasant food with me  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)  
hath lifted up his heel against me, (<span id="ii.xxvi-p19.3"></span>[Ps
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xxvi-p19.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxvi-p20"></span>Besides, in the person of Judas, our Lord
intended to admonish his followers in all ages, not to be discouraged or
faint on account of intimate friends proving to be traitors; because the
same thing that was experienced by Him who is the Head of the whole
Church, must happen to us who are members of it.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p22"></span>**24.** *The Son of man indeed goeth.*
Here Christ meets an offense, which might otherwise have greatly shaken
pious minds. For what could be more unreasonable than that the Son of
God should be infamously betrayed by a disciple, and abandoned to the
rage of enemies, in order to be dragged to an ignominious death? But
Christ declares that all this takes place only by the will of God; and
he proves this decree by the testimony of Scripture, because God
formerly revealed, by the mouth of his Prophet, what he had determined.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p23"></span>We now perceive what is intended by the
words of Christ. It was, that the disciples, knowing that what was done
was regulated by the providence of God, might not imagine that his life
or death was determined by chance. But the usefulness of this doctrine
extends much farther; for never are we fully confirmed in the result of
the death of Christ, till we are convinced that he was not accidentally
dragged by men to the cross, but that the sacrifice had been appointed
by an eternal decree of God for expiating the sins of the world. For
whence do we obtain reconciliation, but because Christ has appeased the
Father by his obedience? Wherefore let us always place before our minds
the providence of God, which Judas himself, and all wicked men — though
it is contrary to their wish, and though they have another end in view —
are compelled to obey. Let us always hold this to be a fixed principle,
that Christ suffered, because it pleased God to have such an expiation.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p24"></span>And yet Christ does not affirm that Judas
was freed from blame, on the ground that he did nothing but what God had
appointed. For though God, by his righteous judgment, appointed for the
price of our redemption the death of his Son, yet nevertheless, Judas,
in betraying Christ, brought upon himself righteous condemnation,
because he was full of treachery and avarice. In short, God’s
determination that the world should be redeemed, does not at all
interfere with Judas being a wicked traitor. Hence we perceive, that
though men can do nothing but what God has appointed, still this does
not free them from condemnation, when they are led by a wicked desire to
sin. For though God directs them, by an unseen bridle, to an end which
is unknown to them, nothing is farther from their intention than to obey
his decrees. Those two principles, no doubt, appear to human reason Lo
be inconsistent with each other, that God regulates the affairs of men
by his Providence in such a manner, that nothing is done but by his will
and command, and yet he damns the reprobate, by whom he has carried into
execution what he intended. But we see how Christ, in this passage,
reconciles both, by pronouncing a curse on Judas, though what he
contrived against God had been appointed by God; not that Judas’s act of
betraying ought strictly to be called the work of God, but because God
turned the treachery of Judas so as to accomplish His own purpose.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p25"></span>I am aware of the manner in which some
commentators endeavor to avoid this rock. They acknowledge that what had
been written was accomplished through the agency of Judas, because God
testified by predictions what He fore-knew. By way of softening the
doctrine, which appears to them to be somewhat harsh, they substitute
the *foreknowledge* of God in place of the *decree,* as if God merely
beheld from a distance future events, and did not arrange them according
to his pleasure. But very differently does the Spirit settle this
question; for not only does he assign as the reason why Christ was
delivered up, that *it was so written,* but also that it was so
*determined.* For where Matthew and Mark quote Scripture, Luke leads us
direct to the heavenly decree, saying, *according to what was
determined;* as also in the Acts of the Apostles, he shows that Christ
*was delivered* not only *by the foreknowledge,* but likewise *by the
fixed purpose of God,* (<span id="ii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>[Ac
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>)
and a little afterwards, that *Herod and Pilate,* with other wicked men,

<span id="ii.xxvi-p26"></span>did those things which had been
fore-ordained by the hand and purpose of God, (<span
id="ii.xxvi-p26.1"></span>[Acts 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028)<span id="ii.xxvi-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxvi-p27"></span>Hence it is evident that it is but an
ignorant subterfuge which is employed by those who betake themselves to
bare foreknowledge.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p28"></span>*It had been good for that man.* By this
expression we are taught what a dreadful vengeance awaits the wicked,
for whom *it would have been better that they had never been born.* And
yet this life, though transitory, and full of innumerable distresses, is
an invaluable gift of God. Again, we also infer from it, how detestable
is their wickedness, which not only extinguishes the precious gifts of
God, and turns them to their destruction, but makes it to have been
*better for them* that they had never tasted the goodness of God. But
this phrase is worthy of observation, *it would have been good for that
man if he had never been born;* for though the condition of Judas was
wretched, yet to have created hint was good in God, who, appointing the
reprobate to the day of destruction, illustrates also in this way his
own glory, as Solomon tells us:

<span id="ii.xxvi-p29"></span>The Lord hath made all things for himself;
yea,  
even the wicked for the day of evil, (<span
id="ii.xxvi-p29.2"></span>[Pr
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxvi-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxvi-p30"></span>The secret government of God, which
provides even the schemes and works of men, is thus vindicated, as I
lately noticed, from all blame and suspicion.

<span id="ii.xxvi-p31"></span><span id="ii.xxvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p32"></span>**25.** *And Judas who betrayed him.*
Though we often see persons trembling, who are conscious of doing wrong,
yet along with dread and secret torments there is mingled such
stupidity, that they boldly make a fiat denial; but in the end they gain
nothing by their impudence but to expose their hidden wickedness. Thus
*Judas,* while he is restrained by an evil conscience, cannot remain
silent; so dreadfully is he tormented, and, at the same time,
overwhelmed with fear and anxiety, by that internal executioner. Christ,
by indirectly glancing, in his reply, at the foolish rashness of
*Judas,* entreats him to consider the crime which he wished to conceal;
but his mind, already seized with diabolical rage, could not admit such
a sentiment. Let us learn from this example, that the wicked, by bold
apologies, do nothing more than draw down upon themselves a more sudden
judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc33027.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>Maistre,
est-ce moy?” — “Master, is it I?”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc33027.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p8"></span> This clause has been omitted, through
oversight, in Calvin’s Latin version; but the defect is supplied—as in
other instances—by the French copy, “<span id="ii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>*Je
vous dy en verité;”* — *“I tell you in truth.”* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc33027.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>Lors ils
commencerent à s’entredemander l’un à l’autre;” — “then they began to
ask one another.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc33027.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>*Celuy
qui mangeoit en ami avec moy;*” — “*he that ate with me as a friend.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:26-30; Mark 14:22-26; Luke 22:17-20](cc33028)
