[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33030)  [Next](cc33032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:36-44; MARK 14:32-40;  
LUKE 22:39-46

<span id="ii.xxx-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:36-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036.md)<span id="ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:32-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:39-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#039.md)<span id="ii.xxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p5"></span>**36. **Then Jesus cometh with them to a
place which is called Gethsemane, and saith to the disciples, Sit here
until I go yonder and pray. **37. **And, having taken with him Peter and
the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be affected with grief and sorrow.
**38. **Then Jesus saith to them, My soul is sorrowful, even to death:
remain here, and watch with me. **39. **And proceeding a little farther,
he fell on his face, praying, and saying, My Father, if it be possible,
let this cup pass from me; but yet not as I will, but as thou wilt.
**40. **And he came to the disciples, and found them sleeping, and said
to Peter, Couldst not thou watch with me one hour? **41. **Watch and
pray, that you may not enter into temptation: the spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak. **42. **He went away again the second
time, and prayed, saying, My Father, if this cup cannot pass from me,
except I drink it, thy will be done. **43. **And he came, and found them
sleeping again; for their eyes were heavy. **44. **And he left them, and
went away again, and prayed a third time, saying the same words.

<span id="ii.xxx-p6"></span>**32. **And they come to a place which is
called Gethsemane; and he saith to his disciples, Sit here until I have
prayed. **33. **And he taketh with him Peter, and James, and John. And
he began to be afraid, and to be very sorrowful. **34. **And he saith to
them, My soul is sorrowful, even to death: remain here and watch.
**35. **And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him; **36. **And
said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee; remove this cup
from me: but yet not what I will, but what thou wilt. **37. **And he
cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith to Peter, Simon, sleepest
thou? Couldst thou not watch one hour? **38. **Watch and pray, that you
may not enter into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the
flesh is weak. **39. **And he went away again, and prayed, saying the
same words. **40. **And he returned, and found them sleeping again; for
their eyes were heavy, and they did not know what to answer him.

<span id="ii.xxx-p7"></span>**39. **And he came out, and went (as he was
wont) to the mountain of Olives; and his disciples also followed him.
**40. **And when he came to the place, he said to then, pray that you
may not enter into temptation. **41. **And he withdrew from them about a
stone’s cast, and kneeled down, and prayed, **42. **Saying, Father, if
thou wilt, remove this cup from me; but yet not my will, but thine be
done. **43. **And there appeared to him an angel from heaven,
strengthening him. **44. **And, being in agony, he prayed more
earnestly; and his sweat was like drops of blood falling to the ground.
**45. **And when he had risen from prayer, and come to his disciples, he
found them sleeping through sorrow. **46. **And he saith to them, Why do
you sleep? Arise; and pray, that you may not enter into temptation.

<span id="ii.xxx-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxx-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p10"></span>**<span id="ii.xxx-p10.2"></span>[Matthew
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#036.md)<span
id="ii.xxx-p10.2"></span>.** *Then Jesus cometh with them.* Luke
mentions *the mountain of Olives* only. Mark and Matthew add a more
minute description of the place. But Luke expresses what is still more
to the purpose, that Christ came there *according to his custom.* Hence
we infer, that he did not seek retirement for the purpose of concealing
himself, but, as if he had made an assignation with his enemies, he
presented himself to death. On this account John says (<span
id="ii.xxx-p10.3"></span>[Joh
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxx-p10.3"></span>.md)
that *the place was known* to the traitor, *because Jesus was wont to
come there frequently.* In this passage, therefore, his obedience is
again described to us, because he could not have appeased the Father but
by a voluntary death.

<span id="ii.xxx-p11"></span>*Sit here.* By leaving the disciples at a
distance, he spares their weakness; as if a man, perceiving that he
would soon be in extreme danger in battle, were to leave his wife and
children in a situation of safety. But though he intended to place them
all beyond arrow-shot, yet he took three of them who accompanied him
more closely than the rest, and these were the flower and choice, in
which there was greater rigor. And yet he did not take them, as if he
believed that they would be able to sustain the attack, but that they
might afford a proof of the defect which was common to them all.

<span id="ii.xxx-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p13"></span>**37.** *He began to be affected with
grief.* We have seen that our Lord formerly contended with the fear of
death; but as he now fights face to face with temptation, such an attack
is called the *beginning* of *grief* and *sorrow.* Hence we infer that
the true test of virtue is only to be found when the contest begins; for
then the weakness of the flesh, which was formerly concealed, shows
itself, and the secret feelings are abundantly displayed. Thus, though
God had already tried his Son by certain preparatory exercises, he now
wounds him more sharply by a nearer prospect of death, and strikes his
mind with a terror to which he had not been accustomed. But as it
appears to be inconsistent with the divine glory of Christ, that he was
seized with trembling and sadness, many commentators have labored with
toil and anxiety to find some way of evading the difficulty. But their
labor has been ill-judged and of no use; for if we are ashamed that
Christ should experience fear and sorrow, our redemption will perish and
be lost.

<span id="ii.xxx-p14"></span>Ambrose justly says: “I not only do not
think that there is any need of excuse, but there is no instance in
which I admire more his kindness and his majesty; for he would not have
done so much for me, if he had not taken upon him my feelings. He
grieved for me, who had no cause of grief for himself; and, laying aside
the delights of the eternal Godhead, he experiences the affliction of my
weakness. I boldly call it *sorrow,* because I preach the cross. For he
took upon him not the appearance, but the reality, of incarnation. It
was therefore necessary that he should experience grief, that he might
overcome sorrow, and not shut it out; for the praise of fortitude is not
bestowed on those who are rather stupefied than pained by wounds.” Thus
far Ambrose.

<span id="ii.xxx-p15"></span>Certainly those who imagine that the Son of
God was exempt from human passions do not truly and sincerely
acknowledge him to be a man. And when it is even said that the divine
power of Christ rested and was concealed for a time, that by his
sufferings he might discharge all that belonged to the Redeemer, this
was so far from being absurd, that in no other way could the mystery of
our salvation have been accomplished. For Cyril has properly said:
“*That* the suffering of Christ on the cross was not in every respect
voluntary, but that it was voluntary on account of the will of the
Father, and on account of our salvation, you may easily learn from his
prayer, *Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.* For the
same reason that *the Word of God is God,* (<span
id="ii.xxx-p15.1"></span>[Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.xxx-p15.1"></span>,) and is naturally *life* itself, (<span
id="ii.xxx-p15.2"></span>[Joh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span id="ii.xxx-p15.2"></span>,.md)
nobody doubts that he had no dread of death; but, having been *made
flesh,* (<span id="ii.xxx-p15.3"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxx-p15.3"></span>,.md)
he allows the flesh to feel what belongs to it, and, therefore, being
truly a man, he trembles at death, when it is now at the door, and says,
*Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; but since it
cannot be otherwise, let it be not as I will, but as thou wilt.* You see
how human nature, even in Christ himself, has the sufferings and fears
which belong to it, but that the Word, who is united to it, raises it to
a fortitude which is worthy of God.” He at length concludes: “*You*
perceive that it was not for the sake of the flesh that the death of
Christ was voluntary, but that it was voluntary, because, on account of
it, according to the will of the Father, salvation and life were
bestowed on men.” Such are the views of Cyril.

<span id="ii.xxx-p16"></span>Still the weakness which Christ took upon
himself must be distinguished from ours, for there is a great
difference. In us there is no affection unaccompanied by sin, because
they all exceed due bounds and proper restraint; but when Christ was
distressed by grief and fear, he did not rise against God, but continued
to be regulated by the true rule of moderation. We need not wonder that,
since he was innocent, and pure from every stain, the affections which
flowed from him were pure and stainless; but that nothing proceeds from
the corrupt nature of men which is not impure and filthy. Let us,
therefore, attend to this distinction, that Christ, amidst fear and
sadness, was weak without any taint of sin; but that all our affections
are sinful, because they rise to an extravagant height.

<span id="ii.xxx-p17"></span>The kind of feelings, by which Christ was
tempted, is also worthy of notice. Matthew says that *he was affected by
grief and sorrow* (or anxiety;)Luke says that he was *seized with
anguish;* and Mark adds that *he trembled.* And whence came his *sorrow*
and *anguish,* and *fear,* but because he felt that death had something
in it more sad and more dreadful than the separation of the soul and
body? And certainly he underwent death, not merely that he might depart
from earth to heaven, but rather that, by taking upon himself the curse
to which we were liable, he might deliver us from it. He had no horror
at death, therefore, simply as a passage out of the world, but because
he had before his eyes the dreadful tribunal of God, and the Judge
himself armed with inconceivable vengeance; and because our sins, the
load of which was laid upon him, pressed him down with their enormous
weight. There is no reason to wonder, therefore, if the dreadful abyss
of destruction tormented him grievously with fear and anguish.

<span id="ii.xxx-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p19"></span>**38.** *My soul is sorrowful.* He
communicates to them his *sorrow,* in order to arouse them to sympathy;
not that he was unacquainted with their weakness, but in order that they
might afterwards be more ashamed of their carelessness. This phrase
expresses a deadly wound of grief; as if he had said, that he fainted,
or was half-dead, with *sorrow.* Jonah (<span
id="ii.xxx-p19.2"></span>[Jon 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.xxx-p19.2"></span>) makes use of a similar phrase in replying to
the Lord; *I am angry even to death.* I advert to this, because some of
the ancient writers, in handling this passage with a misapplication of
ingenuity, philosophize in this way, that *the soul* of Christ was not
*sorrowful in death* but only *even to death.* And here again we ought
to remember the cause of so great *sorrow;* for *death* in itself would
not have so grievously tormented the mind of the Son of God, if he had
not felt that he had to deal with the judgment of God.

<span id="ii.xxx-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p21"></span>**39.** *And he went forward a little.* We
have seen in other passages, that in order to excite himself to greater
earnestness of prayer, the Lord prayed in the absence of witnesses; for
when we are withdrawn from the gaze of men, we succeed better in
collecting our senses, so as to attend more closely to what we are
doing. It is not, indeed, necessary — nay more, it is not always proper
— that we should retire to distant corners whenever we pray; but when
some great necessity urges us, because the fervor of prayer is more
freely indulged when we are alone, it is useful to us to pray apart. And
if the Son of God did not disregard this aid, it would be the greatest
madness of pride in us not to apply it for our own advantage. Add to
this, that when God alone is witness, as there is nothing then to be
feared from ambition, the believing soul unfolds itself with greater
familiarity, and with greater simplicity pours its wishes, and groans,
and anxieties, and fears, and hopes, and joys, into the bosom of God.
God allows his people to make use of many little modes of speaking, when
they pray alone, which, in the presence of men, would savor of
ostentation.

<span id="ii.xxx-p22"></span>*And fell on his face.* By the very gesture
*of falling* on the earth, Christ manifested his deep earnestness in
prayer. For though *kneeling,* as our expression of respect and
reverence, is commonly used in prayer, Christ, by throwing himself on
the ground as a suppliant, placed himself in a pitiable attitude on
account of the vehemence of his grief.

<span id="ii.xxx-p23"></span>*My Father, if it be possible.* In vain do
some persons labor to show that what is here described is not a prayer,
but only a complaint. For my own part, while I own that it is abrupt, I
have no doubt that Christ offered a prayer. Nor is it inconsistent with
this, that he asks a thing that is impossible to be granted to him; for
the prayers of believers do not always flow on with uninterrupted
progress to the end, do not always maintain a uniform measure, are not
always arranged even in a distinct order, but, on the contrary, are
involved and confused, and either oppose each other, or stop in the
middle of the course; like a vessel tossed by tempests, which, though it
advances towards the harbor, cannot always keep a straight and uniform
course, as in a calm sea. We must remember, indeed, what I lately
mentioned, that Christ had not confused emotions, like those to which we
are accustomed, to withdraw his mind from pure moderation; but, so far
as the pure and innocent nature of man could admit, he was struck with
fear and seized with anguish, so that, amidst the violent shocks of
temptation, he vacillated—as it were—from one wish to another. This is
the reason why, after having prayed to be freed from death, he
immediately restrains himself, and, submitting to the authority of the
Father, corrects and recalls that wish which had suddenly escaped him.

<span id="ii.xxx-p24"></span>But it may be asked, How did he pray that
the eternal decree of the Father, of which he was not ignorant, should
be revoked? or though he states a condition, *if it be possible,* yet it
wears an aspect of absurdity to make the purpose of God changeable. We
must hold it to be utterly impossible for God to revoke his decree.
According to Mark, too, Christ would seem to contrast the power of God
with his decree. *All things, says* he, *are possible to thee.* But it
would be improper to extend the power of God so far as to lessen his
truth, by making him liable to variety and change. I answer, There would
be no absurdity in supposing that Christ, agreeably to the custom of the
godly, leaving out of view the divine purpose, committed to the bosom of
the Father his desire which troubled him. For believers, in pouring out
their prayers, do not always ascend to the contemplation of the secrets
of God, or deliberately inquire what is possible to be done, but are
sometimes carried away hastily by the earnestness of their wishes. Thus
Moses prays that he may be *blotted out of the book of life,* (<span
id="ii.xxx-p24.1"></span>[Ex
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033)<span id="ii.xxx-p24.1"></span>;.md)
thus Paul *wished to be made an anathema,*  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) (<span id="ii.xxx-p25.2"></span>[Ro
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="ii.xxx-p25.2"></span>..md)
This, therefore, was not a premeditated prayer of Christ; but the
strength and violence of grief suddenly drew this word from his mouth,
to which he immediately added a correction. The same vehemence of desire
took away from him the immediate recollection of the heavenly decree, so
that he did not at that moment reflect, that it was on this condition,
 <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) that he was sent to be the
Redeemer of mankind; as distressing anxiety often brings darkness over
our eyes, so that we do not at once remember the whole state of the
matter. In short, there is no impropriety, if in prayer we do not always
direct our immediate attention to every thing, so as to preserve a
distinct order. When Christ says, in the Gospel by Matthew, that *all
things are possible to God,* he does not intend by these words to bring
the power of God into conflict with unchangeable truth and firmness; but
as there was no hope—which is usually the case when affairs are
desperate—he throws himself on the power of God. The word (<span
id="ii.xxx-p26.2"></span>ποτήριον) *cup* or *chalice* — as we have
mentioned elsewhere — denotes the providence of God, which assigns to
each his measure of the cross and of affliction, just as the master of a
house gives an allowance to each servant, and distributes portions among
the children.

<span id="ii.xxx-p27"></span>*But yet not as I will, but as thou wilt.*
We see how Christ restrains his feelings at the very outset, and quickly
brings himself into a state of obedience. But here it may first be
inquired, How was his will pure from all vice, while it did not agree
with the will of God? For if the will of God is the only rule of what is
good and right, it follows, that all the feelings which are at variance
with it are vicious. I reply: Though it be true rectitude to regulate
all our feelings by the good pleasure of God, yet there is a certain
kind of indirect disagreement with it which is not faulty, and is not
reckoned as sin; if, for *example,* a person desire to see the Church in
a calm and flourishing condition, if he wish that the children of God
were delivered from afflictions, that all superstitions were removed out
of the world, and that the rage of wicked men were so restrained as to
do no injury. These things, being in themselves right, may properly be
desired by believers, though it may please God to order a different
state of matters: for he chooses that his Son should reign among
enemies; that his people should be trained under the cross; and that the
triumph of faith and of the Gospel should be rendered more illustrious
by the opposing machinations of Satan. We see how those prayers are
holy, which appear to be contrary to the will of God; for God does not
desire us to be always exact or scrupulous in inquiring what he has
appointed, but allows us to ask what is desirable according to the
capacity of our senses.

<span id="ii.xxx-p28"></span>But the question has not yet been fully
answered: for since we have just now said that all the feelings of
Christ were properly regulated, how does he now correct himself? For he
brings his feelings into obedience to God in such a manner as if he had
exceeded what was proper. Certainly in the first prayer we do not
perceive that calm moderation which I have described; for, as far as
lies in his power, he refuses and shrinks from discharging the office of
Mediator. I reply: When the dread of death was presented to his mind,
and brought along with it such darkness, that he left out of view every
thing else, and eagerly presented that prayer, there was no fault in
this. Nor is it necessary to enter into any subtle controversy whether
or not it was possible for him to forget our salvation. We ought to be
satisfied with this single consideration, that at the time when he
uttered a prayer to be delivered from death, he was not thinking of
other things which would have shut the door against such a wish.

<span id="ii.xxx-p29"></span>If it be objected, that the first movement,
which needed to be restrained before it proceeded farther, was not so
well regulated as it ought to have been, I reply: In the present
corruption of our nature it is impossible to find ardor of affections
accompanied by moderation, such as existed in Christ; but we ought to
give such honor to the Son of God, as not to judge of him by what we
find in ourselves. For in us all the affections of the flesh, when
strongly excited, break out into rebellion, or, at least, have some
mixture of pollution; but Christ, amidst the utmost vehemence of grief
or fear, restrained himself within proper bounds. Nay more, as musical
sounds, though various and differing from each other, are so far from
being discordant, that they produce sweet melody and fine harmony; so in
Christ there was a remarkable example of adaptation between the two
wills,  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) the will of God and the
will of man, so that they differed from each other without any conflict
or opposition.

<span id="ii.xxx-p31"></span>This passage shows plainly enough the gross
folly of those ancient heretics, who were called *Monothelites,*  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) because they imagined that the will of
Christ was but one and simple; for Christ, as he was God, *willed*
nothing different from the Father; and therefore it follows, that his
human soul had affections distinct from the secret purpose of God. But
if even Christ was under the necessity of holding his will captive, in
order to subject it to the government of God, though it was properly
regulated, how carefully ought we to repress the violence of our
feelings, which are always inconsiderate, and rash, and full of
rebellion? And though the Spirit of God governs us, so that we wish
nothing but what is agreeable to reason, still we owe to God such
obedience as to endure patiently that our wishes should not be granted;
 <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) For the modesty of faith
consists in permitting God to appoint differently from what we desire.
Above all, when we have no certain and special promise, we ought to
abide by this rule, not to ask any thing but on the condition that God
shall fulfill what he has decreed; which cannot be done, unless we give
up our wishes to his disposal.

<span id="ii.xxx-p34"></span>It comes now to be inquired, what advantage
did Christ gain by praying? The apostle, in writing to the Hebrews, says
that *he was heard* (<span id="ii.xxx-p34.1"></span>ἀπὸ τὢς εὐλαβείας*)
on account of his fear:* for so ought that passage to be explained, and
not, as it is usually explained, *on account of his reverence,* (<span
id="ii.xxx-p34.2"></span>[Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.xxx-p34.2"></span>.) That would not have been consistent, if
Christ had simply feared death; for he was not delivered from it. Hence
it follows, that what led him to pray to be delivered from death was the
dread of a greater evil. When he saw the wrath of God exhibited to him,
as he stood at the tribunal of God charged with the sins of the whole
world, he unavoidably shrunk with horror from the deep abyss of death.
And, therefore, though he suffered death, yet since *its pains were
loosed*—*as* Peter tells us, (<span id="ii.xxx-p34.3"></span>[Ac
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.xxx-p34.3"></span>,)—and he was victorious in the conflict, the
Apostle justly says, that he was heard *on account of his fear.* Here
ignorant people rise up and exclaim, that it would have been unworthy of
Christ to be afraid of being swallowed up by death. But I should wish
them to answer this question, What kind *of fear* do they suppose it to
have been which drew from Christ *drops of blood?* (<span
id="ii.xxx-p34.4"></span>[lu
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#044)<span id="ii.xxx-p34.4"></span>.md)
For that mortal sweat could only have proceeded from fearful and unusual
horror. If any person, in the present day, were to *sweat blood,* and in
such a quantity that the *drops* should *fall to the ground,* it would
be reckoned an astonishing miracle; and if this happened to any man
through *fear of death,* we would say that he had a cowardly and
effeminate mind. Those men, therefore, who deny that Christ prayed that
the Father would rescue him from the gulf of death, ascribe to him a
cowardice that would be disgraceful even in an ordinary man.

<span id="ii.xxx-p35"></span>If it be objected, that the *fear* which I
am describing arises from unbelief, the answer is easy. When Christ was
struck with horror at the divine curse, the feeling of the flesh
affected him in such a manner, that faith still remained firm and
unshaken. For such was the purity of his nature, that he felt, without
being wounded by them, those temptations which pierce us with their
stings. And yet those persons, by representing him not to have felt
temptations, foolishly imagine that he was victorious without fighting.
And, indeed, we have no right to suppose that he used any hypocrisy,
when he complained of a mortal sadness in his soul; nor do the
Evangelists speak falsely, when they say that he *was exceedingly
sorrowful,* and that he *trembled*

<span id="ii.xxx-p36"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p37"></span>**40.** *And he came to his disciples.*
Though he was neither delivered from fear, nor freed from anxiety, yet
he interrupted the ardor of prayer, and administered this consolation.
For believers are not required to be so constant in prayer as never to
cease from conversing with God; but on the contrary, following the
example of Christ, they continue their prayers till they have proceeded
as far as their infirmity allows, then cease for a short time, and
immediately after drawing breath return to God. It would have been no
slight alleviation of his grief, if his disciples had accompanied him,
and taken part in it; and on the other hand, it was a bitter aggravation
of his sufferings, that even they forsook him. For though he did not
need the assistance of any one, yet as he had voluntarily taken upon him
our infirmities, and as it was chiefly in this struggle that he intended
to give a proof of that *emptying of himself,* of which Paul speaks,
(<span id="ii.xxx-p37.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxx-p37.2"></span>,.md)
we need not wonder if the indifference of those whom he had selected to
be his companions added a heavy and distressing burden to his grief. For
his expostulation is not feigned, but, out of the true feeling of his
mind, he declares that he is grieved at having been forsaken. And,
indeed, he had good grounds for reproaching them with indifference,
since, amidst the extremity of his anguish, they *did not watch at least
one hour.*

<span id="ii.xxx-p38"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p39"></span>**41.** *Watch and pray.* As the disciples
were unmoved by their Master’s danger, their attention is directed to
themselves, that a conviction of their own danger may arouse them.
Christ therefore threatens that, if they do not *watch and pray,* they
may be soon overwhelmed by *temptation.* As if he had said, “Though you
take no concern about me, do not fail, at least, to think of yourselves;
for your own interests are involved in it, and if you do not take care,
*temptation* will immediately swallow you up.” For *to enter into
temptation* means *to yield to it.*  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) And let us observe, that the manner of
resistance which is here enjoined is, not to draw courage from reliance
on our own strength and perseverance, but, on the contrary, from a
conviction of our weakness, to ask arms and strength from the Lord. Our
*watching,* therefore, will be of no avail without *prayer.*

<span id="ii.xxx-p41"></span>*The spirit indeed is willing.* That he may
not terrify and discourage his disciples, he gently reproves their
slothfulness, and adds consolation and good ground of hope. And, first,
he reminds them, that though they are earnestly desirous to do what is
right, still they must contend with the weakness of the flesh, and,
therefore, that prayer is never unnecessary. We see, then, that he gives
them the praise of *willingness,* in order that their weakness may not
throw them into despair, and yet urges them to *prayer,* because they
are not sufficiently endued with the power of the Spirit. Wherefore,
this admonition relates properly to believers, who, being regenerated by
the Spirit of God, are desirous to do what is right, but still labor
under the *weakness* of the *flesh;* for though the grace of *the
Spirit* is vigorous in them, they are *weak* according to *the flesh.*
And though the disciples alone have their weakness here pointed out to
them, yet, since what Christ says of them applies equally to all, we
ought to draw from it a general rule, that it is our duty to keep
diligent *watch* by *praying;* for we do not yet possess the power of
*the Spirit* in such a measure as not to fall frequently through the
*weakness* of *the flesh,* unless the Lord grant his assistance to raise
up and uphold us. But there is no reason why we should tremble with
excessive anxiety; for an undoubted remedy is held out to us, which we
will neither have nor to seek nor to seek in vain; for Christ promises
that all who, being earnest in *prayer,* shall perseveringly oppose the
slothfulness of the flesh, will be victorious.

<span id="ii.xxx-p42"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p43"></span>**42.** *Again he went away a second time.*
By these words Christ seems as if, having subdued fear, he came with
greater freedom and courage to submit to the will of *the Father;* for
he no longer asks to have *the cup removed from him,* but, leaving out
this prayer, insists rather on obeying the purpose of God. But according
to Mark, this progress is not described; and even when Christ returned
*a second time,* we are told that he repeated *the same prayer;* and,
indeed, I have no doubt, that at each of the times when he prayed, fear
and horror impelled him to ask that he might be delivered from death.
 <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) Yet it is probable that, at
*the second time,* he labored more to yield obedience to the Father, and
that the first encounter with temptation animated him to approach death
with greater confidence.Luke does not expressly relate that he prayed
three several times, but only says that, when he was pressed with
*anguish,* he prayed with greater copiousness and earnestness, as if he
had continued to pray without any intermission. But we know that the
Evangelists sometimes leave out circumstances, and only glance rapidly
at the substance of what took place. Accordingly, when he says towards
the close, that Christ *came to his disciples,* it is a *hysteron
proteton;*  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) just as, in another
clause, he relates that *an angel from heaven appeared,* before he
speaks of Christ’s *anguish.* But the inversion of the order carries no
absurdity; for, in order to inform us that the *angel* was not sent
without a good reason, the necessity for it is afterwards stated; and
thus the latter part of the narrative is, in some sort, a reason
assigned for the former. Now though it is the Spirit of God alone that
imparts fortitude, that does not hinder God from employing *angels* as
his ministers. And hence we may conclude what excruciating distresses
the Son of God must have endured, since it was necessary that the
assistance of God should be granted to him in a visible manner.

<span id="ii.xxx-p46"></span><span id="ii.xxx-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p47"></span>**43.** *And found them sleeping again.*
This drowsiness arose neither from excessive eating and drinking, nor
from gross stupidity, nor even from effeminate indulgence of the flesh,
but rather—as Luke tells us—from immoderate *sorrow.* Hence we perceive
more clearly how strong is the tendency of our flesh to indifference;
since even dangers lead us to forgetfulness of God. Thus on every hand
Satan finds suitable and ready opportunities of spreading his snares for
us. For if we dread no danger, he intoxicates and drowns us in *sleep;*
and if we experience fear and sorrow, which ought to arouse us to pray,
he overwhelms our senses, so that they do not rise to God; and thus, in
every respect, men fall away and forsake God, till he restores them. We
must observe also this circumstance, that the disciples, after having
been sharply reproved, almost at that very moment fall again asleep. Nor
is this said of the whole body, but of the three whom Christ had
selected to be his chief companions; and what shall we say of the
greater number, when this happened to the flower of them? Now the
repetition of the same words was not a *vain repetition, (*<span
id="ii.xxx-p47.2"></span>βατταλογία*)* which Christ formerly condemned
in hypocrites, (<span id="ii.xxx-p47.3"></span>[Mt
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxx-p47.3"></span>.md)
who hope that they will obtain by idle talking what they do not ask
honestly and sincerely.  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) But
Christ intended to show by his example, that we must not be discouraged
or grow weary in praying, if we do not immediately obtain our wishes. So
then, it is not a superfluous repetition of the words, if a repulse
which we have experienced is so far from extinguishing the ardor of
prayer, that we ask a third and fourth time what God appears to have
denied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc33031.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p25.1"></span>*A desiré
d’estre separé de Christ;”* — *“desired to be separated from Christ.”*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc33031.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p26.1"></span>Avec ceste
condition de souffrir la mort;” — “on this condition of suffering
death.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc33031.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p30.1"></span>Les deux
volontés.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc33031.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p32"></span> <span id="ii.xxx-p32.1"></span>Μονοθελὢται
is compounded of <span id="ii.xxx-p32.2"></span>μόνος, *one,* and <span
id="ii.xxx-p32.3"></span>θέλω, *I will.* The *Monothelite* heresy sprung
up in the Seventh Century, and is fully detailed by our ecclesiastical
historians. Its leading tenet was, that Christ had not *one will* as
God, and *another will* as Man. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc33031.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p32.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p33.1"></span>Que nos
souhaits ne vienent point à loeur issue, quand ainsi luy plaist;” —
“that our wishes should not succeed, when it so pleases Him.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc33031.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p40.1"></span>Succomber
et estre viencu;” — “to yield and to be overcome.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc33031.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p44"></span> “<span id="ii.xxx-p44.1"></span>A requerir
qu’il ne veinst point a ceste mort;” — “to ask that he might not com to
that death.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc33031.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p45"></span> *Hysteron proteron* <span
id="ii.xxx-p45.1"></span>(ὕστερον πρότερον) is a figure of rhetoric, by
which the natural order of events is reversed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc33031.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="ii.xxx-p47.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xxx-p48"></span> *Harmony,* vol. 1, p. 313

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:45-50; Mark 14:41-46; Luke 22:47-48](cc33032.md)
