[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33051)  [Next](cc33053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.li"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p1"></span>MATTHEW 28:16-20; MARK 16:15-18

<span id="ii.li-p2"></span><span id="ii.li-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
28:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016)<span id="ii.li-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p3"></span><span id="ii.li-p3.1"></span>[Mark
16:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="ii.li-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p4"></span>**16. **But the eleven disciples went into
Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had appointed them. **17. **And
when they saw him, they worshipped him; but some doubted. **18. **And
Jesus approached, and spoke to them, saying, All power is given to me in
heaven and on the earth. **19. **Go out, therefore, and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; **20. **Teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you; and, lo, I am with you always, even to
the end of the world.

<span id="ii.li-p5"></span>**15. **And he said to them, Go into all the
world, and preach the gospel to every creature. **16. **He who shall
believe and be baptized shall be saved; but he who shall believe shall
be condemned. **17. **And these signs shall follow those who shall
believe: In my name they shall cast out devils; they shall speak with
new tongues; **18. **They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any
deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick,
and they shall recover.

<span id="ii.li-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.li-p7"></span><span id="ii.li-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p8"></span>**<span id="ii.li-p8.1"></span>[Matthew
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016)<span id="ii.li-p8.1"></span>.**
*And the eleven disciples went into Galilee.* Matthew, passing by those
occurrences which we have taken out of the other three Evangelists,
mentions only in what place *the eleven disciples* were appointed to the
apostolic office. For—as we have already had frequent opportunities of
perceiving—it was not the intention of the Evangelists to embrace every
part of the history; because the Holy Spirit, who guided their pen, has
thought fit to compose such a summary as we see out of their united
testimonies. Matthew has therefore selected what was of the greatest
importance to us, namely, that when Christ appeared to the disciples, he
likewise commissioned them to be apostles, to convey into every part of
the world the message of eternal life.

<span id="ii.li-p9"></span>*To the mountain where Jesus had appointed
them.* Though *the mountain* is not mentioned any where else, yet we
con-elude that this spot *in Galilee* was known to Mary.  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322)

<span id="ii.li-p11"></span><span id="ii.li-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p12"></span>**17.** *But some doubted.* It is wonderful
that, after they had twice seen Christ, still *some doubted.* If any one
choose to view this as referring to the first appearance, there will be
no absurdity in that opinion; for the Evangelists are sometimes in the
habit of blending a variety of transactions. But neither would it have
the appearance of absurdity to suppose that in some of them the remains
of their former terror led them again into hesitation; for we know that,
when Christ appeared, they were struck with fear and amazement, till
they had recovered their minds and had become accustomed to his
presence. The meaning, therefor appears to me to be, that *some* at
first hesitated, until Christ made a nearer and more familiar approach
to them; but that when they certainly and absolutely recognized him,
then *they worshipped,* because the splendor of his divine glory was
manifest. And perhaps it was the same reason that suddenly caused them
to *doubt,* and afterwards led them to *worship him;* namely, that he
had laid aside the form of a servant, and had nothing in his appearance
but what was heavenly.

<span id="ii.li-p13"></span><span id="ii.li-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p14"></span>**18.** *And Jesus approached and spoke to
them.* His *approach* unquestionably removed all hesitation. Before
relating that the office of teaching was committed to the disciples,
Matthew says that Christ began by speaking of his *power;* and not
without reason. For no ordinary authority would here have been enough,
but sovereign and truly divine government ought to be possessed by him
who commands them to promise eternal life in his ham to reduce the whole
world under his sway, and to publish a doctrine which subdues all pride,
and lays prostrate the whole of the human race. And by this preface
Christ not only encouraged the Apostles to full confidence in the
discharge of their office, but confirmed the faith of his gospel in all
ages. Never, certainly, would the Apostles have had sufficient
confidence to undertake so arduous an office, if they had not known that
their Protector sitteth in heaven, and that the highest *authority is
given to him;* for without such a support it would have been impossible
for them to make any progress. But when they learn that he to whom they
owe their services is the Governor of heaven and earth, this alone was
abundantly sufficient for preparing them to rise superior to all
opposition. As regards the hearers, if the contemptible appearance of
those who preach the gospel weakens or retards their faith, let them
learn to raise their eyes to the Master himself, by whose power the
majesty of the Gospel ought to be estimated, and then they will not
venture to despise him when speaking by his ministers.

<span id="ii.li-p15"></span>He expressly calls himself the *Lord and
King of heaven and earth,* because, by constraining men to obey him in
the preaching of the gospel, he establishes his throne *on the earth;*
and, by regenerating his people to a new life, and inviting them to the
hope of salvation, he opens *heaven* to admit to a blessed immortality
with angels those who formerly had not only crawled on the world, but
had been plunged in the abyss of death. Yet let us remember that what
Christ possessed in his own right was given to him by the Father in our
flesh, or—to express it more clearly—in the person of the Mediator; for
he does not lay claim to the eternal power with which he was endued
before the creation of the world, but to that which he has now received,
by being appointed to be Judge of the world. Nay, more, it ought to be
remarked, that this authority was not fully known until he rose from the
dead; for then only did he come forth adorned with the emblems of
supreme King. To this also relate those words of Paul:

<span id="ii.li-p16"></span>he emptied himself, (<span
id="ii.li-p16.1"></span>ἑαυτὸν ἐκένωσε,) therefore God hath exalted him,
and given to him a name which is above every other name,  
(<span id="ii.li-p16.3"></span>[Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="ii.li-p16.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.li-p17"></span>And though, in other passage the *sitting at
the right hand of God* is placed after the ascension to heaven, as later
in the order of time; yet as the resurrection and the ascension to
heaven are closely connected with each other, with good reason does
Christ now speak of his power in such magnificent terms.

<span id="ii.li-p18"></span><span id="ii.li-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p19"></span>**19.** *Go out, therefore, and teach all
nations.* Though Mark, after having related that Christ *appeared to the
eleven disciples,* immediately subjoins the command to *preach the
gospel,* he does not speak of these as an unbroken series of events, for
we learn from the enumeration of them which is given by Matthew, that
the latter event did not take place before they had gone *into Galilee.*
The meaning amounts to this, that by proclaiming the gospel everywhere,
they should bring *all nations* to the obedience of the faith, and next,
that they should seal and ratify their doctrine by the sign of the
gospel. In Matthew, they are first taught simply to *teach;* but Mark
expresses the kind of doctrine, that they should *preach the gospel;*
and shortly afterwards Matthew himself adds this limitation, to *teach
them to observe all things whatsoever the Lord hath commanded.*

<span id="ii.li-p20"></span>Let us learn from this passage, that the
apostleship is not an empty title, but a laborious office; and that,
consequently, nothing is more absurd or intolerable than that this honor
should be claimed by hypocrites, who live like kings at their ease, and
disdainfully throw away from themselves the office of *teaching.* The
Pope of Rome and his band proudly boast of their succession, as if they
held this rank in common with Peter and his companions; and yet they pay
no more regard to doctrine than was paid by the *Luperci,* or the
priests of *Bacchus* and *Venus.*  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) And with what face, pray, do they
claim to be the successors of those who, they are told, were appointed
to be preachers of the gospel? But though they are not ashamed to
display their impudence, still with every reader of sound judgment this
single word is sufficient to lay prostrate their silly hierarchy—that no
man can be a successor of the apostles who does not devote his services
to Christ in the preaching of the gospel. In short, whoever does not
fulfill the duties of a teacher acts wickedly and falsely by assuming
the name of an apostle; and what is more—the priesthood of the New
Testament consists in slaying men, as a sacrifice to God, by the
spiritual sword of the word. Hence it follows, that all are but
pretended and spurious priests who are not devoted to the office of
teaching.

<span id="ii.li-p22"></span>*Teach all nations.* Here Christ, by
removing the distinction, makes the Gentiles equal to the Jews, and
admits both, indiscriminately to a participation in the covenant. Such
is also the import of the term: go *out;* for the prophets under the law
had limits assigned to them, but now,

<span id="ii.li-p23"></span>the wall of partition having been broken
down,  
(<span id="ii.li-p23.2"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="ii.li-p23.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.li-p24"></span>the Lord commands the ministers of the
gospel to go to a distance, in order to spread the doctrine of salvation
in every part of the world. For though, as we have lately suggested, the
right of the first-born at the very commencement of the gospel, remained
among the Jews, still the inheritance of life was common to the
Gentiles. Thus was fulfilled that prediction of Isaiah, (<span
id="ii.li-p24.1"></span>[Isa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span
id="ii.li-p24.1"></span>,) and others of a similar nature, that Christ
was

<span id="ii.li-p25"></span>given for a light of the Gentiles,  
that he might be the salvation of God to the end of the earth.

<span id="ii.li-p26"></span> *Mark* means the same thing by *every
creature;* for when *peace* has been proclaimed to those that are within
the Church, the same message reaches those who are *at a distance, and
were strangers,* (<span id="ii.li-p26.1"></span>[Eph.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="ii.li-p26.1"></span>.)
How necessary it was that the apostles should be distinctly informed of
the calling of the Gentiles, is evident from this consideration, that
even after having received the command, they felt the greatest horror at
approaching them, as if by doing so they polluted themselves and their
doctrine.

<span id="ii.li-p27"></span>*Baptizing them.* Christ enjoins that those
who have submitted to the gospel, and professed to be his disciples,
shall be *baptized;* partly that their *baptism* may be a pledge of
eternal life before God:, and partly that it may be an outward sign of
faith before men. For we know that God testifies to us the grace of
adoption by this sign, because he engrafts us into the body of his Son,
so as to reckon us among his flock; and, therefore, not only our
spiritual washing, by which he reconciles us to himself, but likewise
our new righteousness, are represented by it. But as God, by this seal
confirms to us his grace, so all who present themselves for *baptism*
do, as it were, by their own signature, ratify their faith. Now since
this charge is expressly given to the apostles along with the preaching
of the word, it follows that none can lawfully administer *baptism* but
those who are also the ministers of doctrine. When private persons, and
even women, are permitted to *baptize,* nothing can be more at variance
with the ordinance of Christ, nor is it any thing else than a mere
profanation. Besides, as doctrine is placed first in order, this points
out to us the true distinction between this mystery and the bastard
rites of the Gentiles, by which they are initiated into their sacred
mysteries; for the earthly element does not become a sacrament until God
quickens it by his word. As superstition improperly counterfeits all the
works of God, foolish men forge various sacraments at their pleasure;
but as the word, which is the soul, is not in them, they are idle and
unmeaning shadows. Let us therefore hold that the power of the doctrine
causes the signs to assume a new nature; as the outward working of the
flesh begins to be the spiritual pledge of regeneration, when it is
preceded by the doctrine of the gospel; and this is the true
consecration instead of which, Popery has introduced to us the
enchantments of sorcery.

<span id="ii.li-p28"></span>Accordingly, it is said in Mark, *He that
shall believe and be baptized shall be saved.* By these words Christ not
only excludes from the hope of salvation hypocrites who, though
destitute of faith, are puffed up only by the outward sign; but by a
sacred bond he connects *baptism* with doctrine, so that the latter is
nothing more than an appendage of the former. But as Christ enjoins them
to *teach* before *baptizing,* and desires that none but *believers*
shah be admitted to *baptism,* it would appear that *baptism* is not
properly administered unless when it is preceded by faith. On this
pretense, the *Anabaptists* have stormed greatly against infant baptism.
But the reply is not difficult, if we attend to the reason of the
command. Christ orders them to convey *to all nations* the message of
eternal salvation, and confirms it by adding the seal of baptism. Now it
was proper that *faith* in the word should be placed before *baptism,*
since the Gentiles were altogether alienated from God, and had nothing
in common with the chosen people; for otherwise it would have been a
false figure, which offered forgiveness and the gift of the Spirit to
unbelievers, who were not yet members of Christ. But we know that by
*faith* those who were formerly despised are united to the people of
God.

<span id="ii.li-p29"></span>It is now asked, on what condition does God
adopt as children those who formerly were aliens? It cannot, indeed, be
denied that, when he has once received them into his favor, he continues
to bestow it on their children and their children’s children. By the
coming of Christ God manifested himself as a Father equally to the
Gentiles and to the Jews; and, therefore, that promise, which was
formerly given to the Jews, must now be in force towards the Gentiles,

<span id="ii.li-p30"></span>I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed
after thee,  
(<span id="ii.li-p30.2"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="ii.li-p30.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.li-p31"></span>Thus we see that they who entered by faith
into the Church of God are reckoned, along with their posterity, among
the members of Christ, and, at the same time, called to the inheritance
of salvation. And yet this does not involve the separation of *baptism*
from faith and doctrine; because, though infants are not yet of such an
age as to be capable of receiving the grace of God by faith, still God,
when addressing their parents, includes them also. I maintain,
therefore, that it is not rash to administer baptism to infants, to
which God invites them, when he promises that *he will be their God.*

<span id="ii.li-p32"></span>*In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit.* This passage shows that the full and clear
knowledge of God, which had been but darkly shadowed out under *the Law
and the Prophets,* is at length fully discovered under the reign of
Christ. True, indeed, the ancients would never have ventured to call God
their *Father,* if they had not derived this assurance from Christ their
Head; and the Eternal Wisdom of God, who is the fountain of light and
life, was not wholly unknown to them. It was even one of their
acknowledged principles, that God displays his power by *the Holy
Spirit.* But at the commencement of the gospel God was far more clearly
revealed in Three Persons; for then the Father manifested himself in the
Son, his lively and distinct image, while Christ, irradiating the world
by the full splendor of his Spirit, held out to the knowledge of men
both himself and the Spirit.

<span id="ii.li-p33"></span>There are good reasons why *the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Spirit,* are expressly mentioned; for there is no
other way in which the efficacy of *baptism* can be experienced than
when we begin with the unmerited mercy of *the Father,* who reconciles
us to himself by the only begotten *Son;* next, Christ comes forward
with the sacrifice of his death; and at length, *the Holy Spirit* is
likewise added, by whom he washes and regenerates us, (<span
id="ii.li-p33.1"></span>Titus 3:5,) and, in short, makes us partakers of
his benefits. Thus we perceive that God cannot be truly known, unless
our faith distinctly conceive of Three Persons in one essence; and that
the fruit and efficacy of *baptism* proceed from God *the Father*
adopting us through his *Son,* and, after having cleansed us from the
pollutions of the flesh through *the Spirit:* creating us anew to
righteousness.

<span id="ii.li-p34"></span><span id="ii.li-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p35"></span>**<span id="ii.li-p35.2"></span>[Mark
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span id="ii.li-p35.2"></span>**
*He who shall believe and be baptized shall be saved.* This promise was
added in order to allure all mankind to *believe;* as it is followed, on
the other hand, by a threatening of awful destruction, in order to
terrify unbelievers. Nor is it wonderful that salvation is promised to
*believers;* for, by *believing* in the only begotten Son of God, not
only are they reckoned among the children of God, but receiving the gift
of free justification and of the Spirit of regeneration, they possess
what constitutes eternal life. *Baptism* is joined to the *faith* of the
gospel, in order to inform us that the Mark of our salvation is engraved
on it; for had it not served to testify the grace of God, it would have
been improper in Christ to have said, that *they who shall believe and
be baptized shall be saved.* Yet, at the same time, we must hold that it
is not required as absolutely necessary to salvation, so that all who
have not obtained it must perish; for it is not added to faith, as if it
were the half of the cause of our salvation, but as a testimony. I
readily acknowledge that men are laid under the necessity of not
despising the sign of the grace of God; but though God uses such aids in
accommodation to the weakness of men, I deny that his grace is limited
to them. In this way we will say that it is not necessary in itself, but
only with respect to our obedience.

<span id="ii.li-p36"></span>*But he who shall not believe shall be
condemned.* By this second clause in which Christ *condemns those who
shall not believe,* he means that rebels, when they reject the salvation
offered to them, draw down upon themselves severer punishment, and not
only are involved in the general destruction of mankind, but bear the
guilt of their own ingratitude.

<span id="ii.li-p37"></span><span id="ii.li-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p38"></span>**17** *And these signs shall follow them
that shall believe.* As the Lord, while he still lived with men in the
world, had ratified the faith of his gospel by miracles, so now he
extends the same power to the future, lest the disciples should imagine
that it could not be separated from his bodily presence. For it was of
very great importance that this divine power of Christ should continue
to be exerted amongst *believers,* that it might be certainly known that
he was risen from, the dead, and that thus his doctrine might remain
unimpaired, and that his name might be immortal. When he says that
*believers* will receive this gift, we must not understand this as
applying to every one of them; for we know that gifts were distributed
variously, so that the power of working miracles was possessed by only a
few persons. But as that which was bestowed on a few was common to the
whole Church, and as the miracles performed by one individual served for
the confirmation of all, Christ properly uses the word *believers* in an
indefinite sense. The meaning, therefore, is, that *believers* will be
ministers of the same power which had formerly excited admiration in
Christ, that during his absence the sealing of the gospel may be more
fully ascertained, as he promises

<span id="ii.li-p39"></span>that they will do the same things, and
greater,  
(<span id="ii.li-p39.2"></span>[Joh
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="ii.li-p39.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.li-p40"></span>To testify the glory and the divinity of
Christ, it was enough that a few of the *believers* should be endued
with this power.

<span id="ii.li-p41"></span>Though Christ does not expressly state
whether he intends this gift to be temporary, or to remain perpetually
in his Church, yet it is more probable that miracles were promised only
for a time, in order to give luster to the gospel, while it was new and
in a state of obscurity. It is possible, no doubt, that the world may
have been deprived of this honor through the guilt of its own
ingratitude; but I think that the true design for which miracles were
appointed was, that nothing which was necessary for proving the doctrine
of the gospel should be wanting at its commencement. And certainly we
see that the use of them ceased not long afterwards, or, at least, that
instances of them were so rare as to entitle us to conclude that they
would not be equally common in all ages.

<span id="ii.li-p42"></span>Yet those who came after them, that they
might not allow it to be supposed that they were entirely destitute of
miracles, were led by foolish avarice or ambition to forge for
themselves miracles which had no reality. Thus was the door opened for
the impostures of Satan, not only that delusions might be substituted
for truth, but that, under the pretense of miracles, the simple might be
led aside from the true faith. And certainly it was proper that men of
eager curiosity, who, not satisfied with lawful proof, were every day
asking new miracles, should be carried away by such impostures. This is
the reason why Christ, in another passage, foretold that the reign of
Antichrist would be full of *lying signs,* (<span
id="ii.li-p42.1"></span>[Mt 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span
id="ii.li-p42.1"></span>;) and Paul makes a similar declaration, (<span
id="ii.li-p42.2"></span>[2Th 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span
id="ii.li-p42.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.li-p43"></span>That our faith may be duly confirmed by
miracles, let our minds be kept within that moderation which I have
mentioned. Hence, also, it follows that it is a silly calumny which is
advanced by those who object against our doctrine, that it wants the aid
of miracles; as if it were not the same doctrine which Christ long ago
has abundantly sealed. But on this subject I use greater brevity,
because I have already treated it more fully in many passages.

<span id="ii.li-p44"></span><span id="ii.li-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p45"></span>**<span id="ii.li-p45.2"></span>[Matthew
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.li-p45.2"></span>.**
*Teaching them to observe all things.* By these words, as I have
formerly suggested, Christ shows that, in sending the apostles, he does
not entirely resign his office, as if he ceased to be the Teacher of his
Church; for he sends away the apostles with this reservation, that they
shall not bring forward their own inventions, but shall purely and
faithfully deliver from hand to hand (as we say) what he has entrusted
to them. Would to God that the Pope would subject to this rule the power
which he claims for himself; for we would easily permit him to be the
successor of Peter or of Paul, provided that he did not usurp a
tyrannical dominion over our souls. But as he has set aside the
authority of Christ, and infects the Church with his childish fooleries,
this shows plainly enough how widely he has departed from the apostolic
office. In short, let us hold that by these words teachers are appointed
over the Church, not to put forward whatever they may think proper, but
that they, as well as others, may depend on the mouth of the Master
alone, so as to gain disciples for him, and not for themselves.

<span id="ii.li-p46"></span>*And, lo, I am with you always.* As Christ
gave to the apostles a commission which they were unable to discharge by
reliance on merely human power, he encourages them by the assurance of
his heavenly protection. For before promising that he would be with
them, he began with declaring that he is the, King *of heaven and
earth,* who governs all things by his power and authority.

<span id="ii.li-p47"></span>The pronoun *I* must be viewed as emphatic;
as if he had said that the apostles, if they wished zealously to perform
their duty, must not consider what they are able to do, but must rely on
the invincible power of those under whose banner they fight. The nature
of that presence which the Lord promises to his followers ought to be
understood spiritually; for it is not necessary that he should descend
from heaven in order to assist us, since he can assist us by the grace
of his Spirit, as if he stretched out his hand from heaven. For he who,
in respect of his body, is at a great distance from us, not only
diffuses the efficacy of his Spirit through the whole world, but even
actually dwells in us.

<span id="ii.li-p48"></span>*Even to the end of the world.* It ought
likewise to be remarked, that this was not spoken to the apostles alone;
for the Lord promises his assistance not for a single age only, but
*even to the end of the world.* It is as if he had said, that though the
ministers of the gospel be weak and suffer the want of all things: he
will be their guardian, so that they will rise victorious over all the
opposition of the world. In like manner, experience clearly shows in the
present day, that the operations of Christ are carried on wonderfully in
a secret manner, so that the gospel surmounts innumerable obstacles.

<span id="ii.li-p49"></span>So much the more intolerable is the
wickedness of the Popish clergy, when they take this as a pretext for
their sacrilege and tyranny. They affirm that the Church cannot err,
because it is governed by Christ; as if Christ, like some private
soldier, hired himself for wages to other captains, and as if he had
not, on the contrary, reserved the entire authority for himself, and
declared that he would defend his doctrine, so that his ministers may
confidently expect to be victorious over the whole world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc33052.htm#fr_322) <span
id="ii.li-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.li-p10.1"></span>Que Christ
enseigna nommément ce lieu-là a Marie;” — “that Christ expressly
informed Mary respecting that place.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc33052.htm#fr_323) <span
id="ii.li-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.li-p21"></span> The God *Pan,* in honor of whom the
grossest indecency was practiced at the festival of the *Lupercalia,* —
*Bacchus,* the patron of drunkenness, — and *Venus,* the patroness of
licentiousness, — recall to every one who is familiar with classical
literature the degraded state of morals into which Rome had sunk amidst
the proudest triumphs of civilization. Ancient Heathenism, like the
Braminism of modern Hindostan, offered a ready apology for every species
of crime, and associated with the history of its gods, and with the most
sacred duties of religion, scenes so utterly impure, and so much fitted
to inflame the basest passions, that the bare recital of them would
offend a modest ear. By the present allusion, Calvin means something
more than meets the eye, and reminds us that the Pope and his clergy not
only “paid as little regard to Christian doctrine as the priests of Pan,
and Bacchus, and Venus,” but that they too closely resembled them in the
flagrant immorality of their lives. Above all, he points to the
refinements of casuistry, the shocking disclosures of the confessional,
and the profligacy of monastic life, in all of which, under the cloak of
religion, practices, *of which it is a shame even to speak,* (<span
id="ii.li-p21.1"></span>[Eph 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#012)<span
id="ii.li-p21.1"></span>,) received the most direct encouragement. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark 16:19-20; Luke 24:50-53](cc33053)
