[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33015)  [Next](cc33017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 24:1-8; MARK 13:1-8; LUKE 21:5-11

<span id="ii.xv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
24:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
13:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p4"></span><span id="ii.xv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
21:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p5"></span>**1. **And Jesus went out, and departed from
the temple, and his disciples came to him, to point out to him the
buildings of the temple. **2. **And Jesus said to them, Do you not see
all these things? Verily I say to you, There shall not be left one stone
upon another that shall not be thrown down. **3. **And while he was
sitting on the mountain of Olives, the disciples came to him privately,
saying, Tell us, when will these things be? and what is the sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the world? **4. **And Jesus answering said to
them, Take heed that no man deceive you. **5. **For many will come in my
name, saying, I am Christ, and will deceive many. **6. **For you will
hear of wars and rumors of wars; see that you be not troubled; for all
these things must happen, but the end is not yet. **7. **For nation will
rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be
pestilences, and famines, and earthquakes in various places. **8. **But
all these things are the beginnings of sorrows.

<span id="ii.xv-p6"></span>**1. **And while he was going out of the
temple, one of his disciples saith to him, Master, see what stones and
what buildings! **2. **And Jesus answering saith to him, Seest thou
these vast, buildings? There shall not be left one stone upon another
that shall not be thrown down. **3. **And while he was sitting on the
mountain of Olives, opposite to the temple, Peter, and James, and John,
and Andrew, asked him privately, **4. **Tell us, when will these things
be, and what is the sign when all these things shall be accomplished?
**5. **And Jesus answering began to say to them, Take heed that no man
deceive you. **6. **For many will come in my name, saying, I am Christ,
and will deceive many. **7. **And when you shall hear of wars and rumors
of wars, be not troubled; for these things must be, but the end is not
yet. **8. **For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom; and there will be earthquakes in various places. These things
are the beginnings of sorrows.

<span id="ii.xv-p7"></span>**5. **And while some were saying concerning
the temple, that it was adorned with beautiful stones and gifts, he
said, **6. **The days will come, when of those things which you see
there shall not be left one stone upon another which shall not be thrown
down. **7. **And they asked him, saying, Master, when shall these things
be? and what is the sign when those things shall begin to take place?
**8. **And he said, Take heed that you be not deceived; for many will
come in my name, saying, It is I; and the time approaches: do not
therefore follow them. **9. **But when you shall hear of wars and
seditions, be not terrified: for these things must first take place; but
the end is not immediately.  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md)
**10. **Then he said to them, Nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; **11. **And there will be great earthquakes in
various places, and famines, and pestilences; and there will be
frightful appearances and great signs from heaven.

<span id="ii.xv-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xv-p10"></span><span id="ii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p11"></span>**<span id="ii.xv-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.xv-p11.2"></span>.**
*And Jesus went out.* The disciples undoubtedly perceived that Christ
was paying, as it were, his last adieu to the temple. It remained,
therefor that he should erect a new *temple* far more magnificent, and
that he should produce a more flourishing condition of the kingdom, as
had been foretold by the Prophets; for he had nothing to do with that
*temple,* in which every thing was opposed to him. But again, the
disciples could not believe that the magnificent splendor of the
*temple* would give way to Christ. And it ought to be carefully observed
that, owing to the prodigious costliness of *the temple,* their eyes
were so dazzled by the splendor of its present aspect, that they could
scarcely entertain the hope that the kingdom of Christ would arise. They
do not, indeed, in express terms acknowledge their hesitation, but they
tacitly throw out a suggestion of it, when they allege, in opposition to
Christ, the mass of *stones* which must be got out of the way, and which
must indeed be utterly laid low if he intended to reign. Many simple
persons of our own day are carried away by a similar admiration of
Popery; for, perceiving it to be supported by very great wealth and by
immense power, they are filled with absolute amazement, so as to despise
a Church of mean and slovenly aspect. Many even think that we are mad in
laboring to effect its destruction, as if this were nothing less than an
attempt to draw down the sun out of heaven. And yet, there is no reason
to wonder that a spectacle so imposing held the disciples of Christ in
astonishment; for how great expense that building cost Herod, may be
concluded from the single fact, that he kept ten thousand workmen
employed on it for eight successive years. Nor is it without reason that
they admire the *stones* which, Josephus tells us, were superlatively
beautiful, and were fifteen  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md)
cubits in length, twelve in height, and eight in breadth. Besides, so
great was the reverence entertained for *the temple* even in remote
districts, that scarcely any person would venture to suppose that it
could ever be destroyed.

<span id="ii.xv-p13"></span><span id="ii.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p14"></span>**2.** *Verily I say to you.* As the vast
size and wealth of *the temple,* like a veil hung before the eyes of the
disciples, did not permit them to elevate their faith to the true reign
of Christ, which was still future, so he affirms with an oath, that
those things which occupy their attention will quickly perish. This
prediction of the destruction of the temple, therefore, opened up a path
for the ignorant and weak.  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) Now,
though it was advantageous that *the temple* should be destroyed, lest
its services and shadows might exercise an undue influence on the Jews,
who were already too much attached to earthly elements, yet the chief
reason was, that God determined, by this dreadful example, to take
vengeance on that nation, for having rejected his Son, and despised the
grace which was brought by him. And, therefore, this threatening must
have intimidated the disciples from taking part with a rebellious
people; as the punishments which Scripture denounces against the wicked
ought now to deter us from those crimes which provoke the wrath of God.
Every thing that it tells us, even about the fading and transitory
aspect of the world, ought to correct the vanity of our senses, which
too eagerly follow pomp, and luxury, and pleasure. But more especially,
what it declares respecting the fearful destruction of Antichrist and
his followers, ought to remove every obstacle which hinders us from
pursuing the right course of faith.

<span id="ii.xv-p16"></span><span id="ii.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p17"></span>**3.** *And while he was sitting.* Mark
mentions four disciples, *Peter, James, John, and* *Andrew* But neither
he nor Luke states the matter so fully as Matthew; for they only say
that the disciples inquired about the time of the destruction of *the
temple,* and — as it was a thing difficult to be believed — what outward
*sign* of it God would give from heaven. Matthew tells us that they
inquired about the time of *Christ’s coming, and of the end of the
world.* But it must be observed that, having believed from their infancy
that the temple would stand till the end of time, and having this
opinion deeply rooted in their minds, they did not suppose that, while
the building *of the world* stood, the *temple* could fall to ruins.
Accordingly, as soon as Christ said that *the temple* would be
destroyed, their thoughts immediately turned to *the end of the world;*
and—as one error leads to another—having been convinced that, as soon as
the reign of Christ should commence, they would be in every respect
happy, they leave warfare out of the account, and fly all at once to a
triumph. They associate *the coming of Christ* and *the end of the
world* as things inseparable from each other; and by *the end of the
world* they mean the restoration of all things, so that nothing may be
wanting to complete the happiness of the godly.

<span id="ii.xv-p18"></span>We now perceive that they leap at once to
various questions, because they had given way to these foolish
imaginations, that *the temple* could not fall without shaking the whole
world; that the termination of the shadows of the Law, and of the whole
world, would be the same; that it would be immediately followed by the
exhibition of the glory of Christ’s kingdom, which would make the
children of God perfectly happy; that a visible renovation of the world
was at hand, which would instantly bring order out of a state of
confusion. But above all, a foolish hope which they entertained, as to
the immediate reign of Christ, drove them to hasten to the attainment of
happiness and rest, without attending to the means. Just as, when they
see that Christ is risen from the dead, (<span
id="ii.xv-p18.1"></span>[Ac 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.xv-p18.1"></span>,) they rush forward to grasp at that happiness,
which is laid up for us in heaven, and which must be attained through
faith and patience.

<span id="ii.xv-p19"></span>Now though our condition is different,
because we have not been educated among the shadows of the Law, so as to
be infatuated by that superstition of an earthly kingdom of Christ, yet
scarcely one person in a hundred is to be found who does not labor under
a very similar disease. For since all men naturally shrink from
annoyances, combats, and every kind of cross, the dislike of these
things urges them, without moderation and without hope, to rush forward
unseasonably to the fruit of hope. Thus no man wishes to sow the seed,
but all wish to reap the harvest before the season arrives. To return to
*the disciples,* they had indeed formed in their minds some good seed of
faith, but they do not wait till it arrive at maturity; and holding, at
the same time, erroneous views, they confound the perfection of Christ’s
reign with the commencement of it, and wish to enjoy on earth what they
ought to seek for in heaven.

<span id="ii.xv-p20"></span><span id="ii.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p21"></span>**4.** *And Jesus answering said to them.*
They received an answer very different from what they had expected; for
whereas they were eager for a triumph, as if they had already finished
their warfare, Christ exhorts them to long patience. As if he had said,
“You wish to seize the prize at the very outset, but you must first
finish the course. You would draw down to earth the kingdom of God,
which no man can obtain till he ascend to heaven.” Now while this
chapter contains admonitions highly useful for regulating the course of
our life, we see that, by a wonderful purpose of God, the mistake into
which the apostles fell is made to turn to our advantage. The amount of
the present instruction is, that the preaching of the Gospel is like
sowing the seed, and therefore we ought to wait patiently for the time
of reaping; and that it arises from improper delicacy or effeminacy, if
we lose courage on account of the frost, or snow, or clouds of winter or
other unpleasant seasons.

<span id="ii.xv-p22"></span>*Take heed lest any man deceive you.* There
are two charges which Christ expressly gives to the disciples, to beware
of false teachers, and not to be terrified by scandals. By these words
he gives warning that his Church, so long as its pilgrimage in the world
shall last, will be exposed to these evils. But they might be apt to
think that this was inconsistent, since the prophets gave a widely
different description of the future reign of Christ. Isaiah predicts
that *all* will then be *taught of God,* (<span
id="ii.xv-p22.1"></span>[Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)<span id="ii.xv-p22.1"></span>..md)
The words of God are:

<span id="ii.xv-p23"></span>I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh;  
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy;  
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams,  
(<span id="ii.xv-p23.4"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="ii.xv-p23.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xv-p24"></span>A still more abundant light of understanding
is promised by Jeremiah.

<span id="ii.xv-p25"></span>No longer shall any man teach his neighbor,
nor a man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me from
the least to the greatest, (<span id="ii.xv-p25.1"></span>[Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="ii.xv-p25.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xv-p26"></span>And, therefore, we need not wonder if the
Jews expected, that when *the Sun of righteousness had arisen,* as
Malachi (<span id="ii.xv-p26.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ii.xv-p26.1"></span>.md) had
predicted, they would be entirely free from every cloud of error. Hence,
also, the woman of Samaria said,

<span id="ii.xv-p27"></span>When the Messiah cometh, he will teach us
all things,  
(<span id="ii.xv-p27.2"></span>[Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)<span id="ii.xv-p27.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xv-p28"></span>Now we know what splendid promises of peace,
righteousness, joy, and abundance of all blessings, are to be found
everywhere in Scripture. We need not, therefore, wonder if they expected
that, at the coming of Christ, they would be delivered from commotions
of war, from extortions and every kind of injustice, and, in short, from
famine and pestilence.

<span id="ii.xv-p29"></span>But Christ warns them, that false teachers
will henceforth give no less annoyance to the godly than false prophets
gave to the ancient people; and that disturbances will be not less
frequent under the Gospel than they formerly were under the Law. Not
that those prophecies which I have just mentioned will fail to be
accomplished, but because the full accomplishment of them does not
immediately appear in one day; for it is enough that believers now
obtain a taste of those blessings, so as to cherish the hope of the full
enjoyment of them at a future period. And, therefore, they were greatly
mistaken, who wished to hay at the commencement of the Gospel, an
immediate and perfect exhibition of those things which we see
accomplished from day to day. Besides, that happiness which the prophets
ascribe to the reign of Christ, though it cannot be altogether
annihilated by the depravity of man, is retarded or delayed by it. It is
true that the Lord, in contending with the malice of men, opens up a way
for his blessings through every obstacle; and, indeed, it would be
unreasonable to suppose that what is founded on the undeserved goodness
of God, and does not depend on the will of man, should be set aside
through their fault.

<span id="ii.xv-p30"></span>Yet, that they may receive some punishment
for their ingratitude he drops upon them in small measure his favors,
which would otherwise flow on them in the richest abundance. Hence
arises a labyrinth of evils, through which believers wander all their
life, though they are pursuing the straight road to salvation, having
Christ for their guide, who holds out to them the torch of his Gospel.
Hence arises a multitude of combats, so that they have a hard warfare,
though there is no danger of their being vanquished. Hence arise
disturbances so numerous and so sudden, that they are kept in perpetual
uneasiness, though, resting on Christ, they remain firm to the end. And
since Christ enjoins his disciples to beware of impostures, let us know
that the means of defense will not be wanting, provided that they are
not wanting to themselves.  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) And
therefore, whatever arts Satan may employ, let us entertain no doubt
that we shall be safe from them, if every one of us keep diligent watch
on his own station.

<span id="ii.xv-p32"></span><span id="ii.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p33"></span>**5.** *For many shall come in my name.* He
does not as yet speak generally of false and perverse doctrines, but
refers to one class which was sort of introduction to all errors, by
which Satan has attempted, in various ways, to corrupt the pure doctrine
of the Gospel. For shortly after Christ’s resurrection, there arose
impostors, every one of whom professed to be *the Christ.* And as the
true Redeemer had not only been removed from the world, but oppressed by
the ignominy of the cross, and yet the minds of all were excited by the
hope and inflamed with the desire of redemption, those men had in their
power a plausible opportunity of deceiving. Nor can it be doubted, that
God permitted such reveries to impose on the Jews, who had so basely
rejected his Son. Though those mad attempts speedily disappeared, yet
God determined that disturbances of this kind should arise among the
Jews; first, that they might be exposed to infamy and hatred; secondly,
that they might altogether abandon the hope of salvation; and, lastly,
that having been so frequently disappointed, they might rush to their
destruction with brutal stupidity. For when the world turned away from
the Son of God, to whom it belonged to collect them into holy union, it
was right that it should be driven hither and thither by tempests; and
by the same vengeance of God it was brought about, that more were
carried away by a foolish credulity, than were brought by a right faith
to obey God. This circumstance, too, was expressly stated by Christ,
that believers might not faint at perceiving the crowd of madmen; for we
know how prone we are to follow a multitude, especially when we are few
in number.

<span id="ii.xv-p34"></span><span id="ii.xv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p35"></span>**6** *For you will hear of wars and rumors
of wars.* He describes here those commotions only which arose in Judea,
for we shall find him soon afterwards saying that the flame will spread
much wider. As he had formerly enjoined them to *beware lest any man
deceived them,* so now he bids them meet with courage *rumors of wars
and wars themselves;* for they would be in danger of giving way when
surrounded by calamities, especially if they had promised to themselves
ease and pleasure.

<span id="ii.xv-p36"></span>*For all these things must take place.* He
adds this, not for the purpose of assigning a reason, but of warning
them that none of *these things* happened accidentally, or without the
providence of God, that they may not uselessly kick against the spur;
for nothing has a more powerful efficacy to bring us into subjection,
than when we acknowledge that those things which appear to be confused
are regulated by the good pleasure of God. True, indeed, God himself
never wants proper causes and the best reasons for allowing the world to
be disturbed; but as believers ought to acquiesce in his mere good
pleasure, Christ reckoned it enough to exhort the disciples to prepare
their minds for endurance, and to remain firm, because such is the will
of God.

<span id="ii.xv-p37"></span>*But the end is not yet.* He now states in
plainer terms the threatening which I have already mentioned, that those
events which were in themselves truly distressing would be only a sort
of preparation for greater calamities; because, when the flame of war
has been kindled in Judea, it will spread more widely; for ever since
the doctrine of the Gospel was published, a similar ingratitude
prevailing among other nations has aroused the wrath of God against
them. Hence it happened that, having broken the bond of peace with God,
they tore themselves by mutual contentions; having refused to obey the
government of God, they yielded to the violence of their enemies; not
having permitted themselves to be reconciled to God, they broke out into
quarrels with one another; in short, having shut themselves out from the
heavenly salvation, they raged against each other, and filled the earth
with murders. Knowing how obstinate the malice of the world would be, he
again adds,

<span id="ii.xv-p38"></span><span id="ii.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p39"></span>**8.** *But all these things are the
beginnings of sorrows.* Not that believers, who always have abundant
consolations in calamities, should consume themselves with grief, but
that they should lay their account with a long exercise of patience.
Luke adds likewise *earthquakes, and signs from heaven,* with respect to
which, though we have no authentic history of them, yet it is enough
that they were predicted by Christ. The reader will find the rest in
Josephus, (Wars of the Jews, VI. 5:3.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc33016.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="ii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xv-p8.1"></span>La fin ne sera
point si tost;” — “the end will not be so soon.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc33016.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="ii.xv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p12"></span> Instead of *fifteen,* Josephus states the
length of each of the stones to have been *twenty-five* cubits, (Ant.
XV. xi. 3) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc33016.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="ii.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xv-p15.1"></span>Afin qu’ils
ne trouvassent aucun destourbier de ce costé-la;” — “that they might not
find any impediment in that respect.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc33016.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="ii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.xv-p31.1"></span>Pourveu
qu’ils soyent songneux à en user;” — “provided that they are careful to
use them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 24:9-14; Mark 13:9-13; Luke 21:12-19](cc33017.md)
