[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33033)  [Next](cc33035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:57-61; MARK 14:53-59; LUKE
22:54

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:57-61](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#057.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:53-59](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#053.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#054.md)<span id="ii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p5"></span>**57. **But they who had apprehended
Jesus led him to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and elders
were assembled. **58. **And Peter followed him at a distance, as far as
to the court of the high priest, and having gone in, he sat with the
servants to see the end. **59. **And the chief priests and elders, and
the whole council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to
death, **60. **And found none; even though many false witnesses came,
they found none: but at length came two false witnesses, **61. **Who
said, This man said, I can destroy the temple of God, and build it in
three days.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p6"></span>**53. **And they led Jesus to the high
priest, and all the chief priests, and elders, and scribes, assembled
with him. **54. **And Peter followed him at a distance, as far as to the
palace of the high priest; and he sat along with the servants, and
warmed himself at the fire. **55. **And the chief priests, and the whole
council, sought evidence against Jesus, to put him to death, and found
none. **56. **For many bore false witness against him, but their
declarations did not agree. **57. **Then some arose, and bore false
witness against him, saying, **58. **We have heard him say, I will
destroy this temple, which was made with hands, and within three days I
will build another, made without hands. **59. **But even here their
testimony did not agree.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p7"></span>**54. **And, having seized him, they led
and brought him to the house of the high priest; and Peter followed at a
distance.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p10"></span>Luke follows a different order from
Matthew and Mark in the narrative; but when we come to the proper place,
we will endeavor to reconcile the points in which they differ. It will
be proper, in the meantime, to glance briefly at those things which
claim our attention in the words of Matthew and Mark. First, in order to
remove the offense of the cross, we ought to consider the advantage
which we have derived from Christ’s *emptying of himself,* (<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>;) for thus will the inestimable goodness of
God, and the efficacy of his grace, be found to remove by its brightness
every thing in it that was disagreeable or shameful. According to the
flesh, it was disgraceful that the Son of God should be seized, bound,
and made a prisoner; but when we reflect that by his chains we are
loosed from the tyranny of the devil, and from the condemnation in which
we were involved before God, not only is the stumbling-block, on which
our faith might have struck, removed out of the way, but in place of it
there comes an admiration of the boundless grace of God, who set so high
a value on our deliverance, as to give up his only-begotten Son to be
bound by wicked men. This will also be a pledge of the astonishing love
of Christ towards us, that he spared not himself, but willingly
submitted to wear fetters on his flesh, that our souls might be freed
from fetters of a far worse description.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p11"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>[Matthew
26:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#057.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>.** *But they who had seized Jesus led him
to Caiaphas.* Though the Jews had been deprived of what is called, *the
higher jurisdiction,* there still lingered among them some vestiges of
that judicial authority which the Law confers on the high priest, (<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>[De
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>;) so that, while they had lost the absolute
authority,  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) they retained the
power of administering moderate correction. This is the reason why
Christ is brought before *the high priest* to be interrogated; not that
a final sentence may be pronounced on him by theft tribunal, but that
the priests may afterwards present him before the governor, under the
aggravating influence of their decision.  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) *Caiaphas the high priest* was also
named *Joseph,* and this man—as we are told by the historian
Josephus—was appointed to be *high priest* by Valerius Gratus, governor
of Judea, when Simon, the son of Camithus, was deposed from that office.
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) The Evangelists give his
surname only,  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) perhaps because
he was more generally named, and better known, by it.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p16"></span>Matthew says that the priests *assembled
in the house of Caiaphas;* and that they were already assembled at
midnight, before Christ was brought, but because the place of meeting
had been appointed, that, as soon as the information reached them, they
might meet hastily at an early hour in the morning; though we have
lately seen that some who belonged to the order of the priesthood went
out by night, along with the soldiers, to seize Christ. But we have
frequently seen, in other passages, that the Evangelists were not very
exact in adhering to the order of time. In this passage, certainly, they
had no other object in view than to show that the Son of God was
oppressed by a wicked conspiracy of the whole council. And here a
frightful and hideous spectacle is placed before our eyes; for nowhere
else than at Jerusalem was there at that time either a temple of God, or
lawful worship, or the face of a Church. *The high priest* was a figure
of the only Mediator between God and men; those who sat along with him
in the council represented the whole Church of God; and yet all of them
unite in conspiring to extinguish the only hope Of salvation. But as it
had been declared by prediction of David, that

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p17"></span>the stone which the builders rejected
would nevertheless become the head-stone of the corner, (<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p18"></span>and as Isaiah had foretold that

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p19"></span>the God of armies would be to the whole
people of Israel a stone of stumbling, on which they would dash
themselves,  
(<span id="ii.xxxiii-p19.2"></span>[Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p19.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p20"></span>the Lord wisely made provision that such
wickedness of men should not perplex believing souls.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p22"></span>**59.** *Sought false witness.* By these
words the Evangelists remark, that nothing was farther from the design
of the priests than to inquire into the cause, so that, when the matter
was thoroughly understood, they might decide what was proper. For they
had previously resolved to put Christ to death, and now they only seek a
pretense for oppressing him. Now it is impossible that equity can have
any place where an examination of the cause is not the first step. In
seeking false witnesses, their treacherous cruelty is manifested; and
when, after being disappointed of their expectation, they still do not
desist, this affords a still more striking display of their blinded
obstinacy. Thus, amidst the darkness of their rage, the innocence of the
Son of God shone so brightly, that the devils themselves might know that
he died innocent.

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p23"></span><span id="ii.xxxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p24"></span>It ought to be observed, also, that the
appellation of *false witnesses* is applied not to those who contrive a
lie which had no foundation, but to those who calumniously pervert what
was justly said, and turn it into a crime; an instance of which is here
expressly related as to *the destruction and rebuilding of the temple.*
Christ had indeed said, that when

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p25"></span>the temple of his body was destroyed,  
he would raise it up within three days, (<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p25.2"></span>[Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p25.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p26"></span>The *false witnesses* do not now resort
to some new contrivance, but they put a wrong interpretation on his
words, as if he boasted that he would practice some juggling in
*building the temple.* Now as the calumny was trivial and worthless, we
may readily infer from it how greatly the priests and scribes were
blinded by their fury, since, without any pretext, they demand that
Christ shall be put to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc33034.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>La
puissance de condamner à mort;” — “the power of condemning to death.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc33034.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p13"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>Estant desja chargé par leur jugement, et
que cela soit un prejudice contre luy;” — “being already accused by
their decision, and that this may excite a prejudice against him.”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc33034.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p14"></span> Ant. 18:2. 2. — Repeated allusions have
been made, in earlier portions of the Commentary, to this remarkable
passage in the writings of the great Jewish historian. The reader will
find it quoted at length. — *Harmony* vol. 1, p. 177, n. 1 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc33034.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="ii.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiii-p15"></span> That is, instead of calling him *Joseph
Caiaphas*, they call him simply *Caiaphas.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:62-68; Mark 14:60-65; Luke 22:63-71](cc33035.md)
