[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33031)  [Next](cc33033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 26:45-50; MARK 14:41-46;  
LUKE 22:47-48

<span id="ii.xxxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
26:45-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045.md)<span
id="ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
14:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#041.md)<span
id="ii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:47-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047.md)<span
id="ii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p5"></span>**45. **Then he cometh to his disciples,
and saith to them: Sleep on now, and take your rest; lo, the hour is at
hand, and the Son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
**46. **Arise, let us go: lo, he who betrayeth me is approaching.
**47. **While he was still speaking, lo, Judas, one of the twelve,
cometh, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs,  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) from the chief priests and elders of
the people. **48. **Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign,
saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, it is he: take him. **49. **And
immediately approaching, he said to Jesus, Hail, Rabbi, and kissed him.
**50. **And Jesus said to him, Friend for what purpose comest thou? Then
they approached, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p7"></span>**41. **And he cometh the third time, and
saith to the, Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the hour
is come; lo, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
**42. **Arise, let us go: lo, he who betrayeth me is approaching.
**43. **And immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, who was one
of the twelve, cometh, and with him a great multitude with swords and
clubs,  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) from the chief priests,
and scribes, and elders. **44. **Now he who betrayed him had given them
a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, it is he: take him, and lead
him away cautiously. **45. **And having come, he immediately approacheth
him, and saith, Rabbi, Rabbi,  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md)
and kissed him. **46. **And they laid hands on him, and took him.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p10"></span>**47. **And while he was still speaking,
lo, a multitude, and he who was called Judas, one of the twelve, went
before them, and approached Jesus to kiss him. **48. **And Jesus said to
him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?

<span id="ii.xxxi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxi-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.xxxi-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045.md)<span
id="ii.xxxi-p13.2"></span>.** *Sleep on now, and take your rest.* It is
plain enough, that Christ now speaks ironically, but we must, at the
same time, attend to the object of the irony. For Christ, having gained
nothing by warning his disciples, not only gives an indirect reproof of
their indifference, but threatens, that how indolent so ever they may
choose to be, no longer delay will be allowed them. The meaning
therefore is, “Having hitherto wasted my words on you, I shall now come
to exhort you; but whatever permission I may give you to *sleep,* the
enemies will not allow it to you, but will compel you to watch against
your will.” In Mark, it is accordingly added, *It is enough;* as if he
had said, that there is no more time for *sleeping.* And this is the way
in which the Lord usually chastises the indolence of men, that those who
wax deaf to words may at length be compelled, by their sufferings, to
arouse themselves. Let us, therefore, learn to give immediate attention
to the words of the Lord, lest what he wishes to draw from us
voluntarily may be too late forced from us by necessity.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p15"></span>**46.** *Arise, let us go.* By these words
he declares that, after having prayed, he was furnished with new arms.
He had formerly, indeed, been sufficiently voluntary as to dying; but,
when he came to the point, he had a hard struggle with the weakness of
the flesh, so that he would willingly have withdrawn from dying,
provided that he had been permitted to do so with the good-will of his
Father. He, therefore, obtained by *prayers and tears* (<span
id="ii.xxxi-p15.2"></span>[Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span id="ii.xxxi-p15.2"></span>.md)
new strength from heaven; not that he ever hesitated through want of
strength, but because under the weakness of the flesh, which he had
voluntarily undertaken, he wished to labor anxiously, and with painful
and difficult exertion, to gain a victory for us in his own person. But
now, when the trembling is allayed, and the fear is subdued, that he may
again present a voluntary sacrifice to the Father, he not only does not
retire or conceal himself, but cheerfully advances to death.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p16"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p17"></span>**47.** *While he was still speaking.* The
Evangelists are careful to state that our Lord foresaw what happened;
from which it might be inferred, that he was not dragged to death by
external violence, except so far as wicked men carried into execution
the secret purpose of God. Although, therefore, a melancholy and
frightful spectacle was exhibited to the disciples, yet they received,
at the same time, grounds of confidence to confirm them, since the event
itself showed that nothing occurred by chance; and since Christ’s
prediction directed them to contemplate the glory of his divinity. The
circumstance of *an armed multitude* having been sent by *the chief
priests,* and of *a captain and band* having been obtained by request
from Pilate, makes it evident, that an evil conscience wounded and
tormented them, so that they did every thing in a state of terror. For
what need was there for so great a force to take Christ, who, they were
aware, was not provided with any defensive arms? The reason for such
careful preparation was, that the divine power of Christ, which they had
been compelled to feel by numerous proofs, inwardly tormented them; but,
on the other hand, it is a display of amazing rage, that, relying on the
power of arms, they do not hesitate to rise up against God.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p19"></span>**48.** *Now he who betrayed him.* I have
no doubt that Judas was restrained, either by reverence for our Lord, or
by shame for his crime, from venturing openly to avow himself as one of
the enemies; and the warning which, Mark tells us, he gave the soldiers
— to *lead the away cautiously,* was given, I conjecture, for this
reason, that he recollected the numerous-proofs by which Christ had
formerly attested his divine power. But it was, at the same time,
astonishing madness, either to attempt to conceal himself by frivolous
hypocrisy, when he came into the presence of the Son of God, or to
oppose the tricks and dexterity of men to his boundless power.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p21"></span>**49.** *Hail, Rabbi.* I have no doubt
that Judas, as if trembling for his Master’s danger, pretended by these
words to have some feeling of compassion; and, accordingly, in Mark a
pathetic repetition is expressed,  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) *Rabbi, Rabbi.* For though he was
impressed with the majesty of Christ, still the devil so fascinated his
mind, that he felt assured that his treachery was concealed by *a kiss,*
and by soothing words. This salutation, or exclamation, therefore, was a
pretense of compassion. I offer the same opinion about the *kiss;* for
though it was a very common practice among the Jews to welcome friends
with *a kiss,* yet as Judas had left Christ but a little before, he
seems now — as if he had become suddenly alarmed at his danger — to give
the last *kiss* to his Master. Thus he excels the rest in the appearance
of affection, when he appears to be deeply grieved at being separated
from his Master; but how little he gained by his deception is evident
from Christ’s reply.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p23"></span><span id="ii.xxxi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p24"></span>**50.** *Friend, for what purpose comest
thou?* Luke expresses it more fully: *Judas, betrayest thou the Son of
man with a kiss?* except that there is greater force in this reproof,
that the benevolence of his Master, and the very high honor conferred on
him, are wickedly abused for the purpose of the basest treachery. For
Christ does not employ an ironical address when he calls him *friend,*
but charges him with ingratitude, that, from being an intimate *friend,*
who sat at his table, he had become a traitor, as had been predicted in
the psalm: *If a stranger had done this, I could have endured it; but
now my private and familiar friend, with whom I took food pleasantly,
who accompanied me to the temple of the Lord, hath prepared snares
against me.*  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) This shows
clearly—what I hinted a little ago—that, whatever may be the artifices
by which hypocrites conceal themselves, and whatever may be the
pretenses which they hold out, when they come into the presence of the
Lord, their crimes become manifest; and it even becomes the ground of a
severer sentence against them, that, having been admitted into the bosom
of Christ, they treacherously rise up against him. For the word
*friend,* as we have stated, contains within itself a sharp sting.

<span id="ii.xxxi-p26"></span>Let us know that this evil, which Christ
once sustained in his own person, is an evil to which the Church will
always be exposed—that of cherishing traitors in her bosom; and,
therefore, it was said a little before, *The traitor approached, who was
one of the twelve,* that we may not be immediately distressed by such
instances; for the Lord intends to try our faith in both ways, when,
*without,* Satan opposes us and the Church by open enemies, and,
*within,* he attempts secret destruction by means of hypocrites. We are
taught, at the same time, that we who are his disciples ought to worship
God with sincerity; for the apostasies, which we see every day, excite
us to fear, and to the cultivation of true godliness, as Paul says,

<span id="ii.xxxi-p27"></span>Let every one that calleth on the name of
God depart from iniquity,  
(<span id="ii.xxxi-p27.2"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxxi-p27.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xxxi-p28"></span>We are all commanded to *kiss the Son of
God,* (<span id="ii.xxxi-p28.1"></span>[Ps
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxxi-p28.1"></span>;.md)
and we ought, therefore, to see that no one give him a traitor’s *kiss,*
otherwise it will cost us dear to have been elevated to so great an
honor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc33032.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p6"></span> Our english versions have generally
rendered <span id="ii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>ξύλων by *staves*; but with two
exceptions: *swerdis and battis,* (Wiclif, 1580) *swordes and clubbes*
(Rheims, 1582). Campbell has adopted the term *clubs.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc33032.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p8"></span> Our english versions have generally
rendered <span id="ii.xxxi-p8.1"></span>ξύλων by *staves*; but with two
exceptions: *swerdis and battis,*(Wiclif, 1580) *swordes and clubbes*
(Rheims, 1582). Campbell has adopted the term *clubs.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc33032.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxi-p9.1"></span>Maistre,
Maistre;” — “Master, Master.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc33032.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxi-p22.1"></span>Il y a
une repetition comme d’un homme parlant de grande affection;” — “there
is a repetition, as if by a man who spoke from strong feeling.”

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc33032.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="ii.xxxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxi-p25"></span> Our Author, quoting from memory, has
blended two passages of a kindred spirit: <span
id="ii.xxxi-p25.1"></span>[Ps
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.xxxi-p25.1"></span>,
and <span id="ii.xxxi-p25.2"></span>[Ps.
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.xxxi-p25.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 26:51-56; Mark 14:47-52; Luke 22:49-53](cc33033.md)
