[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33009)  [Next](cc33011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 23:1-12; MARK 12:38-39;  
LUKE 11:43, 45-46; 20:45-46

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span><span id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
23:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span><span id="ii.ix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
12:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#038.md)<span id="ii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span><span id="ii.ix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
11:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#045.md)<span id="ii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span>**1. **Then Jesus spoke to the multitude, and
to his disciples, **2. **Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in
the chair of Moses. **3. **Observe and do, therefore, all things
whatever they command you to observe; but do not according to their
works; for they say and do not. **4. **For they bind heavy and
intolerable burdens, and lay them on men’s shoulders; but they refuse to
touch them with their finger. **5. **And they do all their works that
they may be seen by men, and make their phylacteries broad, and wear
large fringes on their robes, **6. **And love the first places at
entertainments, and the first seats in the synagogues, **7. **And
salutations in the marketplace, and to be called by men Rabbi.  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md) **8. **But as for you, be not called
Rabbi;  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) for there is one who is
your Master, Christ; and you are all brethren. **9. **And do not call
any one on earth your Father; for one is your Father, who is in heaven.
**10. **And be not called Masters;  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md)
for one is your Master, Christ. **11. **He who is greatest among you
shall be your servant. **12. **But he that exalteth himself shall be
humbled; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

<span id="ii.ix-p9"></span>**38. **And he said to them in his doctrine,
Beware of the scribes, who love to walk in robes, and love salutations
in the marketplaces, **39. **And the first seats in the synagogues, and
the first places at entertainments.

<span id="ii.ix-p10"></span>**45. **And one of the lawyers  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) answering said to him, Master, in saying
these things thou also reproachest us. **46. **And he said, Woe also to
you, lawyers! for you load men with burdens which are intolerable; and
you yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers. (A little
before.)

<span id="ii.ix-p12"></span><span id="ii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Luke
20:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#045.md)<span id="ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p13"></span>**45. **And while all the people were
hearing, he said to his disciples, **46. **Beware of the scribes, who
desire to walk in robes, and love salutations in the marketplaces and
the first seats in the synagogues, and the first places at
entertainments.

<span id="ii.ix-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.ix-p15"></span><span id="ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.ix-p16.2"></span>[Matthew
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.ix-p16.2"></span>.**
*Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes.* This warning was highly useful,
that, amidst contentions and the noise of combats, amidst the trouble
and confusion of public affairs, amidst the destruction of proper and
lawful order, the authority of the word of God might remain entire. The
design of Christ was, that the people might not, in consequence of being
offended at the vices of *the scribes,*  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) throw away reverence for the Law. For we
know how prone the minds of men are to entertain dislike of the Law; and
more especially when the life of their pastors is dissolute, and does
not correspond to their words, almost all grow wanton through their
example, as if they had received permission to sin with impunity. The
same thing happens — and something worse — when contentions arise; for
the greater part of men, having thrown off the yoke, give utterance to
their wicked desires, and break out into extreme contempt.

<span id="ii.ix-p18"></span>At that time *the scribes* burned with
covetousness and swelled with ambition; their extortions were notorious;
their cruelty was formidable; and such was their corruption of manners,
that one would think they had conspired for the destruction of the Law.
Besides, they had perverted by their false opinions the pure and natural
meaning of the Law, so that Christ was constrained to enter into a sharp
conflict with them; because their amazing rage hurried them on to
extinguish the light of truth. So then, because there was danger that
many persons, partly on account of such abuses, and partly on account of
the din of controversies, would come to despise all religion, Christ
seasonably meets them, and declares that it would be unreasonable if, on
account of the vices of men, true religion were to perish, or reverence
for the Law to be in any degree diminished. As *the scribes* were
obstinate and inveterate enemies, and as they held the Church oppressed
through their tyranny, Christ was compelled to expose their wickedness;
for if good and simple men had not been withdrawn from bondage to them,
the door would have been shut against the Gospel. There was also another
reason; for the common people think themselves at liberty to do whatever
they see done by their rulers, whose corrupt manners they form into a
law.

<span id="ii.ix-p19"></span>But that no man might put a different
interpretation on what he was about to say, he begins by stating, that
whatever sort of men the teachers were it was altogether unreasonable,
either that on account of their filth the word of God should receive any
stain, or that on account of their wicked examples men should hold
themselves at liberty to commit sin. And this wisdom ought to be
carefully observed; for many persons, having no other object in view
than to bring hatred and detestation on the wicked and ungodly, mix and
confound every thing through their inconsiderate zeal. All discipline is
despised, and shame is trampled under foot; in short, there remains no
respect for what is honorable, and, what is more, many are emboldened by
it, and intentionally blazon the sins of priests, that they may have a
pretext for sinning with less restraint. But in attacking the *scribes,*
Christ proceeds in such a manner, that he first vindicates the Law of
God from contempt. We must attend to this caution also if we desire that
our reproofs should be of any service. But, on the other hand, we ought
to observe, that no dread of giving offense prevented Christ from
exposing ungodly teachers as they deserved; only he preserved such
moderation, that the doctrine of God might not come to be despised on
account of the wickedness of men.

<span id="ii.ix-p20"></span>To inform us that he spoke publicly about
their vices, not to raise envy against their persons, but to prevent the
contagion from spreading more widely, Mark expressly states that *he
spoke to them in his doctrine*; by which words he means that the hearers
were profitably warned to beware of them. Now, though Luke appears to
restrict it to the *disciples,* yet it is probable that the discourse
was addressed indiscriminately to the whole multitude; which appears
more clearly from *Matthew,* and, indeed, the subject itself required
that Christ should have his eye on all without exception.

<span id="ii.ix-p21"></span><span id="ii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p22"></span>**2.** *In the chair of Moses.* Reasons were
not wanting for inserting here what Luke relates at a different place.
Besides that the doctrine is the same, I have no doubt that *Luke,*
after having said that the scribes were sharply and severely reproved by
our Lord, added also the other reproofs which Matthew delayed till the
proper place; for already we have frequently seen that the Evangelists,
as occasion required, collected into one place various discourses of
Christ. But as the narrative of Matthew is more full, I choose rather to
take his words as the subject of exposition.

<span id="ii.ix-p23"></span>Our Lord gives a general exhortation to
believers to beware of conforming their life to the wicked conduct of
*the scribes,* but, on the contrary, to regulate it by the rule of the
Law which they hear from the mouth of *the scribes;* for it was
necessary (as I have lately hinted) that he should reprove many abuses
in them, that the whole people might not be infected. Lest, through
their crimes, the doctrine of which they were the ministers and heralds
should be injured, he enjoins believers to attend to their words, and
not to their actions; as if he had said, that there is no reason why the
bad examples of pastors should hinder the children of God from holiness
of life. That the word *scribes,* agreeably to the Hebrew idiom, denotes
the teachers or expounders of the *Law,* is well known; and it is
certain that Luke calls the same persons *lawyers*  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md)

<span id="ii.ix-p25"></span>Now our Lord refers peculiarly to the
Pharisees, who belonged to the number of *the* *scribes,* because at
that time this sect held the highest rank in the government of the
Church, and in the exposition of Scripture. For we have formerly
mentioned that, while the *Sadducees* and *Essenes* preferred the
literal interpretation of Scripture, the *Pharisees* followed a
different manner of teaching, which had been handed down, as it were, to
them by their ancestors, which was, to make subtle inquiries into the
mystical meaning of Scripture. This was also the reason why they
received their name; for they are called *Pherusim,* that is,
expounders.  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) And though they had
debased the whole of Scripture by their false opinions, yet, as they
plumed themselves on that popular method of instruction, their authority
was highly esteemed in explaining the worship of God and the rule of
holy life. The phrase ought, therefore, to be thus interpreted: *“The
Pharisees and other scribes,* or, *the* *scribes, among whom the
Pharisees are the most highly esteemed,* when they speak to you, are
good teachers of a holy life, but by their works they give you very bad
instructions; and therefore attend to their lips rather than to their
hands.”

<span id="ii.ix-p27"></span>It may now be asked, Ought we to submit to
all the instructions of teachers without exception? For it is plain
enough, that the scribes of that age had wickedly and basely corrupted
the Law by false inventions, had *burdened* wretched souls by unjust
laws, and had corrupted the worship of God by many superstitions; but
Christ wishes their doctrine to be observed, as if it had been unlawful
to oppose their tyranny. The answer is easy. He does not absolutely
compare any kind of doctrine with the life, but the design of Christ
was, to distinguish the holy Law of God from their profane works. For to
*sit in the chair of Moses* is nothing else than to teach, according to
the Law of God, how we ought to live. And though I am not quite certain
whence the phrase is derived, yet there is probability in the conjecture
of those who refer it to the *pulpit* which *Ezra* erected, from which
the Law was read aloud, (<span id="ii.ix-p27.1"></span>[Ne
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p27.1"></span>..md)
Certainly, when the Rabbis expounded Scripture, those who were about to
speak rose up in succession; but it was perhaps the custom that the Law
itself should be proclaimed from a more elevated spot. That man,
therefore, *sits in the chair of Moses* who teaches, not from himself,
or at his own suggestion, but according to the authority and word of
God. But it denotes, at the same time, a lawful calling; for Christ
commands that the scribes should be heard, because they were the public
teachers of the, Church.

<span id="ii.ix-p28"></span>The Papists reckon it enough, that those who
issue laws should possess the title and occupy the station; for in this
way they torture the words of Christ to mean, that we are bound to
receive obediently whatever the ordinary prelates of the Church enjoin.
But this calumny is abundantly refuted by another injunction of Christ,
when he bids them *beware of the leaven of the Pharisees*, (<span
id="ii.ix-p28.1"></span>[Mt 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ix-p29"></span>If Christ pronounces it to be not only
lawful, but even proper, to reject whatever of their own the scribes
mingle with the pure doctrine of the Law, certainly we are not bound to
embrace, without discrimination or the exercise of judgment, whatever
they are pleased to enjoin. Besides, if Christ had intended here to bind
the consciences of his followers to the commandments of men, there would
have been no good ground for what he said in another passage, that *it
is in vain to worship God by the commandments of men*, (<span
id="ii.ix-p29.1"></span>[Mt 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ix-p30"></span>Hence it is evident, that Christ exhorts the
people to obey the scribes, only so far as they adhere to the pure and
simple exposition of the Law. For the exposition of, *Augustine* is
accurate, and in accordance with Christ’s meaning, that, “the scribes
taught the Law of God while they *sat in the chair of Moses;* and,
therefore, that the sheep ought to hear the voice of the Shepherd by
them, as by hirelings.” To which words he immediately adds: “God
therefore teaches by them; but if they wish to teach any thing of their
own, refuse to hear, refuse to do them.” With this sentiment accords
what the same writer says in his Fourth Book of Christian Doctrine:
“Because good believers do not obediently listen to any sort of man, but
to God himself; therefore we may profitably listen even to those whose
lives are not profitable.” It was, therefore, not *the chair* of the
scribes, but *the chair of Moses,* that constrained them to teach what
was good, even when they did not do what was good. For what they did in
their life was their own; but *the chair* of another man did not permit
them to teach what was their own.

<span id="ii.ix-p31"></span><span id="ii.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p32"></span>**4.** *For they bind heavy and intolerable
burdens.* He does not charge the scribes with oppressing and tyrannizing
over souls by harsh and unjust laws; for, though they had introduced
many superfluous ceremonies — as is evident from other passages — yet
Christ does not at present refer to that vice, because his design is, to
compare right doctrine with a wicked and dissolute life. That the Law of
God should be called *a heavy and intolerable burden* is not wonderful,
and more especially in reference to our weakness. But though the scribes
required nothing but what God had enjoined, yet Christ reproves the
stern and rigid manner of teaching which was usually followed by those
proud hypocrites, who authoritatively demand from others what they owe
to God, and are rigorous in enforcing duties, and yet indolently
dispense with the performance of what they so strictly enjoin on others,
and allow themselves to do whatever they please. In this sense Ezekiel
(<span id="ii.ix-p32.2"></span>[Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span id="ii.ix-p32.2"></span>.md)
reproaches them for ruling with sternness and rigor. For those who truly
fear God, though they sincerely and earnestly endeavor to bring their
disciples to obey Him, yet as they are more severe towards themselves
than towards others, they are not so rigid in exacting obedience, and,
being conscious of their own weakness, kindly forgive the weak. But it
is impossible to imagine any thing that can exceed the insolence in
commanding, or the cruelty, of stupid despisers of God, because they
give themselves no concern about the difficulty of doing those things
from which they relieve themselves; and therefore no man will exercise
moderation in commanding others, unless he shall first become his own
teacher.  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md)

<span id="ii.ix-p34"></span><span id="ii.ix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p35"></span>**5.** *And all their works they do that
they may be seen by men.* He had lately said that the *scribes* live
very differently from what they teach; but now he adds that, if they
have any thing which is apparently good, it is hypocritical and
worthless, because they have no other design than to please men, and to
vaunt themselves. And here zeal for piety and a holy life is contrasted
with the mask of those *works* which serve no purpose but for
ostentation; for an upright worshipper of God will never give himself up
to that empty parade by which hypocrites are puffed up. Thus not only is
the ambition of *the scribes and Pharisees* reproved, but our Lord,
after having condemned the transgression and contempt of the Law of God
in their whole life, that they might not shield themselves by their
pretended holiness, anticipates them by replying, that those things of
which they boast are absolute trifles, and of no value whatever, because
they spring from mere ostentation. He afterwards produces a single
instance, by which that ambition was easily perceived, which was, that
by the *fringes of their robes* they held themselves out to the eyes of
men as good observers of the Law.

<span id="ii.ix-p36"></span>*And make their phylacteries broad, and
enlarge the fringes of their robes.* For why were their *fringes* made
*broader,* and their *phylacteries* more *magnificent*, than what was
customary, except for idle display? The Lord had commanded the Jews to
wear, both on their forehead and on their raiment, some remarkable
passages selected out of the Law, (<span id="ii.ix-p36.1"></span>[De
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#008)<span id="ii.ix-p36.1"></span>..md) As
forgetfulness of the Law easily creeps upon the flesh, the Lord intended
in this manner to keep it constantly in the remembrance of his people;
for they were likewise enjoined to inscribe such sentences

<span id="ii.ix-p37"></span>on the posts of their houses, (<span
id="ii.ix-p37.1"></span>[De 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#009.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p37.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.ix-p38"></span>that, wherever they turned their eyes, some
godly warning might immediately meet them. But what did *the scribes*
do? In order to distinguish themselves from the rest of the people, they
carried about with them the commandments of God more magnificently
inscribed on their garments; and in this boasting there was displayed an
offensive ambition.

<span id="ii.ix-p39"></span>Let us also learn from this, how ingenious
men are in mixing up vain deception, in order to conceal their vices
under some pretext and cloak of virtues, by turning to the purposes of
their own hypocrisy those exercises of piety which God has enjoined.
Nothing was more profitable than to exercise all their senses in the
contemplation of the Law, and it was not without good reason that this
was enjoined by the Lord. But so far were they from profiting by these
simple instructions, that, by making perfect righteousness to consist in
the adorning of robes, they despised the Law throughout their whole
life. For it was impossible to treat the Law of God with greater
contempt, than when they imagined that they kept it by pompous dress, or
pronounced masks contrived for enacting a play to be a keeping of the
Law.

<span id="ii.ix-p40"></span>What Mark and Luke say about the *robes*
relates to the same subject. We know that the inhabitants of Eastern
countries commonly used long *robes*, — a custom which they retain to
this day. But it is evident from Zechariah (<span
id="ii.ix-p40.1"></span>[Zec 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p40.1"></span>) that the prophets were distinguished from the
rest of the people by a particular form of a cloak. And, indeed, it was
highly reasonable that the teachers should dress in this manner, that
there might be a higher degree of gravity and modesty in their dress
than in that of the common people; but the *scribes* had made an
improper use of it by turning it into luxury and display. Their example
has been followed by the Popish priests, among whom *robes* are
manifestly nothing more than the badges of proud tyranny.

<span id="ii.ix-p41"></span><span id="ii.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p42"></span>**6** *And love the first places at
entertainments..* He proves, by evident signs, that no zeal for piety
exists in the *scribes,* but that they are wholly devoted to ambition.
For to seek *the first places* and *the first seats* belongs only to
those who choose rather to exalt themselves among men, than to enjoy the
approbation of God. But above all, Christ condemns them for desiring to
be called *masters;* for, though the name *Rabbi* in itself denotes
excellence, yet at that time the prevailing practice among the Jews was,
to give this name to the *masters* and *teachers* of the Law. But Christ
asserts that this honor does not belong to any except himself; from
which it follows that it cannot, without doing injury to him, be applied
to men. But there is an appearance of excessive harshness, and even of
absurdity, in this, since Christ does not now teach us in his own
person, but appoints and ordains *masters* for us. Now it is absurd to
take away the title from those on whom he bestows the office, and more
especially since, while he was on earth, he appointed apostles to
discharge the office of teaching in his name.

<span id="ii.ix-p43"></span>If the question be about the title, Paul
certainly did not intend to do any injury to Christ by sacrilegious
usurpation or boasting, when he declared that. he was

<span id="ii.ix-p44"></span>a master and teacher of the Gentiles, (<span
id="ii.ix-p44.1"></span>[1Ti 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p44.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ix-p45"></span>But as Christ had no other design than to
bring all, from the least to the greatest, to obey him, so as to
preserve his own authority unimpaired, we need not give ourselves much
trouble about the word. Christ therefore does not attach importance to
the title bestowed on those who discharge the office of teaching, but
restrains them within proper limits, that they may not rule over the
kith of brethren. We must always attend to the distinction, that Christ
alone ought to be obeyed, because concerning him alone was the voice of
the Father heard aloud from heaven, *Hear him,* (<span
id="ii.ix-p45.1"></span>[Mt 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p45.1"></span>;) and that teachers are his ministers in such a
manner that he ought to be heard in them, and that they are *masters*
under him, so far as they represent his person. The general meaning is,
that his authority must remain entire, and that no mortal man ought to
claim the smallest portion of it. Thus he is the only Pastor; but yet he
admits many pastors under him, provided that he hold the preeminence
over them all, and that by them he alone govern the Church.

<span id="ii.ix-p46"></span>*And you are all brethren.* This opposite
clause must be observed. For, since *we are brethren,* he maintains that
no man has a right to hold the place of a *master* over others; and
hence it follows, that he does not condemn that authority of *masters*
which does not violate brotherly intercourse among the godly. In short,
nothing else is here enjoined than that all should depend on the mouth
of Christ alone. Nearly to the same purpose does Paul argue, when he
says that we have no right to *judge* one another, for all are
*brethren,* and

<span id="ii.ix-p47"></span>all must stand before the judgment seat of
Christ,  
(<span id="ii.ix-p47.2"></span>[Ro
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)<span id="ii.ix-p47.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.ix-p48"></span><span id="ii.ix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p49"></span>**9.** *And call no man on earth your
Father.* He claims for God alone the honor of *Father,* in nearly the
same sense as he lately asserted that he himself is the only *Master;*
for this name was not assumed by men for themselves, but was given to
them by God. And therefore it is not only lawful *to call men on earth
fathers*, but it would be wicked to deprive them of that honor. Nor is
there any importance in the distinction which some have brought forward,
that men, by whom children have been begotten, are *fathers* according
to the flesh, but that God alone is *the Father of spirits.* I readily
acknowledge that in this manner God is sometimes distinguished from men,
as in <span id="ii.ix-p49.1"></span>[Heb
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.ix-p49.1"></span>,
but as Paul more than once calls himself a spiritual *father,* (<span
id="ii.ix-p49.2"></span>[1 Cor. 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015.md),
[Phil. 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p49.2"></span>,) we must see how this agrees with the words of
Christ. The true meaning therefore is, that the honor of a *father* is
falsely ascribed to men, when it obscures the glory of God. Now this is
done, whenever a mortal man, viewed apart from God, is accounted *a
father,* since all the degrees of relationship depend on God alone
through Christ, and are held together in such a manner that, strictly
speaking, God alone is the *Father* of all.

<span id="ii.ix-p50"></span><span id="ii.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p51"></span>**10.** *For* *one is your Master, even
Christ.* He repeats a second time the former statement about Christ’s
office as *Master,* in order to inform us that the lawful order is, that
God alone rule over us, and possess the power and authority of a
*Father,* and that Christ subject all to his doctrine, and have them as
disciples; as it is elsewhere said, that Christ is the only

<span id="ii.ix-p52"></span>head of the whole Church, (<span
id="ii.ix-p52.1"></span>[Eph 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.ix-p52.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.ix-p53"></span>because the whole body ought to be subject
to him and obey him.

<span id="ii.ix-p54"></span><span id="ii.ix-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p55"></span>**11.** *He who is greatest among you.* By
this conclusion he shows that he did not, after the manner of the
sophists, dispute about words, but, on the contrary, looked to the fact,
that no man, through forgetfulness of his rank, might claim more than
was proper. He therefore declares that the highest honor in the Church
is not government, but service. Whoever keeps himself within this limit,
whatever may be the title which he bears, takes nothing away either from
God or from Christ; as, on the other hand, it serves no good purpose to
take the name of a *servant* for the purpose of cloaking that power
which diminishes the authority of Christ as a *Master.* For of what
avail is it that the Pope, when he is about to oppress wretched souls by
tyrannical laws, begins with styling himself *the servant of servants of
God,* but to insult God openly, and to practice shameful mockery on men?
Now while Christ does not insist on words, he strictly forbids his
followers to aspire or desire to rise any higher than to enjoy brotherly
intercourse on an equal footing under the heavenly Father, and charges
those who occupy places of honor to conduct themselves as the servants
of others. He adds that remarkable statement which has been formerly
explained,  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) he *that humbleth
himself shall be exalted.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc33010.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p6.1"></span>Estre appelez
des hommes Maistres;” — “to be called by men Masters.”

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc33010.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p7.1"></span>No Soyez point
appelez Maistres;” — “but not be called Masters.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc33010.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p8.1"></span>Docteurs;” —
“doctors.”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc33010.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p11.1"></span>Un des
docteurs de la loy;” — “one of the doctors of the law.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc33010.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p17.1"></span>Offensé et
scandalizé des vices qu’on voyoit és scribes;” — “offended and
scandalized at the vices which they saw in the scribes.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc33010.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p24.1"></span>Docteurs de
la loy;” — “teachers,” or “doctors of the law.” Harmony, vol. 1, p. 281.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc33010.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p26"></span> *Harmony,* vol 1, p. 281.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc33010.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.ix-p33.1"></span>Si
premierement il ne se regle luy-mesme, et s’assul jetit aux mesmes
choses qu’il commande;” — “if he do not first rule himself, and submit
to the same things which he commands.”

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc33010.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="ii.ix-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p56"></span> *Harmony*, vol. 2, p. 165.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 23:13-15; Mark 12:40 Luke 11:52; 20:47](cc33011.md)
