[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc33017)  [Next](cc33019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 24:15-28; MARK 13:14-23;  
LUKE 21:20-24; 17:22-25

<span id="ii.xvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
24:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
13:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
21:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p5"></span>**15. **When therefore you shall see the
abomination of desolation, which is described by Daniel the prophet,
standing in the holy place, (let him that readeth understand,)
**16. **Then let them who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
**17. **Let not him who is on the housetop go down to carry anything out
of his house; **18. **And let not him who is in the field return to
carry away his clothes. **19. **But woe to the women with child, and to
them that give suck in those days. **20. **And pray that your flight may
not be in the winter, nor on the sabbath.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) **21. **For there will then be great
tribulation, such as hath not been from the beginning of the world till
this time, nor will be. **22. **And unless those days had been
shortened, no flesh would have been saved, but on account of the elect
those days shall be shortened. **23. **If anyone shall then say to you,
Lo, here is Christ, or there, do not believe it. **24. **For false
Christs and false prophets shall arise, and shall perform great signs
and wonders, so that even the elect (if it were possible) will be led
into error. **25. **Lo, I have foretold it to you. **26. **If then they
shall say to you, Lo, he is in the desert, go not out; lo, he is in the
secret chamber, do not believe it. **27. **For as the lightning goeth
out of the east, and shineth even to the west, so shall also be the
coming of the Son of man. **28. **For wherever the carcass is, there
will the eagles also be gathered together.

<span id="ii.xvii-p7"></span>**14. **But when you shall see the
abomination of desolation, which is described by Daniel the prophet,
standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let
them that are in Judea flee to the mountains; **15. **And let not him
who is on the housetop go down into the house, or enter into it, to
carry away anything out of his house. **16. **And let not him that is in
the field return back to bring away his cloak. **17. **But woe to the
women with child, and to them that give suck in those days. **18. **But
pray that your flight may not be in the winter. **19. **For in those
days there shall be tribulation, such as hath not been from the
beginning of the creation which God created till this time, nor will be.
**20. **And unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh would have
been saved, but on account of the elect whom he hath chosen, he hath
shortened the days. **21. **And if anyone shall then say to you, Lo,
here is Christ, or, lo, there, do not believe it. **22. **For false
Christs and false prophets shall arise, and shall perform signs and
wonders to deceive (if it were possible) even the elect. **23. **But
take heed; lo, I have foretold to you all things.

<span id="ii.xvii-p8"></span>**20. **And when you shall see Jerusalem
surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation is at hand.
**21. **Then let them who are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let
them who are in the midst of it withdraw; and let not those who are in
the fields enter into it. **22. **For these are days of vengeance, that
all things which are written may be fulfilled. **23. **But woe to women
with child, and to them that give suck in those days; for there shall be
great tribulation on the earth, and wrath on this people. **24. **And
they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led captive into
all nations; and Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles, till
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

<span id="ii.xvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>[Luke
17:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p11"></span>**22. **And he said to the disciples, The
days will come when you shall desire to see one of the days of the Son
of man, and shall not see it. **23. **And they will say to you, Lo, he
is here, or, lo, he is here; do not go, nor follow them.  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) **24. **For as the lightning, flashing
from one side which is under heaven, shineth to the other side which is
under heaven, so shall be also the Son of man in his day. **25. **But he
must first suffer many things, and be rejected by this generation.

<span id="ii.xvii-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p15"></span>**<span id="ii.xvii-p15.2"></span>[Matthew
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p15.2"></span>.** *When you shall see the abomination of
desolation.* Because the destruction of the temple and city of
Jerusalem, together with the overthrow of the whole Jewish government,
was (as we have already said) a thing incredible, and because it might
be thought strange, that the disciples could not be saved without being
torn from that nation, to which had been committed *the adoption and the
covenant* (<span id="ii.xvii-p15.3"></span>[Ro
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span id="ii.xvii-p15.3"></span>.md)
of eternal salvation, Christ confirms both by the testimony of *Daniel*
As if he had said, That you may not be too strongly attached to the
temple and to the ceremonies of the Law, God has limited them to a fixed
time,  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) and has long ago
declared, that when the Redeemer should come, sacrifices would cease;
and that it may not give you uneasiness to be cut off from your own
nation, God has also forewarned his people, that in due time it would be
rejected. Such a prediction was not only well adapted for removing
ground of offense, but likewise for animating the minds of the godly,
that amidst the sorest calamities—knowing that God was looking upon
them, and was taking care of their salvation—they might betake
themselves to the sacred anchor, where, amidst the most dreadful
heavings of the billows, their condition would be firm and secure.

<span id="ii.xvii-p17"></span>But before I proceed farther, I must
examine the passage which is quoted by Christ. Those commentators are, I
think, mistaken, who think that this quotation is made from the ninth
chapter of the Book of *Daniel*  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md)
For there we do not literally find the words, *abomination, of
desolation;* and it is certain that the angel does not there speak of
the final destruction which Christ now mentions, but of the temporary
dispersion which was brought about by the tyranny of Antiochus.  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) But in the twelfth chapter the angel
predicts what is called the *final* abrogation of the services of the
Law,  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) which was to take place at
the coming of Christ. For, after having exhorted believers to unshaken
constancy, he fixes absolutely the time both of the ruin and of the
restoration.  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md)

<span id="ii.xvii-p22"></span>From the time, says he, that the daily
sacrifices shall be taken away, and the abomination of desolation set
up, there will be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he
who shall wait till he come to the thousand three hundred and
thirty-five days, (<span id="ii.xvii-p22.1"></span>[Dan.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012)<span id="ii.xvii-p22.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xvii-p23"></span>I am aware that this passage is tortured
in a variety of ways on account of its obscurity; but I consider the
natural meaning of it to be, that the angel declares that, after the
temple has been once purified from the pollutions and idols of
Antiochus, another period will arrive when it will be exposed to a new
profanation, and when all its sacredness and majesty will be for ever
lost.  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) And as that message was
sad and melancholy, he again recalls the prophet to one year, and two
years, and six months. These words denote both the duration and the
close of the calamities; for, in an interrupted succession of
calamities, the course of one year appears to us very long, but when
that space of time is doubled, the distress is greatly increased. The
Spirit therefore exhorts believers to prepare themselves for the
exercise of patience, not only for a single year, that is, for a long
period, but to lay their account with enduring tribulations through an
uninterrupted succession of many ages. There is no small consolation
also in the phrase, *half a time,* (<span id="ii.xvii-p24.2"></span>[Da
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007)<span id="ii.xvii-p24.2"></span>.md)
for though the *tribulations* be of long continuance, yet the Spirit
shows that they will not be perpetual. And, indeed, he had formerly used
this form of expression: The calamity of the Church shall last through
*a time, times, and half a time,* (<span id="ii.xvii-p24.3"></span>[Da
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)<span id="ii.xvii-p24.3"></span>..md)
But now he reckons the period of *three years and six months* by *days,*
that believers may be more and more hardened by a very long continuance
of calamities; for it is customary with men in adversity to compute
time, not by years or months, but by *days,* a single *day* being, in
their estimation, equal to a *year*  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) He says that those will be *happy* who
bear up to the end of that period; that is, who with invincible patience
persevere to the end.

<span id="ii.xvii-p26"></span>Now Christ selects only what suited his
purpose, namely, that the termination of sacrifices was at hand, and
that the *abomination,* which was the sign of the final *desolation,*
would be placed in the temple. But as the Jews were too strongly
attached to their present condition, and therefore paid little attention
to the prophecies which foretold the abolition of it, Christ, as if
endeavoring to gain their ear, bids them read attentively that passage,
where they would learn that what appeared to them difficult to be
believed was plainly declared by the Prophets.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) *Abomination* means *profanation;* for
this word denotes *uncleanness,*  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) which corrupts or overturns the pure
worship of God. It is called *desolation,* because it drew along with it
the destruction of the temple and of the government; as he had formerly
said, (<span id="ii.xvii-p28.2"></span>[Da
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027)<span id="ii.xvii-p28.2"></span>,.md)
that the pollution introduced by Antiochus was, as it were, the standard
of temporary *desolation;* for such I conceive to be the meaning of the
*wing,* or, *“spreading out.”*  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md)
It is a mistake to suppose that this expression denotes the siege of
Jerusalem, and the mistake receives no countenance from the words of
Luke, who did not intend to say the same thing, but something quite
different. For that city having been formerly delivered, when it
appeared to be in the midst of destruction, lest believers should expect
something of the same kind in future, Christ declares that, as soon as
it would be *surrounded by armies,* it was utterly ruined, because it
was wholly deprived of divine assistance. The meaning therefore is, that
the issue of the war will not be doubtful, because that city is devoted
to destruction, which it will not be able to escape any more than to
rescind a decree of heaven. Accordingly, Luke shortly afterwards adds,
that *Jerusalem will be trodden down by the Gentiles, a* mode of
expression which denotes utter ruin. But as it might appear to be
strange that the holy city should be thus given up to *the Gentiles,* to
do with it as they pleased, he adds a consolation,  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) that it was only for a time that so
much liberty was allowed to *the Gentiles,* till their iniquity was
ripe, and the vengeance which had been reserved for them was fully
displayed.

<span id="ii.xvii-p31"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p32"></span>**16.** *Then let them who are in Judea
flee to the mountains.* Having shown by the testimony of the prophet
that, when the temple had been profaned, the services of the Law would
soon afterwards be abolished, he adds, that fearful and appalling
calamities will soon overtake the whole of *Judea,* so that there will
be nothing more desirable than to withdraw a distance from it; and, at
the same time, he states that they will be so sudden, that time will
scarcely be time allowed for the most rapid flight. For such is the
import of the expressions, *Let not him who is on the house-top enter
into the house; let not him who is in the field turn back;* that is,
lest, by attempting to save their property, they themselves perish.
Again, *Woe to the women with child, and to them that give suck;* for
they will not be in a fit condition for flight. Again, *Pray that your
fight may not be in the winter;* that is, that neither a regard to the
sacredness of the day, nor the roughness of the roads, nor the shortness
of the clays, may prevent or retard your flight. The design of Christ
therefore was, first, to arouse his followers, that they might no longer
indulge the hope of ease and repose, and the enjoyments of an earthly
kingdom; and, secondly, to fortify their minds, that they might not give
way under ordinary calamities. Such an admonition, no doubt, was fir
from being agreeable, but, in consequence of their stupidity, and the
great weight of the calamities, it was highly necessary.

<span id="ii.xvii-p33"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p34"></span>**21** *For there will then be great
tribulation.* Luke says also, that there will be *days of vengeance, and
of wrath on that people, that all things which are written may be
fulfilled.* For since *the people,* through obstinate malice, had then
broken the covenant of God, it was proper that alarming changes should
take place, by which the earth itself and the air would be shaken. True,
indeed, the most destructive plague inflicted on the Jews was, that the
light of heavenly doctrine was extinguished among them, and that they
were rejected by God; but they were compelled—as the great hardness of
their hearts made it necessary that they should be compelled—to feel the
evil of their rejection by sharp and severe chastisements. Now the true
cause of such an awful punishment was, that the desperate wickedness of
that nation had reached its height. For not only had they haughtily
despised, but even disdainfully rejected the medicine which was brought
for their diseases; and, what was worse, like persons who were mad or
possessed by the devil, they wreaked their cruelty on the Physician
himself.  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) Since the Lord
executed his vengeance on those men for their inveterate contempt of the
Gospel, accompanied by incorrigible rage, let their punishment be always
before our eyes; and let us learn from it, that no offense is more
heinous in the sight of God, than obstinacy in despising his grace. But
though all who in like manner despise the Gospel will receive the same
punishment, God determined to make a very extraordinary demonstration in
the case of the Jews, that the coming of Christ might be regarded by
posterity with greater admiration and reverence. For no words can
express the baseness of their criminality in putting to death the Son of
God, who had been sent to them as the Author of life. Having committed
this execrable sacrilege, they did not cease to incur the guilt of one
crime after another, and thus to draw down upon themselves every ground
of utter destruction. And, therefore, Christ declares that *never
afterwards will there be such tribulation* in the world; for, as the
rejection of Christ, viewed in itself, and especially as attended by so
many circumstances of detestable obstinacy and ingratitude, was worthy
of abhorrence above all the sins committed ill all ages, so also it was
proper that, in the severity of punishment with which it was visited, it
should go beyond all others.

<span id="ii.xvii-p36"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p37"></span>**22** *And unless those days had been
shortened.* He presents an appalling view of those calamities, but at
the same time mingles it with this consolation, that they would be
sufficient to exterminate the very name of the Jews, if God did not look
to *his elect,* and on their account grant some alleviation. This
passage agrees with that of Isaiah:

<span id="ii.xvii-p38"></span>Unless the Lord had left us a small seed,
we would have been as Sodom, and we would have been like Gomorrah,
(<span id="ii.xvii-p38.1"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="ii.xvii-p38.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xvii-p39"></span>For it was necessary, as Paul assures us,
that the vengeance of God, which had been displayed in the Babylonish
captivity, should be again fulfilled at the coming of Christ, (<span
id="ii.xvii-p39.1"></span>[Ro
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span id="ii.xvii-p39.1"></span>..md)
Nay more, in proportion as our wickedness was greater, it deserved a
greater severity of punishment. And therefore Christ says that, unless
God put a period to those calamities, the Jews will utterly perish, so
that not a single individual will be left; but that God will remember
his gracious covenant, and will spare *his elect,* according to that
other prediction of Isaiah,

<span id="ii.xvii-p40"></span>Though thy people were like the sand of
the sea,  
a remnant only shall be saved, (<span id="ii.xvii-p40.2"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p40.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xvii-p41"></span>This affords us a striking proof of the
judgment of God, when he afflicts his visible Church to such a degree,
that we would be ready to conclude that it had altogether perished; and
yet, in order to *preserve some seed,* he miraculously rescues from
destruction *his* elect, though few in number, that, contrary to
expectation, they may escape from the jaws of death. For, on the one
hand, it is fitted to alarm hypocrites, that they may not, through
reliance on the title and outward appearance of a Church, cherish the
vain hope that they will pass unpunished, for the Lord will find some
means of delivering his Church, when those men have been given up to
destruction; and, on the other hand, it conveys a wonderful consolation
to the godly, that God will never allow his wrath to proceed so far as
not to provide for their safety. Thus, in punishing the Jews, the wrath
of God burned to an extent which was truly awful, and yet, contrary to
the expectation of men, he restrained it in such a manner, that not one
of *the elect* perished. And it was a miracle which almost exceeded
belief; that, as salvation was to proceed from Judea, out of a few drops
of a fountain which was dried up God formed rivers to water the whole
world; for, in consequence of the hatred of all nations which they had
drawn upon themselves, they narrowly escaped from being murdered in all
places, by a preconcerted signal, in one day. Nor can it be doubted,
that when many persons entreated that they should be slaughtered in this
manner, Titus was restrained by God from giving permission to his
soldiers and to others who were excessively desirous to carry such a
design into execution; and, therefore, when the Roman Emperor at that
time prevented the utter destruction of the whole nation, that was the
*shortening* here mentioned, for *preserving some seed,* (<span
id="ii.xvii-p41.1"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="ii.xvii-p41.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.xvii-p42"></span>Yet it ought to be observed, that it was
*on account of the elect* that God restrained the fierceness of his
anger, that he might not consume them all. For why did he determine that
a few should remain out of a vast multitude? and what reason had he for
giving them a preference above others? It was because his grace dwelt in
the people whom he had adopted; and, that his covenant might not fail,
some were *elected* and appointed to salvation by his eternal purpose.
Hence Paul ascribes to free *election* (<span
id="ii.xvii-p42.1"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="ii.xvii-p42.1"></span>.md)
the reason why out of an immense nation *a remnant* only was saved. Away
then with human merits, when our attention is directed exclusively to
the good pleasure of God, that the distinction between some persons and
others may depend solely on this, that those who have been *elected*
must be saved. To state the matter more clearly and fully, Mark uses a
superfluity of words,  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md)
expressing it thus, on *account of the elect, whom he hath chosen, he
hath shortened the days.* Certainly the use of the word *elect* might
have been sufficient, if he had not intended to state expressly that God
is not induced by external causes to bestow his favor on some rather
than on others; but that, because he has *elected* those whom he will
save, he ratifies the secret purpose of his grace in their salvation.

<span id="ii.xvii-p44"></span>But a question arises, how was it on
*account of the elect* that God set a limit to these calamities, so as
not utterly to destroy the Jews, when many of those who were saved were
reprobate and desperate? The reply is easy. A part of the nation was
preserved, that out of them God might bring his *elect,* who were mixed
with them, like the seed after the chaff has been blown off. So then,
though temporal safety was bestowed equally on the reprobate and on *the
elect,* yet, as it was of no advantage to the reprobate, it is justly
ascribed to *the elect* alone, for it was to their benefit that the
wonderful providence of God was directed.

<span id="ii.xvii-p45"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p46"></span>**23.** *If any one shall then say to
you.* He again repeats what he had said about impostors, and not without
reason; for there was great danger arising from this temptation, that
wretched men, while their affairs were in a troubled and desperate
condition, would be deceived by false pretenses, would seek phantoms
instead of Christ, and would embrace the delusions of Satan, as if they
were assistance from God. As the Jews, when they were so severely
oppressed on account of having despised redemption, needed, at least,
violent remedies to restrain them from treachery, Satan cunningly held
out to them new hopes, which would withdraw them still farther from God.
And certainly, when we are left without direction in adversity, nothing
is more pernicious than to be deceived, under the disguise of the name
of God, by falsehoods which not only shut against us the door of
repentance, but increase the darkness of infidelity, and at length
overwhelm us with despair, and drive us to madness. The repetition of
the statement, therefore, was far from being superfluous, when the
danger was so great; and especially when Christ warns them that *false
prophets* will come prepared with no ordinary instruments of deception,
with *signs and wonders* fitted to confound weak minds. For since it is
by miracles that God attests the presence of his power, and since they
are therefore seals of the true doctrine, we need not wonder if
impostors gain credit by them. By this kind of delusion God revenges the
ingratitude of men, that they who rejected the truth may believe a lie,
and that they who shut their eyes against the light which was offered to
them may be plunged deeper and deeper in darkness. He exercises, at the
same time, the constancy of his followers, which comes to shine with
greater brightness, when they give way to no kind of impostures.

<span id="ii.xvii-p47"></span>Again, since our Lord declares that
*antichrists* and *false prophets* would be armed with miracles, there
is no reason why the Papists should talk so haughtily on this ground, or
why we should be terrified by their boasting. In support of their
superstitions they plead miracles, — those very miracles which, the Son
of God predicted, would corrupt the faith of many, and which, therefore,
wise men ought not to hold in such estimation as to be sufficient of
themselves to prove either one or another kind of doctrine. If it be
objected, that such reasoning would overthrow and set aside the miracles
by which both the Law and the Gospel were ratified, I reply, that the
Spirit engraved on them an undoubted mark, which removed from believers
all doubt and fear of being mistaken. For when God displayed his power
for the purpose of confirming his people, he did not act in so confused
a manner as not to manifest the true and infallible distinction.
Besides, the manner in which miracles seal doctrine is such, that the
doctrine itself mutually shines before them, and dispels all the clouds
by which Satan darkens the minds of the simple. In short, if we wish to
guard against impostures, let us preserve the connection between
miracles and doctrine unbroken.

<span id="ii.xvii-p48"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p49"></span>**24.** *So that even the elect (if it
were possible) will be led into error.* This was added for the purpose
of exciting alarm, that believers may be more careful to be on their
guard; for when such unbounded freedom of action is allowed to *false
prophets,* and when they are permitted to exert such powers of
deceiving, those who are careless and inattentive would easily be
entangled by their snares. Christ therefore exhorts and arouses his
disciples to keep watch, and at the same time reminds them that there is
no reason for being troubled at the strangeness of the sight, if they
see many persons on every hand led away into error. While he excites
them to solicitude, that Satan may not overtake them in a state of
sloth, he gives them abundant ground of confidence on which they may
calmly rely, when he promises that they will be safe under the defense
and protection of God against all the snares of Satan. And thus, however
frail and slippery the condition of the godly may be, yet here is a firm
footing on which they may stand; for it is not possible for them to fall
away from salvation, to whom the Son of God is a faithful guardian. For
they have not sufficient energy to resist the attacks of Satan, unless
in consequence of their being

<span id="ii.xvii-p50"></span>the sheep of Christ, which none can pluck
out of his hand,  
(<span id="ii.xvii-p50.2"></span>[Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p50.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xvii-p51"></span>It must therefore be observed, that the
permanency of our salvation does not depend on us, but on the secret
election of God; for though our salvation *is kept through faith,* as
Peter tells us, (<span id="ii.xvii-p51.1"></span>[1Pe
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005)<span id="ii.xvii-p51.1"></span>,.md)
yet we ought to ascend higher, and assure ourselves that we are in
safety, because the Father hath given us to the Son, and the Son himself
declares, that

<span id="ii.xvii-p52"></span>none who have been given to him shall
perish (<span id="ii.xvii-p52.1"></span>[Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p52.1"></span>.).

<span id="ii.xvii-p53"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p54"></span>**25.** *Lo, I have foretold it to you.
Mark* expresses our Lord’s meaning more fully. *But take heed: lo, I
have foretold you all things.* By these words we are taught that they
who are dismayed by the stumbling-blocks which Christ predicted are
altogether inexcusable; for since the will of God ought to be our rule,
it is sufficient that we have received timely warning that such is his
pleasure. Again, as he declares that

<span id="ii.xvii-p55"></span>he is faithful, and will not suffer us to
be tempted beyond  
what we are able to bear, (<span id="ii.xvii-p55.2"></span>[1Co
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p55.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.xvii-p56"></span>we shall never be in want of strength to
resist, provided that our weakness be not nourished by indifference.

<span id="ii.xvii-p57"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p58"></span>**26.** *Lo, he is in the desert.* Luke
connects this discourse with another reply of Christ; for, having been
interrogated by the Pharisees *about the coming of the kingdom of God,*
he replied, that *it would not come with observation;* and then follows
in Luke’s narrative that, turning *to his disciples,* he informed them
that *the days would come when they would no longer see a day of the Son
of man.* By these words he intended to charge them

<span id="ii.xvii-p59"></span>to walls in the light before the darkness
of the night overtook them, (<span id="ii.xvii-p59.1"></span>[Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p59.1"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xvii-p60"></span>for this ought to have been a very
powerful excitement to endeavor to make progress, so long as they
enjoyed the presence of Christ, when they 1earned that very serious
disturbances were at hand. Whether or not Christ admonished his
disciples twice on this subject is uncertain; but I think it. probable
that Luke, while he was speaking of *the coming of the kingdom of God*
introduced sentences taken from a different occasion, which he
frequently does, as we have seen in other instances.

<span id="ii.xvii-p61"></span>But as this passage has been, through
ignorance, tortured in various ways, that the reader may ascertain the
true meaning, he must attend to the contrast between a state of
concealment and that extension of the kingdom of Christ far and wide,
and which would be sudden and unexpected, *as the lightning dashes from
the east to the west.* For we know that the *false Christs*—in
accordance with the gross and foolish hope of that nation—drew along
with them as large bodies of men as they could collect into the recesses
of the desert, or into caverns, or other places of retirement, in order
to throw off the yoke of the Roman government by force and by arms. The
meaning therefore is, that every one who collects his forces into a
secret place, in order to regain the freedom of the nation by arms,
falsely pretends to be *the Christ;* for the Redeemer is sent to diffuse
his grace suddenly and unexpectedly through every quarter of the world.
But these two things are quite contrary, to shut up redemption within
some corner, and to spread it through the whole world. The disciples
were thus reminded that they must no longer seek a Redeemer within the
small enclosure of Judea, because he will suddenly extend the limits of
his kingdom to the uttermost ends of the world. And, indeed, this
astonishing rapidity, with which the gospel flew through every part of
the world, was a manifest testimony of divine power. For it could not be
the result of human industry, that the light of the gospel, as soon as
it appear, darted from one side of the world to the opposite side *like
lightning;* and therefore it is not without reason that Christ
introduces this circumstance for demonstrating and magnifying his
heavenly glory. Besides, by holding out this vast extent of his kingdom,
he intended to show that the desolation of Judea would not hinder him
from reigning.

<span id="ii.xvii-p62"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p63"></span>**28** *Wheresoever the carcass is.* The
meaning is, that by whatever methods Satan endeavors to scatter the
children of God in various directions, still in Christ himself is the
sacred bond of union, by which they must be kept united. For whence
comes the dispersion, but that many depart from Christ, in whom alone
our strength lies? Here then is a method laid down for promoting a holy
union, that the separations produced by errors may not tear in pieces
the body of the Church; and that method is, when we remain united to
Christ. This ought to be carefully observed; for Christ does not
restrict us either to the primacy of the Roman See, or to any other
foolery, but employs this method alone for binding his Church together,
that all in every quarter should look to him as the only head. Hence it
follows, that those who are united to him by pure faith are beyond the
risk of schism. Let the adherents of Rome now go, and exclaim that all
are schismatics who do not allow themselves to be separated from Christ,
that they may transfer their allegiance to a robber.

<span id="ii.xvii-p64"></span>*There also will the eagles be gathered
together.* When the Papists interpret the word *carcass* to denote the
company of those who profess the same faith, and allegorically explain
*the eagles* to represent acute and sagacious men,  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) it is excessively absurd,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) for Christ had manifestly no other
design than to call to himself, and to retain in union to him, the
children of God, wherever they were scattered. Nor does Christ simply
employ the word *body,* but (<span id="ii.xvii-p66.2"></span>πτῶμα)
*carcass;*  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) and he ascribes
nothing to *eagles* but what we might apply to *crows* or *vultures,*
according to the nature of the country which we inhabit. I attach as
little value to the ingenuity of other commentators, who say that the
death of Christ had a sweet savor, to draw the elect to God; for, in my
opinion, Christ intended to argue from the less to the greater, that if
birds have so great sagacity as to flock in great numbers from distant
places to a single *carcass,* it would be disgraceful in believers not
to assemble to the Author of life, from whom alone they derive their
actual nourishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc33018.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>*Ny an*
jour du *Sabbath;*” — “*nor on the Sabbath*-Day.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc33018.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>Mais n’y
allez point, et ne les suyvez point;” — “but go not there, and do not
follow them.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc33018.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p16.1"></span>Dieu a
limité certain temps auquel ces choses prendrent fin;” — “God has
limited a certain time when those things shall be terminated.”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc33018.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p18"></span> The passage here referred to, and from
which CALVIN thinks that the quotation is *not* made, is <span
id="ii.xvii-p18.1"></span>[Da
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md)<span id="ii.xvii-p18.1"></span>,
*And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week; and in the
midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifices and the oblation to
cease, and for the overspreading* or abominations *he shall make it*
desolate, *even until the consummation, and that determined shall be
poured upon the* desolate. The other passage, from which he supposes the
quotation to have been actually made, is <span
id="ii.xvii-p18.2"></span>[Da
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.xvii-p18.2"></span>,
*And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and*
the abomination that maketh desolate *set up, there shall be a thousand
two hundred and ninety days.* We have given both passages, as they stand
in the authorized version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc33018.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p19"></span> Antiochus, known in history by the
surname *Epiphanes,* or, *Illustrious,* but more frequently denominated
by the Jews who had beheld his cruelties, and by others who were shocked
at the indecency of his public life, Antiochus *Epimanes,* or,
*Furious.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc33018.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p20.1"></span>Du
service et des ceremonies de la Loy;” — “of the service and of the
ceremonies of the Law.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc33018.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p21.1"></span>Car
apres qu’il avoit exhorté les fideles à une constance ferme et bien
assuree, et avoit predit que l’advenement de Christ mettroit fin aux
ceremonies, et doan, pour signe la profanation externe du temple,
finale-ment au chapitre treizieme *(douzieme?)* il determine un temps
certain tant de la ruine que du restablissement.” — “For after having
exhorted believers to a firm and assured constancy, and having predicted
that the coming of Christ would put an end to ceremonies, and having
given the outward profanation of the temple as a sign, finally, in the
thirteenth *(twelfth?)* chapter he determines a fixed time both for the
ruin and for the restoration.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc33018.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p24.1"></span>Sans
esperance de plus la recouvrer;” — “without the expectation of ever
again recovering it.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc33018.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p25"></span> In prophetic language *one day* stands
*for a year,* a Jewish month (of thirty days) for *thirty years,* and a
Jewish year (of three hundred and sixty days) for *three hundred and
sixty years.* Thus *a time,* or Jewish year, stood for three hundred and
sixty years; *times,* or two Jewish years, stood for seven hundred and
twenty years; and *half a time,* or half of a Jewish year, stood for
*one hundred and eighty years;* so that the *time, times, and half a
time,* (<span id="ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>[Dan.
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md), [Dan.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xvii-p25.2"></span>[Re
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.xvii-p25.2"></span>,) or three years and a half, represented *one
thousand two hundred and sixty years.* By a similar computation,
*forty-two months,* (<span id="ii.xvii-p25.3"></span>[Rev.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002.md), [Rev.
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)<span id="ii.xvii-p25.3"></span>,.md)
of thirty days each, denoted the same period. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc33018.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p27.1"></span>Sinon
qu’on vueille prendre. ceci comme estant dit en la personne de
l’Evangeliste; toutesfois il est plus vray-semblable que c’est Christ
qui parle, et que suyvant son propos d’un fil continuel, il exhorte les
siens estre attentifs a bon escient.” — “Unless we choose to take this
as having been said in the person of the Evangelist; yet it is more
probable that it is Christ who speaks, and that, following out his
subject, he exhorts his followers to be earnestly attentive.”

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc33018.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p28.1"></span>La
pollution, immondicit, et souillure;” — “pollution, uncleanness, and
defilement.”

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc33018.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p29"></span> <span id="ii.xvii-p29.1"></span>כנפ
שקוצים משמם*, the wing* (or, *spreading out) of* abominations *which
maketh* desolate. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc33018.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p30.1"></span>Il
adjouste quant et quant une consolation speciale pour le regard des
fideles, (laquelle Daniel omet, pource qu’il parle à tout le corps du
peuple;)” — “he adds to it a special consolation with respect to
believers, (which Daniel leaves out, because he speaks to the whole body
of the people.”)

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc33018.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p35.1"></span>Il
s’estoyent ruez cruellment, contre la personne mesme du Medecin, le
mettant à mort.” — “They had pursued with cruel rage the very person of
the Physician, putting him to death.”

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc33018.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p43"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p43.1"></span>Il use
de redite, ou de paroles superflues;” — “he makes use of a repetition,
or of superfluous words.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc33018.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p65"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p65.1"></span>Les gens
subtils et de jugement, à scavoir les docteurs;” — “men of acuteness and
judgment, namely, the doctors.”

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc33018.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p66"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p66.1"></span>Il n’y a
ne rime ne raison en cela;” — “there is neither rhyme nor reason in it.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc33018.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="ii.xvii-p66.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p67"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p67.1"></span>Aussi le
mot Grec duquel use l’Evangeliste, ne signifie pas simplement un corps,
mais un corps mort.” — “The Greek word, too, which the Evangelist
employs, does not denote simply *a body,* but *a dead body.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 24:29-31; Mark 13:24-27; Luke 21:25-28](cc33019.md)
