[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33039)  [Next](cc33041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 27:24-32; MARK 15:15-21;  
LUKE 23:24-32

<span id="ii.xxxix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
27:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
15:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p4"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
23:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p5"></span>**24.** But Pilate, perceiving that he
gained nothing by it, but that the tumult became the greater, took
water, and washed his hands before the people, saying, I am innocent of
the blood of this righteous man: see you to it. **25.** And the whole
people, answering, said, His blood be on us and on our children.
**26.** Then he released to them Barabbas, and after having scourged
Jesus, he delivered him up to be crucified. **27.** Then the soldiers of
the governor conducted Jesus into the Pretorium, and gathered around him
the whole band. **28.** And having stripped him, they put on him a
scarlet robe. **29.** And having wreathed a crown of thorns, they put it
on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and kneeling before him, they
mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! **30.** And having spat on
him, they took the reed and struck him on the head. **31.** And after
having mocked him, they stripped him of the robe, and put his own
raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. **32.** And as they
were going out, they found a Cyrenian named Simon: him they constrained
to bear his cross.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p6"></span>**15.** Pilate then wishing to satisfy the
multitude, released Barabbas to them, and after having scourged Jesus,
he delivered him up to be crucified. **16.** And the soldiers conducted
him into the hall, which is the Pretorium; and they gather together the
whole band. **17.** And they clothe him with purple, and put upon his
head a crown interwoven with thorns. **18.** And they began to salute
him, Hail, King of the Jews! **19.** And they struck him on the head
with a reed, and spat on him; and kneeling they worshipped him.
**20.** And having mocked him, they stripped him of the purple, and put
his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. **21.** And
they compelled the one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was passing by, who was
coming from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his
cross.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p7"></span>**24.** And Pilate decided that what they
demanded should be done. **25.** And he released to them him who, for
sedition and murder, had been put in prison, whom they had desired; and
delivered up Jesus to their will. **26.** And as they were leading him
away, they seized one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming out of the
country, and laid the cross upon him, to carry it after Jesus.
**27.** And there followed him a great multitude of people and of women,
who also bewailed and lamented him. **28.** And Jesus turning to them
said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves
and for your children. **29.** For, lo, the days will come in which they
shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that did not bear, and
the breasts which did not give suck. **30.** Then shall they begin to
say to the mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us.
**31.** For if they do these things in the green tree, what shall be
done in the dry? **32.** Two others also, who were malefactors, were led
with him to be crucified.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxix-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p10"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxix-p10.2"></span>[Matthew
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p10.2"></span>.** *But Pilate, perceiving that he gained
nothing by it.* As sailors, who have experienced a violent tempest, at
last give way, and permit themselves to be carried out of the proper
course; so Pilate, finding himself unable to restrain the commotion of
the people, lays aside his authority as a judge, and yields to their
furious outcry. And though he had long attempted to hold out, still the
necessity does not excuse him; for he ought rather to have submitted to
any amount of suffering than to have swerved from his duty. Nor is his
guilt alleviated by the childish ceremony which he uses; for how could a
few drops of water wash away the stain of a crime which no satisfaction
of any kind could obliterate? His principal object in doing so was not
to wash out his stains before God, but to exhibit to the people a Mark
of abhorrence, to try if perhaps he might lead them to repent of their
fury; as if he had employed such a preface as this, *“Lo,* you compel me
to an unrighteous murder, to which I cannot come but with trembling and
horror. What then shall become of you, and what dreadful vengeance of
God awaits you, who are the chief actors in the deed?” But whatever
might be the design of Pilate, God intended to testify, in this manner,
the innocence of his Son, that it might be more manifest that in him our
sins were condemned. The supreme and sole Judge of the world is placed
at the bar of an earthly judge, is condemned to crucifixion as a
malefactor, and — what is more — is placed between two robbers, as if he
had been the prince of robbers. A spectacle so revolting might, at first
sight, greatly disturb the senses of men, were it not met by this
argument, that the punishment which had been due to us was laid on
Christ, so that, our guilt having now been removed, we do not hesitate
to come into the presence of the Heavenly Judge. Accordingly, the
*water,* which was of no avail for washing away the filth of Pilate,
ought to be efficacious, in the present day, for a different purpose, to
cleanse our eyes from every obstruction, that, in the midst of
condemnation, they may clearly perceive the righteousness of Christ.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p12"></span>**25.** *His blood be on us.* There can
be no doubt that the Jews pronounced this curse on themselves without
any concern, as if they had been fully convinced that they had a
righteous cause before God; but their inconsiderate zeal carries them
headlong, so that, while they commit an irreparable crime, they add to
it a solemn imprecation, by which they cut themselves off from the hope
of pardon. Hence we infer how carefully we ought to guard against
headlong rashness in all our judgments. For when men refuse to make
inquiry, and venture to decide in this or the other matter according to
their own fancy, blind impulse must at length carry them to rage. And
this is the righteous vengeance of God with which he visits the pride of
those who do not deign to take the trouble of distinguishing between
right and wrong. The Jews thought that, in slaying Christ, they were
performing a service acceptable to God; but whence arose this wicked
error, unless from wicked obstinacy, and from despising God himself?
Justly, therefore, were they abandoned to this rashness of drawing upon
themselves final ruin. But when the question relates to the worship of
God and his holy mysteries, let us learn to open our eyes, and to
inquire into the matter with reverence and sobriety, lest through
hypocrisy and presumption we become stupefied and enraged.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p13"></span>Now as God would never have permitted
this execrable word to proceed from the mouth of the people, if their
impiety had not been already desperate, so afterwards he justly revenged
it by dreadful and unusual methods; and yet by an incredible miracle he
reserved for himself some remnant, that his covenant might not be
abolished by the destruction of the whole nation. He had adopted for
himself the seed of Abraham, that it might be

<span id="ii.xxxix-p14"></span>a chosen nation, a royal priesthood, his
peculiar people and inheritance,  
(<span id="ii.xxxix-p14.2"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxxix-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxix-p15"></span>The Jews now conspire, as with one voice,
to renounce a favor so distinguished. Who would not say that the whole
nation was utterly rooted out from the kingdom of God? But God, through
their treachery, renders more illustrious the fidelity of his promise,
and, to show that he did not in vain make a covenant with Abraham, he
rescues from the general destruction those whom he has elected by free
grace. Thus the truth of God always rises superior to all the obstacles
raised by human unbelief.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p16"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p17"></span>**26** *Then he released to them
Barabbas.* Our three Evangelists do not mention what is related by John,
(<span id="ii.xxxix-p17.2"></span>[Joh
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p17.2"></span>,) that Pilate ascended the judgment-seat to
pronounce sentence from it; for they only state that the clamor of the
people and the confused tumult prevailed on him basely to deliver up
Christ to death. But both of these things must be observed, that a
compliance was forced from him contrary to his will, and yet that he
exercised the office of a judge in condemning him whom he pronounces to
be innocent. For if the Son of God had not been free from all sin, we
would have had no right to look for satisfaction from his death; and, on
the other hand, if he had not become our surety, to endure the
punishment which we had deserved, we would now have been involved in the
condemnation of our sins. So then God determined that his Son should be
condemned in a solemn manner, that he might acquit us for his sake.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p18"></span>But even the severity of the punishment
serves to confirm our faith, not less than to impress our minds with
dread of the wrath of God, and to humble us by a conviction of our
miseries. For if we are desirous to profit aright by meditating on the
death of Christ, we ought to begin with cherishing abhorrence of our
sins, in proportion to the severity of the punishment which he endured.
This will cause us not only to feel displeasure and shame of ourselves,
but to be penetrated with deep grief, and therefore to seek the medicine
with becoming ardor, and at the same time to experience confusion and
trembling. For we must have hearts harder than stones, if we are not cut
to the quick by the wounds of the Son of God, if we do not hate and
detest our sins, for expiating which the Son of God endured so many
torments. But as this is a display of the dreadful vengeance of God, so,
on the other hand, it holds out to us the most abundant grounds of
confidence; for we have no reason to fear that our sins, from which the
Son of God acquits us by so valuable a ransom, will ever again be
brought into judgment before God. For not only did he endure an ordinary
kind of death, in order to obtain life for us, but along with the cross
he took upon him our curse, that no uncleanness might any longer remain
in us.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p19"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p20"></span>**27.** *Then the soldiers of the
governor.* It is not without reason that these additional insults are
related. We know that it was not some sort of ludicrous exhibition, when
God exposed his only-begotten Son to every kind of reproaches. First,
then, we ought to consider what we have deserved, and, next, the
satisfaction offered by Christ ought to awaken us to confident hope. Our
filthiness deserves that God should hold it in abhorrence, and that all
the angels should *spit* upon us; but Christ, in order to present us
pure and unspotted in presence of the Father, resolved to be *spat
upon,* and to be dishonored by every kind of reproaches. For this
reason, that disgrace which he once endured on earth obtains for us
favor in heaven, and at the same time restores in us the image of God,
which had been not only stained, but almost obliterated, by the
pollutions of sin. Here, too, is brightly displayed the inconceivable
mercy of God towards us, in bringing his only-begotten Son so low on our
account. This was also a proof which Christ gave of his astonishing love
towards us, that there was no ignominy to which he refused to submit for
our salvation. but these matters call for secret meditation, rather than
for the ornament of words.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p21"></span>We are also taught that the kingdom of
Christ ought not to be estimated by the sense of the flesh, but by the
judgment of faith and of the Spirit. For so long as our minds grovel in
the world, we look: upon his kingdom not only as contemptible, but even
as loaded with shame and disgrace; but as soon as our minds rise by
faith to heaven, not only will the spiritual majesty of Christ be
presented to us, so as to obliterate all the dishonor of the cross, but
the *spittings, scourgings, blows,* and other indignities, will lead us
to the contemplation of his glory; as Paul informs us, that

<span id="ii.xxxix-p22"></span>God hath given him a name, and the
highest authority, that before him every knee might bow, because he
willingly emptied himself (<span id="ii.xxxix-p22.1"></span>ἐκένωσε)
even to the death of the cross,  
(<span id="ii.xxxix-p22.3"></span>[Php
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p22.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxix-p23"></span>If, therefore, even in the present day,
the world insolently mocks at Christ, let us learn to rise above these
offenses by elevated faith; and let us not stop to inquire, what
unworthy opposition is made to Christ by wicked men, but with what
ornaments the Father hath clothed him, with what scepter and with what
crown he hath adorned him, so as to raise him high, not only above men,
but even above all the angels.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p24"></span>Mark uses the word *purple* instead of
*scarlet;* but though these are different colors, we need not trouble
ourselves much about that matter. That Christ was clothed with a costly
garment is not probable; and hence we infer that it was not *purple,*
but something that bore a resemblance to it, as a painter counterfeits
truth by his likenesses.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p25"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p26"></span>**32.** *They found a man, a Cyrenian.*
This circumstance points out the extreme cruelty both of the Jewish
nation and of the soldiers. There is no reason to doubt that it was then
the custom for malefactors to carry their own crosses to the place of
punishment, but as the only persons who were crucified were robbers, who
were men of great bodily strength, they were able to bear such a burden.
It was otherwise with Christ, so that the very weakness of his body
plainly showed that it was a lamb that was sacrificed. Perhaps, too, in
consequence of having been mangled by scourging, and broken down by many
acts of outrage, he bent under the weight of the cross. Now the
Evangelists relate that the soldiers *constrained* a man who was a
peasant, and of mean rank, *to carry the cross;* because that punishment
was reckoned so detestable, that every person thought himself polluted,
if he only happened to put his hand to it.  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) But God ennobles by his heralds the
man who was taken from the lowest dregs of the people to perform a mean
and infamous office; for it is not a superfluous matter, that the
Evangelists not only mention his name, but inform us also about his
country and his children. Nor can there be any doubt that God intended,
by this preparation, to remind us that we are of no rank or estimation
in ourselves, and that it is only from the cross of his Son that we
derive eminence and renown.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p28"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p29"></span>**<span id="ii.xxxix-p29.2"></span>[Luke
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#027)<span
id="ii.xxxix-p29.2"></span>.** *And there followed him.* Although in
public all the people, with one shout, had condemned Christ, yet we see
that there were some who had not forgotten his doctrine and miracles;
and thus, in the midst of that miserable dispersion, God reserved for
himself a small remnant. And though the faith of those *women* was weak,
yet it is probable that there was a hidden seed of piety, which
afterwards in due time produced fruit. Yet their *lamentation* served to
condemn the wicked and shocking cruelty of the men, who had conspired
with the scribes and priests to put Christ to death But Luke’s design
was different, namely, to inform us, that when the wickedness of men
breaks out into unrestrained disorder, God does not indolently look on,
to see what they are doing, but sits as a judge in heaven, to punish
them soon for their unjust cruelty; and that we ought not to despise his
vengeance, because he delays it till the proper time, but that we ought
to dread it before he appears.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p30"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p31"></span>**28.** *Weep not.* Some have thought
that the *women* are reproved, because foolishly and inconsiderately
they poured out *tears* to no purpose. On the contrary, Christ does not
simply reprove them, as if it were improperly and without a cause that
they were *weeping,* but warns them that there will be far greater
reason for *weeping* on account of the dreadful judgment of God which
hangs over them; as if he had said, that his death was not the end, but
the beginning, of evils to Jerusalem and to the whole nation; and in
this way he intimates, that he was not abandoned to the wickedness of
man in such a manner as not to be the object of Divine care. For, from
the punishment which immediately followed, it was manifest that the life
of Christ was dear to God the Father, at the time when all imagined that
he had been wholly forsaken and cast off.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p32"></span>These words do indeed show plainly with
what exalted fortitude Christ was endued; for he could not have spoken
in this manner, if he had not advanced to death with a steady and firm
step. But the principal object is to show, that under this mean and
revolting aspect he is still under the eye of God, and that wicked men,
who now proudly triumph, as if they had obtained a victory, will not
long enjoy their foolish mirth, for it will quickly be followed by an
astonishing change. This doctrine is even now of use to us, when we
learn that Christ was not less dear to his Father, because for a moment
he was deprived of his aid, but that he set so high a value on our
salvation, that he did not even spare his only-begotten Son. He gave a
remarkable proof of this, when he razed to the foundation, and
destroyed, along with its inhabitants, the Holy City, in which he had
chosen his only sanctuary. Let us learn from this to rise to meditation
on the cause of the death of Christ; for since God revenged it with such
severity, he would never have permitted his Son to endure it, unless he
had intended that it should be an expiation for the sins of the world.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p33"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p34"></span>**29** *For, lo, the days will come.* He
threatens, that a calamity which is not usual, but fearful and unheard
of, is at hand, in which will be perceived, at a glance, the vengeance
of God. As if he had said, that this nation will not be carried away by
a single or ordinary kind of destruction, but that it will perish under
a mass of numerous and great calamities, so that it would be much more
desirable that the *mountains should fall upon them,* and crush them, or
that the earth should open and swallow them up, than that they should
pine away amidst the cruel torments of a lingering destruction. Nor did
those threatenings fall to the ground without effect, but this thunder
of words was surpassed by the awful result, as is evident from Josephus.
And as the wish to be crushed by the mountains, and the cursing of their
children, were expressive of the lowest despair, Christ taught by these
words that the Jews would at length feel that they had made war, not
with a mortal man, but with God. Thus shall the enemies of God reap the
just reward of their impious rage, when they who formerly dared even to
attack heaven, shall in vain desire to employ the earth as a shield
against his vengeance.

<span id="ii.xxxix-p35"></span><span id="ii.xxxix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p36"></span>**31.** *If they do these things in the
green tree.* By this sentence Christ confirms what he had stated, that
his death will not remain unpunished, and that the Jews, whose iniquity
is ripe, or rather half-rotten, will not remain long in their present
condition; and by a familiar comparison, he proves it to be impossible
but that the fire of the divine wrath shall immediately kindle and
devour them. We know that *dry* wood is wont to be first thrown into the
fire; but if what is moist and *green* be burnt, much less shall *the
dry* be ultimately spared. The phrase, *if they do,* may be taken
indefinitely for *if it be done*  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) and the meaning will be: *“If green*
wood is thrown into the fire before the time, what, think you, shall
become of what is *dry* and old?” But some perhaps will prefer to view
it as a comparison of men with God, as if Christ had said: “Wicked men,
who resemble *dry* wood, when they have basely murdered the righteous,
will find that their time is prepared by God. For how could they who are
already devoted to destruction escape the hand of the heavenly Judge,
who grants them so much liberty for a time against the good and
innocent?”

<span id="ii.xxxix-p38"></span>Whether you choose to interpret it in the
one or the other of these ways, the general meaning is, that the
*lamentation of the women* is foolish, if they do not likewise expect
and dread the awful judgment of God which hangs over the wicked. And
whenever our distress of mind, arising from the bitterness of the cross,
goes to excess, it is proper to soothe it by this consolation, that God,
who now permits his own people to be unjustly oppressed, will not
ultimately allow the wicked to escape punishment. If we were not
sustained by this hope, we must unavoidably sink under our afflictions.
Though it be the natural and more frequent practice to make a fire of
*dry* wood rather than of *green* wood, yet God pursues a different
order; for, while he allows tranquillity and ease to the reprobate, he
trains his own people by a variety of afflictions, and therefore their
condition is more wretched than that of others, if we judge of it from
the present appearance. But this is an appropriate remedy, if we
patiently look for the whole course of the judgment of God; for thus we
shall perceive that the wicked gain nothing by a little delay; for when
God shall have humbled his faithful servants by fatherly chastisements,
he will rise with a drawn sword against those whose sins he appeared for
a time not to observe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc33040.htm#fr_264) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p27.1"></span>S’il
luy fust advenu d’y mettre la main.”

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc33040.htm#fr_265) <span
id="ii.xxxix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxix-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxix-p37.1"></span>Pour
*si on fait* ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 27:33-38; Mark 15:22-28; Luke 23:33-34, 38](cc33041)
