[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc33004)  [Next](cc33006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 33: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part III*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 21:33-46; MARK 12:1-12; LUKE 20:9-19

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span><span id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
21:33-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033)<span id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span><span id="ii.iv-p3.1"></span>Mark
21:1-12<span id="ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span><span id="ii.iv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
20:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span>**33. **Hear another parable: There was a
certain householder, who planted a vineyard, and surrounded it by a
ditch, and dug a wine-press in it, and built a tower, and let it to
husbandmen, and went abroad, **34. **And when the season of the fruits
drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might
receive its fruits. **35. **And the husbandmen, having seized his
servants, wounded one, killed another, and stoned another.
**36. **Again, he sent other servants more numerous  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) than the first, and they did to them in
the same manner. **37. **And last of all he sent to them his son,
saying, They will reverence my son. **38. **And when the husbandmen saw
his son, they said within themselves, This is the heir: come, let us
kill him, and seize on his inheritance. **39. **And they caught him, and
cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him. **40. **When therefore the
proprietor of the vineyard shall come, what will he do to those
husbandmen? **41. **They say to him, Since they are wicked, he will
miserably destroy them, and will let his vineyard to other husbandmen,
who will render to him the fruit in its seasons. **42. **Jesus saith to
them, Have you never read in the Scriptures, The stone which the
builders rejected is made the head of the corner;  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) this is done by the Lord, and is
wonderful in our eyes?  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)
**43. **Therefore I say to you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and shall be given to a nation yielding its fruits. **44. **And
whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be bruised, but on whomsoever
it shall fall, it will crush him. **45. **And when the chief priests and
Pharisees heard his parables, they knew that he spoke of them.
**46. **And though they sought to take him, they dreaded the multitudes,
because they reckoned him a prophet.

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span>**1. **And he began to speak to them by
parables: A man planted a vineyard, and surrounded it by a hedge, and
dug a ditch,  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) and built a tower,
and let it to husbandmen and went abroad. **2. **And at the proper
season he sent a servant, to the husbandmen to receive from the
husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. **3. **But they seized him, and
beat him, and sent him away empty. **4. **And again he sent to them
another servant; and they threw stones at him, and bruised his head, and
sent him away disgraced. **5. **And again he sent another, and him they
killed, and many others, beating some and killing some. **6. **And while
he had yet one son,  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) his
well-beloved, he sent him also last to them, saying, They will reverence
my son. **7. **But the husbandmen said within themselves, This is the
heir: come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.
**8. **And they seized him, and killed him, and cast him out of the
vineyard. **9. **What then will the proprietor of the vineyard do? He
will come and destroy the husbandmen, and give the vineyard to others.
**10. **And have you not read the Scripture, The stone which the
builders rejected is made the head of the corner; **11. **This is done
by the Lord, and is wonderful in our eyes?  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) **12. **And they sought to take him, and
dreaded the multitude; for they knew that he had spoken the parable
against them: and they left him, and went away.

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span>**9. **And he began to speak to the people
this parable: A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it to
husbandmen, and went abroad for a long time. **10. **And at the proper
season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they might give him of
the fruit of the vineyard; and they beat him, and sent him away empty.
**11. **And again he sent yet another servant; and him also they
wounded, and drove out. **13. **And the proprietor of the vineyard said,
What shall I do? I will send my well-beloved son; perhaps they will
reverence him when they see him. **14. **But when the husbandmen saw
him, they thought within themselves, saying, This is the heir: come, let
us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours. **15. **And they cast him
out of the vineyard, and slew him. What then shall the proprietor of the
vineyard do to them? **16. **He will come and destroy those husbandmen,
and give the vineyard to others. And when they heard this, they said,
God forbid. **17. **And he looked at them, and said, What then is this
that is written, The stone which the builders rejected is made the head
of the corner? **18. **Every one that shall fall on this stone will be
bruised; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will crush him. **19. **And
the chief priests and scribes sought at that hour to lay hands on him;
(and they dreaded the people;) for they knew that he had spoken this
parable against them.

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span><span id="ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>[Matthew
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033)<span id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>.**
*Hear another parable.* The words of Luke are somewhat different; for he
says that Christ *spoke to the people,* while here the discourse is
addressed to the priests and scribes. But the solution is easy; for,
though Christ *spoke against them,* he exposed their baseness in the
presence of all the people. Mark says that Christ *began to speak by
parables,* but leaves out what was first in order, as also in other
passages he gives only a part of the whole. The substance of this
parable is, that it is no new thing, if the priests and the other rulers
of the Church wickedly endeavor to defraud God of his right; for long
ago they practiced the same kind of robbery towards the prophets, and
now they are ready to *slay his Son;* but they will not go unpunished,
for God will arise to defend his right. The object is two-fold; first,
to reproach the priests with base and wicked ingratitude; and, secondly,
to remove the offense which would be occasioned by his approaching
death. For, by means of a false title, they had gained such influence
over simple persons and the ignorant multitude, that the religion of the
Jews depended on their will and decision. Christ therefore forewarns the
weak, and shows that, as so many prophets, one after another, had
formerly been slain by the priests, no one ought to be distressed, if a
similar instance were exhibited in his own person. But let us now
examine it in detail.

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span>*A man planted a vineyard.* This comparison
frequently occurs in Scripture. With respect to the present passage,
Christ only means that, while God appoints pastors over his Church, he
does *not* convey his right to others, but acts in the same manner as if
a *proprietor* were to *let a vineyard* or *field* to a *husbandman,*
who would labor in the cultivation of it, and make an annual return. As
he complains by Isaiah (<span id="ii.iv-p17.1"></span>[Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv-p17.1"></span>) and
Jeremiah, (<span id="ii.iv-p17.2"></span>[Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv-p17.2"></span>,)
that he had received no fruit from the *vine* on the cultivation of
which he had bestowed so much labor and expense; so in this passage he
accuses the vine-dressers themselves, who, like base swindlers,
appropriate to themselves the produce of the *vineyard.* Christ says
that the *vineyard* was well furnished, and in excellent condition, when
the *husbandmen* received it from the hands of the *proprietor.* By this
statement he presents no slight aggravation of their crime; for the more
generously he had acted toward them, the more detestable was their
ingratitude. Paul employs the same argument, when he wishes to exhort
pastors to be diligent in the discharge of their duty, that they are
stewards, chosen to govern the house of God, which is the

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span>pillar and round of truth, (<span
id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>[1Ti 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv-p19"></span>And properly; for the more honorable and
illustrious their condition is, they lie under so much the deeper
obligations to God, not to be indolent in their work. So much the more
detestable (as we have already said) is the baseness of those who pour
contempt on the great kindness of God, and on the great honor which they
have already received from Him.

<span id="ii.iv-p20"></span>God *planted a vineyard,*  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) when, remembering his gratuitous
adoption, he brought the people out of Egypt, separated them anew to be
his inheritance, and called them to the hope of eternal salvation,
promising to be their God and Father; for this is the *planting* of
which Isaiah speaks, (<span id="ii.iv-p21.2"></span>[Isa.
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021), [Isa.
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv-p21.2"></span>.)
By the *wine-press* and the *tower* are meant the aids which were added
for strengthening the faith of the people in the doctrine of the Law,
such as, sacrifices and other ritual observances; for God, like a
careful and provident head of a family, has left no means untried for
granting to his Church all necessary protection.

<span id="ii.iv-p22"></span>*And let it to husbandmen.* God might indeed
of himself, without the agency of men, preserve his Church in good
order; but he takes men for his ministers, and makes use of their hands.
Thus, of old, he appointed priests to be, as it were, cultivators of the
*vineyard.* But the wonder is, that Christ compares the prophets to
servants, who are sent, after the vintage, to demand the fruit;  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) for we know that they too were
*vine-dressers,* and that they held a charge in common with the priests.
I reply, it was not necessary for Christ to be careful or exact in
describing the resemblance or contrariety between those two orders. The
priests were certainly appointed at first on the condition of thoroughly
cultivating the Church by sound doctrine; but as they neglected the work
assigned them, either through carelessness or ignorance, the prophets
were sent as an extraordinary supply, to clear the vine from weeds, to
lop off the superfluous wood, and in other ways to make up for the
neglect of the priests; and, at the same time, severely to reprove the
people, to raise up decayed piety, to awaken drowsy souls, and to bring
back the worship of God and a new life. And what else was this than to
demand the revenue which was due to God from his vineyard? All this
Christ applies justly and truly to his purpose; for the regular and
permanent government of his Church was not in the hands of the prophets,
but was always held by the priests; just as if lazy *husbandman,* while
he neglected cultivation, claimed the place to which he had been once
appointed, under the plea of possession.

<span id="ii.iv-p24"></span><span id="ii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p25"></span>**35.** *And wounded one, and killed
another.* Here Mark andLuke differ a little from <span
id="ii.iv-p25.2"></span>Matthew*;* for while Matthew mentions many
servants, all of whom were ill-treated and insulted, and says that
*afterwards other servants were sent more numerous than the first, Mark*
and Luke mention but one at a time, as if the *servants* had been sent,
not two or three together, but one after another. But though all the
three Evangelists have the same object in view, namely, to show that the
Jews will dare to act towards the Son in the same manner as they have
repeatedly done towards the prophets, Matthew explains the matter more
at large, namely, that God, by sending a multitude of prophets,
contended with the malice of the priests.  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) Hence it appears how obstinate their
malice was, for the correction of which no remedies were of any avail.
 <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="ii.iv-p28"></span><span id="ii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p29"></span>**37.** *They will reverence my son.*
Strictly speaking, indeed, this thought does not apply to God; for He
knew what would happen, and was not deceived by the expectation of a
more agreeable result; but it is customary,  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) especially in parables, to ascribe to Him
human feelings. And yet this was not added without reason; for Christ
intended to represent, as in a mirror, how deplorable their impiety was,
of which it was too certain a proof, that they rose in diabolical rage
against the Son of God, who had come to bring them back to a sound mind.
 <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) As they had formerly, as far as
lay in their power, driven God from his inheritance by the cruel murder
of the prophets, so it was the crowning point of all their crimes to
*slay the Son,* that they might reign, as in a house which wanted an
heir. Certainly the chief reason why the priests raged against Christ
was, that, they might not lose their tyranny, which might be said to be
their prey;  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) for he it is by whom
God chooses to govern, and to whom He has given all authority.

<span id="ii.iv-p33"></span>The Evangelists differ also a little in the
conclusion. For Matthew relates that he drew from them the confession,
by which they condemned themselves; while Mark says simply that Christ
declared what punishment must await *servants* so unprincipled and
wicked. Luke differs, at first sight, more openly, by saying that they
turned away with horror from the punishment which Christ had threatened.
But if we examine the meaning more closely, there is no contradiction;
for, in regard to the punishment which such servants deserved, there can
be no doubt that they agreed with Christ, but when they perceived that
both the crime and the punishment were made to apply to themselves, they
deprecated that application.

<span id="ii.iv-p34"></span><span id="ii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p35"></span>**42.** *Have* you *never read in the
Scriptures? We* must remember what we said a little before, that, as
*the priests and scribes* kept the people devoted to them, it was a
principle current among them, that they alone were competent to judge
and decide as to the future redemption, so that no one ought to be
received as Messiah, unless he were approved and sanctioned by their
voice. They therefore maintain that what Christ had said is impossible,
that they would *slay* the *son* and *heir* of *the proprietor of the
vineyard.* But Christ confirms his statement by the testimony of
Scripture, and the interrogation is emphatic, as if he had said, “You
reckon it highly absurd to say that it is possible for the *vine
dressers* to conspire wickedly against the Son of God. But what then?
Did the Scripture (<span id="ii.iv-p35.2"></span>[Ps
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv-p35.2"></span>)
foretell that he would be received with joy, and favor, and applause; or
did it not, on the contrary, foretell that the rulers themselves would
oppose him?”

<span id="ii.iv-p36"></span>The passage which he quotes is taken from
the same psalm from which had been taken that joyful exclamation,  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) *Save,*  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) *O Lord. Blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord.* That it is a prediction of the reign of the Messiah
is evident from this consideration, that David was appointed by God to
be king, on the condition that his throne would remain forever, so long
as the sun and moon would shine in heaven, and that, when decayed, it
would again be restored by the favor of God to its former prosperity.
Since, therefore, that psalm contains a description of the reign of
David, there is also added the perpetuity of it, on which the
restoration depends. If the discourse had related to any temporal reign,
Christ would have acted improperly in applying it to himself. But we
must also observe what sort of reign God raised up in the person of
David. It was that which He would establish in the true Messiah to the
end of the world; for that ancient anointing was but a shadow. Hence we
infer that what was done in the person of David was a prelude and figure
of Christ.

<span id="ii.iv-p39"></span>Let us now return to the words of the psalm.
The scribes and priests reckoned it incredible that Christ should be
rejected  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) by the rulers of the
Church. But he proves from the psalm, that he would be placed on his
throne by the wonderful power of God, contrary to the will of men, and
that this had already been shadowed out in David, whom, though rejected
by the nobles, God took to give an instance and proof of what he would
at length do in his Christ. The prophet takes the metaphor from
buildings; for, since the Church is God’s sanctuary, Christ, on whom it
is founded, is justly called the *corner stone;* that is, the *stone*
which supports the whole weight of the building. If one were to examine
minutely every thing that relates to Christ, the comparison would not
apply in every part; but it is perfectly appropriate, for on him the
salvation of the Church rests, and by him its condition is preserved.
And therefore the other prophets followed the same form of expression,
particularly Isaiah and Daniel. But Isaiah makes the closest allusion to
this passage, when he represents God as thus speaking,

<span id="ii.iv-p41"></span>Lo, I lay in Zion a foundation-stone, a
precious and elect stone, against which both houses of Israel shall
stumble!  
(<span id="ii.iv-p41.2"></span>[Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv-p41.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv-p42"></span>The same mode of expression frequently
occurs in the New Testament.

<span id="ii.iv-p43"></span>The amount of it therefore is, that the
kingdom of God will be founded on *a stone,* which *the builders*
themselves will *reject* as unsuitable and useless; and the meaning is,
that the Messiah, who is the foundation of the safety of the Church,
will not be chosen by the ordinary suffrages of men, but that, when God
shall miraculously raise him up by a secret and unknown power, the
rulers, to whom has been committed the care of the *building,* will
oppose and persecute him. There are two things here which we ought to
consider. First, that we may not be perplexed by the wicked attempts of
men, who rise up to hinder the reign of Christ, God has warned us
beforehand that this will happen. Secondly, whatever may be the
contrivances of men, God has at the same time declared, that in setting
up the kingdom of Christ, His power will be victorious. Both ought to be
carefully observed by us. It appears to be monstrous that the Author of
salvation should be rejected, not by strangers, but by those who
belonged to his own household, — not by the ignorant multitude, but by
the rulers themselves, who hold the government of the Church. Against
such strange madness of men our faith ought to be fortified, that it may
not give way through the novelty of the occurrence. We now perceive how
useful that prediction is, which relieves godly minds from the terror
that would otherwise be produced by the mournful spectacle. For nothing
is more unreasonable than that the members should rise up against the
head, the *vine-dressers* against the *proprietor,* the counselors
against their king, and that the *builders* should *reject* the
foundation of the building.

<span id="ii.iv-p44"></span>*That stone is made the head of the corner.*
Still more emphatic is this clause, in which God declares that the
wicked, by rejecting Christ, will avail nothing, but that his rank will
remain unimpaired. The design of it is, that believers, relying on that
promise, may safely look down with contempt and derision on the wicked
pride of men; for when they have made all their contrivances, Christ
will still, ill opposition to their wishes, retain the place which the
Father has appointed to him. How fiercely soever he may be assailed by
those who appear to possess honor and dignity, he will nevertheless
remain in his own rank, and will abate nothing on account of their
wicked contempt. In short, the authority of God will prevail, that he
may be the *elect* and *precious stone,* which supports the Church of
God, his kingdom and temple. The *stone* is said to be made *the head of
the corner,* not that he is only a part of the building, (since it is
evident from other passages that the Church is entirely founded on Him
alone,) but the prophet merely intended to state that he will be the
chief support of the building. Some go into ingenious arguments about
the word *corner,* that Christ is placed in *the corner,* because he
unites two separate walls, the Gentiles and Jews. But in my opinion,
David meant nothing more than that *the corner-stone* supports the chief
weight of the building.

<span id="ii.iv-p45"></span>It may now be asked, How does the Spirit
call those men *builders,* who are so strongly bent on the ruin and
destruction of the temple of God? For Paul boasts of having been an
honest *builder,* because he founded the Church on Christ alone, (<span
id="ii.iv-p45.1"></span>[1 Cor. 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv-p45.1"></span>.)
The answer is easy. Though they are unfaithful in the execution of the
office committed to them, yet he gives them this title with respect to
their calling. Thus the name *prophet* is often given to deceivers, and
those who devour the flock like wolves are called *pastors.* And so far
is this from conferring honor on them, that it renders them detestable,
when they utterly overthrow the temple of God, which they were appointed
to *build.* Hence we draw a useful warning, that the lawful calling does
not prevent those who ought to have been the ministers of Christ from
being sometimes his base and wicked enemies. The legal priesthood had
certainly been appointed by God, and the Lord had bestowed on the
Levites permission to govern the Church. Did they therefore discharge
their office faithfully? or ought the godly to have obeyed them by
renouncing Christ?

<span id="ii.iv-p46"></span>Let the Pope now go with his mitered
bishops, and let them boast that they ought to be believed in all
things, because they occupy the place of pastors. Even granting that
they were lawfully called to the government of the Church, yet they have
no right to claim any thing more than to hold the title of prelates of
the Church. But even the title of calling does not belong to them; for,
in order to raise them to that tyranny, it would be necessary that the
whole order of the Church should be overturned. And even though they
might justly claim ordinary jurisdiction, yet, if they overturn the
sacred house of God, it is only in name that they must be reckoned
*builders.* Nor does it always happen that Christ is rejected by those
who are entrusted with the government of the Church; for not only were
there many godly priests under the Law, but also, under the reign of
Christ, there are some pastors who labor diligently and honestly in
*building* the Church; but as it was necessary that this prediction
should be fulfilled, that *the builders* should *reject the stone,*
wisdom must be exercised in distinguishing between them. And the Holy
Spirit has expressly warned us, that none may be mistaken as to an empty
title or the dignity of calling.

<span id="ii.iv-p47"></span>*This has been done by the Lord,* As it is a
matter too far removed from the ordinary judgment of men, that the
pastors of the Church should themselves *reject* the Son of God from
being their Prince, the prophet refers it to the secret purpose of God,
which, though we cannot comprehend it by our senses, we ought to
contemplate and admire. Let us therefore understand, that this cuts
short every question, and that every man is expressly forbidden to judge
and measure the nature of Christ’s kingdom by the reason of the flesh;
for what folly is it to wish to subject to the capacity of our mind a
miracle which the prophet exhorts us to adore? Will you then receive
nothing but what appears to yourself to be probable, in reference to the
kingdom of Christ, the commencement of which the Holy Spirit declares to
be a mystery worthy of the highest admiration, because it is concealed
from the eyes of men? So then, whenever the question relates to the
origin, restoration, condition, and the whole safety of the Church, we
must not consult our senses,  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) but
must honor the power of God by admiring his hidden work.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) There is also an implied contrast between
God and men; for not only are we commanded to embrace the wonderful
method of governing the Church, because it is the work of God, but we
are likewise withdrawn from a foolish reverence for men, which
frequently obscures the glow of God; as if the prophet had said, that
however magnificent may be the titles which men bear, it is wicked in
any man to oppose them to God.

<span id="ii.iv-p50"></span>This furnishes a refutation of the
diabolical wickedness of the Papists, who do not scruple to prefer to
the word of God a decision of their pretended Church. For on what does
the authority of the word of God depend, according to them, but on the
opinion of men, so that no more power is left to God than what the
Church is pleased to allow him? Far otherwise does the Spirit instruct
us by this passage namely, that as soon as the majesty of God  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) appears, the whole world ought to be
silent.

<span id="ii.iv-p52"></span><span id="ii.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p53"></span>**43.** *Therefore I say to you.* Hitherto
Christ directed his discourse to rulers and governors, but in presence
of the people. Now, however, he addresses in the same manner the people
themselves, and not without reason, for they had been the companions and
assistants of the priests and scribes in hindering the grace of God. It
was from the priests, no doubt, that the evil arose, but the people had
already deserved, on account of their sins, to have such corrupt and
degenerate pastors. Besides, the whole body was infected, as it were, by
a similar malice to resist God. This is the reason why Christ denounces
against all indiscriminately the dreadful vengeance of God; for as the
priests were inflated with the desire of holding the highest power, so
the rest of the people gloried on the ground of having been adopted.
Christ now declares that God was not bound to them, and, therefore, that
he will convey to another the honor of which they rendered themselves
unworthy. And this, no doubt, was once spoken to them, but was written
for the sake of all of us, that, if God choose us to be His people, we
may not grow wanton through a vain and wicked confidence in the flesh,
but may endeavor, on our part, to perform the duties which he enjoins on
his children;

<span id="ii.iv-p54"></span>for if he spared not the natural branches,
(<span id="ii.iv-p54.1"></span>[Ro
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv-p54.1"></span>,)

<span id="ii.iv-p55"></span>what will he do with those which were
engrafted? The Jews thought that the kingdom of God dwelt among them by
hereditary right, and therefore they adhered obstinately to their vices.
We have unexpectedly come into their room contrary to nature, and
therefore much less is the kingdom of God bound to us, if it be not
rooted in true godliness.

<span id="ii.iv-p56"></span>Now as our minds ought to be struck with
terror by the threatening of Christ, that those who have profaned the
kingdom of God will be deprived of it, so the perpetuity of that
kingdom, which is here described, may afford comfort to all the godly.
For by these words Christ assures us that, though the ungodly destroyed
the worship of God among themselves, they would never cause the name of
Christ to be abolished, or true religion to perish; for God, in whose
hand are all the ends of the earth, will find elsewhere a dwelling and
habitation for his kingdom. We ought also to learn from this passage,
that the Gospel is not preached in order that it may lie barren and
inoperative, but that it may yield fruit.

<span id="ii.iv-p57"></span><span id="ii.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p58"></span>**44.** *And he who shall fall on this
stone.* Christ confirms more fully the former statement, that he suffers
no loss or diminution when he is rejected by the wicked, because, though
their obstinacy were like a stone or like iron, yet by his own hardness
he will break them, and therefore he will be the more highly glorified
in their destruction. He perceived in the Jews an astonishing obstinacy,
and therefore it was necessary that this kind of punishment should be
described to them in an alarming manner, that they might not flatter
themselves, while they thus dashed against him. This doctrine partly
instructs us to give ourselves up gently, with a mild and tractable
heart, to the dominion of Christ, and partly fortifies us against the
obstinacy and furious attacks of the wicked, for whom there awaits a
dreadful end.

<span id="ii.iv-p59"></span>Those persons are said to *fall upon*
Christ, who rush forward to destroy him; not that they occupy a more
elevated position than he does, but because their madness carries them
so far, that they endeavor to attack Christ as if he were below them.
But Christ tells them that all that they will gain by it is, that by the
very conflict they will be *broken.* But when they have thus proudly
exalted themselves, he tells them that another thing will happen, which
is, that they will be *bruised* under the *stone,* against which they so
insolently dashed themselves.

<span id="ii.iv-p60"></span><span id="ii.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p61"></span>**45.** *They knew that he spoke of them.*
The Evangelists show how little success Christ had, that we may not
wonder if the doctrine of the Gospel does not bring all men, in the
present day, to yield obedience to God. Let us also learn that it is
impossible but that the rage of ungodly men will be more and more
inflamed by threatenings; for as God seals his word on our hearts, so
also it is a hot iron to wound bad consciences, in consequence of which
their ungodliness is the more inflamed. We ought therefore to pray that
he would subdue us to voluntary fear, lest the mere knowledge of his
vengeance should exasperate us the more. When they are restrained solely
by the dread of the people from laying their hands on Christ, let us
learn that God had laid a bridle on them; from which also arises a very
delightful consolation to believers, when they learn that God protects
them, and constantly enables them to escape from the jaws of death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc33005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p6.1"></span>En plus grand
nombre;” — “in greater number.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc33005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p7.1"></span>Est mise au
principal lieu du com;” — “is put in the chief place of the corner.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc33005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>Devant nos
yeux;” — “before our eyes.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc33005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p10.1"></span>Et y fouyt
une fosse pour les esgouts d’un pressoir;” — “and dug in it a ditch for
the cistern of a wine press.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc33005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p11.1"></span>Or voyant
qu’il avoit encore un fils;” — “But perceiving that he had still one
son.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc33005.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p12.1"></span>Devant nos
yeux;” — “before our eyes.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc33005.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>Son vigne;”
— “His vineyard.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc33005.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p23.1"></span>Le fruit de
la vigne;” — “the fruit of the vine.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc33005.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.iv-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p26.1"></span>Que Dieu ne
s’est point lassé pour la cruauté des sacrificateurs, d’envoyer des
prophetes; mais les suscitant comme par troupes, a combatu contre leur
malice;” — “That God did not, on account of the cruelty of the priests,
fail to send prophets; but raising them up — as it were — in troops,
fought against their malice.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc33005.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p27.1"></span>Veu que tous
les mayens et remedes que Dieu y a employez n’ont rien servi;” — “since
all the means and remedies which God employed for it were of no avail.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc33005.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p30.1"></span>C’est la
coustume de l’Escriture;” — “it is the custom of Scripture.”

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc33005.htm#fr_47) <span
id="ii.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p31.1"></span>Qui estoit
venu pour les retirer de leurs meschantes façons de faire;” — “who had
come to withdraw them from their wicked courses of life.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc33005.htm#fr_48) <span
id="ii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p32.1"></span>Pource
qu’ils avoyent peur de perdre la proye; c’est a dire, de dimineur
quelque chose de leur tyrannie;” — “because they were afraid of losing
the prey; that is to say, of diminishing something of their tyranny.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc33005.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p37.1"></span>Ceste priere
de louange;” — “that prayer of praise.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc33005.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.iv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p38"></span> Our author alludes to the word Hosanna,
(<span id="ii.iv-p38.1"></span>ὡσαννὰ) which he had explained (Harmony,
vol. 2, p. 452) to be formed, by a slight alteration of the sound, from
a Hebrew phrase used in the 118 Psalm, *Hoshiana* (<span
id="ii.iv-p38.3"></span>הושיע נא,) Save now, we beseech thee. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc33005.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p40.1"></span>Ne pouvoient
croire que Christ peust estre rejetté;” — “could not believe that Christ
could be rejected.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc33005.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p48"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p48.1"></span>Qu’il nous
souviene de ne nous arrester point a ce que nos sens pervent comprende;”
— “let us remember not to stop at what our senses can comprehend.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc33005.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.iv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p49"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p49.1"></span>Son œuvre
incomprehensible;” — “his incomprehensible work.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc33005.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p51"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p51.1"></span>La majesté
du Fils de Dieu;” — “the majesty of the Son of God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 22:15-22; Mark 12:13-17; Luke 20:20-26](cc33006)
