[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yml53)  [Next](yml55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### Topol the Clever

IN A PLACE called Sikchibei, which is situated about two kilometers from
Torim toward where the sun sets, there in ancient times one of the
greatest fiestas of the Yaquis took place. People from the eight pueblos
attended. It was dedicated to the three divinities, Father, Son and the
Holy Spirit. Nobody remained in his home.

In those times people did not know corn, beans, garbanzos, or any of
these things, but the Yaquis, then, contributed roots and wild fruits.
Others brought herbs to cook and give to the fiesteros to serve. Others
brought deer, coyotes, and javelinas.

Here Topol performed. Topol means tiger. Here it was that he received as
a reward for his cleverness a beautiful Yaqui maiden named Wotoboli Sewa
Tosali.

A *kobanao* there had offered this girl to the man who could bring in,
alive, without having struck it or touched it, a javelina to the fiesta.
Others brought deer, lions, and dead javelina, but no one knew how to
bring in a javelina he had not touched. But Topol was clever. He cut
himself a stick of the wood of a plant which has blue flowers. With this
stick he set out into the forest. There, he encountered a band of
javelinas. All ran away but one. This one ran toward Topol. Topol did
not move. He held his stick out. The javelina bit it. The animal bit the
stick with great strength as if he wanted to take it away from Topol.
Thus Topol began to drag on the stick and the pig didn't want to let it
go. Instead, he followed wherever Topol dragged him. Pulling the stick
and

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

the pig traveling behind never letting go of the stick, Topol dragged
him all the way to Sikchibei, where the fiesta was taking place.

When the Indians saw Topol bring in the animal, those who were seated
arose, shouting "Topol! It is he who wins Wotoboli Sewa Tosali!" All of
the Indians looked with admiration at him for his great valor. Topol
gave the pig to the chiefs of the fiesta. But the father of Wotoboli
Sewa Tosali said to him, "There still lacks one thing before you
conclude your task."

Without saying anything, Topol made as if to mount the javelina, passing
over its back and pressing his legs about its ribs. This he repeated
three times and it was finished.

Immediately they brought out the girl, dressed with beautiful skins and
a crown of the finest bird plumes. The witnesses and god-parents
appeared and the *maestros* and *cantoras*. With all of these, they
appeared at the altar. There they were taken care of. Then followed the
fiesta.

Later, it is said that Topol became a chief and gave battle against the
Apaches. Having come out of the battle wounded by three arrows, from
this he died. At his funeral great fiestas were celebrated. And it was
here, for the first time, that the dance of the coyote was performed. It
was sung thus:

*yoli yoli yoli tamewuk yoli tamewuk  
kayoli tamewukayoli tamewuk kayoli tamewuk  
ponki ponki ponki pok pok pok*

With this coyote song they buried the chief, Topol. And from then until
today, when a soldier dies, or a Yaqui chief, in his funeral services,
they sing and dance the coyote.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why the Animals Remain Animals](yml55)
