[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax04)  [Next](lax06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V: Unn goes to Iceland, A.D. 895

Unn now got ready to go away from the Faroe Isles, and made it known to
her shipmates that she was going to Iceland. She had with her Olaf
"Feilan", the son of Thorstein, and those of his sisters who were
unmarried. After that she put to sea, and, the weather being favourable,
she came with her ship to the south of Iceland to Pumice-Course
(Vikrarskeid). There they had their ship broken into splinters, but all
the men and goods were saved. After that she went to find Helgi, her
brother, followed by twenty men; and when she came there he went out to
meet her, and bade her come stay with him with ten of her folk. She
answered in anger, and said she had not known that he was such a churl;
and she went away, being minded to find Bjorn, her brother in
Broadfirth, and when he heard she was coming, he went to meet her with
many followers, and greeted her warmly, and invited her and all her
followers to stay with him, for he knew his sister's high-mindedness.
She liked that right well, and thanked him for his lordly behaviour. She
stayed there all the winter, and was entertained in the grandest manner,
for there was no lack of means, and money was not spared. In the spring
she went across Broadfirth, and came to a certain ness, where they ate
their mid-day meal, and since that it has been called Daymealness, from
whence Middlefell-strand stretches (eastward). Then she steered her ship
up Hvammfirth and came to a certain ness, and stayed there a little
while. There Unn lost her comb, so it was afterwards called Combness.
Then she went about all the Broadfirth-Dales, and took to her lands as
wide as she wanted. After that Unn steered her ship to the head of the
bay, and there her high-seat pillars were washed ashore, and then she
deemed it was easy to know where she was to take up her abode. She had a
house built there: it was afterwards called Hvamm, and she lived there.
The same spring as Unn set up household at Hvamm, Koll married Thorgerd,
daughter of Thorstein the Red. Unn gave, at her own cost, the
bridal-feast, and let Thorgerd have for her dowry all Salmonriver-Dale;
and Koll set up a household there on the south side of the Salmon-river.
Koll was a man of the greatest mettle: their son was named Hoskuld.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Unn Divides her Land](lax06)
