[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax05)  [Next](lax07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI: Unn Divides her Land

After that Unn gave to more men parts of her land-take. To Hord she gave
all Hord-Dale as far as Skramuhlaups River. He lived at Hordabolstad
(Hord-Lair-Stead), and was a man of the greatest mark, and blessed with
noble offspring. His son was Asbjorn the Wealthy, who lived in
Ornolfsdale, at Asbjornstead, and had to wife Thorbjorg, daughter of
Midfirth-Skeggi. Their daughter was Ingibjorg, who married Illugi the
Black, and their sons were Hermund and Gunnlaug Worm-tongue. They are
called the Gilsbecking-race. Unn spoke to her men and said: "Now you
shall be rewarded for all your work, for now I do not lack means with
which to pay each one of you for your toil and good-will. You all know
that I have given the man named Erp, son of Earl Meldun, his freedom,
for far away was it from my wish that so high-born a man should bear the
name of thrall." Afterwards Unn gave him the lands of Sheepfell, between
Tongue River and Mid River. His children were Orm and Asgeir, Gunbjorn,
and Halldis, whom Alf o'Dales had for wife. To Sokkolf Unn gave
Sokkolfsdale, where he abode to old age. Hundi was the name of one of
her freedmen. He was of Scottish kin. To him she gave Hundidale. Osk was
the name of the fourth daughter of Thorstein the Red. She was the mother
of Thorstein Swart, the Wise, who found the "Summer eeke". Thorhild was
the name of a fifth daughter of Thorstein. She was the mother of Alf
o'Dales, and many great men trace back their line of descent to him. His
daughter was Thorgerd, wife of Ari Marson of Reekness, the son of Atli,
the son of Ulf the Squinter and Bjorg, Eyvind's daughter, the sister of
Helgi the Lean. From them come all the Reeknessings. Vigdis was the name
of the sixth daughter of Thorstein the Red. From her come the men of
Headland of Islefirth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Of the Wedding of Olaf “Feilan”, A.D. 920](lax07.md)
