[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax01)  [Next](lax03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II: Ketill and his Sons prepare to leave Norway

In the latter days of Ketill arose the power of King Harald the
Fairhaired, in such a way that no folkland king or other great men could
thrive in the land unless he alone ruled what title should be theirs.
When Ketill heard that King Harald was minded to put to him the same
choice as to other men of might -- namely, not only to put up with his
kinsmen being left unatoned, but to be made himself a hireling to boot
-- he calls together a meeting of his kinsmen, and began his speech in
this wise: "You all know what dealings there have been between me and
King Harald, the which there is no need of setting forth; for a greater
need besets us, to wit, to take counsel as to the troubles that now are
in store for us. I have true news of King Harald's enmity towards us,
and to me it seems that we may abide no trust from that quarter. It
seems to me that there are two choices left us, either to fly the land
or to be slaughtered each in his own seat. Now, as for me, my will is
rather to abide the same death that my kinsmen suffer, but I would not
lead you by my wilfulness into so great a trouble, for I know the temper
of my kinsmen and friends, that ye would not desert me, even though it
would be some trial of manhood to follow me."

Bjorn, the son of Ketill, answered: "I will make known my wishes at
once. I will follow the example of noble men, and fly this land. For I
deem myself no greater a man by abiding at home the thralls of King
Harald, that they may chase me away from my own possessions, or that
else I may have to come by utter death at their hands."

At this there was made a good cheer, and they all thought it was spoken
bravely. This counsel then was settled, that they should leave the
country, for the sons of Ketill urged it much, and no one spoke against
it. Bjorn and Helgi wished to go to Iceland, for they said they had
heard many pleasing news thereof. They had been told that there was good
land to be had there, and no need to pay money for it; they said there
was plenty of whale and salmon and other fishing all the year round
there. But Ketill said, "Into that fishing place I shall never come in
my old age." So Ketill then told his mind, saying his desire was rather
to go west over the sea, for there there was a chance of getting a good
livelihood. He knew lands there wide about, for there he had harried far
and wide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Ketill's Sons go to Iceland](lax03)
