[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax08)  [Next](lax10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IX: Hoskuld's Marriage, A.D. 935

At this time Norway was ruled by Hakon, Athelstan's fosterling. Hoskuld
was one of his body-guard, and stayed each year, turn and turn about, at
Hakon's court, or at his own home, and was a very renowned man both in
Norway and in Iceland. Bjorn was the name of a man who lived at
Bjornfirth, where he had taken land, the firth being named after him.
This firth cuts into the land north from Steingrim's firth, and a neck
of land runs out between them. Bjorn was a man of high birth, with a
great deal of money: Ljufa was the name of his wife. Their daughter was
Jorunn: she was a moat beautiful woman, and very proud and extremely
clever, and so was thought the best match in all the firths of the West.
Of this woman Hoskuld had heard, and he had heard besides that Bjorn was
the wealthiest yeoman throughout all the Strands. Hoskuld rode from home
with ten men, and went to Bjorn's house at Bjornfirth. He was well
received, for to Bjorn his ways were well known. Then Hoskuld made his
proposal, and Bjorn said he was pleased, for his daughter could not be
better married, yet turned the matter over to her decision. And when the
proposal was set before Jorunn, she answered in this way: "From all the
reports I have heard of you, Hoskuld, I cannot but answer your proposal
well, for I think that the woman would be well cared for who should
marry you; yet my father must have most to say in this matter, and I
will agree in this with his wishes."

And the long and short of it was, that Jorunn was promised to Hoskuld
with much money, and the wedding was to be at Hoskuldstead. Hoskuld now
went away with matters thus settled, and home to his abode, and stays
now at home until this wedding feast was to be held. Bjorn came from the
north for the wedding with a brave company of followers. Hoskuld had
also asked many guests, both friends and relations, and the feast was of
the grandest. Now, when the feast was over each one returned to his home
in good friendship and with seemly gifts. Jorunn Bjorn's daughter sits
behind at Hoskuldstead, and takes over the care of the household with
Hoskuld. It was very soon seen that she was wise and well up in things,
and of manifold knowledge, though rather high-tempered at most times.
Hoskuld and she loved each other well, though in their daily ways they
made no show thereof. Hoskuld became a great chieftain; he was mighty
and pushing, and had no lack of money, and was thought to be nowise less
of his ways than his father, Koll. Hoskuld and Jorunn had not been
married long before they came to have children. A son of theirs was
named Thorleik. He was the Eidest of their children. Bard was another
son of theirs. One of their daughters was called Hallgerd, afterwards
surnamed "Long-Breeks." Another daughter was called Thurid. All their
children were most hopeful. Thorleik was a very tall man, strong and
handsome, though silent and rough; and men thought that such was the
turn of his temper, as that he would be no man of fair dealings, and
Hoskuld often would say, that he would take very much after the race of
the men of the Strands. Bard, Hoskuld's son, was most manly to look at,
and of goodly strength, and from his appearance it was easy to see that
he would take more after his father's people. Bard was of quiet ways
while he was growing up, and a man lucky in friends, and Hoskuld loved
him best of all his children. The house of Hoskuld now stood in great
honour and renown. About this time Hoskuld gave his sister Groa in
marriage to Veleif the Old, and their son was "Holmgang" Bersi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Of Viga Hrapp](lax10.md)
