[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax10)  [Next](lax12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI: About Thord Goddi and Thorbjorn Skrjup

Thord Goddi was the name of a man who lived in Salmon-river-Dale on the
northern side of the river, and his house was called Goddistead. He was
a very wealthy man; he had no children, and had bought the land he lived
on. He was a neighbour of Hrapp's, and was very often badly treated by
him. Hoskuld looked after him, so that he kept his dwelling in peace.
Vigdis was the name of his wife. She was daughter of Ingjald, son of
Olaf Feilan, and brother's daughter of Thord Yeller, and sister's
daughter of Thorolf Rednose of Sheepfell. This Thorolf was a great hero,
and in a very good position, and his kinsmen often went to him for
protection. Vigdis had married more for money than high station. Thord
had a thrall who had come to Iceland with him, named Asgaut. He was a
big man, and shapely of body; and though he was called a thrall, yet few
could be found his equal amongst those called freemen, and he knew well
how to serve his master. Thord had many other thralls, though this one
is the only one mentioned here. Thorbjorn was the name of a man. He
lived in Salmon-river-Dale, next to Thord, up valley away from his
homestead, and was called Skrjup. He was very rich in chattels, mostly
in gold and silver. He was an huge man and of great strength. No
squanderer of money on common folk was he. Hoskuld, Dalakoll's son,
deemed it a drawback to his state that his house was worse built than he
wished it should be; so he bought a ship from a Shetland man. The ship
lay up in the mouth of the river Blanda. That ship he gets ready, and
makes it known that he is going abroad, leaving Jorunn to take care of
house and children. They now put out to sea, and all went well with
them; and they hove somewhat southwardly into Norway, making Hordaland,
where the market-town called Biorgvin was afterwards built. Hoskuld put
up his ship, and had there great strength of kinsmen, though here they
be not named. Hakon, the king, had then his seat in the Wick. Hoskuld
did not go to the king, as his kinsfolk welcomed him with open arms.
That winter all was quiet (in Norway).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: Hoskuld Buys a Slave Woman](lax12.md)
