[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax14)  [Next](lax16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XV: Thorolf's Escape with Asgaut the Thrall

Ingjald and his men got up and dressed. Vigdis asked Thord what his talk
with Ingjald had been about the evening before. Thord said they had
talked about many things, amongst others how the place was to be
ransacked, and how they should be clear of the case if Thorolf was not
found there. "So I let Asgaut, my thrall, take the man away."

Vigdis said she had no fondness for lies, and said she should be very
loath to have Ingjald sniffing about her house, but bade him, however,
do as he liked. After that Ingjald ransacked the place, and did not hit
upon the man there. At that moment Asgaut came back, and Vigdis asked
him where he had parted with Thorolf. Asgaut replied, "I took him to our
sheephouses as Thord told me to."

Vigdis replied, "Can anything be more exactly in Ingjald's way as he
returns to his ship? Nor shall any risk be run, lest they should have
made this plan up between them last night. I wish you to go at once, and
take him away as soon as possible. You shall take him to Sheepfell to
Thorolf; and if you do as I tell you, you shall get something for it. I
will give you your freedom and money, that you may go where you will."

Asgaut agreed to this, and went to the sheephouse to find Thorolf, and
bade him get ready to go at once. At this time Ingjald rode out of
Goddistead, for he was now anxious to get his money's worth. As he was
come down from the farmstead (into the plain) he saw two men coming to
meet him; they were Thorolf and Asgaut. This was early in the morning,
and there was yet but little daylight. Asgaut and Thorolf now found
themselves in a hole, for Ingjald was on one side of them and the Salmon
River on the other. The river was terribly swollen, and there were great
masses of ice on either bank, while in the middle it had burst open, and
it was an ill-looking river to try to ford.

Thorolf said to Asgaut, "It seems to me we have two choices before us.
One is to remain here and fight as well as valour and manhood will serve
us, and yet the thing most likely is that Ingjald and his men will take
our lives without delay; and the other is to tackle the river, and yet
that, I think, is still a somewhat dangerous one."

Asgaut said that Thorolf should have his way, and he would not desert
him, "whatever plan you are minded to follow in this matter."

Thorolf said, "We will make for the river, then," and so they did, and
arrayed themselves as light as possible. After this they got over the
main ice, and plunged into the water. And because the men were brave,
and Fate had ordained them longer lives, they got across the river and
upon the ice on the other side. Directly after they had got across,
Ingjald with his followers came to the spot opposite to them on the
other side of the river.

Ingjald spoke out, and said to his companions, "What plan shall we
follow now? Shall we tackle the river or not?"

They said he should choose, and they would rely on his foresight, though
they thought the river looked impassable. Ingjald said that so it was,
and "we will turn away from the river;" and when Thorolf and Asgaut saw
that Ingjald had made up his mind not to cross the river, they first
wring their clothes and then make ready to go on. They went on all that
day, and came in the evening to Sheepfell. They were well received
there, for it was an open house for all guests; and forthwith that same
evening Asgaut went to see Thorolf Rednose, and told him all the matters
concerning their errand, "how Vigdis, his kinswoman, had sent him this
man to keep in safety." Asgaut also told him all that had happened
between Ingjald and Thord Goddi; therewithal he took forth the tokens
Vigdis had sent.

Thorolf replied thus, "I cannot doubt these tokens . I shall indeed take
this man in at her request. I think, too, that Vigdis has dealt most
bravely with this matter, and it is a great pity that such a woman
should have so feeble a husband. And you, Asgaut, shall dwell here as
long as you like."

Asgaut said he would tarry there for no length of time. Thorolf now
takes unto him his namesake, and made him one of his followers; and
Asgaut and they parted good friends, and he went on his homeward
journey.

And now to tell of Ingjald. He turned back to Goddistead when he and
Thorolf parted. By that time men had come there from the nearest
farmsteads at the summons of Vigdis, and no fewer than twenty men had
gathered there already. But when Ingjald and his men came to the place,
he called Thord to him, "You have dealt in a most cowardly way with me,
Thord," says he, "for I take it to be the truth that you have got the
man off."

Thord said this had not happened with his knowledge; and now all the
plotting that had been between Ingjald and Thord came out. Ingjald now
claimed to have back his money that he had given to Thord. Vigdis was
standing near during this talk, and said it had fared with them as was
meet, and prayed Thord by no means to hold back this money, "For you,
Thord," she said, "have got this money in a most cowardly way."

Thord said she must needs have her will herein. After that Vigdis went
inside, and to a chest that belonged to Thord, and found at the bottom a
large purse. She took out the purse, and went outside with it up to
where Ingjald was, and bade him take the money. Ingjald's brow cleared
at that, and he stretched out his hand to take the purse. Vigdis raised
the purse, and struck him on the nose with it, so that forthwith blood
fell on the earth. Therewith she overwhelmed him with mocking words,
ending by telling him that henceforth he should never have the money,
and bidding him go his way. Ingjald saw that his best choice was to be
off, and the sooner the better, which indeed he did, nor stopped in his
journey until he got home, and was mightily ill at ease over his travel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Thord becomes Olaf's Foster Father, A.D. 945](lax16.md)
