[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax20)  [Next](lax22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXI: Olaf the Peacock goes to Ireland, A.D. 956

Now Hoskuld came back from the Thing and heard these tidings, and was
very much displeased. But seeing that his near akin were concerned in
the matter, he quieted down and let things alone. Olaf and his
companions had a good voyage, and came to Norway. Orn urges Olaf to go
to the court of King Harald, who, he said, bestowed goodly honour on men
of no better breeding than Olaf was. Olaf said he thought he would take
that counsel. Olaf and Orn now went to the court, and were well
received. The king at once recognised Olaf for the sake of his kindred,
and forthwith bade him stay with him. Gunnhild paid great heed to Olaf
when she knew he was Hrut's brother's son; but some men would have it,
that she took pleasure in talking to Olaf without his needing other
people's aid to introduce him. As the winter wore on, Olaf grew sadder
of mood. Orn asked him what was the matter of his sorrow?

Olaf answered, "I have on hand a journey to go west over the sea; and I
set much store by it and that you should lend me your help, so that it
may be undertaken in the course of next summer."

Orn bade Olaf not set his heart on going, and said he did not know of
any ships going west over the sea. Gunnhild joined in their talk, and
said, "Now I hear you talk together in a manner that has not happened
before, in that each of you wants to have his own way!"

Olaf greeted Gunnhild well, without letting drop their talk. After that
Orn went away, but Gunnhild and Olaf kept conversing together. Olaf told
her of his wish, and how much store he set by carrying it out, saying he
knew for certain that Myrkjartan, the king, was his mother's father.
Then Gunnhild said, "I will lend you help for this voyage, so that you
may go on it as richly furnished as you please."

Olaf thanked her for her promise. Then Gunnhild had a ship prepared and
a crew got together, and bade Olaf say how many men he would have to go
west over the sea with him. Olaf fixed the number at sixty; but said
that it was a matter of much concern to him, that such a company should
be more like warriors than merchants. She said that so it should be; and
Orn is the only man mentioned by name in company with Olaf on this
journey. The company were well fitted out. King Harald and Gunnhild led
Olaf to his ship, and they said they wished to bestow on him their
good-luck over and above other friendship they had bestowed on him
already. King Harald said that was an easy matter; for they must say
that no goodlier a man had in their days come out of Iceland. Then
Harald the king asked how old a man he was. Olaf answered, "I am now
eighteen winters."

The king replied, "Of exceeding worth, indeed, are such men as you are,
for as yet you have left the age of child but a short way behind; and be
sure to come and see us when you come back again."

Then the king and Gunnhild bade Olaf farewell. Then Olaf and his men got
on board, and sailed out to sea. They came in for unfavourable weather
through the summer, had fogs plentiful, and little wind, and what there
was was unfavourable; and wide about the main they drifted, and on most
on board fell "sea- bewilderment." But at last the fog lifted over head;
and the wind rose, and they put up sail. Then they began to discuss in
which direction Ireland was to be sought; and they did not agree on
that. Orn said one thing, and most of the men went against him, and said
that Orn was all bewildered: they should rule who were the greater in
number. Then Olaf was asked to decide. He said, "I think we should
follow the counsel of the wisest; for the counsels of foolish men I
think will be of all the worse service for us in the greater number they
gather together."

And now they deemed the matter settled, since Olaf spake in this manner;
and Orn took the steering from that time. They sailed for days and
nights, but always with very little wind. One night the watchmen leapt
up, and bade every one wake at once, and said they saw land so near that
they had almost struck on it. The sail was up, but there was but little
wind. Every one got up, and Orn bade them clear away from the land, if
they could.

Olaf said, "That is not the way out of our plight, for I see reefs all
about astern; so let down the sail at once, and we will take our counsel
when there is daylight, and we know what land this is."

Then they cast anchors, and they caught bottom at once. There was much
talk during the night as to where they could be come to; and when
daylight was up they recognised that it was Ireland. Orn said, "I don't
think we have come to a good place, for this is far away from the
harbours or market-towns, whose strangers enjoy peace; and we are now
left high and dry, like sticklebacks, and near enough, I think, I come
to the laws of the Irish in saying that they will lay claim to the goods
we have on board as their lawful prize, for as flotsam they put down
ships even when sea has ebbed out shorter from the stern (than here)."

Olaf said no harm would happen, "But I have seen that today there is a
gathering of men up inland; so the Irish think, no doubt, the arrival of
this ship a great thing. During the ebb-tide to- day I noticed that
there was a dip, and that out of the dip the sea fell without emptying
it out; and if our ship has not been damaged, we can put out our boat
and tow the ship into it."

There was a bottom of loam where they had been riding at anchor, so that
not a plank of the ship was damaged. So Olaf and his men tow their boat
to the dip, cast anchor there. Now, as day drew on, crowds drifted down
to the shore. At last two men rowed a boat out to the ship. They asked
what men they were who had charge of that ship, and Olaf answered,
speaking in Irish, to their inquiries. When the Irish knew they were
Norwegians they pleaded their law, and bade them give up their goods;
and if they did so, they would do them no harm till the king had sat in
judgment on their case. Olaf said the law only held good when merchants
had no interpreter with them. "But I can say with truth these are
peaceful men, and we will not give ourselves up untried."

The Irish then raised a great war-cry, and waded out into the sea, and
wished to drag the ship, with them on board, to the shore, the water
being no deeper than reaching up to their armpits, or to the belts of
the tallest. But the pool was so deep where the ship was floating that
they could not touch the bottom. Olaf bade the crew fetch out their
weapons, and range in line of battle from stem to stern on the ship; and
so thick they stood, that shield overlapped shield all round the ship,
and a spear point stood out at the lower end of every shield. Olaf
walked fore to the prow, and was thus arrayed: he had a coat of mail,
and a gold, reddened helmet on his head; girt with a sword with
gold-in-laid hilt, and in his hand a barbed spear chased and well
engraved. A red shield he had before him, on which was drawn a lion in
gold. When the Irish saw this array fear shot through their hearts, and
they thought it would not be so easy a matter as they had thought to
master the booty. So now the Irish break their journey, and run all
together to a village near. Then there arose great murmur in the crowd,
as they deemed that, sure enough, this must be a war-ship, and that they
must expect many others; so they sent speedily word to the king, which
was easy, as he was at that time a short way off, feasting. Straightway
he rides with a company of men to where the ship was. Between the land
and the place where the ship lay afloat the space was no greater than
that one might well hear men talking together. Now Olaf stood forth in
the same arrayal whereof is written before, and men marvelled much how
noble was the appearance of the man who was the captain of the ship. But
when the shipmates of Olaf see how a large company of knights rides
towards them, looking a company of the bravest, they grow hushed, for
they deemed here were great odds to deal with. But when Olaf heard the
murmur which went round among his followers, he bade them take heart,
"For now our affairs are in a fair way; the Irish are now greeting
Myrkjartan, their king."

Then they rode so near to the ship, that each could hear what the other
said. The king asked who was the master of the ship. Olaf told his name,
and asked who was the valiant-looking knight with whom he then was
talking. He answered, "I am called Myrkjartan."

Olaf asked, "Are you then a king of the Irish?"

He said he was. Then the king asked Olaf for news commonly talked of,
and Olaf gave good answers as to all news he was asked about. Then the
king asked whence they had put to sea, and whose men they were. And
still the king asked, more searchingly than before, about Olaf's
kindred, for the king found that this man was of haughty bearing, and
would not answer any further than the king asked.

Olaf said, "Let it be known to you that we ran our ship afloat from the
coast of Norway, and these are of the bodyguard of King Harald, the son
of Gunnhild, who are here on board. And as for my race, I have, sire, to
tell you this, that my father lives in Iceland, and is named Hoskuld, a
man of high birth; but of my mother's kindred, I think you must have
seen many more than I have. For my mother is called Melkorka, and it has
been told me as a truth that she is your daughter, king. Now, this has
driven me upon this long journey, and to me it is a matter most weighty
what answer you give in my case."

The king then grew silent, and had a converse with his men. The wise men
asked the king what might be the real truth of the story that this man
was telling.

The king answered, "This is clearly seen in this Olaf, that he is a
highborn man, whether he be a kinsman of mine or not, as well as this,
that of all men he speaks the best of Irish."

After that the king stood up, and said, "Now I will give answer to your
speech, in so far as we grant to you and all your shipmates peace; but
on the kinship you claim with us, we must talk more before I give answer
to that."

After that they put out their gangways to the shore, and Olaf and his
followers went on land from the ship; and the Irish now marvel much how
warrior-like these men are. Olaf greeted the king well, taking off his
helmet and bowing to the king, who welcomes Olaf with all fondness.
Thereupon they fall to talking together, Olaf pleading his case again in
a speech long and frank; and at the end of his speech he said he had a
ring on his hand that Melkorka had given him at parting in Iceland,
saying "that you, king, gave to her as a tooth gift."

The king took and looked at the ring, and his face grew wondrous red to
look at; and then the king said, "True enough are the tokens, and become
by no means less notable thereby that you have so many of your mother's
family features, and that even by them you might be easily recognised;
and because of these things I will in sooth acknowledge your kinship,
Olaf, by the witnessing of these men that here are near and hear my
speech. And this shall also follow that I will ask you to my court, with
all your suite, but the honour of you all will depend thereon of what
worth as a man I find you to be when I try you more."

After that the king orders riding-horses to be given to them, and
appoints men to look after their ship, and to guard the goods belonging
to them. The king now rode to Dublin, and men thought this great
tidings, that with the king should be journeying the son of his
daughter, who had been carried off in war long ago when she was only
fifteen winters old. But most startled of all at these tidings was the
foster-mother of Melkorka, who was then bedridden, both from heavy
sickness and old age; yet she walked with no staff even to support her,
to meet Olaf.

The king said to Olaf, "Here is come Melkorka's foster-mother,. and she
will wish to hear all the tidings you can tell about Melkorka's life."

Olaf took her with open arms, and set the old woman on his knee, and
said her foster-daughter was well settled and in a good position in
Iceland. Then Olaf put in her hands the knife and the belt, and the old
woman recognised the gifts, and wept for joy, and said it was easy to
see that Melkorka's son was one of high mettle, and no wonder, seeing
what stock he comes of. The old woman was strong and well, and in good
spirits all that winter. The king was seldom at rest, for at that time
the lands in the west were at all times raided by war-bands. The king
drove from his land that winter both Vikings and raiders. Olaf was with
his suite in the king's ship, and those who came against them thought
his was indeed a grim company to deal with. The king talked over with
Olaf and his followers all matters needing counsel, for Olaf proved
himself to the king both wise and eager- minded in all deeds of prowess.
But towards the latter end of the winter the king summoned a Thing, and
great numbers came. The king stood up and spoke.

He began his speech thus: "You all know that last autumn there came
hither a man who is the son of my daughter, and highborn also on his
father's side; and it seems to me that Olaf is a man of such prowess and
courage that here such men are not to be found. Now I offer him my
kingdom after my day is done, for Olaf is much more suitable for a ruler
than my own sons."

Olaf thanked him for this offer with many graceful and fair words, and
said he would not run the risk as to how his sons might behave when
Myrkjartan was no more; said it was better to gain swift honour than
lasting shame; and added that he wished to go to Norway when ships could
safely journey from land to land, and that his mother would have little
delight in life if he did not return to her. The king bade Olaf do as he
thought best. Then the Thing was broken up. When Olaf's ship was ready,
the king saw him off on board; and gave him a spear chased with gold,
and a gold-bedecked sword, and much money besides. Olaf begged that he
might take Melkorka's foster-mother with him; but the king said there
was no necessity for that, so she did not go. Then Olaf got on board his
ship, and he and the king parted with the greatest friendship. Then Olaf
sailed out to sea. They had a good voyage, and made land in Norway; and
Olaf's journey became very famous. They set up their ship; and Olaf got
horses for himself, and went, together with his followers, to find King
Harald.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII: Olaf the Peacock comes Home to Iceland, A.D.
957](lax22.md)
