[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax23)  [Next](lax25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIV: The Building of Herdholt, A.D. 962

Olaf and Thorgerd lived at Hoskuldstead and loved each other very
dearly; it was easily seen by every one that she was a woman of very
high mettle, though she meddled little with everyday things, but
whatever Thorgerd put her hand to must be carried through as she wished.
Olaf and Thorgerd spent that winter turn and turn about at Hoskuldstead,
or with Olaf's foster-father. In the spring Olaf took over the household
business at Goddistead. The following summer Thord fell ill, and the
illness ended in his death. Olaf had a cairn raised over him on the ness
that runs out into the Salmon-river and is called Drafn-ness, with a
wall round which is called Howes-garth. After that liegemen crowded to
Olaf and he became a great chieftain. Hoskuld was not envious of this,
for he always wished that Olaf should be consulted in all great matters.
The place Olaf owned was the stateliest in Salmon-river-Dale. There were
two brothers with Olaf, both named An. One was called An the White and
the other An the Black. They had a third brother who was named Beiner
the Strong. These were Olaf's smiths, and very valiant men. Thorgerd and
Olaf had a daughter who was named Thurid. The land that Hrapp had owned
all lay waste, as has been told before. Olaf thought that it lay well
and set before his father his wishes on the matter; how they should send
down to Trefill with this errand, that Olaf wished to buy the land and
other things thereto belonging at Hrappstead. It was soon arranged and
the bargain settled, for Trefill saw that better was one crow in the
hand than two in the wood. The bargain arranged was that Olaf should
give three marks of silver for the land; yet that was not fair price,
for the lands were wide and fair and very rich in useful produce, such
as good salmon fishing and seal catching. There were wide woods too, a
little further up than Hoskuldstead, north of the Salmon-river, in which
was a space cleared, and it was well-nigh a matter of certainty that the
flocks of Olaf would gather together there whether the weather was hard
or mild. One autumn it befell that on that same hill Olaf had built a
dwelling of the timber that was cut out of the forest, though some he
got together from driftwood strands. This was a very lofty dwelling. The
buildings stood empty through the winter. The next spring Olaf went
thither and first gathered together all his flocks which had grown to be
a great multitude; for, indeed, no man was richer in live stock in all
Broadfirth. Olaf now sent word to his father that he should be standing
out of doors and have a look at his train as he was moving to his new
home, and should give him his good wishes. Hoskuld said so it should be.
Olaf now arranged how it should be done. He ordered that all the shiest
of his cattle should be driven first and then the milking live stock,
then came the dry cattle, and the pack horses came in the last place;
and men were ranged with the animals to keep them from straying out of
straight line. When the van of the train had got to the new homestead,
Olaf was just riding out of Goddistead and there was nowhere a gap
breaking the line. Hoskuld stood outside his door together with those of
his household. Then Hoskuld spake, bidding Olaf his son welcome and
abide all honour to this new dwelling of his, "And somehow my mind
forebodes me that this will follow, that for a long time his name will
be remembered."

Jorunn his wife said, "Wealth enough the slave's son has got for his
name to be long remembered."

At the moment that the house-carles had unloaded the pack horses Olaf
rode into the place. Then he said, "Now you shall have your curiosity
satisfied with regard to what you have been talking about all the winter
as to what this place shall be called; it shall be called Herdholt."

Every one thought this a very happy name, in view of what used to happen
there. (1) Olaf now sets up his household at Herdholt, and a stately one
it soon became, and nothing was lacking there. And now the honour of
Olaf greatly increased,.there being many causes to bring it about: Olaf
was the most beloved of men, for whatever he had to do with affairs of
men, he did so that all were well contented with their lot. His father
backed him up very much towards being a widely honoured man, and Olaf
gained much in power from his alliance with the Mere-men. Olaf was
considered the noblest of all Hoskuld's sons. The first winter that Olaf
kept house at Herdholt, he had many servants and workmen, and work was
divided amongst the house-carles; one looked after the dry cattle and
another after the cows. The fold was out in the wood, some way from the
homestead. One evening the man who looked after the dry cattle came to
Olaf and asked him to make some other man look after the neat and "set
apart for me some other work."

Olaf answered, "I wish you to go on with this same work of yours."

The man said he would sooner go away. "Then you think there is something
wrong," said Olaf. "I will go this evening with you when you do up the
cattle, and if I think there is any excuse for you in this I will say
nothing about it, but otherwise you will find that your lot will take
some turn for the worse."

Olaf took his gold-set spear, the king's gift, in his hand, and left
home, and with him the house-carle. There was some snow on the ground.
They came to the fold, which was open, and Olaf bade the house-carle go
in. "I will drive up the cattle and you tie them up as they come in."

The house-carle went to the fold-door. And all unawares Olaf finds him
leaping into his open arms. Olaf asked why he went on so terrified?

He replied, "Hrapp stands in the doorway of the fold, and felt after me,
but I have had my fill of wrestling with him."

Olaf went to the fold-door and struck at him with his spear. Hrapp took
the socket of the spear in both hands and wrenched it aside, so that
forthwith the spear shaft broke. Olaf was about to run at Hrapp but he
disappeared there where he stood, and there they parted, Olaf having the
shaft and Hrapp the spearhead. After that Olaf and the house-carle tied
up the cattle and went home. Olaf saw the house-carle was not to blame
for his grumbling. The next morning Olaf went to where Hrapp was buried
and had him dug up. Hrapp was found undecayed, and there Olaf also found
his spearhead. After that he had a pyre made and had Hrapp burnt on it,
and his ashes were flung out to sea. After that no one had any more
trouble with Hrapp's ghost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV: About Hoskuld's Sons](lax25.md)
