[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax34)  [Next](lax36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXV: Gudrun's Second Marriage, A.D. 991

Kotkell was the name of a man who had only come to Iceland a short time
before. Grima was the name of his wife. Their sons were Hallbjorn
Whetstone-eye, and Stigandi. These people were natives of Sodor. They
were all wizards and the greatest of enchanters. Hallstein Godi took
them in and settled them down at Urdir in Skalmfirth, and their dwelling
there was none of the best liked. That summer Gest went to the Thing and
went in a ship to Saurby as he was wont. He stayed as guest at Hol in
Saurby. The brothers-in-law found him in horses as was their former
wont. Thord Ingunson was amongst the followers of Gest on this journey
and came to Laugar in Salingsdale. Gudrun Osvif's daughter rode to the
Thing, and Thord Ingunson rode with her. It happened one day as they
were riding over Blueshaw-heath, the weather being fine, that Gudrun
said, "Is it true, Thord, that your wife Aud always goes about in
breeches with gores in the seat, winding swathings round her legs almost
to her feet?"

Thord said, "He had not noticed that."

"Well, then, there must be but little in the tale," said Gudrun, "if you
have not found it out, but for what then is she called Breeches Aud?"

Thord said, "I think she has been called so for but a short time."

Gudrun answered, "What is of more moment to her is that she bear the
name for a long time hereafter."

After that people arrived at the Thing and no tidings befell there.
Thord spent much time in Gest's booth and always talked to Gudrun. One
day Thord Ingunson asked Gudrun what the penalty was for a woman who
went about always in breeches like men. Gudrun replied, "She deserves
the same penalty as a man who is dressed in a shirt with so low a neck
that his naked breast be seen separation in either case."

Then Thord said, "Would you advise me to proclaim my separation from Aud
here at the Thing or in the country by the counsel of many men? For I
have to deal with high-tempered men who will count themselves as
ill-treated in this affair."

Gudrun answered after a while, "For evening waits the idler's suit."

Then Thord sprang up and went to the law rock and named to him
witnesses, declared his separation from Aud, and gave as his reason that
she made for herself gored breeches like a man. Aud's brothers disliked
this very much, but things kept quiet. Then Thord rode away from the
Thing with the sons of Osvif. When Aud heard these tidings, she said,
"Good! Well, that I know that I am left thus single."

Then Thord rode, to divide the money, west into Saurby and twelve men
with him, and it all went off easily, for Thord made no difficulties as
to how the money was divided. Thord drove from the west unto Laugar a
great deal of live stock. After that he wooed Gudrun and that matter was
easily settled; Osvif and Gudrun said nothing against it. The wedding
was to take place in the tenth week of the summer, and that was a right
noble feast. Thord and Gudrun lived happily together. What alone
withheld Thorkell Whelp and Knut from setting afoot a lawsuit against
Thord Ingunson was, that they got no backing up to that end. The next
summer the men of Hol had an out-dairy business in Hvammdale, and Aud
stayed at the dairy. The men of Laugar had their out-dairy in Lambdale,
which cuts westward into the mountains off Salingsdale. Aud asked the
man who looked after the sheep how often he met the shepherd from
Laugar. He said nearly always as was likely since there was only a neck
of land between the two dairies. Then said Aud, "You shall meet the
shepherd from Laugar today, and you can tell me who there are staying at
the winter-dwelling (1) or who at the dairy, and speak in a friendly way
of Thord as it behoves you to do."

The boy promised to do as she told him. And in the evening when the
shepherd came home Aud asked what tidings he brought. The shepherd
answered, "I have heard tidings which you will think good, that now
there is a broad bedroom-floor between the beds of Thord and Gudrun, for
she is at the dairy and he is swinging at the rear of the hall, he and
Osvif being two together alone at the winter-dwelling."

"You have espied well," said she, "and see to have saddled two horses at
the time when people are going to bed."

The shepherd did as she bade him. A little before sunset Aud mounted,
and was now indeed in breeches. The shepherd rode the other horse and
could hardly keep up with her, so hard did she push on riding. She rode
south over Salingsdale-heath and never stopped before she got to the
home-field fence at Laugar. Then she dismounted, and bade the shepherd
look after the horses whilst she went to the house. Aud went to the door
and found it open, and she went into the fire-hall to the locked-bed in
the wall. Thord lay asleep, the door had fallen to, but the bolt was not
on, so she walked into the bedroom. Thord lay asleep on his back. Then
Aud woke Thord, and he turned on his side when he saw a man had come in.
Then she drew a sword and thrust it at Thord and gave him great wounds,
the sword striking his right arm and wounding him on both nipples. So
hard did she follow up the stroke that the sword stuck in the bolster.
Then Aud went away and to her horse and leapt on to its back, and
thereupon rode home. Thord tried to spring up when he got the blow, but
could not, because of his loss of blood. Then Osvif awoke and asked what
had happened, and Thord told that he had been wounded somewhat. Osvif
asked if he knew who had done the deed on him, and got up and bound up
his wounds. Thord said he was minded to think that Aud had done it.
Osvif offered to ride after her, and said she must have gone on this
errand with few men, and her penalty was ready-made for her. Thord said
that should not be done at all, for she had only done what she ought to
have done. Aud got home at sunrise, and her brothers asked her where she
had been to. Aud said she had been to Laugar, and told them what tidings
had befallen in her journey. They were pleased at this, and said that
too little was likely to have been done by her. Thord lay wounded a long
time. His chest wound healed well, but his arm grew no better for work
than before (i.e. when it first was wounded). All was now quiet that
winter. But in the following spring Ingun, Thord's mother, came west
from Skalmness. Thord greeted her warmly: she said she wished to place
herself under his protection, and said that Kotkell and his wife and
sons were giving her much trouble by stealing her goods, and through
witchcraft, but had a strong support in Hallstein the Priest. Thord took
this matter up swiftly, and said he should have the right of these
thieves no matter how it might displease Hallstein. He got speedily
ready for the journey with ten men, and Ingun went west with him. He got
a ferryboat out of Tjaldness. Then they went to Skalmness. Thord had put
on board ship all the chattels his mother owned there, and the cattle
were to be driven round the heads of the firths. There were twelve of
them altogether in the boat, with Ingun and another woman. Thord and ten
men went to Kotkell's place. The sons of Kotkell were not at home. He
then summoned Kotkell and Grima and their sons for theft and witchcraft,
and claimed outlawry as award. He laid the case to the Althing, and then
returned to his ship. Hallbjorn and Stigandi came home when Thord had
got out but a little way from land, and Kotkell told his sons what had
happened there. The brothers were furious at that, and said that
hitherto people had taken care not to show them in so barefaced a manner
such open enmity. Then Kotkell had a great spell-working scaffold made,
and they all went up on to it, and they sang hard twisted songs that
were enchantments. And presently a great tempest arose. Thord, Ingun's
son, and his companions, continued out at sea as he was, soon knew that
the storm was raised against him. Now the ship is driven west beyond
Skalmness, and Thord showed great courage with seamanship. The men who
were on land saw how he threw overboard all that made up the boat's
lading, saving the men; and the people who were on land expected Thord
would come to shore, for they had passed the place that was the
rockiest; but next there arose a breaker on a rock a little way from the
shore that no man had ever known to break sea before, and smote the ship
so that forthwith up turned keel uppermost. There Thord and all his
followers were drowned, and the ship was broken to pieces, and the keel
was washed up at a place now called Keelisle. Thord's shield was washed
up on an island that has since been called Shieldisle. Thord's body and
the bodies of his followers were all washed ashore, and a great howe was
raised over their corpses at the place now called Howesness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI: About Kotkell and Grima](lax36)
