[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax36)  [Next](lax38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVII: About Hrut and Eidgrim, A.D. 995

One summer at the Thing, as Thorleik was sitting in his booth, a very
big man walked into the booth. He greeted Thorleik, who took well the
greeting of this man and asked his name and whence he was. He said he
was called Eidgrim, and lived in Burgfirth at a place called
Eidgrimstead -- but that abode lies in the valley which cuts westward
into the mountains between Mull and Pigtongue, and is now called
Grimsdale. Thorleik said, "I have heard you spoken of as being no small
man."

Eidgrim said, "My errand here is that I want to buy from you the
stud-horses, those valuable ones that Kotkell gave you last summer."

Thorleik answered, "The horses are not for sale."

Eidgrim said, "I will offer you equally many stud-horses for them and
some other things thrown in, and many would say that I offer you twice
as much as the horses are worth."

Thorleik said, "I am no haggler, but these horses you will never have,
not even though you offer three times their worth."

Eidgrim said, "I take it to be no lie that you are proud and
self-willed, and I should, indeed, like to see you getting a somewhat
less handsome price for them than I have now offered you, and that you
should have to let the horses go none the less."

Thorleik got angered at these words, and said, "You need, Eidgrim, to
come to closer quarters if you mean to frighten the horses out of me."

Eidgrim said, "You think it unlikely that you will be beaten by me, but
this summer I shall go and see the horses, and we will see which of us
will own them after that."

Thorleik said, "Do as you like, but bring up no odds against me."

Then they dropped their talk. The man who heard this said that for this
sort of dealing together here were two just fitting matches for each
other. After that people went home from the Thing, and nothing happened
to tell tidings of. It happened one morning early that a man looked out
at Hrutstead at goodman Hrut's, Herjolf's son's, and when he came in
Hrut asked what news he brought. He said he had no other tidings to tell
save that he saw a man riding from beyond Vadlar towards where
Thorleik's horses were, and that the man got off his horse and took the
horses. Hrut asked where the horses were then, and the house- carle
replied, "Oh, they have stuck well to their pasture, for they stood as
usual in your meadows down below the fence-wall."

Hrut replied, "Verily, Thorleik, my kinsman, is not particular as to
where he grazes his beasts; and I still think it more likely that it is
not by his order that the horses are driven away."

Then Hrut sprang up in his shirt and linen breeches, and cast over him a
grey cloak and took in his hand his gold inlaid halberd that King Harald
had given him. He went out quickly and saw where a man was riding after
horses down below the wall. Hrut went to meet him, and saw that it was
Eidgrim driving the horses. Hrut greeted him, and Eidgrim returned his
greeting, but rather slowly. Hrut asked him why he was driving the
horses. , Eidgrim replied, "I will not hide it from you, though I know
what kinship there is between you and Thorleik; but I tell you I have
come after these horses, meaning that he shall never have them again. I
have also kept what I promised him at the Thing, that I have not gone
after the horses with any, great company."

Hrut said, "That is no deed of fame to you to take away the horses while
Thorleik lies in his bed and sleeps; you would keep best what you agreed
upon if you go and meet himself before you drive the horses out of the
countryside."

Eidgrim said, "Go and warn Thorleik if you wish, for you may see I have
prepared myself in such a manner as that I should like it well if we
were to meet together, I and Thorleik," and therewith he brandished the
barbed spear he had in his hand. He had also a helmet on his head, and a
sword girded on his side, and a shield on his flank, and had on a chain
coat.

Hrut said, "I think I must seek for something else than to go to
Combeness for I am heavy of foot; but I mean not to allow Thorleik to be
robbed if I have means thereto, no matter how little love there may go
with our kinship."

Eidgrim said, "And do you mean to take the horses away from me?"

Hrut said, "I will give you other stud-horses if you will let these
alone, though they may not be quite so good as these are."

Eidgrim said, "You speak most kindly, Hrut, but since I have got hold of
Thorleik's horses you will not pluck them out of my hands either by
bribes or threats."

Hrut replied, "Then I think you are making for both of us the choice
that answers the worst."

Eidgrim now wanted to part, and gave the whip to his horse, and when
Hrut saw that, he raised up his halberd and struck Eidgrim through the
back between the shoulders so that the coat of mail was torn and the
halberd flew out through the chest, and Eidgrim fell dead off his horse,
as was only natural. After that Hrut covered up his body at the place
called Eidgrim's-holt south of Combeness. Then Hrut rode over to
Combeness and told Thorleik the tidings. Thorleik burst into a rage, and
thought a great shame had been done him by this deed, while Hrut thought
he had shown him great friendship thereby. Thorleik said that not only
had he done this for an evil purpose, but that, moreover, no good would
come in return for it. Hrut said that Thorleik must do what pleased him,
and so they parted in no loving kindness. Hrut was eighty years old when
he killed Eidgrim, and he was considered by that deed to have added much
to his fame. Thorleik thought that Hrut was none the worthier of any
good from him for being more renowned for this deed, for he held it was
perfectly clear he would have himself have got the better of Eidgrim if
they had had a trial of arms between them, seeing how little was needed
to trip Eidgrim up. Thorleik now went to see his tenants Kotkell and
Grima, and bade them do something to the shame of Hrut. They took this
up gladly, and said they were quite ready to do so. Thorleik now went
home. A little later they, Kotkell and Grima and their sons, started on
a journey from home, and that was by night. They went to Hrut's
dwelling, and made great recantations there, and when the spell-working
began, those within were at a loss to make out what could be the reason
of it; but sweet indeed was that singing. they heard. Hrut alone knew
what these goings on meant, and bade no man look out that night, "and
let every one who may keep awake, and no harm will come to us if that
counsel is followed."

But all the people fell asleep. Hrut watched longest, and at last he too
slept. Kari was the name of a son of Hrut, and he was then twelve
winters old. He was the most promising of all Hrut's sons, and Hrut
loved him much. Kari hardly slept at all, for to him the play was made;
he did not sleep very soundly, and at last he got up and looked out, and
walked in the direction of the enchantment, and fell down dead at once.
Hrut awoke in the morning, as also did his household, and missed his
son, who was found dead a short way from the door. This Hrut felt as the
greatest bereavement, and had a cairn raised over Kari. Then he rode to
Olaf Hoskuldson and told him the tidings of what had happened there.
Olaf was madly wroth at this, and said it showed great lack of
forethought that they had allowed such scoundrels as Kotkell and his
family to live so near to him, and said that Thorleik had shaped for
himself an evil lot by dealing as he had done with Hrut, but added that
more must have been done than Thorleik ever could have wished. Olaf said
too that forthwith Kotkell and his wife and sons must be slain, "late
though it is now."

Olaf and Hrut set out with fifteen men. But when Kotkell and his family
saw the company of men riding up to their dwelling, they took to their
heels up to the mountain. There Hallbjorn Whetstone-eye was caught and a
bag was drawn over his head, and while some men were left to guard him
others went in pursuit of Kotkell, Grima, and Stigandi up on the
mountain. Kotkell and Grima were laid hands on the neck of land between
Hawkdale and Salmon-river-Dale, and were stoned to death and a heap of
stones thrown up over them, and the remains are still to be seen, being
called Scratti-beacon. Stigandi took to his heels south over the neck
towards Hawkdale, and there got out of their sight. Hrut and his sons
went down to the sea with Hallbjorn, and put out a boat and rowed out
from land with him, and they took the bag off his head and tied a stone
round his neck. Hallbjorn set gloating glances on the land, and the
manner of his look was nowise of the goodliest. Then Hallbjorn said, "It
was no day of bliss when we, kinsfolk, came to this Combeness and met
with Thorleik. And this spell I utter," says he, "that Thorleik shall
from henceforth have but few happy days, and that all who fill his place
have a troublous life there."

And this spell, men deem, has taken great effect. After that they
drowned him, and rowed back to land.

A little while afterwards Hrut went to find Olaf his kinsman, and told
him that he would not leave matters with Thorleik as they stood, and
bade him furnish him with men to go and make a house- raid on Thorleik.
Olaf replied, "It is not right that you two kinsmen should be laying
hands on each other; on Thorleik's behalf this has turned out a matter
of most evil luck. I would sooner try and bring about peace between you,
and you have often waited well and long for your good turn."

Hrut said, "It is no good casting about for this; the sores between us
two will never heal up; and I should like that from henceforth we should
not both live in Salmon-river-Dale."

Olaf replied, "It will not be easy for you to go further against
Thorleik than I am willing to allow; but if you do it, it is not
unlikely that dale and hill will meet." (1)

Hrut thought he now saw things stuck hard and fast before him; so he
went home mightily ill pleased; but all was quiet or was called so. And
for that year men kept quiet at home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII: The Death of Stigandi. Thorleik Leaves
Iceland](lax38)
