[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax47)  [Next](lax49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLVIII: The Men of Laugar and Gudrun plan an Ambush for Kjartan, A.D. 1003

Kjartan spent the fourth day after Easter at Hol, and there was the
greatest merriment and gaiety. The night after An was very ill at ease
in his sleep, so they waked him. They asked him what he had dreamt.

He answered, "A woman came to me most evil looking and pulled me forth
unto the bedside. She had in one hand a short sword, and in the other a
trough; she drove the sword into my breast and cut open all the belly,
and took out all my inwards and put brushwood in their place. After that
she went outside."

Kjartan and the others laughed very much at this dream, and said he
should be called An "brushwood belly", and they caught hold of him and
said they wished to feel if he had the brushwood in his stomach. Then
Aud said, "There is no need to mock so much at this; and my counsel is
that Kjartan do one of two things: either tarry here longer, or, if he
will ride away, then let him ride with more followers hence than hither
he did."

Kjartan said, "You may hold An 'brushwood belly' a man very sage as he
sits and talks to you all day, since you think that whatever he dreams
must be a very vision, but go I must, as I have already made up my mind
to, in spite of this dream."

Kjartan got ready to go on the fifth day in Easter week; and at the
advice of Aud, so did Thorkell Whelp and Knut his brother. They rode on
the way with Kjartan a band of twelve together. Kjartan came to
Whitedale and fetched the homespun for Thorhalla Chatterbox as he had
said he would. After that he rode south through Swinedale. It is told
how at Laugar in Saelingsdale Gudrun was early afoot directly after
sunrise. She went to where her brothers were sleeping. She roused Ospak
and he woke up at once, and then too the other brothers. And when Ospak
saw that there was his sister, he asked her what she wanted that she was
up so early. Gudrun said she wanted to know what they would be doing
that day. Ospak said he would keep at rest, "for there is little work to
do."

Gudrun said, "You would have the right sort of temper if you were the
daughters of some peasant, letting neither good nor bad be done by you.
Why, after all the disgrace and shame that Kjartan has done to you, you
none the less lie quietly sleeping, though he rides past this place with
but one other man. Such men indeed are richly endowed with the memory of
swine. I think it is past hoping that you will ever have courage enough
to go and seek out Kjartan in his home, if you dare not meet him now
that he rides with but one other man or two; but here you sit at home
and bear yourselves as if you were hopeful men; yea, in sooth there are
too many of you."

Ospak said she did not mince matters and it was hard to gainsay her, and
he sprang up forthwith and dressed, as did also each of the brothers one
after the other. Then they got ready to lay an ambush for Kjartan. Then
Gudrun called on Bolli to bestir him with them. Bolli said it behoved
him not for the sake of his kinship with Kjartan, set forth how lovingly
Olaf had brought him up.

Gudrun answered, "Therein you speak the truth, but you will not have the
good luck always to do what pleases all men, and if you cut yourself out
of this journey, our married life must be at an end."

And through Gudrun's harping on the matter Bolli's mind swelled at all
the enmity and guilts that lay at the door of Kjartan, and speedily he
donned his weapons, and they grew a band of nine together. There were
the five sons of Osvif -- Ospak, Helgi, Vandrad, Torrad, and Thorolf.
Bolli was the sixth and Gudlaug, the son of Osvif's sister, the
hopefullest of men, the seventh. There were also Odd and Stein, sons of
Thorhalla Chatterbox.. They rode to Swinedale and took up their stand
beside the gill which is called Goat-gill. (1) They bound up their
horses and sat down. Bolli was silent all day, and lay up on the top of
the gill bank. Now when Kjartan and his followers were come south past
Narrowsound, where the dale begins to widen out, Kjartan said that
Thorkell and the others had better turn back. Thorkell said they would
ride to the end of the dale. Then when they came south past the
out-dairies called Northdairies Kjartan spake to the brothers and bade
them not to ride any farther. "Thorolf the thief," he said, "shall not
have that matter to laugh at that I dare not ride on my way with few
men."

Thorkell Whelp said, "We will yield to you in not following you any
farther; but we should rue it indeed not to be near if you should stand
in need of men today."

Then Kjartan said, "Never will Bolli, my kinsman, join hands with
plotters against my life. But if the sons of Osvif lie in wait for me,
there is no knowing which side will live to tell the tale, even though I
may have some odds to deal with."

Thereupon the brothers rode back to the west.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX: The Death of Kjartan](lax49)
