[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax41)  [Next](lax43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLII: Bolli makes love to Gudrun, A.D. 1000

After that Kjartan and Bolli parted, and Gizor and Hjalti sailed from
Norway and had a good journey, and came to the Westmen's Isles at the
time the Althing was sitting, and went from thence to the mainland, and
had there meetings and parleys with their kinsmen. Thereupon they went
to the Althing and preached the faith to the people in an harangue both
long and telling, and then all men in Iceland received the faith. Bolli
rode from the Thing to Herdholt in fellowship with his uncle Olaf, who
received him with much loving kindness. Bolli rode to Laugar to disport
himself after he had been at home for a short time, and a good welcome
he had there. Gudrun asked very carefully about his journey and then
about Kjartan. Bolli answered right readily all Gudrun asked, and said
there were no tidings to tell of his journey. "But as to what concerns
Kjartan there are, in truth, the most excellent news to be told of his
ways of life, for he is in the king's bodyguard, and is there taken
before every other man; but I should not wonder if he did not care to
have much to do with this country for the next few winters to come."

Gudrun then asked if there was any other reason for it than the
friendship between Kjartan and the king. Bolli then tells what sort of
way people were talking about the friendship of Kjartan with Ingibjorg
the king's sister, and said he could not help thinking the king would
sooner marry Ingibjorg to Kjartan than let him go away if the choice lay
between the two things. Gudrun said these were good tidings, "but
Kjartan would be fairly matched only if he got a good wife."

Then she let the talk drop all of a sudden and went away and was very
red in the face; but other people doubted if she really thought these
tidings as good as she gave out she thought they were. Bolli remained at
home in Herdholt all that summer, and had gained much honour from his
journey; all his kinsfolk and acquaintances set great store by his
valiant bearing; he had, moreover, brought home with him a great deal of
wealth. He would often go over to Laugar and while away time talking to
Gudrun. One day Bolli asked Gudrun what she would answer if he were to
ask her in marriage. Gudrun replied at once, "No need for you to bespeak
such a thing, Bolli, for I cannot marry any man whilst I know Kjartan to
be still alive."

Bolli answered, "I think then you will have to abide husbandless for
sundry winters if you are to wait for Kjartan; he might have chosen to
give me some message concerning the matter if he set his heart at all
greatly on it."

Sundry words they gave and took, each at variance with the other. Then
Bolli rode home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII: Kjartan comes back to Iceland, A.D.1001](lax43.md)
