[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax51)  [Next](lax53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LII: The Killing of Thorkell of Goat-Peaks

In the spring Bolli and Gudrun set up house-holding at Saelingsdale
Tongue, and it soon became a stately one. Bolli and Gudrun begat a son.
To that boy a name was given, and he was called Thorleik; he was early a
very fine lad, and a right nimble one. Halldor Olafson lived at
Herdholt, as has before been written, and he was in most matters at the
head of his brothers. The spring that Kjartan was slain Thorgerd Egil's
daughter placed a lad, to her, with Thorkell of Goat-Peaks, and the lad
herded sheep there through the summer. Like other people he was much
grieved over Kjartan's death. He could never speak of Kjartan if
Thorkell was near, for he always spoke ill of him, and said he had been
a "white" man and of no heart; he often mimicked how Kjartan had taken
his death-wound. The lad took this very ill, and went to Herdholt and
told Halldor and Thorgerd and begged them to take him in. Thorgerd bade
him remain in his service till the winter.

The lad said he had no strength to bear being there any longer. "And you
would not ask this of me if you knew what heart-burn I suffer from all
this."

Then Thorgerd's heart turned at the tale of his grief, and she said that
as far as she was concerned, she would make a place for him there.
Halldor said, "Give no heed to this lad, he is not worth taking in
earnest."

Then Thorgerd answered, "The lad is of little account," says she, but
Thorkell has behaved evilly in every way in this matter, for he knew of
the ambush the men of Laugar laid for Kjartan, and would not warn him,
but made fun and sport of their dealings together, and has since said
many unfriendly things about the matter; but it seems a matter far
beyond you brothers ever to seek revenge where odds are against you, now
that you cannot pay out for their doings such scoundrels as Thorkell
is."

Halldor answered little to that, but bade Thorgerd do what she liked
about the lad's service. A few days after Halldor rode from home, he and
sundry other men together. He went to Goat- Peaks, and surrounded
Thorkell's house. Thorkell was led out and slain, and he met his death
with the utmost cowardice. Halldor allowed no plunder, and they went
home when this was done. Thorgerd was well pleased over this deed, and
thought this reminder better than none. That summer all was quiet, so to
speak, and yet there was the greatest ill-will between the sons of Olaf
and Bolli. The brothers bore themselves in the most unyielding manner
towards Bolli, while he gave in to his kinsmen in all matters as long as
he did not lower himself in any way by so doing, for he was a very proud
man. Bolli had many followers and lived richly, for there was no lack of
money. Steinthor, Olaf's son, lived in Danastead in Salmon-river-Dale.
He had for wife Thurid, Asgeir's daughter, who had before been married
to Thorkell Kuggi. Their son was Steinthor, who was called "Stone-
grig".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII: Thorgerd's Egging, A.D. 1006](lax53)
