[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax58)  [Next](lax60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LIX: Gudrun demands Revenge for Bolli, A.D. 1019

In "Twinmonth" that summer Gudrun, Osvif's daughter, went from home up
into the Dales. She rode to Thickshaw; and at this time Thorleik was
sometimes at Thickshaw with the sons of Armod Halldor and Ornolf, and
sometimes at Tongue with Thorgils. The same night Gudrun sent a man to
Snorri Godi saying that she wished to meet him without fail the next
day. Snorri got ready at once and rode with one other man until he came
to Hawkdale- river; on the northern side of that river stands a crag by
the river called Head, within the land of Lea-Shaw. At this spot Gudrun
had bespoken that she and Snorri should meet. They both came there at
one and the same time. With Gudrun there was only one man, and he was
Bolli, son of Bolli; he was now twelve years old, but fulfilled of
strength and wits was he, so much so, that many were they who were no
whit more powerful at the time of ripe manhood; and now he carried
Footbiter. Snorri and Gudrun now fell to talking together; but Bolli and
Snorri's follower sat on the crag and watched people travelling up and
down the countryside. When Snorri and Gudrun had asked each other for
news, Snorri inquired on what errand he was called, and what had come to
pass lately that she sent him word so hurriedly.

Gudrun said, "Truth to tell, to me is ever fresh the event which I am
about to bring up, and yet it befell twelve years ago; for it is about
the revenge of Bolli I wish to speak, and it ought not to take you
unawares. I have called it to your mind from time to time. I must also
bring this home to you that to this end you have promised me some help
if I but waited patiently, but now I think it past hope that you will
give any heed to our case. I have now waited as long as my temper would
hold out, and I must have wholehearted counsel from you as to where this
revenge is to be brought home."

Snorri asked what she chiefly had in her mind's eye.

Gudrun said, "It is my wish that all Olaf's sons should not go
scatheless."

Snorri said he must forbid any onset on the men who were not only of the
greatest account in the countryside, but also closely akin to those who
stand nearest to back up the revenge; and it is high time already that
these family feuds come to an end.

Gudrun said, "Then Lambi shall be set upon and slain; for then he, who
is the most eager of them for evil, would be put out of the way."

Snorri said, "Lambi is guilty enough that he should be slain; but I do
not think Bolli any the more revenged for that; for when at length peace
should come to be settled, no such disparity between them would be
acknowledged as ought to be due to Bolli when the manslaughters of both
should come up for award."

Gudrun spoke, "It may be that we shall not get our right out of the men
of Salmon-river-Dale, but some one shall pay dear for it, whatever dale
he may dwell in. So we shall turn upon Thorstein the Black, for no one
has taken a worse share in these matters than he."

Snorri spake, "Thorstein's guilt against you is the same as that of the
other men who joined in the raid against Bolli, but did not wound him.
But you leave such men to sit by in quiet on whom it seems to me revenge
wrought would be revenge indeed, and who, moreover, did take the life of
Bolli, such as was Helgi Hardbeinson."

Gudrun said, "That is true, but I cannot be sure that, in that case, all
these men against whom I have been stirring up enmity will sit quietly
by doing nothing."

Snorri said, "I see a good way to hinder that. Lambi and Thorstein shall
join the train of your sons, and that is a fitting ransom for those
fellows, Lambi and Thorstein; but if they will not do this, then I shall
not plead for them to be let off, whatever penalty you may be pleased to
put upon them."

Gudrun spake: "How shall we set about getting these men that you have
named to go on this journey?"

Snorri spake: "That is the business of them who are to be at the head of
the journey."

Gudrun spake: "In this we must have your foresight as to who shall rule
the journey and be the leader."

Then Snorri smiled and said, "You have chosen your own man for it."

Gudrun replied, "You are speaking of Thorgils."

Snorri said so it was.

Gudrun spake: "I have talked the matter over already with Thorgils, but
now it is as good as all over, for he gave me the one choice, which I
would not even look at. He did not back out of undertaking to avenge
Bolli, if he could have me in marriage in return; but that is past all
hope, so I cannot ask him to go this journey."

Snorri spoke: "On this I will give you a counsel, for I do not begrudge
Thorgils this journey. You shall promise marriage to him, yet you shall
do it in language of this double meaning, that of men in this land you
will marry none other but Thorgils, and that shall be holden to, for
Thorkell Eyjolfson is not, for the time being, in this land, but it is
he whom I have in my mind's eye for this marriage."

Gudrun spake: "He will see through this trick."

Snorri answered, "Indeed he will not see through it, for Thorgils is
better known for foolhardiness than wits. Make the covenant with but few
men for witnesses, and let Halldor, his foster- brother, be there, but
not Ornolf, for he has more wits, and lay the blame on me if this will
not work out."

After that they parted their talk and each bade the other farewell,
Snorri riding home, and Gudrun unto Thickshaw. The next morning Gudrun
rode from Thickshaw and her sons with her, and when they ride west along
Shawstrand they see that men are riding after them. They ride on quickly
and catch them up swiftly, and lo, there was Thorgils Hallason. They
greeted each other well, and now ride on in the day all together, out to
Holyfell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX: The Egging of Gudrun](lax60)
