[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax53)  [Next](lax55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LIV: Halldor prepares to avenge Kjartan

Now Halldor told Bardi in secret that the brothers had made up their
minds to set on Bolli, for they could no longer withstand the taunts of
their mother. "And we will not conceal from you, kinsman Bardi, that
what mostly lay behind the invitation to you was this, that we wished to
have your help and fellowship."

Then Bardi answered, "That will be a matter ill spoken of, to break the
peace on one's own kinsmen, and on the other hand it seems to me nowise
an easy thing to set on Bolli. He has many men about him and is himself
the best of fighters, and is not at a loss for wise counsel with Gudrun
and Osvif at his side. Taking all these matters together they seem to me
nowise easy to overcome."

Halldor said, "There are things we stand more in need of than to make
the most of the difficulties of this affair. Nor have I broached it till
I knew that it must come to pass, that we make earnest of wreaking
revenge on Bolli. And I hope, kinsman, you will not withdraw from doing
this journey with us."

Bardi answered, "I know you do not think it likely that I will draw
back, neither do I desire to do so if I see that I cannot get you to
give it up yourselves."

"There you do your share in the matter honourably," said Halldor, "as
was to be looked for from you."

Bardi said they must set about it with care. Halldor said he had heard
that Bolli had sent his house-carles from home, some north to Ramfirth
to meet a ship and some out to Middlefell strand. "It is also told me
that Bolli is staying at the outdairy in Saelingsdale with no more than
the house-carles who are doing the haymaking. And it seems to me we
shall never have a better chance of seeking a meeting with Bolli than
now."

So this then Halldor and Bardi settled between them. There was a man
named Thorstein the Black, a wise man and wealthy; he lived at Hundidale
in the Broadfirth-Dales; he had long been a friend of Olaf Peacock's. A
sister of Thorstein was called Solveig; she was married to a man who was
named Helgi, who was son of Hardbein. Helgi was a very tall and strong
man, and a great sailor; he had lately come to Iceland, and was staying
with his brother-in-law Thorstein. Halldor sent word to Thorstein the
Black and Helgi his brother-in-law, and when they were come to Herdholt
Halldor told them what he was about, and how he meant to carry it out,
and asked them to join in the journey with him. Thorstein showed an
utter dislike of this undertaking, saying, "It is the most heinous thing
that you kinsmen should go on killing each other off like that; and now
there are but few men left in your family equal to Bolli."

But though Thorstein spoke in this wise it went for nought. Halldor sent
word to Lambi, his father's brother, and when he came and met Halldor he
told him what he was about, and Lambi urged hard that this should be
carried out. Goodwife Thorgerd also egged them on eagerly to make an
earnest of their journey, and said she should never look upon Kjartan as
avenged until Bolli paid for him with his life. After this they got
ready for the journey. In this raid there were the four sons of Olaf and
the fifth was Bardi. There were the sons of Olaf, Halldor, Steinthor,
He!gi, and Hoskuld, but Bardi was Gudmund's son. Lambi was the sixth,
the seventh was Thorstein, and the eighth Helgi, his brother-in-law, the
ninth An Brushwood-belly. Thorgerd betook herself also to the raid with
them; but they set themselves against it, and said that such were no
journeys for women. She said she would go indeed, "For so much I know of
you, my sons, that whetting is what you want."

They said she must have her own way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV: The Death of Bolli](lax55)
