[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax68)  [Next](lax70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXIX: The Quarrel about Gunnar at the Feast

That autumn Gunnar, the slayer of Thidrandi, had been sent to Gudrun for
"trust and keep", and she had taken him in, his name being kept secret.
Gunnar was outlawed because of the slaying of Thidrandi, Geitir's son,
as is told in the Niard-wickers' Saga. He went about much "with a hidden
head", for that many great men had their eyes upon him. The first
evening of the feast, when men went to wash, a big man was standing by
the water; he was broad of shoulder and wide of chest, and this man had
a hat on his head. Thorkell asked who he was. He .named himself as it
seemed best to him.

Thorkell says: "I think you are not speaking the truth; going by what
the tale tells you would seem more like to Gunnar, the slayer of
Thidrandi. And if you are so great a hero as other men say, you will not
keep hidden your name."

Then said Gunnar: "You speak most eagerly on this matter; and, truth to
tell, I think I have no need to hide myself from you. You have rightly
named your man; but then, what have you chiefly bethought yourself of
having done to me?"

Thorkell said he would like that he should soon know it, and spake to
his men, ordering them to lay hands on him. Gudrun sat on the dais at
the upper end of the hall, together with other women all becoifed with
white linen, and when she got aware of this she rises up from the bridal
bench and calls on her men to lend Gunnar help, and told them to give
quarter to no man who should show any doubtful behaviour. Gudrun had the
greatest number of followers, and what never was meant to happen seemed
like to befall. Snorri Godi went between both sides and bade them allay
this storm.

"The one thing clearly to be done by you, Thorkell, is not to push
things on so hotly; and now you can see what a stirring woman Gudrun is,
as she overrules both of us together."

Thorkell said he had promised his namesake, Thorkell Geitir's son, that
he would kill Gunnar if he came into the countrysides of the west.

"And he is my greatest friend," Snorri spake. "You are much more in duty
bound to act as we wish; and for yourself, it is a matter of the
greatest importance, for you will never find such another woman as
Gudrun, however far you may seek."

And because of Snorri's reasoning, and seeing that he spoke the truth,
Thorkell quieted down, and Gunnar was sent away that evening. The feast
now went forward well and bravely, and when it was over the guests got
ready to go away. Thorkell gave to Snorri very rich gifts, and the same
to all the chief men. Snorri asked Bolli Bollison to go home with him,
and to live with him as long as he liked. Bolli accepted this with
thanks, and rides home to Tongue. Thorkell now settled down at Holyfell,
and took in hand the affairs of the household, and it was soon seen that
he was no worse a hand at that than at trade-voyaging. He had the hall
pulled down in the autumn and a new one built, which was finished when
the winter set in, and was both large and lofty. Between Gudrun and
Thorkell dear love now grew up, and so the winter passed on. In the
spring Gudrun asked how Thorkell was minded to look out for Gunnar the
slayer of Thidrandi. He said that Gudrun had better take the management
of that matter, "for you have taken it so hard in hand, that you will
put up with nothing but that he be sent away with honour."

Gudrun said he guessed aright: "I wish you to give him a ship, and
therewithal such things as he cannot do without."

Thorkell said and smiled, "You think nothing small on most matters,
Gudrun, and would be ill served if you had a mean-minded man for a
husband; nor has that ever been your heart's aim. Well, this shall be
done after your own will." -- and carried out it was.

Gunnar took the gifts most gratefully. "I shall never be so 'long-armed'
as to be able to repay all this great honour you are doing to me," he
said.

Gunnar now went abroad and came to Norway, and then went to his own
estates. Gunnar was exceeding wealthy, most great-hearted, and a good
and true man withal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXX: Thorleik goes to Norway](lax70)
