[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax66)  [Next](lax68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXVII: The Death of Thorgils Hallason, A.D. 1020

Thorarin was the name of a man who lived at Longdale: he was a
chieftain, but not a mighty one. His son was named Audgisl, and was a
nimble sort of a man. Thorgi1s Hallason took the chieftainship from them
both, father and son. Audgisl went to see Snorri Godi, and told him of
this unfairness, and asked him to help. Snorri answered only by fair
words, and belittled the whole affair; but answered, "Now that
Halla's-grig is getting too forward and swaggering. Will Thorgils then
happen on no man that will not give in to him in everything? No doubt he
is a big man and doughty, but men as good as he is have also been sent
to Hel."

And when Audgisl went away Snorri gave him an inlaid axe. The next
spring Thorgils Hallason and Thorstein the Black went south to
Burgfirth, and offered atonement to the sons of Helgi and his other
kinsmen, and they came to terms of peace on the matter, and fair honour
was done (to Helgi's side). Thorstein paid two parts of the atonement
for the manslaughter, and the third part Thorgils was to pay, payment
being due at the Thing. In the summer Thorgils rode to the Thing, but
when he and his men came to the lava field by Thingvellir, they saw a
woman coming to meet them, and a mighty big one she was. Thorgils rode
up to her, but she turned aside, and said this --

     

         "Take care

         If you go forward,

         And be wary

         Of Snorri's wiles,

         No one can escape,

         For so wise is Snorri."

And after that she went her way.

Then Thorgils said, "It has seldom happened so before, when luck was
with me, that you were leaving the Thing when I was riding to it."

He now rode to the Thing and to his own booth. And through the early
part the Thing was quiet. It happened one day during the Thing that
folk's clothes were hung out to dry. Thorgils had a blue hooded cloak,
which was spread out on the booth wall, and men heard the cloak say thus
--

     

         "Hanging wet on the wall,

         A flooded cloak knows a braid (trick);

         I do not say he does not know two,

         He has been lately washed."

This was thought a most marvellous thing. The next day Thorgils went
west over the river to pay the money to the sons of Helgi. He sat down
on the lava above the booths, and with him was his foster-brother
Halldor and sundry more of them were there together. The sons of Helgi
came to the meeting. Thorgils now began to count out the money. Audgisl
Thorarinson came near, and when Thorgils had counted ten Audgisl struck
at him, and all thought they heard the head say eleven as it flew off
the neck. Audgisl ran to the booth of the Waterfirthers and Halldor
rushed after him and struck him his deathblow in the door of the booth.
These tidings came to the booth of Snorri Godi how Thorgils was slain.

Snorri said, "You must be mistaken; it must be that Thorgils Hallason
has slain some one."

The man replied, "Why, the head flew off his trunk."

"Then perhaps it is true," said Snorri. This manslaughter was peacefully
atoned; as is told in the Saga of Thorgils Hallason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII: Gudrun's Marriage with Thorkell Eyjolfson](lax68)
