[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax60)  [Next](lax62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXI: Of Thorstein the Black and Lambi

The next Lord's day a leet was held, and Thorgils rode thither with his
company. Snorri Godi was not at the leet, but there was a great many
people together. During the day Thorgils fetched up Thorstein the Black
for a talk with him, and said, "As you know, you were one in the onset
by the sons of Olaf when Bolli was slain, and you have made no atonement
for your guilt to his sons. Now although a long time is gone since those
things befell, I think their mind has not given the slip to the men who
were in that raid. Now, these brothers look in this light upon the
matter, that it beseems them least, by reason of kinship, to seek
revenge on the sons of Olaf; and so the brothers purpose to turn for
revenge upon Helgi Hardbeinson, for he gave Bolli his deathwound. So we
ask this of you, Thorstein, that you join in this journey with the
brothers, and thus purchase for yourself peace and goodwill."

Thorstein replied, "It beseems me not at all to deal in treason with
Helgi, my brother-in-law, and I would far rather purchase my peace with
as much money as it would be to their honour to take."

Thorgils said, "I think it is but little to the mind of the brothers to
do aught herein for their own gain; so you need not hide it away from
yourself, Thorstein, that at your hands there lie two choices: either to
betake yourself to this journey, or to undergo the harshest of
treatments from them as soon as they may bring it about; and my will is,
that you take this choice in spite of the ties that bind you to Helgi;
for when men find themselves in such straits, each must look after
himself."

Thorstein spake: "Will the same choice be given to more of the men who
are charged with guilt by the sons of Bolli?"

Thorgils answered, "The same choice will be put to Lambi."

Thorstein said he would think better of it if he was not left the only
one in this plight. After that Thorgils called Lambi to come and meet
him, and bade Thorstein listen to their talk.

He said, "I wish to talk over with you, Lambi, the same matter that I
have set forth to Thorstein; to wit, what amends you are willing to make
to the sons of Bolli for the charges of guilt which they have against
you? For it has been told me as true that you wrought wounds on Bolli;
but besides that, you are heavily guilt-beset, in that you urged it hard
that Bolli should be slain; yet, next to the sons of Olaf, you were
entitled to some excuse in the matter."

Then Lambi asked what he would be asked to do. Thorgils said the same
choice would be put to him as to Thorstein "to join with the brothers in
this journey."

Lambi said, "This I think an evil price of peace and a dastardly one,
and I have no mind for this journey."

Then said Thorstein, "It is not the only thing open to view, Lambi, to
cut so quickly away from this journey; for in this matter great men are
concerned, men of much worth, moreover, who deem that they have long had
to put up with an unfair lot in life. It is also told me of Bolli's sons
that they are likely to grow into men of high mettle, and that they are
exceeding masterful; but the wrong they have to wreak is great. We
cannot think of escaping from making some amends after such awful deeds.
I shall be the most open to people's reproaches for this by reason of my
alliance with Helgi. But I think most people are given to 'setting all
aside for life', and the trouble on hand that presses hardest must first
be thrust out of the way."

Lambi said, "It is easy to see what you urge to be done, Thorstein; and
I think it well befitting that you have your own way in this matter, if
you think that is the only way you see open, for ours has been a long
partnership in great troubles. But I will have this understood if I do
go into this business, that my kinsmen, the sons of Olaf, shall be left
in peace if the revenge on Helgi shall be carried out."

Thorgils agreed to this on behalf of the brothers. So now it was settled
that Lambi and Thorstein should betake themselves to the journey with
Thorgils; and they bespoke it between them that they should come early
on the third day (Tuesday) (1) to Tongue, in Hord-Dale. After that they
parted. Thorgils rode home that evening to Tongue. Now passes on the
time within which it was bespoken they should come to Tongue. In the
morning of the third day (Tuesday), before sunrise, Thorstein and Lambi
came to Tongue, and Thorgils gave them a cheerful welcome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXII: Thorgils and his Followers leave Home](lax62.md)
