[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax59)  [Next](lax61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LX: The Egging of Gudrun

Few nights after Gudrun had come home she called her sons to her to have
a talk with them in her orchard; and when they were come there they saw
how there were lying out some linen clothes, a shirt and linen breeches,
and they were much stained with blood.

Then spake Gudrun: "These same clothes you see here cry to you for your
father's revenge. I will not say many words on this matter, for it is
past hope that you will heed an egging-on by words alone if you bring
not home to your minds such hints and reminders as these."

The brothers were much startled at this, and at what Gudrun had to say;
but yet this way they made answer that they had been too young to seek
for revenge without a leader; they knew not, they felt, how to frame a
counsel for themselves or others either.

"But we might well bear in mind what we have lost."

Gudrun said, "They would be likely to give more thought to horse- fights
or sports."

After that they went away. The next night the brothers could not sleep.
Thorgils got aware of this, and asked them what was the matter. They
told him all the talk they had had with their mother, and this withal
that they could no longer bear their grief or their mother's taunts.

"We will seek revenge," said Bolli, "now that we brothers have come to
so ripe an age that men will be much after us if we do not take the
matter in hand."

The next day Gudrun and Thorgils had a talk together, and Gudrun started
speaking in this wise: "I am given to think, Thorgils, that my sons
brook it ill to sit thus quietly on any longer without seeking revenge
for their father's death. But what mostly has delayed the matter
hitherto is that up to now I deemed Thorleik and Bolli too young to be
busy in taking men's lives. But need enough there has been to call this
to mind a good long time before this."

Thorgils answered, "There is no use in your talking this matter over
with me, because you have given a flat denial to 'walking with me'
(marrying me). But I am in just the same frame of mind as I have been
before, when we have had talks about this matter. If I can marry you, I
shall not think twice about killing either or both of the two who had
most to do with the murder of Bolli."

Gudrun spoke: "I am given to think that to Thorleik no man seems as well
fitted as you to be the leader if anything is to be done in the way of
deeds of hardihood. Nor is it a matter to be hidden from you that the
lads are minded to go for Helgi Hardbeinson the 'Bearserk' who sits at
home in his house in Skorradale misdoubting himself of nothing."

Thorgils spake: "I never care whether he is called Helgi or by any other
name, for neither in Helgi nor in any one else do I deem I have an
overmatch in strength to deal with. As far as I am concerned, the last
word on this matter is now spoken if you promise before witnesses to
marry me when, together with your sons, I have wreaked the revenge."

Gudrun said she would fulfil all she should agree to, even though such
agreement were come to before few men to witness it. "And," said she,
"this then we shall settle to have done."

Gudrun bade be called thither Halldor, Thorgils' foster. brother, and
her own sons. Thorgils bade that Ornolf should also be with them. Gudrun
said there was no need of that, "For I am more doubtful of Ornolf's
faithfulness to you than I think you are yourself."

Thorgils told her to do as she liked. Now the brothers come and meet
Gudrun and Thorgils, Halldor being also at the parley with them. Gudrun
now sets forth to them that "Thorgils has said he will be the leader in
this raid against Helgi Hardbeinson, together with my sons, for revenge
of Bolli, and Thorgils has bargained in return for this under taking to
get me for wife. Now I avow, with you to witness, that I promise this to
Thorgils, that of men in this land I shall marry none but him, and I do
not purpose to go and marry in any other land."

Thorgils thought that this was binding enough, and did not see through
it. And now they broke up their talk. This counsel is now fully settled
that Thorgils must betake himself to this journey. He gets ready to
leave Holyfell, and with him the sons of Gudrun, and they rode up into
the Dales and first to the homestead at Tongue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI: Of Thorstein the Black and Lambi](lax61.md)
