[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax61)  [Next](lax63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXII: Thorgils and his Followers leave Home

Thorgils got himself ready to leave home, and they all rode up along
Hord-Dale, ten of them together. Thorgils Hallason was the leader of the
band. In that train were the sons of Bolli, Thorleik and Bolli, and
Thord the Cat, their brother, was the fourth, the fifth was Thorstein
the Black, the sixth Lambi, the seventh and eighth Haldor and Ornolf,
the ninth Svein, and the tenth Hunbogi. Those last were the sons of Alf
o' Dales. They rode on their way up to Sweeping-Pass, and across
Long-waterdale, and then right across Burgfirth. They rode across
North-river at Isleford, but across White-river at Bankford, a short way
down from the homestead of By. Then they rode over Reekdale, and over
the neck of land to Skorradale, and so up through the wood in the
neighbourhood of the farmstead of Water-Nook, where they got off their
horses, as it was very late in the evening. The homestead of Water-Nook
stands a short way from the lake on the south side of the river.

Thorgils said to his followers that they must tarry there over night,
"and I will go to the house and spy and see if Helgi be at home. I am
told Helgi has at most times very few men with him, but that he is of
all men the wariest of himself, and sleeps in a strongly made lock-bed."

Thorgils' followers bade him follow his own foresight. Thorgils now
changed his clothes, and took off his blue cloak, and slipped on a grey
foul-weather overall. He went home to the house. When he was come near
to the home-field fence he saw a man coming to meet him, and when they
met Thorgils said, "You will think my questions strange, comrade, but
whose am I come to in this countryside, and what is the name of this
dwelling, and who lives here?"

The man answered, "You must be indeed a wondrous fool and wit- bereft if
you have hog heard Helgi Hardbeinson spoken of, the bravest of warriors,
and a great man withal."

Thorgils next asked how far Helgi took kindly to unknown people coming
to see him, such as were in great need of help. He replied, "In that
matter, if truth is told, only good can be said of Helgi, for he is the
most large-hearted of men, not only in giving harbour to comers, but
also in all his high conduct otherwise."

"Is Helgi at home now?" asked Thorgils; "I should like to ask him to
take me in."

The other then asks what matters he had on his hands.

Thorgils answered, "I was outlawed this summer at the Thing, and I want
to seek for myself the help of some such man as is a mighty one of his
hands and ways, and I will in return offer my fellowship and service. So
now you take me home to the house to see Helgi."

"I can do that very well, to show you home," he said, "for you will be
welcome to quarters for the night, but you will not see Helgi, for he is
not at home."

Then Thorgils asked where he was. The man answered, "He is at his
out-dairy called Sarp."

Thorgils asked where that was, and what men were with him. He said his
son Hardbein was there, and two other men, both outlaws, whom he had
taken in to shelter. Thorgils bade him show the nearest way to the
dairy, "for I want to meet Helgi at once, when I can get to him and
plead my errand to him."

The house-carle did so and showed him the way, and after that they
parted. Thorgils returned to the wood to his companions, and told them
what he had found out about Helgi. "We must tarry here through the
night, and not go to the dairy till tomorrow morning."

They did as he ordained, and in the morning Thorgils and his band rode
up through the wood till they were within a short way from the dairy.
Then Thorgils bade them get off their horses and eat their morning meal,
and so they did, and stayed there for a while.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIII: The Description of his Enemies brought to
Helgi](lax63.md)
