[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax73)  [Next](lax75) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXXIV: Thorkell Eyjolfson goes to Norway

Now the tale is to be taken up again where Thorkell Eyjolfson sits at
home in lordly way. His and Gudrun's son, Gellir, grew up there at home,
and was early both a manly fellow and winning. It is said how once upon
a time Thorkell told Gudrun a dream he had had.

"I dreamed," he said, "that I had so great a beard that it spread out
over the whole of Broadfirth."

Thorkell bade her read his dream.

Gudrun said, "What do you think this dream betokens?"

He said, "To me it seems clear that in it is hinted that my power will
stand wide about the whole of Broadfirth."

Gudrun said, "Maybe that such is the meaning of it, but I rather should
think that thereby is betokened that you will dip your beard down into
Broadfirth."

That same summer Thorkell runs out his ship and gets it ready for
Norway. His son, Gellir, was then twelve winters old, and he went abroad
with his father. Thorkell makes it known that he means to fetch timber
to build his church with, and sails forthwith into the main sea when he
was ready. He had an easy voyage of it, but not a very short one, and
they hove into Norway northwardly. King Olaf then had his seat in
Thrandheim, and Thorkell sought forthwith a meeting with King Olaf, and
his son Gellir with him. They had there a good welcome. So highly was
Thorkell accounted of that winter by the king, that all folk tell that
the king gave him not less than one hundred marks of refined silver. The
king gave to Gellir at Yule a cloak, the most precious and excellent of
gifts. That winter King Olaf had a church built in the town of timber,
and it was a very great minster, all materials thereto being chosen of
the best. In the spring the timber which the king gave to Thorkell was
brought on board ship, and large was that timber and good in kind, for
Thorkell looked closely after it. Now it happened one morning early that
the king went out with but few men, and saw a man up on the church which
then was being built in the town. He wondered much at this, for it was a
good deal earlier than the smiths were wont to be up. Then the king
recognised the man, and, lo! there was Thorkell Eyjolfson taking the
measure of all the largest timber, crossbeams, sills, and pillars. The
king turned at once thither, and said: "What now, Thorkell, do you mean
after these measurements to shape the church timber which you are taking
to Iceland?"

"Yes, in truth, sire," said Thorkell.

Then said King Olaf, "Cut two ells off every main beam, and that church
will yet be the largest built in Iceland."

Thorkell answered, "Keep your timber yourself if you think you have
given me too much, or your hand itches to take it back, but not an ell's
length shall I cut off it. I shall both know how to go about and how to
carry out getting other timber for me."

Then says the king most calmly, "So it is, Thorkell, that you are not
only a man of much account, but you are also now making yourself too
big, for, to be sure, it is too overweening for the son of a mere
peasant to try to vie with us. But it is not true that I begrudge you
the timber, if only it be fated to you to build a church therewith; for
it will never be large enough for all your pride to find room to lie
inside it. But near it comes to the foreboding of my mind, that the
timber will be of little use to men, and that it will be far from you
ever to get any work by man done with this timber."

After that they ceased talking, and the king turned away, and it was
marked by people that it misliked him how Thorkell accounted as of
nought what he said. Yet the king himself did not let people get the
wind of it, and he and Thorkell parted in great goodwill. Thorkell got
on board his ship and put to sea. They had a good wind and were not long
out about the main. Thorkell brought his ship to Ramfirth, and rode soon
from his ship home to Holyfell, where all folk were glad to see him. In
this journey Thorkell had gained much honour. He had his ship hauled
ashore and made snug, and the timber for the church he gave to a
caretaker, where it was safely bestowed, for it could not be brought
from the north this autumn, as he was at all time full of business.
Thorkell now sits at home at his manor throughout the winter. He had
Yule-drinking at Holyfell, and to it there came a crowd of people; and
altogether he kept up a great state that winter. Nor did Gudrun stop him
therein; for she said the use of money was that people should increase
their state therewith; moreover, whatever Gudrun must needs be supplied
with for all purposes of high-minded display, that (she said) would be
readily forthcoming (from her husband). Thorkell shared that winter
amongst his friends many precious things he had brought with him out to
Iceland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXV: Thorkell and Thorstein and Halldor Olafson, A.D.
1026](lax75)
