[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax75)  [Next](lax77.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXXVI: The Drowning of Thorkell, A.D. 1026

On Maundy Thursday, early in the morning, Thorkell got ready for his.
journey. Thorstein set himself much against it: "For the weather looks
to me uncertain," said he.

Thorkell said the weather would do all right, "And you must not hinder
me now, kinsman, for I wish to be home before Easter."

So now Thorkell ran out the ferryboat, and loaded it. But Thorstein
carried the lading ashore from out the boat as fast as Thorkell and his
followers put it on board.

Then Thorkell said, "Give over now, kinsman, and do not hinder our
journey this time; you must not have your own way in this."

Thorstein said, "He of us two will now follow the counsel that will
answer the worst, for this journey will cause the happening of great
matters."

Thorkell now bade them farewell till their next meeting, and Thorstein
went home, and was exceedingly downcast. He went to the guesthouse, and
bade them lay a pillow under his head, the which was done. The
servant-maid saw how the tears ran down upon the pillow from his eyes.
And shortly afterwards a roaring blast struck the house, and Thorstein
said, "There, we now can hear roaring the slayer of kinsman Thorkell."

Now to tell of the journey of Thorkell and his company: they sail this
day out, down Broadfirth, and were ten on board. The wind began to blow
very high, and rose to full gale before it blew over. They pushed on
their way briskly, for the men were most plucky. Thorkell had with him
the sword Skofnung, which was laid in the locker. Thorkell and his party
sailed till they came to Bjorn's isle, and people could watch them
journey from both shores. But when they had come thus far, suddenly a
squall caught the sail and overwhelmed the boat. There Thorkell was
drowned and all the men who were with him. The timber drifted ashore
wide about the islands, the corner-staves (pillars) drove ashore in the
island called Staff-isle. Skofnung stuck fast to the timbers of the
boat, and was found in Skofnungs-isle. That same evening that Thorkell
and his followers were drowned, it happened at Holyfell that Gudrun went
to the church, when other people had gone to bed, and when she stepped
into the lichgate she saw a ghost standing before her.

He bowed over her and said, "Great tidings, Gudrun."

She said, "Hold then your peace about them, wretch."

Gudrun went on to the church, as she had meant to do, and when she got
up to the church she thought she saw that Thorkell and his companions
were come home and stood before the door of the church, and she saw that
water was running off their clothes. Gudrun did not speak to them, but
went into the church, and stayed there as long as it seemed good to her.
After that she went to the guest-room, for she thought Thorkell and his
followers must have gone there; but she came into the chamber, there was
no one there. Then Gudrun was struck with wonder at the whole affair. On
Good Friday Gudrun sent her men to find out matters concerning the
journeying of Thorkell and his company, some up to Shawstrand and some
out to the islands. By then the flotsam had already come to land wide
about the islands and on both shores of the firth. The Saturday before
Easter the tidings got known and great news they were thought to be, for
Thorkell had been a great chieftain. Thorkell was eight-and-forty years
old when he was drowned, and that was four winters before Olaf the Holy
fell. Gudrun took much to heart the death of Thorkell, yet bore her
bereavement bravely. Only very little of the church timber could ever be
gathered in. Gellir was now fourteen years old, and with his mother he
took over the business of the household and the chieftainship. It was
soon seen that he was made to be a leader of men. Gudrun now became a
very religious woman. She was the first woman in Iceland who knew the
Psalter by heart. She would spend long time in the church at nights
saying her prayers, and Herdis, Bolli's daughter, always went with her
at night. Gudrun loved Herdis very much. It is told that one night the
maiden Herdis dreamed that a woman came to her who was dressed in a
woven cloak, and coifed in a head cloth, but she did not think the woman
winning to look at.

She spoke, "Tell your grandmother that I am displeased with her, for she
creeps about over me every night, and lets fall down upon me drops so
hot that I am burning all over from them. My reason for letting you know
this is, that I like you somewhat better, though there is something
uncanny hovering about you too. However, I could get on with you if I
did not feel there was so much more amiss with Gudrun."

Then Herdis awoke and told Gudrun her dream. Gudrun thought the
apparition was of good omen. Next morning Gudrun had planks taken up
from the church floor where she was wont to kneel on the hassock, and
she had the earth dug up, and they found blue and evil-looking bones, a
round brooch, and a wizard's wand, and men thought they knew then that a
tomb of some sorceress must have been there; so the bones were taken to
a place far away where people were least likely to be passing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVII: Return of Bolli, A.D. 1030](lax77.md)
