[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lax72)  [Next](lax74.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXXIII: Bolli's Voyage

Now the brothers went both to their ship. Bolli took a great deal of
money abroad with him. They now arrayed the ship, and when everything
was ready they put out to sea. The winds did not speed them fast, and
they were a long time out at sea, but got to Norway in the autumn, and
made Thrandheim in the north. Olaf, the king, was in the east part of
the land, in the Wick, where he had made in-gatherings for a stay
through the winter. And when the brothers heard that the king would not
come north to Thrandheim that autumn, Thorleik said he would go east
along the land to meet King Olaf.

Bolli said, "I have little wish to drift about between market towns in
autumn days; to me that is too much of worry and restraint. I will
rather stay for the winter in this town. I am told the king will come
north in the spring, and if he does not then I shall not set my face
against our going to meet him."

Bolli has his way in the matter, and they put up their ship and got
their winter quarters. It was soon seen that Bolli was a very pushing
man, and would be the first among other men; and in that he had his way,
for a bounteous man was he, and so got speedily to be highly thought of
in Norway. Bolli kept a suite about him during the winter at Thrandheim,
and it was easily seen, when he went to the guild meeting-places, that
his men were both better arrayed as to raiment and weapons than other
townspeople. He alone also paid for all his suite when they sat drinking
in guild halls, and on a par with this were his open- handedness and
lordly ways in other matters. Now the brothers stay in the town through
the winter. That winter the king sat east in Sarpsborg, and news spread
from the east that the king was not likely to come north. Early in the
spring the brothers got their ship ready and went east along the land.
The journey sped well for them, and they got east to Sarpsborg, and went
forthwith to meet King Olaf. The king gave a good welcome to Thorleik,
his henchman, and his followers. Then the king asked who was that man of
stately gait in the train of Thorleik; and Thorleik answered, "He is my
brother, and is named Bolli."

"He looks, indeed, a man of high mettle," said the king.

Thereupon the king asks the brothers to come and stay with him, and that
offer they took with thanks, and spend the spring with the king. The
king was as kind to Thorleik as he had been before, yet he held Bolli by
much in greater esteem, for he deemed him even peerless among men. And
as the spring went on, the brothers took counsel together about their
journeys

And Thorleik asked Bolli if he was minded to go back to Iceland during
the summer, "or will you stay on longer here in Norway?"

Bolli answered, "I do not mean to do either. And sooth to say, when I
left Iceland, my thought was settled on this, that people should not be
asking for news of me from the house next door; and now I wish, brother,
that you take over our ship."

Thorleik took it much to heart that they should have to part. "But you,
Bolli, will have your way in this as in other things."

Their matter thus bespoken they laid before the king, and he answered
thus: "Will you not tarry with us any longer, Bolli?" said the king. "I
should have liked it best for you to stay with me for a while, for I
shall grant you the same title that I granted to Thorleik, your brother"

Then Bolli answered' "I should be only too glad to bind myself to be
your henchman, but I must go first whither I am already bent, and have
long been eager to go, but this choice I will gladly take if it be fated
to me to come back."

"You will have your way as to your journeyings, Bolli," says the king,
"for you Icelanders are self-willed in most matters. But with this word
I must close, that I think you, Bolli, the man of greatest mark that has
ever come from Iceland in my days."

And when Bolli had got the king's leave he made ready for his journey,
and went on board a trade-ship that was bound south for Denmark. He also
took a great deal of money with him, and sundry of his followers bore
him company. He and King Olaf parted in great friendship, and the king
gave Bolli some handsome gifts at parting. Thorleik remained behind with
King Olaf, but Bolli went on his way till he carne south to Denmark.
That winter he tarried in Denmark, and had great honour there of mighty
men; nor did he bear himself there in any way less lordly than while he
was in Norway. When Bolli had been a winter in Denmark he started on his
journey out into foreign countries, and did not halt in his journey till
he came to Micklegarth (Constantinople). He was there only a short time
before he got himself into the Varangian Guard, and, from what we have
heard, no Northman had ever gone to take warpay from the Garth king
before Bolli, Bolli's son. He tarried in Micklegarth very many winters,
and was thought to be the most valiant in all deeds that try a man, and
always went next to those in the forefront. The Varangians accounted
Bolli most highly of whilst he was with them in Micklegarth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIV: Thorkell Eyjolfson goes to Norway](lax74.md)
