[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ttx02) [Next](ttx04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

# THE YIN FU CHING.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PREFATORY NOTE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

T<span class="small">HIS</span> treatise is one of the most interesting
and important in the Taoist canon. Tradition ascribes its authorship to
the mythical Emperor Huang Ti, or one of his six Ministers; but although
it of course appeared at a considerably later date than this, all
scholars agree in attributing it to a very remote antiquity. The
earliest Commentator who published an edition of the work is said to
have been Chiang Tsze-ya, otherwise known as T‘ai Kung, \#\#\#, the
famous Minister of Hsi Pŏ, and a reputed descendant of the Yellow
Emperor; so, if this were true, we should be able to trace its existence
at least as far back as the Shang dynasty, or say twelve hundred years
before Christ.

   The aim of this ancient compilation, to quote the authority of Mr.
Wylie, is to "reconcile the decrees of Heaven with the current of
mundane affairs." It is supposed to contain the very root and essence of
Taoism, and its entire freedom from all allusions to the later and baser
developments of that philosophy appears to constitute a strong argument
in favour of its distant origin. Our translation of the title, *Yin Fu*,
\#\#\# is of course merely approximative, and may be criticised
accordingly. *Fu* means a seal, divided into two parts. On one half of
this seal we have the visible phenomena of the world around us; this we
can all see, but, the diagram being incomplete, we require the *other*
half of the seal, that bearing the \#\#\# of Heaven or the Unseen World,
before we can understand the why and the wherefore of the existing order
of things. In this book the two halves of the seal are professedly
brought together, and we are thus enabled to perceive the hidden harmony
which runs through all things where before we could see nothing but
discord, and are presented with an explanation of all the mysteries of
the world, the secret coincidences between the Seen and the Unseen, of
which in our unenlightened state we are profoundly ignorant. The idea is
a remarkably beautiful one, and the representation of such a 'Clue to
the Unseen' by a divided seal, strikes us as singularly forcible and
apt. The edition now translated bears the name of Chang Shih-ch‘un as
editor, a scholar of Honan who lived in the reign of Ts‘ung Chêng, last
Emperor of the Mings.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TEXT.

### I.

   *To observe the* T<span class="small">AO</span> *of Heaven, and grasp
its method of operation, is the limit of all achievement.*

   The root of Heaven is in T<span class="small">AO</span>; and T<span
class="small">AO</span> being fixed, Heaven secures it and so brings
about its transmutations. Principles have their root in circumstances,
or facts; and facts being determined, it is Principles by which they are
modified or varied. Thus Principles have no unvarying course, and facts
no essential uniformity; both belong to the region of the unlimited. It
is only by observing the T<span class="small">AO</span> of Heaven, and
grasping that, that the limit can be reached.

   *Thus Heaven has Five Despoilers: and he who perceives them will
flourish.*

   There is no benefit intended towards man when the Five Atmospheric
Influences<span id="page_50_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_50_note_*) are set
in motion; how, then, can there be any intentional injury to things?
Observing the nourishing and beneficial results of these Influences, men
call it virtue; observing the injury and ruin they cause, men call it
spoliation. As soon as we see a thing produced, it is destroyed; and
having witnessed its destruction, we see it come into being again. The
Afflatus of the East is antagonistic to the Centre; the Afflatus of the
Centre is antagonistic to the North; the Afflatus of the North is
antagonistic to the South; the Afflatus of the South is antagonistic to
the West; the Afflatus of the West is antagonistic to the East.<span
id="page_50_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_50_note_dagger) When these Five
Afflati promote the growth of one another, they move freely; but the
very ease with which they flow leads to their exhaustion. When they act
in antagonism to each other, their motion is arrested; but if such
arrest be counteracted they are re-established \[in their course\]. Man
is in the centre of Heaven \[and Earth\]; the heart is in the centre of
man. When anything occupies a central position, it may be removed to the
outside. If one wishes to control much by means of a little, it is
necessary to use contrivances—or, to employ one's faculty of
contrivance—in manipulating the material under one's hand. Nevertheless,
let the mind be once set in motion, everything under Heaven may be
accomplished; while by using antagonistic agencies, that which is
complete and permanent may be produced.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

   *The Moral Nature of Heaven is Man: the Mind of Man embodies his
motive power; and the Principle of Heaven being established, the destiny
of Man is fixed.*

   The Moral Nature is that entity which produces human genius; the
region which contains, or holds in reserve, all mutations \[of the
mind\]. Heaven has no Moral Nature of itself; Man is the Moral Nature of
Heaven, just as the mind, which, located in the centre of the body, is
united with that body and so completes the human shape. But the mind is
the natural disposition of the body; the motive power within is the
origin of *spontaneous* or *voluntary* action, and embodies the capacity
of *intelligent* action; and when a man avails himself of this motive
power, its action may not be arrested. The mind has but a material
seat—the heart; yet although this is but so much matter, it possesses
certain capacities, and these capacities constitute the motive power of
the man. When \[these capacities\] are located in a body which is
incompatible with them, they cannot be said to constitute the true mind
belonging to that body; and \[the man himself\], being thus placed in a
position unconsonant with Heaven, cannot be regarded as constituting
Heaven's true Nature.<span
id="page_51_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_51_note_*) The Principle of Heaven
being established, the destiny of man is fixed.

   *When Heaven sends forth its engines of destruction, the stars are
moved out of their places and the constellations metamorphosed. When
Earth sends forth its engines of destruction, dragons and snakes appear
on the dry land.*<span
id="page_51_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_51_note_dagger) *When Man puts
forth his faculties of destruction, Heaven falls and Earth is
overthrown. When Heaven and Man do so in concert, all the disorganised
phenomena are re-established on a new basis.*

   The stars and constellations are the countenance of Heaven. In like
manner,<span id="page_51_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_51_note_ddagger)
when a man is angry, his countenance will surely change. Dragons and
serpents are the breath and blood \[the hidden agencies\] of earth. In
like manner, when a man is sick, his breath and blood will surge up, or
overflow. Man, situated in the centre of the Universe, is as it were the
abdomen of Heaven and Earth. When the viscera are injured, the effects
are manifest from top to toe; everything, from the head down to the
feet, is thrown into disorder. When Earth is in harmony with Heaven, Man
occupies the same relation towards each. For Heaven to respond to human
requirements, or affairs, it is necessary <span id="page_52">p.
52</span> to wait until such affairs be brought to a state of
completion. If any one such affair be uncompleted, even the Sage will be
unable to undertake its achievement; but when it is perfected—*q.d.*, in
such a forward state as to be prepared for the co-operation or
assistance of Heaven—the response of Heaven will come, as in former
cases.<span id="page_52_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_52_note_*) This may be
compared to the capture of Wu by the Prince of Yueh.

   *The Five Despoilers pertain to the Heart; but their operation is
diffused all over the world. The Universe is in one's Hand; all
transmutations take their rise from the body.*

   Thieves, or despoilers, are so called because they are unseen; if, in
acting as thieves, they are perceived, their depredations are put an end
to. The antagonism which exists between Water and Fire is turned to
advantage when brought into contact with matter, and eventual welfare is
the result.<span id="page_52_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_52_note_dagger)
The Five Despoilers of Heaven are identical with the Five Despoilers of
men. These Five Despoilers residing in the human heart, their agency is
diffused far and wide; but is Heaven within the range of my—*i.e.*, any
man's—activity? Now co-operation implies the same object being held in
view by two persons. If the other man acts, it is as though I myself
acted; just, for instance, as in riding,—the rider is identified with
his horse; and where the horse arrives the rider arrives too. Therefore
a journey of a thousand *li* may be said to be held in the hollow of
one's hand; for if a desire arises in the mind to go, say, from Yen in
the north to Yueh in the south, you will be able to reach your
destination supposing you make proper use of your intellectual
faculties.

   *Sagacity and stupidity are both integral parts of Man's nature; and
both may be concealed from view.*

   The existence of dualism in things causes doubt; from this arises
duplicity, and thus the nature of man becomes no longer homogeneous.
This nature includes both sagacity and stupidity. If pretended sagacity
be apparent outwardly—*lit.*, in the teeth and heels—stupidity may be
peaceably maintained \[within\]; while if the outward appearance be
characterised by pretended stupidity, the real sagacity of the man will
have free scope for action. This amounts to a mutual concealment, by the
two qualities, of each other. Therefore genuineness consists in
homogeneity, while duplicity is the result of dualism. These two are the
outcome<span id="page_52_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_52_note_ddagger)
of the principles of Truth and Falsehood respectively; they may
therefore be put into practice *ad infinitum*.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

   *The Abuse of the Nine Openings of the Body having specially to do
with the Three which are most important, action and rest are both
possible.*

   The Nine Openings are, all of them, the organs of intelligent
perception; even those which have least capacity serving as passages for
air. Eight of these openings are channels for the exercise of sagacity;
it is only the private part behind, which is without any such faculty.
The implication \[in the text\] that they are *all* liable to misuse, is
simply made as applying to the majority, \[the one exception\] being
wrongly included for the sake of convenience. But it is the Ear, the
Eye, and the Month, which are the most liable to deception and abuse;
therefore their action should be confined within certain limits, and
subjected to the will of their owner. Then they may be made to act and
abstain from action; by which means the body may be nourished and
provision made \[for any exigencies that may arise\].

   The diseases to which men are subject are the result of abuse. It is
only the Sage who knows how to value this abuse \[of the bodily
organs\], for, when it becomes violent, it is only the Sage who is able
to hinder its operation. Then \[the man's\] action becomes in accord
with the principle Yang, and his repose in accord with the principle
Yin; \[the man himself\] developing mental powers of superhuman
excellence.

   *Fire is produced from Wood; but in the case of any disaster arising*
\[*from fire*\] *the wood will be overcome. Treacherous* \[*Ministers*\]
*arise in States; as soon as they act, the result is disaster. Those who
understand how to refine and discipline themselves are called Sages.*

   Alas! the hiding-place of treachery is in my own body. If one is able
to recognise its quality, or nature, it may be changed into goodness; if
one is unable to do so, it will always remain treachery. It is the Five
Elements who destroy me; it is the Five Elements to whom I owe my life.
The process of refinement consists in discarding the redundant; that of
discipline, in discarding the coarse or low.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II.

   *The productive and destructive attributes of Heaven constitute a
governing principle of* T<span class="small">AO</span>*. Heaven and
Earth are the plunderers of All Things; All Things are the plunderers of
Man, and Man, also, is the plunderer of All Things. When the Three
Plunderers are in mutual accord, the Three Powers will be settled in
tranquility.*

   Men all regard Heaven, Earth, and All Things as having been
established for mutual production or support; but the Sage regards them
as having been established with a view to mutual destruction. With
respect to the productive attributes of Heaven and Earth: what <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> they produce to-day they afterwards destroy.
Now to give life again to what they have once destroyed renders that
destruction purposeless, and the life itself as though it had never been
conferred; for which reason Heaven and Earth are the plunderers of All
Things. Man is supported or nurtured by All Things, and yet incurs
actual danger from them; for which reason All Things are the plunderers
of Man. Man makes All Things,<span
id="page_54_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_54_note_*) and then lays them under
contribution for his food and clothing; and thus he is the plunderer of
All Things. These plunderers are such by reason of their ignorance that
what they do is plunder. If each one sees only the life-giving process,
and not the process of destruction, the Three Plunderers will be each in
its proper sphere \[*quoad* the other two\], and the Three Powers
enabled to hold permanent sway.

   *Wherefore it may be said that when Sacrifices are partaken of* \[*by
Spirits*\] *their bones will be at rest; and when the mainsprings* \[*of
the Universe*\] *are set in motion, its various transmutations will go
on undisturbed.*

   When men lay violent hands on matter, the most honourable use they
make of so doing is in offering food in sacrifice;<span
id="page_54_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_54_note_dagger) when Heaven and
Earth act as the plunderers of All Things, the most honourable use they
make of so doing is in influencing and rectifying their springs of
action. When the Three Plunderers are all prevented from overstepping
their due prerogatives, they are then in their proper sphere.

   *Days and months have their fixed numbers; greatness and smallness
their due capacity—or measure. This proceeds from the merit of the
Sages, and is produced by the intelligence of Spirits.*

   Sacrifices are offered once every twelve years; in pursuance of which
the Sage fixes a certain period \[for the ceremony\]. Bodies have their
respective measures, or capacities; in pursuance of which the Sage
establishes a regular standard, assigning the different degrees in which
things may be used in the morning and evening respectively,<span
id="page_54_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_54_note_ddagger) and regulating
the respective capacities of the breath and blood. When, in the world,
the recurring intervals of sacrifices are estimated with precision, and
things are employed with a due regard to their compatibility to the
affair in hand, it results from the profundity of the merit of the Sages
and the perspicacity of spiritual beings.

   *The motive-power of the Three Plunderers is invisible and
undiscoverable by men generally. When the Model Man obtains it, he is
enabled to* <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> *fortify his body; but when
the Mean Man obtains it, he sets light store by his life.*

   To pilfer and use the motive-power of Heaven and Earth; to pilfer and
employ the motive-power of creation at large; to pilfer and control the
motive-power of my own body,—all constitute a robbery of motive-power.
But there is a proper and an improper use to which such motive-power may
be put; and from these two methods benefit and injury respectively
result. Thus, there are those who avail themselves of it for the
strengthening of their physical frame; who use both their own powers and
the powers of the world around them for their own tranquillity. There
are others who, having obtained it, set light store by their life; who
perversely bring about their own destruction, and provoke destruction
from the world around them; so that what they have obtained is far
removed from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III.

   *The blind are quick of hearing; the deaf are quick of sight. If all
advantages be concentrated into a single source,*<span
id="page_55_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_55_note_*) *you will have ten times
as many soldiers under your command as you would otherwise; and after
the revolution of three days and nights you will have ten thousand times
as many.*

   When the human Spirit is contained in the Mind, it is complete in all
its completeness, in the Mind. If it be divided into three, its strength
will be no longer complete. For instance, sight is not hearing; but in
exercising the faculty of sight, there really is a secret appropriation
of the hearing power. Hearing is not sight; but in exercising the
faculty of hearing, there is really a secret appropriation of the power
of vision. How do we know that this participation takes place? Thus—that
the blind are quick of hearing, and the deaf quick of sight; that is how
we know it. If, of these two things, one be discarded, the remaining one
will obtain just so much the more power;<span
id="page_55_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_55_note_dagger) and thus we may
know that, if anything be divided between two, both will have but
little. Thus if one particular advantage be made exclusive use of, and
gathered into a single source, the force at your command will be
increased ten-fold. If, then, the advantage being all thus concentrated,
you put forth greater energy, your force will be increased a
hundred-fold, whether you be engaged in the employment of your own
perceptive faculties or in that of soldiery.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

   *The Mind is produced from matter and dies with matter; the working
faculty resides in the Eye.*<span
id="page_56_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_56_note_*)

   Man has no Mind \[as existing apart from his body\]; his Eye is his
mind. What the eye sees, the mind acquires; what the eye cannot see the
mind does not obtain. What the eye sees is matter; what the mind knows
is simply whatever object is seen with the eye.<span
id="page_56_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_56_note_dagger) How, then, can
those who are born blind acquire knowledge? They acquire knowledge by
depending on the eyes of others.

   *Though Heaven has no benignity, the most benign results are produced
by its operations; there is nothing to which even the crashing
thunderclap and the cruel wind do not impart vitality.*

   The very injury done to man and things is a source of benefit to
them. The very death visited upon them leads to their revivification.
Those who understand this law are able to govern both themselves and
others.

   *Perfect joy consists in one's nature having abundance, or being
fully satisfied; perfect tranquillity, in being contented with little.*

   If \[man's\] nature has not abundance, it is dissatisfied. Joy
consists in the mind having abundance, more than it possesses capacity
for Quiescence consists in the mind being as it were unsatisfied, having
*less* than it possesses capacity for. One may use much or little
according to the measure of one's faculty; and I understand the use that
should be made of both.

   *Heaven appears most partial; but in reality its dealings are most
just.*

   Heaven, in its relations with created beings, deals with them all
differently; which seems partial in the extreme. But these differences
are equalized, or harmonised, by virtue of their very
differentiation,—or, harmony is evolved from these very inequalities;
and thus their treatment on the part of Heaven is, in reality, most
just.<span id="page_56_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_56_note_ddagger)

   It is on account of this apparent partiality that things attain
perfection; for although they are treated unequally, such treatment is
really right and just. Jutice, or equity, consists in \[equitable\]
distribution. <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> Partiality, or
selfishness, consists in the setting-up of one's self, and so
apportioning \[one's energies\] as to become a match for the whole
world. The selfish are such as are exclusively devoted to themselves;
and exclusive devotion to any one thing results in the subtilization or
refining \[of the power thus cultivated\]. Now all beings have their own
special vitality, which is exercised by this refined or subtle faculty;
thus individuality becomes lost,—\[*i.e.*, the body is as though it were
not, being reduced to a mere passive instrument\].<span
id="page_57_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_57_note_*) Individuality cannot be a
factor in the equitable; what a man loses himself, another cannot make
up to him. Great as is the Earth, there are yet men everywhere;
wherefore the rain and dew descend, and overspread it. Earth gives birth
to herbs, trees, birds and beasts, and receives them again at their
death; the Sun and Moon shine upon her, and she is brought under the
influence of their light and heat; in the course of a single year she
derives in great abundance all that is thus diffused. Heaven has never
yet conferred gifts, as such; but nothing that proceeds from it ever
returns to it again. Thus it is that Heaven is perfectly equitable in
its actions—*i.e.*, just to all alike; but men only know that Heaven is
equitable—they do not know the use made by it of partiality. The
partiality, or inequitableness of Heaven is far removed from its
capacity for self-sufficiency. Heaven has no affection for anything
external to itself; in its exercise—or dealing with such things—it is
sparing of its most subtle agencies and parsimonious of its vitalizing
influences; it is only its superfluities that it dispenses abroad. It is
for this reason that it is able to act without limit.<span
id="page_57_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_57_note_dagger) The partiality
of Heaven is far greater than that of the Earth, but its equity is also
far greater than the equity of the Earth; for if Heaven were not
avaricious of its own, its resources would in time be exhausted, and how
could men or things rely upon it any more? Wherefore partiality is the
very essence of T<span class="small">AO</span>, and the height of
partiality proves to be the height of justice.

   *The Laws affecting the Animal Creation reside in the Breath, or
Vital Fluid.*

   All things in the world confer vitality<span
id="page_57_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_57_note_ddagger) upon each
other; and when the use made of the material form \[thus produced\] is
great, the injury is small. When all things use their refined and subtle
essence in competing <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> with each other,
the Breath of Vital Fluid is not called much into play, and great
consequences are obtained. It afterwards becomes known that the
superiority of the great over the small results from the employment of
the Vital Fluid, which, hidden in the body, enables the body to confer
it in its turn on others; for what power to do so has the body of
itself?

   *Life is the root of Death; Death is the root of Life. Beneficence is
produced from Injury and Injury from Beneficence.*

   When men seek advantage where no advantage properly exists, any
advantage so acquired will be utterly nullified—or, turned into injury.
If injury is sought where no injury properly exists, injury will result
from \[what would otherwise be\] advantage. If this theory be minutely
investigated, and examined by the light of the past, we may arrive at an
understanding of its intrinsic or essential truth. \[For instance\]:
winter exercises a beneficial influence in heralding the spring, while
summer exercises a pernicious influence in introducing autumn.

   *If the stupid study the science of Heaven and Earth, they may become
wise; I, by studying the science of Seasons and Things, become
enlightened. Those who fear stupidity, become stupid; I, because I do
not fear stupidity, am wise. Others use means with a view to becoming
wise; I do not so. Wherefore it may be said that those who drown
themselves in water in order to extinguish a fire, seek their own
destruction.*

   The minute investigation of the science of Heaven and Earth suffices
to confer a knowledge of Height and Depth. The minute investigation of
the science of Seasons and of Things suffices to confer a knowledge of
what is Subtle and Diminutive. Though others always pursue their
researches among the Distant, I pursue mine amid the Near. This is quite
sufficient, the Near being the necessary condition of the Distant.
Wherefore, those whom others call wise, I regard as stupid. In cases
where the extreme summit of all Doctrine has been reached, the epithets
'wise' and 'stupid' should both be abjured. Thus there are, among men,
those who desire stupidity and those who aim at wisdom; but I neither
pursue the one nor seek the other. Abiding in neither stupidity nor
wisdom, I also rest not in mere enlightenment \[or cleverness\]. The
place where my body is at ease is outside both stupidity and wisdom; it
is in \[the contemplation of\] Times and Things that I penetrate the
mysteries of the Sublime. How, then, can I run counter to those
mainsprings of action which exist in the world around me? Let the
Outward manifestation \[of wisdom and stupidity\] be once seen, and the
injury inherent in both will be experienced. The one will plunge men
into water and the other throw them into fire, so that in either case
they will come to an untimely end.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

   *The Principle of Spontaneity*<span
id="page_59_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_59_note_*) *is quiescent; and from
it Heaven, Earth, and All Things are produced.*

   Spontaneity acts, yet acts not;<span
id="page_59_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_59_note_dagger) its force, or
influence, is silent. If we observe the growth of vegetation, we see
that the process takes place secretly in the dead of night; when we rise
next day we find suddenly that there is augmentation. By this it may be
known that things are born of stillness, the verification of which fact
is found in the stillness of the night. But there is stillness which
belongs to the day, too; and the nature of this stillness is most
recondite. Yet when its greatness is investigated, what part is it not
found to have played in the production of Heaven and Earth?

   *The Principle of Heaven and Earth is gradual in its working; so that
the Yin and Yang flourish abundantly. When the Yin and Yang alternate
with each other, the transmutations of the Universe flow smoothly on;
for which reason the Sage knows that the Law of Spontaneity may not be
opposed, and so he controls it* \[*by gentle means*\]*.*

   Cold may produce the congealment of water; heat will cause the fusion
of metal. These two influences are mutually antagonistic. But both, in
reaching their culminating points, progress by degrees, and this law of
degrees implies a gradual process, extended over a long period of time.
By such a protracted process water may be changed into fire, and winter
into summer. Of those who originate, or embody, ideas, and those who
carry such ideas into execution, the former are characterized by
quiescence, while the latter work cautiously, or step by step; and where
these two things exist, everything may be accomplished. I owe all the
power I possess to them. The usefulness of an axe is fulfilled in
thinning out a forest; a vessel speeds along only when its sails are
filled with wind. All the strength I have, I derive from quiescence, and
the habit of acting gradually; all my knowledge has been conferred upon
me from the same source,

   The Sage acts by this Law of Gradation to transform both Things and
Thoughts, and to change the expression of another's countenance; he acts
by the Law of Quiescence to control all beings that move, and to fathom
the motive principles of Heaven.

   The Yin is antagonistic to the Yang; but now, if the principle of
gradualness be brought into play, the opposition between the two will be
forgotten. The Yang is entered from the Yin, and the Yin from the Yang;
for both are the same fundamentally.<span
id="page_59_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_59_note_ddagger) And how is
this? It results from that Circularity to which Heaven conforms its
external shape. Heaven is circular; circularity is the condition of its
stability; and all <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> things thus revolving
in a circle, with Heaven, pass through stages of decadence and decay.
Now deteriorating, now compliant, now waning, and now dependent on one
another, each gets nearer to the other the further each one goes. A
superficial contemplation of what lies abroad enables one to distinguish
the four points of the compass; but if a man pushes his investigations
to the furthest possible limit, what does he find does not follow \[the
universal order\]?

   *Seeing that the Principle of Quiescence cannot be brought under the
control of calendrical computations, it needs be that there is a
mysterious Receptacle* \[*in Nature*\]*;*<span
id="page_60_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_60_note_*) *and from this have
sprung the Myriad Simulacra, the Eight Diagrams, the Sexagenary Cycle,
the potent faculties of Spirits, and the invisibility of Demons. The
mystery of the antagonism between the Yin and the Yang is clearly
manifest, and enters into all forms of visible existence.*

   The things recorded in calendars are recorded in the order of their
progression; when this is not so, they are noted according to the
spontaneity of their nature. Now Spontaneity is the highest form of
Quiescence; what is recorded is the active, or working, phase of things;
and this active phase being placed on record, the quiescent element
becomes more absolutely hidden than ever. Wherefore quiescence is the
mysterious Receptacle of Heaven; quiescence produces transmutation and
change, and it is through this that Vital Force and Destiny exist.<span
id="page_60_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_60_note_dagger) Destiny takes
its rise from the two constellations Emptiness and Danger;<span
id="page_60_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_60_note_ddagger) and from it
proceeds the Sexagenary Cycle. Days, months, years, and hours are all
dated from the first stem of the Cycle, and the first of each is named
Chia Tsze accordingly. The Chia Tsze being once established, the full
number of the Sexagenary Cycle became completed, the four points of the
compass and the four seasons were instituted, everything which has form
was produced. But the root from which they all sprang was the One
Spontaneous Quiescence; is not this wonderful—mysterious? We call it
wonderful, but the epithet is insufficient. Wherefore it may be said,
with reference to the potent faculties of spirits and the invisible
element in demons, that it is from this that the spirits derive their
powers inexhaustibly, and from this that demons derive their
invisibility, without ceasing. Thus it may be known that the antagonism
which exists between the Yin and the Yang takes its rise from this
cause; and <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> further we may know that this
antagonism does not lie in outward, visible things. When a certain
destination has been reached, and the person so reaching it then passes
beyond it, that is called advancing. The alternation which takes place
between the Yin and the Yang constitutes their present difference; and
this comes from their spontaneous nature, which constituted their
difference in the past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SUMMARY.

   The Intelligent Faculty resides in the Mind; but its exercise is
wholly dependent upon the existence of external objects. If there is
nothing upon which to rest the thoughts, the thinking power will
perforce remain unoccupied; if the intelligent faculty be not centred
upon the abstruse or sublime, the thoughts will not be deep; if it be
not employed upon the perplexing and that which has only the semblance
of reality, the thoughts will not be able to branch off into side
issues; from which it follows that this faculty must necessarily have
its tally, in the shape of something objective to work upon, before it
can begin to act. But if it borrows any of the foregoing objects of
thought as a vehicle for itself, the faculty is still most certainly
subjective—or, it still resides in me, and is at my own disposal;
consequently contemplation can be pursued to the very furthest point. If
one looks steadfastly at the empty air for any length of time, one
begins to see tiny objects floating dimly before the eyes; if one peers
into darkness for any length of time, one begins to distinguish a little
light; but these appearances have no actual objectivity,—they are purely
subjective, and exist only in myself. Wherefore this book, the 'Clue to
the Unseen,' is intended to show men how to look for Correspondences in
the Obscure; and here may be found \[the explanation of\] all that
perplexes, and which has only the semblance of reality. Whether one
desires to use this book to nourish the body, or to assist him in
military tactics, both objects may be attained. If one holds a definite
object in view, the course to attain it should be followed with a single
mind; for a multiplicity of ideas will never agree with one another—they
are mutually incompatible. Yet can it be said that this teaching is
deceptive and far-fetched? The myriad changes and transformations which
take place in the world are all included under one law; wherefore the
*Yî Ching* deals with all existing simulacra as they are pourtrayed in
the *Ho-t‘u* and the *Lo-shu*.<span
id="page_61_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_61_note_*) If a small portion \[of
this principle\] be applied, or brought into coincidence, with created
things, it is not that this will environ or comprehend them all equally;
it is that <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> all things are really one
\[in their reception of the influences of Heaven\]. Those who understand
this cause, wherever their eyes and ears may reach, will all be able to
recognise the hidden correspondences of Nature, and will not need to
study the 'Clue to the Unseen' itself. Only let the doctrine here taught
be brought face to face with \[the phenomena of\] Heaven and Earth, and
it will prove to have sprung from the Radical, the Great, and the
Primordial. Thus the Five Elements act with a view to beneficence; the
Sage alone regards them in the light of robbers. The myriad
transmutations take place with a view to utility; the Sage alone regards
them as destructive. The nine openings exist with a view to what is
right and proper; the Sage alone regards them as the means of abuse. All
things contribute to each other's growth, or welfare; the Sage alone
regards them all as plunderers. But in observing the immediate sequel of
these phenomena, men fail to get a knowledge of their ultimate destiny
or aim; so that the affairs of the world are some of them in good
repute, while others are looked upon as evil, ordinary reason being
pointed at as the essence of all knowledge! Therefore, I recognise good
influences in robbery itself; I can distinguish utility in the midst of
destruction; I can find advantage in the midst of plunder, and gather
what is of real consequence out of the midst of abuses. An absence of
all benignity (passionlessness) constitutes Law—or, the Principle of
Nature; utter partiality constitutes super-excellence; while the Six
Evils contain in themselves the gist and essence of this 'Clue to the
Unseen.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ttx04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_50">p. 50</span>

<span id="page_50_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_50_fr_*) Rain—which is the
influence of the element *Wood*: Fine Weather—the influence of the
element *Metal*: Heat—the influence of the element *Fire*: Cold—the
influence of the element *Water*: and Wind—the influence of the element
Earth.

<span id="page_50_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_50_fr_dagger) The Five
Breaths or Afflati represent, in the order in which they stand, the Five
so-called Elements of Nature—see above, [Note.\*](#page_50_note_*) Thus
Earth, or that which is in the Centre, may be injured by Wood.—*q.d.*,
implements of husbandry; Water by Earth—the solid and fluid being
mutually opposed; Fire by Water—the latter extinguishing the former;
Metal by Fire—as being melted by it; while Wood is liable to be cut and
spoiled by Metal.

<span id="footnotes_page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="page_51_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_51_fr_*) Referring to the
theory put forward in the italicised text, that Man is the Moral Nature
of Heaven. I think I may claim to have translated this most enigmatical
passage correctly. The Chinese runs as follows: \#\#\#.

<span id="page_51_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_51_fr_dagger) Invisible
agents become supernaturally visible.

<span id="page_51_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_51_fr_ddagger) That is,
the stars and constellations, which are the countenance of Heaven, are
all disturbed and thrown into confusion when Heaven is angry; just as
the face of a man becomes distorted when the man is in a rage. Each of
these short sections is simply an amplification of its heading.

<span id="footnotes_page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="page_52_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_52_fr_*) According to the
English proverb that Heaven only helps those who help themselves.

<span id="page_52_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_52_fr_dagger) For
instance, the antagonism of water to fire is of great use to matter in
the case of a conflagration; and matter thus reaps the benefit.

<span id="page_52_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_52_fr_ddagger) The idea
evidently is that \#\#\# and \#\#\# are the \#\#\# of which \#\#\# and
\#\#\# are respectively the \#\#\#.

<span id="footnotes_page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="page_54_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_54_fr_*) Possibly referring
to the Holy or Ideal Man, who is said in some mystic sense to be the
creator of the world. Or it may mean that many things owe their
existence to the energies of man, as vegetable productions, which are
sown and reared by human Instrumentality.

<span id="page_54_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_54_fr_dagger) The
Chinese idiom is here puzzling in the extreme: \#\#\#.

<span id="page_54_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_54_fr_ddagger) Here
again the text is most difficult to make anything of. It runs \#\#\#.

<span id="footnotes_page_55">p. 55</span>

<span id="page_55_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_55_fr_*) This is the
translation of a very obscure idiom in the original: \#\#\#. It occurs
in the \#\#\# of Huang T‘ing-chien, where it is followed by the phrase
\#\#\#.

<span id="page_55_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_55_fr_dagger) This
reminds us of a scene in the *Malade Imaginaire*, where Toinette
recommends Argan to poke out one of his eyes in order that he may see
better with the other.

<span id="footnotes_page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="page_56_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_56_fr_*) This short section
is peculiarly interesting as embodying a bold denial of any future life
or the existence of spirit apart from matter.

<span id="page_56_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_56_fr_dagger) All
knowledge is objective; the mind has no subjective existence or
perceptions. It is as it were, created by the object perceived, just as
colour is produced by the rays of light which are thrown back from the
object instead of being absorbed. Light is a necessary condition of
colour; if there were no light, colour could not exist; and similarly if
there were no external object of perception there would be no perceptive
faculty—no mind. The same idea occurs in Chuang Tsze, where it is
affirmed that a road has no actual objective existence; it is the *act
of walking* which produces the road, and if no one walked the road would
not exist.

<span id="page_56_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_56_fr_ddagger) In other
words, a law of compensation runs through the whole economy of Nature;
the rigour of northern climates being accompanied by a plentiful supply
of fur for the protection of the inhabitants—and so on. See the first
chapter of Huai-nan Tsze, where this idea is gone into at some length.

<span id="footnotes_page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="page_57_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_57_fr_*) This passage runs
as follows: \#\#\#. It seems capable of another and less abstract
rendering, in which would be synonymous with \#\#\#; but although I do
not claim more than an approximation to accuracy for the translation
given above, I hesitate to adopt the physiological interpretation, as
irrelevant to the context.

<span id="page_57_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_57_fr_dagger) Its
resources are never exhausted because always carefully husbanded;
therefore the apparent parsimony of Heaven is really just and wise.

<span id="page_57_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_57_fr_ddagger)
Literally, the *coarse*; that is, the \#\#\#, in opposition to the
\#\#\# or subtle essence.

<span id="footnotes_page_59">p. 59</span>

<span id="page_59_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_59_fr_*) Including both
self-existence and spontaneous or natural action. The phrase in the
original is \#\#\#.

<span id="page_59_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_59_fr_dagger) Or,
accomplishes ends by not acting. Or again, acts as though not acting.

<span id="page_59_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_59_fr_ddagger) In the
text, "both belong to the same category or order."

<span id="footnotes_page_60">p. 60</span>

<span id="page_60_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_60_fr_*) Compare *Tao Tê
Ching*, chap. LXII.

<span id="page_60_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_60_fr_dagger) For an
example of the character \#\#\# being used in the sense of destiny, see
the *Shu Ching*, where Yao addresses Shun, saying, \#\#\#. It means the
appointment of Heaven, the unavoidabe lot.

<span id="page_60_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_60_fr_ddagger) Two of
the Twenty-eight Constellations or Stellar Mansions. "Emptiness" \#\#\#
consists of two stars in a straight line, *viz.*, *Beta* in the left
shoulder of Aquarius and *Alpha* in the forehead of Equuleus. 'Danger'
\#\#\# consists of three stars, in the shape of an obtuse-angle, *viz.*,
*Alpha* in the right shoulder of Aquarius, *Epsilon* or *Enif*, and
*Theta* in the head of Pegasus.—M<span class="small">AYERS</span>.

<span id="footnotes_page_61">p. 61</span>

<span id="page_61_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_61_fr_*) The mystic scrolls
presented to Fu Hsi by the river-dragon in the guise of a tortoise. The
sentence in question might perhaps be translated with considerable
amplification, thus: "Wherefore the *Yî Ching* comprehends, under this
doctrine, all existing simulacra—\[this doctrine\] having been set forth
in the *Ho-t‘u* and *Lo-shu*."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
