[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ttx10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

# THE KAN YING PIEN.<span id="page_103_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_103_note_*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

T<span class="small">HE</span> Supreme One, Lao Tsze, said:—

   Happiness and evil do not come spontaneously; it is men who bring
them upon themselves. The consequences of virtue and vice follow each
just as the shadow follows the form. Now there are spirits in Heaven and
in Earth whose business it is to investigate the sins of men, and who
shorten their lives according as their transgressions are serious or
venial. If a man's span of life be thus abbreviated, he will spend it in
poverty and waste, and meet with constant disasters. Everybody will hate
him; punishments and miseries will dog his footsteps; blessing and good
fortune will hold themselves aloof; a baleful star will bring him
sorrow; and when his time is up, he will die. Besides this, there are
spirits in three of the stars in the constellation of "God's
Chariot"<span id="page_103_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_103_note_dagger)
who record the sins and crimes of men in the Upper Sphere, and cut off
their days; and there is also a spirit in the body of each man which
ascends to the Tribunal of Heaven upon a certain day, once every sixty
years, to report the sins he has committed. And at the end of every
month the Spirit of the Hearth does the same. All men who have committed
great sins are deprived of twelve years of life; those whose sins are
less serious lose only one. Now there are several hundred different
kinds of sin, both small and great, which all you who wish to live a
long life must be careful to avoid. Advance in all that is in harmony
with the right; retreat from everything that is opposed to it. Walk not
in the paths of depravity, nor deceive yourselves by sinning in the dark
where none can see you. Accumulate virtue, and store up merit; treat all
with gentleness and love; be loyal, be dutiful; be respectful to your
elder brothers and kind to your juniors; be upright yourselves, in order
that you may reform others; compassionate the fatherless and widow;
reverence the aged and cherish the young; do not injure even little
insects, or grass, or trees. Pity the wickedness of others, and be glad
of their virtues; succour them in their distress, and rescue them when
in danger; when a man gains his desire, let it be as though his good
fortune were your own; when one suffers loss, as though you suffered it
yourself. Never publish the failings of another, or make a parade of
your own merits; <span id="page_104">p. 104</span> put a stop to evil,
and afford every encouragement to virtue; be not grasping, but learn to
content yourself with little. When you are reviled, cherish not feelings
of resentment; if you receive favours, do so as deprecating your
deserts; be kind and generous without seeking for any return, and never
repent of anything that you may give to others. This is to be a good
man; one whom Heaven will defend, whom all will respect, whom blessings
and honours will accompany, whom evil will not touch, and whom all good
spirits will protect. All the desires of such a man will be realised,
and he may reasonably hope to attain to immortality. A man whose wish it
is to become a Heavenly Immortal must perform one thousand three hundred
works of merit; he who only aspires to earthly immortality—to become
endowed with supernatural powers—can gain his end by performing three
hundred virtuous acts. But if any person acts in opposition to what is
right and turns his back upon the truth, becoming expert in wickedness
and hardened in cruelty; if he secretly injures the gentle and the good,
abuses his sovereign and his parents in private, treats his elders with
disrespect, rebels against his employers, deceives the simple, slanders
his fellow students, brings false accusations against others, and plays
the hypocrite generally, prying into the shortcomings of his own
relatives and then bruiting them abroad; if he is peevish, wilful, and
unloving, perverse and headstrong, calling good evil and evil good,
doing what he ought not to do, and leaving undone what he ought to do;
if he tyrannises over his subordinates, appropriating to himself the
merit of their work, flatters his superiors and anticipates their
intentions; if he is ungrateful for kindness received, and cherishes
unceasing resentment for grievances; if, as a mandarin, he neglects the
welfare of the people, brings sedition into the State, rewards the
undeserving, punishes the innocent, condemns men to death for filthy
lucre, ruins others in order to secure their positions, slaughters those
who have tendered their submission in war, degrades the upright and
shelves the virtuous, oppresses the orphan and persecutes the widow,
accepts bribes for violating the law, treats the straight as if it were
crooked and the crooked as if it were straight, regards trivial
misdemeanours as grave crimes, and waxes still fiercer against those who
deserve death instead of pitying them; if he is aware of his own faults
yet does not reform, knows what is good yet does not do it; if he lays
his own crimes upon others, places hindrances in the way of such men as
physicians, diviners, astrologers and physiognomists, blasphemes the
virtuous and holy, and intimidates or insults the wise and good; if he
shoots birds and hunts animals, routs hybernating insects and reptiles
out of their burrows, frightens birds at roost, stops up the holes of
the former and overturns the nests of the latter, injures a fœtus in the
womb or breaks eggs in the process of incubation; if he wishes that
<span id="page_105">p. 105</span> misfortune may come on others,
detracts from their achievements and merits, exposes other people to
danger and keeps on the safe side himself, injuring them in order to
secure his own advantage; returns evil for good, suffers private ends to
interfere with public interests, takes credit to himself for the ability
of others, conceals their virtues, mocks at their physical deformities,
pries into other people's private affairs, squanders their property,
makes mischief between blood-relations, tries to deprive others of what
they specially love, eggs people on to commit sin, boasts of his own
influence and power, puts others to shame in the desire to get the
better of them, destroys crops, and upsets intended marriages; if he is
arrogant on the score of ill-gotten gains, sneaks shamelessly off from
the results of his own evil deeds, claims credit for kindnesses he never
showed, denies the bad offices he actually performed, brings evil on
others with malicious intent, schemes after unmerited reputation, hides
wicked designs in his heart, effaces goodness in others and harbours
vice in himself, takes advantage of his own power to vex and harass his
neighbours, and complies with tyrannical designs to kill or wound; if he
wantonly cuts things to pieces with scissors, slaughters animals without
regard to the proprieties, throws away grain, teases and worries dumb
creatures, breaks up homes and seizes all the valuables they contain,
floods people's houses with water or burns them with fire, overturns and
disturbs customs in order to prevent a man from accomplishing his ends,
spoils implements so as to render them useless, desires to deprive
others of their rank and influence and to make them lose all their
wealth, conceives lustful desires at the sight of beauty, borrows money
and then longs for the lender's death, hates and vilifies those who do
not accede to every request he makes, attributes the misfortunes of
others to their sins, mocks their personal defects, represses those who
have laudable ability and parts, injures persons by sorcery and foul
arts, kills trees by means of poisonous drugs, cherishes hatred to his
teachers, runs counter to his parents and elder brothers, takes away
other people's property by main force, or insists upon it being given
up—bent on getting it by hook or by crook; if he acquires wealth by
robbery and extortion, schemes after promotion in sly and underhand
ways, is unjust both in the bestowal of rewards and the infliction of
punishments, overindulgent in ease and pleasure, threatening and
tyrannical to his inferiors; if he blames Heaven and decries men, finds
fault with the wind and curses the rain, for his misfortunes; if he is
much given to going to law against others, join in friendly associations
with bad men, pays heed to the talk of his wife and concubines but turns
a deaf ear to the admonitions of his parents, forsakes old friends for
new ones, speaks good words while his heart is full of evil, is covetous
of gain, hoodwinks and defrauds his superiors, brings reproach on others
by falsehood, reviles <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> men and then
plumes himself upon his candour in doing so, abuses the gods and poses
as a man of integrity, runs counter to the established rule of right,
neglects his own kin and transfers all his attention to those who are in
no way connected with him, calls Heaven and Earth to witness about
trifles, and swears by the gods about low and disreputable matters; if
he repents having bestowed alms or given presents, borrows and fails to
repay, schemes after and meddles with what lies beyond the scope of his
own functions, passes all bounds in lasciviousness, assumes an
appearance of gentleness while fierce and cruel at heart, gives people
dirt and filth to eat, puts them in positions of perplexity by
left-handed dealings, uses short measures and light weights in trade,
adulterates good wares with stuff of inferior quality, amasses wealth by
foul means, forces virtuous folk to commit evil deeds, insults and
deludes the simple; if he is insatiably covetous, if he invokes
imprecations on people to get at the bottom of any difficulty, or is
given to bad conduct under the influence of liquor, or wrangles and
quarrels with his own flesh and blood; as a man, neither loyal nor
good—as a woman, neither gentle nor compliant—the one always at
logger-heads with his wife, the other disrespectful to her husband; if
he is given to vaunting his own praises, and for ever envying the good
fortune of others; if he treats his wife and children badly, or, in the
case of a woman, if she behaves indecorously to her parents-in-law; if
he conducts himself contemptuously to the Tablet of a dead person, turns
a disobedient ear to the commands of his superiors, busies himself about
useless matters, acts insincerely towards others, calls down curses upon
himself or his fellows, cherishes unreasonable hatreds and undue
partialities, steps over wells and stoves instead of walking round them
out of respect to the presiding deities, jumps over any victuals or
persons that may lie in his way, injures his children or destroys a
fœtus in the womb; if he is addicted to occult or secret practices, to
singing and dancing on moonless nights or on inauspicious days in the
last month of the year, to weeping and giving way to anger early in the
morning on the first day of a month, to spitting, evacuating, or blowing
his nose towards the north—where the gods reside,—to reciting ballads,
singing songs, or weeping, towards the fireplace—thus failing in respect
to the Spirit of the Hearth,—to using the fire of a cooking-stove to
burn incense with, or to employing unclean fuel in the preparation of
food; if he neglects to cover himself when he gets up during the night,
inflicts punishments on any of the eight festivals, spits at meteors or
falling stars, points at lightning, or at a rainbow, or at anyone of the
Three Luminaries; if he gazes for any length of time at the Sun or Moon,
burns grass or shoots birds in the spring, utters curses towards the
north, wantonly kills tortoises or strikes at snakes; if a man is guilty
of any of these crimes, the God who rules over human <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> destinies will, according as the sin is
trivial or serious, abbreviate his span of life. When his time is
finished, he will die; and if any of his sins be left unatoned for, they
will be visited upon his sons and grandsons. If a man has laid unjust
hands upon the goods of others, the responsibility will descend to his
wife and family, and they will gradually drop off and die; if not, they
will either be bereft of their property by water or fire, or they will
lose it themselves, or fall a prey to disease, or be the victims of
false accusations—in order that full satisfaction for their ill-gotten
gains may be exacted. If a man puts others to death illegally, his
weapons will be turned against himself, and he will in his turn be
killed. If a man acquires riches by unjust means, it will be as though
he had eaten poisoned meat in his hunger and drunk poisoned wine in his
thirst; his appetite will not be left unsatisfied, but death will
inevitably result. Now if a virtuous thought arises in a man's heart,
even though it be not put into practice, he will be accompanied by good
spirits; but if a thought of wickedness arises, even though it be not
carried out, all bad spirits will follow in his wake. If a man, having
committed some bad act, afterwards repents and reforms, avoiding sin and
striving to be good and virtuous, he will eventually be rewarded and
blessed, and the evil that would have come upon him will be turned into
a blessing. Thus all that good men say is good, all that they look at is
good, all that they do is good; every day they live is characterised by
goodness in these three forms, and in three years Heaven will send them
happiness. But all that bad men say is bad, all that they look at is
bad, all that they do is bad; every day they live is characterised by
these three forms of badness, and in three years' time Heaven will send
them a curse. Why, then, do not men force themselves to walk in the
paths of virtue?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The Divine Man, who existed in the Beginning of All Things, said: If
one reads a page, daily, of the admonitions thus offered by the Supreme
One, his sins will be blotted out. If he abides by them for a month, his
happiness and prosperity will be established and prolonged. If he acts
in accordance with them for a year, seven generations of his ancestors
will be enabled to enter Paradise. If he never departs from them, and
becomes not weary in well doing, his span of life will be lengthened;
the Celestial Gods themselves will reverence him, and his name will be
enrolled among the spirits of the blest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*How to Read the Foregoing Essay.*

   This essay, which deals with the recompenses and retributions
inseparable from virtue and vice, embodies an eternal law of Heaven;
<span id="page_108">p. 108</span> so it must not be read carelessly, as
though it were no more than an ordinary essay on morals. Those who study
it should sit in an erect and decent posture in a quiet room by
themselves; they must put away all wandering thoughts and cultivate a
reverential frame of mind, devoting their hearts to the reception of the
truth; then the awakening words which are here found will be able to
effect an entrance, and arouse their consciences. If this method of
study be permanently persevered in, all depraved thoughts will disappear
of themselves.

   Now the first requisite for studying this book profitably, is
unquestioning Faith. In examining the ancient standards of right and
wrong. and comparing them with those accepted at the present day, we
find that there has never been a discrepancy of a single hair between
any given action and the recompense which is its inalienable attendant.
Only, some consequences follow immediately, while others are delayed; so
that people have not been able to trace the connection between them in
every instance. Young folks are often so headstrong, wilful, prejudiced
and infatuated that they do not believe in this at all; it is only when
they have arrived at greater experience and fuller age that they
gradually get to understand it more clearly, and to repent of their
former folly. But by that time they are old, and their bad habits are
confirmed; and to attempt to put away the vice and depravity of a
life-time when the sun of life is setting, is like trying to extinguish
a blazing waggon-load of fuel with a cup of water—the means are wholly
inadequate to the end. Therefore, it is necessary that all who would
read this essay should resolutely exercise a heart of faith; for, let
this faith be once formed, a root of virtue is implanted; a fresh root
being planted with each succeeding exercise of faith. If the faith be
small, the blessing will be small; if great, the blessing will be great;
while if faith be mixed with doubt, self-injury and self-loss will be
the inevitable result.

   The second requisite is Diligence in Self-cultivation. Now this
chapter has been compiled for the special benefit of those who wish to
live a long life. It treats of the true law by which one may free
oneself from the world—a law to which all who are yet upon earth, all
who transmit consequences for good or evil to after generations, all who
have left the world, and all who return to the world in another form
after death, are subject. For instance: P‘ei Pu succeeded in prolonging
his span of years, while Lo Kung acted so that his life was cut short
midway. Such is the law in its application to people while they are yet
in the body. Tou Shih left good deeds behind him, the rewards of which
descended upon his posterity, while Lin Chi, by a vicious course,
brought about the utter extinction of his family. Such is the Law in its
application to those who leave a heritage of good or ill behind them
after death. There <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> are those whose
treasuries are full of gold and whose granaries are well stored with
rice, and who are themselves possessed of boundless influence and power;
yet, when they come to die, their works will follow them—not one iota of
their merits and their sins being misplaced or lost. Such is the Law in
its application to those who have left the world in the ordinary course
of nature. The Empress Ch‘uëh, who disobeyed the decrees of Heaven,
re-appeared as a python; Wang Shao, who died without paying his just
debts, was transformed into a cow. The crimes of these two having
reached their full measure, they were degraded to the brute creation.
Such is the Law in its application to those who return to the world in
another shape after death. Wherefore those whose object it is to regain
the principle by which they can bring about the sublimation of their
bodies and attain to a condition of immortality, must begin by
accumulating hidden virtue. To practise good deeds unknown to others; to
be charitable without hoping for any reward; to save those who are in
danger without taking advantage of their helplessness;—such is secret
virtue. When secret virtue is abundantly practised, the man will be able
of himself to enter upon a full comprehension of this doctrine; and the
eyes of his understanding being opened, he will be enabled to attain to
everlasting life in another world. And even if a man take no thought for
the attainment of immortality, will he not sometimes ponder upon life
and death, and on what may befal his immediate descendants? Dear reader,
I urge you to advance swiftly, fearlessly, and with your whole heart, in
the course I have here laid down. Know that we are surrounded on all
sides by a multitude of spiritual beings, who take note of all we do;
therefore, be watchful, and examine yourself strictly at all times; act
in accordance with these admonitions in whatever you may have to do;
then you will never fail to do justice to your real self. If, however,
you do not act thus; if you progress a little way and then stop, doing
good by fits and starts without seriousness and resolution,—how long do
you think that you will live? How long will it take you to lay up a
store of hidden virtue? You will just be the sport of surrounding
influences your whole life through, and nothing further will you ever
gain!

   The third requisite is Determination and Perseverance. Now goodness
in little things brings a speedy recompense; the rewards of great virtue
come slowly. But speedy rewards consist of only trivial blessings; those
which delay their coming consist of very great ones. There are people in
the world who believe this, but very few who act it out with any
resolution. And why? Because, after they have walked in the ways of
virtue for little while, they meet with difficulties or obstacles;
whereupon they are discouraged, and say, foolishly, that the laws of
Heaven are really very hard to understand; so that finally they abandon
<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> all the progress they have made so
far, and allow their impatience to hinder them from reaping the rewards
of their well-doing.

   The fourth requisite is genuine Sincerity. All who lay themselves out
to do good to others must be indefatigable, earnest, urgent, and
resolute in their undertaking. In the duty of self-examination, it is
necessary to be honest and true, and to avoid all self-deception. One
sincere resolve is sufficient to ensure the assistance of both the
heavenly and earthly Gods; but will any resolve that is *not* sincere
accomplish this? The example afforded by Yü Ching-yi sets forth this
truth as clearly as in a mirror.

   The fifth requisite is the Promulgation of these Admonitions among
one's Fellows. The rewards inseparable from virtue and vice respectively
are sufficient in themselves to incite to the one and dissuade from the
other. This connection between actions and their consequences is the
mysterious law of God Himself,—the changeless decree pronounced by the
Judge of the Unseen World. It is not necessary for the present writer to
disclose his name. His object in writing is not to fish for compliments
and praise. Nor is it necessary that the bookseller should make a
fortune out of the sale of the work. He would not dare to use virtue as
a means of angling for profit. Wherever this book is to be found, there
will be a root from which some good may spring; if anybody hides it
away, and prevents its free circulation, he will incur no ordinary
retribution. Wherefore if a man shows it to but one other person, he
will be credited with ten good deeds; if he shows it to ten persons, he
will be credited with a hundred. If he distributes it among the great
and noble, those who are leaders of men, and those who possess influence
and power, he will be credited with a thousand virtuous deeds. If he
mentions it on every possible occasion, and brings its maxims to mind
whenever opportunity for doing so arises, so that there will eventually
be no one in the world who will not have heard them and have had a
chance of being influenced by them, converted, and brought to lead a new
life,—the merit and the happiness of such a one will both alike be
measureless. In former times Chou Ch‘ih quoted this book far and wide:
and in virtue of so doing, he succeeded in averting the horrors of a
famine that then raged. Ch‘ün Ping led men into paths of goodness, and
he suddenly found himself ascending to the ranks of the immortals. What
limit, indeed, is there to the blessing attending those whose goodness
is thus unselfish?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Certain Wonderful Verifications of the Above.*

   When Wang Yuen, a native of Ch‘ien-tang, was still a child, he met
with the foregoing essay, and took great delight in studying it. And not
only so; he followed all the admonitions therein contained, with great
<span id="page_111">p. 111</span> reverence and care. As Mr. Ching Hsü,
his father, was prevented by death from fulfilling his intention of
having additional copies of it prepared, he spent his own money in the
work: leaving no stone unturned to enlist the pecuniary assistance of
certain other men of worth. He printed in all ten thousand copies, which
he distributed broadcast. One night he dreamt that his father appeared
to him, and said, "Not only have you completely carried out the design I
was prevented from fulfilling, but, you have succeeded in securing the
assistance of others in the good cause. In consequence of this, I have
already ascended to the Halls of Paradise; your mother will be blessed
with a long life; while your own name and the names of your coadjutors
are conspicuous upon the roll of virtuous men." Subsequent events proved
the truth of these predictions.

   A certain man of Huei-chou, named Wu Ta-tso, had great difficulty in
procuring a son. He prayed in all sorts of temples and in every variety
of manner, without receiving any answer. But one day a friend sent him a
copy of the Book of Recompenses, saying, "This contains the secret of
procuring children and securing happiness." Wu bowed to the ground, and
accepted the gift. Then he studied the book with all his heart and soul.
Whenever he was able to perform a virtuous action he performed it;
whatever vice he had to be discarded, he discarded; and in a very short
time he found himself the father of three sons. Whereupon he was led to
place implicit faith in the supernatural proofs thus afforded of the
truth of the book; so he printed off a number of copies at his own
expense, in which he recorded his personal experiences. This occurred in
the reign of T‘ien Ch‘i of the Ming dynasty.

   Yang Shou-yeh, a native of Ho-chien Fu, lived to the age of sixty
without having a son. This grieved him bitterly, so on meeting with this
book he set himself reverently to follow its instructions. In the reign
of Wang Li he fell sick, died, and came to life again; whereupon he
addressed his relatives, saying, "I have just been to the Realms of
Darkness, where I saw an official holding a register, on which was
inscribed my name. My destiny, he said, was originally that I should be
childless; but seeing that I have humbly striven to carry out the
admonitions of the Book of Recompenses, an addition to life and honours
has been conferred upon me. Besides this, too, I am to have a son." And
the very next year, a son was born to him!

   Wang Chu, a native of Hsien-chü Hsien, had a son named Wang Tsing,
who fell sick and died when only four years old, to his father's
deep-felt grief. Whereupon Wang Chu formed a resolution to print a
number of copies of this book, which he distributed among the people
with the object of causing his lost son to enter once more into his
mother's womb. Some time afterwards, his wife found herself *enceinte*;
<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> and one night she dreamt she went to
the Ting-kuang Temple at Huang-yen Hsien, whence she returned carrying
her little boy home in her arms. When she awoke she experienced a
movement in her womb, and soon gave birth to a son, vastly resembling
the one that she had lost. In fact, the same body was born twice over;
the bones and flesh had actually been brought together a second time!

   Ching Yung-pao, a native of Chieh-hsin Hsien, lived to the age of
over fifty years without having a son. He prayed silently to High Heaven
to bestow upon him but one child in order that he and his late father
might have somebody to offer sacrifices to them after he himself was
dead; promising to publish a hundred copies of the Book of Recompenses
and distribute them abroad, and for evermore to walk humbly in
accordance with its precepts in gratitude for the mercy he sought. And
sure enough, a son was born to him when he was fifty-five.

   A certain magistrate of Kuang-chou, in Szechuen, named Li
Ch‘ang-ling, was very eminent for reversing unjust decisions and
righting those who had been unjustly cast into jail. His fame,
therefore, was very great; and he had, moreover, annotated an edition of
the Book of Recompenses to assist him in promulgating good principles
and reforming the morals of the people. Consequently the teachings of
this book became widely diffused and understood, and Heaven showered its
blessings upon the man who had been instrumental in accomplishing this
good work. He eventually became Vice-president of the Board of Imperial
Historiographers, and died Keeper of the Secret Archives.

   Chêng Ts‘ing-chih, a native of the state of Yueh, made a copy of this
book and presented it to Li Tsung, who afterwards became King of Sung.
After Li Tsung's elevation to the Throne, he presented Ts‘ing-chih with
money from his privy purse to defray the expenses of a new edition;
writing with his own hand upon the title-page, the following
words,—"Avoid wickedness of every sort; walk humbly in the paths of
virtue." This heightened to no small extent the respect with which the
book was regarded by the world at large; and Ts‘ing-chih, from this
occurrence, rose to the position of Prime Minister and became one of the
foremost members of the General Council of States. The rank of Royal
Prince was also conferred upon him; and an unusual affection of the
eyes, from which he had suffered, disappeared altogether as soon as ever
he had finished writing an essay in praise and corroboration of the
work.

   Yang Ch‘ên, a native of Huang-yang Hsien, came of a very poor family.
He saw his fellow-villagers printing off copies of the Book of
Recompenses, and longed to assist them; but he was powerless to do so,
by reason of his poverty. Still, he managed to cut one block for the
seventeenth page; and on a certain night he dreamt that a spirit
appeared <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> to him and said, "As a reward
for doing the little you are able to, Sir, you shall meet with success
in the examinations;" and he actually did come out *seventeenth* in the
examination for the degree of Doctor!

   While Mao Ch‘i-tsung, a native of Ju-kao, was engaged in writing an
additional commentary upon the Essay on Recompenses, it occurred to him
that there was no form of dissipation so destructive to a man's virtue
as the pleasures of lust; so when he came to the sentence condemning
those who conceive lustful desires at the sight of beauty, he recounted
all the evil results of such indulgence that he could think of. Now the
teacher who assisted him in the work was a person named Lo Hsien-yo; and
when it was finished, the two parted company and did not meet again tor
eight years. One night Lo had a dream, in which he thought he saw three
personages in Taoist robes, who had all the appearance of Immortals. The
middle one, who was an aged man, then drew a volume from his bosom; and
turning to the youth on his left, said, "Read!" The one who stood upon
his left then took the book, and in a clear voice read from it for some
time; and the listener knew that what he was reading was the passage in
the Essay on Recompenses condemning the indulgence of lust. When the
lecture was finished, the old man said, "The writer of that passage will
certainly take his doctor's degree in the competitive examinations."
Then turning to the youth on his right, he said, "Now write a verse of
poetry on this subject." So he did so, and the stanza he composed was as
follows:—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Longing to pluck the red olive in the Palace of the Moon,<br />
He yet does not believe that loveliness is false;<br />
Could he but see that favour is deceitful and beauty vain,<br />
When the <em>pang-hua</em> arrives the whole city would be red with congratulatory placards.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   When the old man had read it, he smiled and disappeared; the dreamer
awoke, and recorded his dream, including the verse of poetry, in a
letter to the son of Mao Ch‘i-tsung. "Your honoured father," he wrote,
"will certainly have met with a great triumph in the examination-hall;
but I can't understand what the expression *pang-hua* means, and I fear
I must have heard it incorrectly." Well, sure enough, when the names of
the successful candidates were published, that of Mao Ch‘i-tsung was
among them. Next day Mao Ch‘i-tsung repaired to the study of Ch‘en
Tsung-chin, where he noticed an encyclopœdia; and on opening it his eye
fell upon the two characters *pang-hua*, the signification of which was
explained as follows:—"A term applied to that surname which occurs least
frequently in the returns of successful candidates; the use of it
commenced in the T‘ang dynasty." Now it so happened that there were
fewer candidates named Mao, in the examinations just concluded, than of
any other surname; so that the dream was fulfilled to the very letter.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

   During the reign of K‘ai Hsi, one Wang Hsün, a Doctor of Chien-chou,
was pursued by a lictor belonging to the tribunal of the Unseen World
till he came to a certain mountain, on which stood a magnificent and
massive Temple. Over the entrance were inscribed, in large characters,
the words "Hall of the Eastern Peak." On the right side of the Temple
there was a stone tablet over a yard in height, and on it was engraved,
in gold, the whole of the Book of Recompenses. Hsün read it through
once, and was immediately filled with reverence and joy; whereupon he
heard the voice of a spirit saying to him, "O Wang Hsün! Having now read
this book, you experience respect and love for it; if you are able, from
this time forward, humbly to carry out its teachings and to refrain from
taking animal life, your years will be prolonged. On the present
occasion, although your span of life in the Upper Sphere is exhausted,
you will be permitted to return to the world." Then Hsün went back, and
never relaxed his efforts to walk according to the precepts of this
book; so that he was eventually blessed with a happy and green old age.

   Wang Fêng, whose family had practised medicine for many generations
at Jui-an, reverently carried out these teachings. He also caused new
editions of the book to be printed, which he distributed freely among
others. But one day he fell alarmingly sick, and was soon carried off to
Hades by a couple of lictors from that place. When he had got half-way
upon his journey, he saw two spirits poised in mid-air; one of whom, who
was dressed in a yellow robe, said, "This is Wang Fêng, who for a long
time has been reverently carrying out the precepts of the Book of
Recompenses; liberate him at once, and let him return to earth!" The
lictors prepared to obey; but Wang Fêng was so tired that he could not
put one foot before the other, so his conductors had to support him on
the way back. By that time it was just midnight, and his friends were in
a state of great confusion and distress; when suddenly he was seen to
come to life again! He then recounted the experiences he had met with,
found himself entirely recovered, and lived to be a very old man.

   Fang Shih-k‘o, a native of Hsing-an, had been very sickly from a
child. Afterwards he began to enquire into the mysteries of Taoism, with
a view of procuring the secret of immortality. Arrived one day at the
Cloud-capped Monntain, he met a person of strange appearance, who said,
"With such a face as yours, how can you expect to get the blessings that
you seek? It is impossible—unless you first plant a root of goodness."
Then Shih-k‘o went home; and although he was a poor man he found means
to print off an edition of the Book of Recompenses and distribute copies
among his friends. By the time he had printed ten pages, his sickness
was half-cured; when the work was completed, he found himself entirely
recovered; and from that time forward he became <span id="page_115">p.
115</span> robust in body, and quite different from what he had been
before in appearance.

   Chou Ch‘ih of Sui-ning, having obtained this book, studied it daily
with great diligence and experienced a great desire to make its contents
known to others. On the 21st of the 2nd month of the 21st year of
Shao-hsing, he died quite suddenly; but the very next day his soul came
back. Then he said to his wife, "I have been taken before the Tribunal
of Hades. Half the people who surrounded me I recognised as being those
who had died of starvation in our immediate neighbourhood; whereupon I
was struck with terror and dismay. In a few minutes the presiding Judge
called out my name, and said, 'Now your name was originally inscribed
upon the roll of those who were destined to be starved to death. But you
have always placed great faith in the Book of Recompenses, and done what
you could to promulgate its teachings; and although you were prevented
from carrying out your full intentions in the matter, you have still
been the means of turning many to righteousness and a virtuous life;
indeed there are even some who, through your instrumentality, have
tasted the fruits of immortality. You are therefore credited with all
their merits; at this very moment, you and those whom you were the means
of converting are all present here, and your names have been transferred
to the register of Honours and Long Life. After your liberation from
this place, see that you cherish and strengthen the good that is in your
heart! then you will arrive at the summit of all there is to gain, and
there will be no necessity for you to come here again.' As I came out,"
continued Chou Ch‘ih, "I met a subordinate officer who said to me,
admonishingly, 'When you find yourself once more in the Upper World, do
all you can to diffuse the Book of Recompenses far and wide. If its
teachings are accepted and followed out in any one place, the
inhabitants will escape difficulties and troubles; while if the whole
world were to accept them, the human race at large would prosper and be
at peace. The merit of those who promulgate this work is far from
trifling; not only will they be able to deliver themselves from the
perils of water and fire, but they will be blessed, in addition, with
many sons and daughters, and secure an enhancement of the riches,
honours, and years which were originally destined for them; and if you
extend the sphere of your operations and carry out all the designs you
thus propose to yourself, you will be enabled to rise to the condition
of an Immortal.'" From this time forward the affairs of Chou Ch‘ih
prospered more and more every day, and he often recounted this
experience of his for the benefit of those around him.

   There was a salt-merchant of Yang-chou named Wu, who paid great
reverence to the Book of Recompenses and Wên-chang's book of Salvation
from Suffering, always practising the teachings therein contained. <span
id="page_116">p. 116</span> In the first year of Shun Ch‘ih, just a
month before the capture of the city by the Manchus, a Taoist priest
appeared at the door of his house, begging for a meal of rice. When he
had finished eating, he said to his host, "I hear that you hold the Book
of Recompenses and Wên-chang's Salvation from Suffering in great
estimation. Do you know that long narrow blind-alley that runs by the
side of the wall? Well, if ever you should be in any danger hereafter,
you will find it a good place to hide yourself in." Wu made some
indifferent reply; but a month afterwards, when the city fell, and
everybody was paralysed with terror, he remembered what the priest had
said; so he and all his family scrambled over the wall and hid
themselves safely away. It was, as the Taoist had described it, a
*cul-de-sac*; the surrounding walls were thick and strong, and quite
impregnable from the outside. After they had been there five or six
days, they sent a servant to the house to take a look and see how the
land lay. In doing this, he was captured by an officer, who asked him
who he was. He replied that he was in the employ of a salt-merchant. Now
just at that very time the Government was on the look-out for people to
superintend the shipment of salt from one part of the empire to the
other; so the servant communicated the fact to his master, who sent in a
tender offering to transport over thirty thousand measures per annum;
the upshot being that in course of time he made a tremendous fortune.

   Ts‘ing San of Tsze-chi, being very poor, supported his mother by
bodily labour. Afterwards he fell sick, being afflicted with ulcers in
his legs which laid him up and prevented his going to work. One day he
met a Taoist, who said to him, "If you will follow me, I will undertake
your cure." Whereupon he stroked the man's left foot, and behold! it was
instantly healed. So Ts‘ing San went and told his mother of the
occurrence, and then returned to accompany the priest. The priest told
him to shut his eyes, and then led him along for a short time till they
came to a mountain, which was inhabited by genii. When they saw him they
exclaimed, "How can this person, whose bones are not those of the
immortals, have come hither?" "His family," returned the priest, "have
for many generations paid great respect to the Book of Recompenses; they
have instructed their sons and grandsons in its teachings, so that in
each generation a root of virtue has been implanted. That is the reason
I have accepted him." But Ts‘ing San longed to see his mother again, and
wanted to return; so the Taoist led him back to the world, when he found
that he had been absent for thirteen days!

   When Chou Ju-têng, a gentleman of Tsung-yueh, was young, he was one
of the pupils of a certain tutor named Lung Chi. Although he constantly
listened to the instructions of his preceptor he derived no benefit
whatever; but subsequently he fell in with this book, and from <span
id="page_117">p. 117</span> that time forward set himself heart and soul
to walk according to its doctrines. Besides this, he collected all the
best commentaries on the text and verifications of the theories, and
published them for the benefit of the world. Many were brought to lead
good lives by this means; and the gentleman himself, by virtue of his
great merit, found himself one day suddenly endowed with supernatural
wisdom, so that he could see, as it were, right through the doctrines of
Confucius and Lao Chün. Thus he passed for one of the greatest scholars
of the Ming dynasty. At the present day, Confucianists study the Sage,
Buddhists study Fo, and Taoists study the Immortals; but to the end of
their lives they never arrive at a full comprehension of what they are
learning, and some give up when they are only half way. And why is this?
It is because their root is inadequate to producing a full measure of
fruit, and therefore they do not bring forth any works of merit. Chang
Tsze-yang said, "He who does not cultivate himself, and accumulate
unostentatious, or hidden, virtue, will be so blinded by evil spirits as
to be unable to see clearly into the truth." The Book of Recompenses
should be studied by Confucianists, Buddhists, and Taoists alike, for it
alone is able to provide a starting-point for journeying to the highest
goal.

   There was once a Doctor named Shên Ch‘in, who lived at Nanking. His
wife fell very sick while in the family-way; whereupon the Doctor began
to cast about how he could print and distribute copies of the Book of
Recompenses—his idea being to publish the work in a pocket form, so that
it could be easily carried about and read at one's ease. He thought that
if the book were thus constantly perused people would get to understand
it sooner; and that if they understood it thoroughly, they would not
find any difficulty in acting up to its precepts. At last the edition
was finished; and, just as the printer's devil was bringing it to the
Doctor's door, his wife was confined, and both she and the baby
progressed in a most favourable way.

   Ch‘ên Pi-sung, one of the Imperial Body-guard, lived outside the
North Gate of Wu-lin. He was a charitable man, for ever giving things to
those who wanted them; his virtue was most extensive; and moreover he
guided himself strictly by the teachings of the Book of Recompenses. He
hired workmen to print new editions of the book, and distributed them
far and wide, from the sea to the borders of the world. Now it so
happened that at one time there was a great rain, that lasted for more
than a month; and he was away from home. His wife kept the lamp trimmed,
waiting for his return; when suddenly, as she was sitting up one night,
she heard a thundering rap at the door. Now the neighbourhood had
recently been much infested with burglars, and the people in the lane
where Ch‘ên lived had kept up a constant watch against them; so Mrs.
Ch‘ên, thinking that the robbers had come to her <span id="page_118">p.
118</span> at last, made a bolt of it with everybody else in the house.
Just as she had got outside the door, down came the wall of the room
with a crash, bringing everything else with it—bed, curtains, and
crockery being reduced to a heap of rags and ruins. The servant-girl,
who was not quite so quick in escaping as the others, was struck on the
heel by a flying brick. Now mark:—if Ch‘ên had not been absent, his wife
would not have been sitting up for him; the family would have been all
in bed; and who, in that case, would have escaped with his life? It
often happens that Heaven interposes in this remarkable manner on behalf
of those it wishes to protect.

   A graduate of Ts‘ien-tung, named Hsü Ting-yü, who humbly followed the
instructions of this Book, copied it out upon a scroll of paper, and
hung it upon the wall of a vacant room. Every morning and evening he
went to read it by way of devotion, and never departed from its
teachings. One night, a band of robbers, out on a predatory expedition,
found their way into the room where this scroll was hanging; but no
sooner were they inside than they became completely stupefied, and lost
their bearings altogether. This terrified them, and they made the best
of their way off. Afterwards the occurrence came to the knowledge of
Hsü, and his faith in the book was confirmed more strongly than ever. He
redoubled his efforts to diffuse it far and wide, depending his own
money and enlisting the pecuniary assistance of others, imploring all to
walk in harmony with its precepts.

 

THE END.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_103">p. 103</span>

<span id="page_103_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_103_fr_*) The Rewards and
Retributions which are the natural and inalienable results of virtue and
vice; analogous to the Buddhist Karma. The 'Book of Recompenses,' or
*Kan-ying Pien*, is the most popular and widely-read religious work in
China.

<span id="page_103_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_103_fr_dagger) That
part of Ursa Major which contains the four stars *Alpha, Beta, Gamma,
Delta*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
