[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc04)  [Next](pcc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### IV.

### TOTEM-SACRAMENTS AND EUCHARISTS

Much has been written on the origin of the Totem-system--the system,
that is, of naming a tribe or a portion of a tribe (say a *clan*) after
some *animal*--or sometimes--also after some plant or tree or
Nature-element, like fire or rain or thunder; but at best the subject is
a difficult one for us moderns to understand. A careful study has been
made of it by Salamon Reinach in his *Cultes, Mythes et
Religions*, <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) where he formulates his
conclusions in twelve statements or definitions; but even so--though his
suggestions are helpful--he throws very little light on the real origin
of the system. <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56.md)

There are three main difficulties. The first is to understand why
primitive Man should name his Tribe after an animal or object of nature
at all; the second, to understand on what principle he selected the
particular name (a lion, a crocodile, a lady bird, a certain tree); the
third, why he should make of the said totem a divinity, and pay honor
and worship to it. It may be worth while to pause for a moment over
these.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

\(1\) The fact that the Tribe was one of the early things for which Man
found it necessary to have a name is interesting, because it shows how
early the solidarity and psychological actuality of the tribe was
recognized; and as to the selection of a name from some animal or
concrete object of Nature, that was inevitable, for the simple reason
that there was *nothing else for the savage to choose from*. Plainly to
call his tribe "The Wayfarers" or "The Pioneers" or the "Pacifists" or
the "Invincibles," or by any of the thousand and one names which modern
associations adopt, would have been impossible, since such abstract
terms had little or no existence in his mind. And again to name it after
an animal was the most obvious thing to do, simply because the animals
were by far the most important features or accompaniments of his own
life. As I am dealing in this book largely with certain psychological
conditions of human evolution, it has to be pointed out that to
primitive man the animal was the nearest and most closely related of all
objects. Being of the same order of consciousness as himself, the animal
appealed to him very closely as his mate and equal. He made with regard
to it little or no distinction from himself. We see this very clearly in
the case of children, who of course represent the savage mind, and who
regard animals simply as their mates and equals, and come quickly into
*rapport* with them, not differentiating themselves from them.

\(2\) As to the particular animal or other object selected in order to
give a name to the Tribe, this would no doubt be largely accidental. Any
unusual incident might superstitiously precipitate a name. We can hardly
imagine the Tribe scratching its congregated head in the deliberate
effort to think out a suitable emblem for itself. That is not the way in
which nicknames are invented in a school or anywhere else to-day. At the
same time the heraldic appeal of a certain object of nature, animate or
inanimate, would be deeply and widely felt. The strength of the lion,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the fleetness of the deer, the food-value of a bear, the flight of a
bird, the awful jaws of a crocodile, might easily mesmerize a whole
tribe. Reinach points out, with great justice, that many tribes placed
themselves under the protection of animals which were supposed (rightly
or wrongly) to act as guides and augurs, foretelling the future.
"Diodorus," he says, "distinctly states that the hawk, in Egypt, was
venerated because it foretold the future." \[Birds generally act as
weather-prophets.\] "In Australia and Samoa the kangaroo, the crow and
the owl premonish their fellow clansmen of events to come. At one time
the Samoan warriors went so far as to rear owls for their prophetic
qualities in war." \[The jackal, or 'pathfinder'--whose tracks sometimes
lead to the remains of a food-animal slain by a lion, and many birds and
insects, have a value of this kind.\] "The use of animal totems for
purposes of augury is, in all likelihood, of great antiquity. Men must
soon have realized that the senses of animals were acuter than their
own; nor is it surprising that they should have expected their
totems--that is to say, their natural allies--to forewarn them both of
unsuspected dangers and of those provisions of nature, *wells*
especially, which animals seem to scent by instinct." <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md) And again, beyond all this, I have little
doubt that there are subconscious affinities which unite certain tribes
to certain animals or plants, affinities whose origin we cannot now
trace, though they are very real--the same affinities that we recognize
as existing between individual *persons* and certain objects of nature.
W. H. Hudson--himself in many respects having this deep and primitive
relation to nature--speaks in a very interesting and autobiographical
volume <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58.md) of the extraordinary
fascination exercised upon him as a boy, not only by a snake, but by
certain trees, and especially by a particular flowering-plant "not more

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

than a foot in height, with downy soft pale green leaves, and clusters
of reddish blossoms, something like valerian." . . . "One of my sacred
flowers," he calls it, and insists on the "inexplicable attraction"
which it had for him. In various ways of this kind one can perceive how
particular totems came to be selected by particular peoples.

\(3\) As to the tendency to divinize these totems, this arises no doubt
partly out of question (2). The animal or other object admired on
account of its strength or swiftness, or adopted as guardian of the
tribe because of its keen sight or prophetic quality, or infinitely
prized on account of its food-value, or felt for any other reason to
have a peculiar relation and affinity to the tribe, is by that fact *set
apart*. It becomes taboo. It must not be killed--except under necessity
and by sanction of the whole tribe--nor injured; and all dealings with
it must be fenced round with regulations. It is out of this taboo or
system of taboos that, according to Reinach, religion arose. "I propose
(he says) to define religion as: *A sum of scruples (taboos) which
impede the free exercise of our faculties*." <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) Obviously this definition is gravely
deficient, simply because it is purely negative, and leaves out of
account the positive aspect of the subject. In Man, the positive content
of religion is the instinctive sense--w ether conscious or
subconscious--of an inner unity and continuity with the world around.
This is the stuff out of which religion is made. The scruples or taboos
which "impede the freedom" of this relation are the negative forces
which give outline and form to the relation. These are the things which
generate the *rites and ceremonials* of religion; and as far as Reinach
means by religion *merely* rites and ceremonies he is correct; but
clearly he only covers half the subject. The tendency to divinize the
totem is at least as much dependent on the positive sense of unity with
it, as on the negative scruples which limit

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the relation in each particular case. But I shall return to this subject
presently, and more than once, with the view of clarifying it. Just now
it will be best to illustrate the nature of Totems generally, and in
some detail.

 

As would be gathered from what I have just said, there is found among
all the more primitive peoples, and in all parts of the world, an
immense variety of totem-names. The Dinkas, for instance, are a rather
intelligent well-grown people inhabiting the upper reaches of the Nile
in the vicinity of the great swamps. According to Dr. Seligman their
clans have for totems the lion, the elephant, the crocodile, the
hippopotamus, the fox, and the hyena, as well as certain birds which
infest and damage the corn, some plants and trees, and such things as
rain, fire, etc. "Each clan speaks of its totem as its ancestor, and
refrains \[as a rule\] from injuring or eating it." <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) The members of the Crocodile clan call
themselves "brothers of the crocodile." The tribes of Bechuana-land have
a very similar list of totem-names--the buffalo, the fish, the
porcupine, the wild vine, etc. They too have a Crocodile clan, but they
call the crocodile their *father*! The tribes of Australia much the same
again, with the differences suitable to their country; and the Red
Indians of North America the same. Garcilasso della Vega, the Spanish
historian, son of an Inca princess by one of the Spanish conquerors of
Peru and author of the well-known book *Commentarias Reales*, says in
that book (i, 57), speaking of the pre-Inca period, "An Indian (of Peru)
was not considered honorable unless he was descended from a fountain,
river or lake, or even from the sea, or from a wild animal, as a bear,
lion, tiger, eagle, or the bird they call *cuntur* (condor), or some
other bird of prey." <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) According

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

to Lewis Morgan, the North American Indians of various tribes had for
totems the wolf, bear, beaver, turtle, deer, snipe, heron, hawk, crane,
loon, turkey, muskrat; pike, catfish, carp; buffalo, elk, reindeer,
eagle, hare, rabbit, snake; reed-grass, sand, rock, and tobacco-plant.

So we might go on rather indefinitely. I need hardly say that in more
modern and civilized life, relics of the totem system are still to be
found in the forms of the heraldic creatures adopted for their crests by
different families, and in the bears, lions, eagles, the sun, moon and
stars and so forth, which still adorn the flags and are flaunted as the
*insignia* of the various nations. The names may not have been
*originally* adopted from any definite belief in blood-relationship with
the animal or other object in question; but when, as Robertson says
(*Pagan Christs*, p. 104), a "savage learned that he was 'a Bear' and
that his father and grandfather and forefathers were so before him, it
was really impossible, after ages in which totem-names thus passed
current, that he should fail to assume that his folk were *descended*
from a bear."

As a rule, as may be imagined, the savage tribesman will on no account
*eat* his tribal totem-animal. Such would naturally be deemed a kind of
sacrilege. Also it must be remarked that some totems are hardly suitable
for eating. Yet it is important to observe that occasionally, and
guarding the ceremony with great precautions, it has been an almost
universal custom for the tribal elders to call a feast at which an
animal (either the totem or some other) *is* killed and commonly
eaten--and this in order that the tribesmen may absorb some virtue
belonging to it, and may confirm their identity with the tribe and with
each other. The eating of the bear or other animal, the sprinkling with
its blood, and the general ritual in which the participants shared its
flesh, or dressed and disguised themselves in its skin, or otherwise
identified themselves with it, was to them a symbol of their community

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of life with each other, and a means of their renewal and salvation in
the holy emblem. And this custom, as the reader will perceive, became
the origin of the Eucharists and Holy Communions of the later religions.

Professor Robertson-Smith's celebrated *Camel* affords an instance of
this. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) It appears that St. Nilus
(fifth century) has left a detailed account of the occasional sacrifice
in his time of a spotless white camel among the Arabs of the Sinai
region, which closely resembles a totemic communion-feast. The uncooked
blood and flesh of the animal had to be entirely consumed by the
faithful before daybreak. "The slaughter of the victim, the sacramental
drinking of the blood, and devouring in wild haste of the pieces of
still quivering flesh, recall the details of the Dionysiac and other
festivals." <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) Robertson-Smith himself
says:--"The plain meaning is that the victim was devoured before its
life had left the still warm blood and flesh . . . and that thus in the
most literal way, all those who shared in the ceremony absorbed part of
the victim's life into themselves. One sees how much more forcibly than
any ordinary meal such a rite expresses the establishment or
confirmation of a bond of common life between the worshipers, and also,
since the blood is shed upon the altar itself, between the worshipers
and their god. In this sacrifice, then, the significant factors are two:
the conveyance of the living blood to the godhead, and the absorption of
the living flesh and blood into the flesh and blood of the worshippers.
Each of these is effected in the simplest and most direct manner, so
that the meaning of the ritual is perfectly transparent."

It seems strange, of course, that men should eat their totems; and it
must not by any means be supposed that this practice is (or was)
universal; but it undoubtedly

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

obtains in some cases. As Miss Harrison says (*Themis*, p. 123); "you do
not as a rule eat your relations," and as a *rule* the eating of a totem
is *tabu* and forbidden, but (Miss Harrison continues) "at certain times
and under certain restrictions a man not only may, but *must*, eat of
his totem, though only sparingly, as of a thing sacrosanct." The
ceremonial carried out in a communal way by the tribe not only
identifies the tribe with the totem (animal), but is held, according to
early magical ideas, and when the animal is desired for food, to favor
its manipulation. The human tribe partakes of the *mana* or life-force
of the animal, and is strengthened; the animal tribe is sympathetically
renewed by the ceremonial and multiplies exceedingly. The slaughter of
the sacred animal and (often) the simultaneous outpouring of human blood
seals the compact an confirms the magic. This is well illustrated by a
ceremony of the 'Emu' tribe referred to by Dr. Frazer:--

"In order to multiply Emus which are an important article of food, the
men of the Emu totem in the Arunta tribe proceed as follows: They clear
a small spot of level ground, and opening veins in their arms they let
the blood stream out until the surface of the ground for a space of
about three square yards is soaked with it. When the blood has dried and
caked, it forms a hard and fairly impermeable surface, on which they
paint the sacred design of the emu totem, especially the parts of the
bird which they like best to eat, namely, the fat and the eggs. Round
this painting the men sit and sing. Afterwards performers wearing long
head-dresses to represent the long neck and small head of the emu, mimic
the appearance of the bird as it stands aimlessly peering about in all
directions." <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

Thus blood sacrifice comes in; and--(whether this has ever actually
happened in the case of the Central Australians

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I know not)--we can easily imagine a member of
the Emu tribe, and disguised as an actual emu, having been ceremonially
slaughtered as a firstfruits and promise of the expected and prayed-for
emu-crop; just as the same certainly *has* happened in the case of men
wearing beast-masks of Bulls or Rams or Bears being sacrificed in
propitiation of Bull-gods, Ram-gods or Bear-gods or simply in pursuance
of some kind of magic to favor the multiplication of these food-animals.

"In the light of totemistic ways of thinking we see plainly enough the
relation of man to food-animals. You need or at least desire flesh food,
yet you shrink from slaughtering 'your brother the ox'; you desire his
*mana*, yet you respect his *tabu*, for in you and him alike runs the
common life-blood. On your own individual responsibility you would never
kill him; but for the common weal, on great occasions, and in a fashion
conducted with scrupulous care, it is expedient that he die for his
people, and that they feast upon his flesh." <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md)

In her little book *Ancient Art and Ritual* <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) Jane Harrison describes the dedication of
a holy Bull, as conducted in Greece at Elis, and at Magnesia and other
cities. "There at the annual fair year by year the stewards of the city
bought a Bull 'the finest that could be got,' and at the new moon of the
month at the beginning of seed-time \[? April\] they dedicated it for
the city's welfare. . . . The Bull was led in procession at the head of
which went the chief priest and priestess of the city. With them went a
herald and sacrificer, and two bands of youths and maidens. So holy was
the Bull that nothing unlucky might come near him. The herald pronounced
aloud a prayer for 'the safety of the city and the land, and the
citizens, and the women and children, for peace and wealth, and for the
bringing forth of grain and all other fruits,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

and of cattle.' All this longing for fertility, for food and children,
focuses round the holy Bull, whose holiness *is* his strength and
fruitfulness." The Bull is sacrificed. The flesh is divided in solemn
feast among those who take part in the procession. "The holy flesh is
not offered to a god, it is eaten--to every man his portion--by each and
every citizen, that he may get his share of the strength of the Bull, of
the luck of the State." But at Athens the *Bouphonia*, as it was called,
was followed by a curious ceremony. "The hide was stuffed with straw and
sewed up, and next the stuffed animal was set on its feet and yoked to a
plough as though it were ploughing. The Death is followed by a
Resurrection. Now this is all important. We are accustomed to think of
sacrifice as the death, the giving up, the renouncing of something. But
*sacrifice* does not mean 'death' at all. It means *making holy*,
sanctifying; and holiness was to primitive man just special strength and
life. What they wanted from the Bull was just that special life and
strength which all the year long they had put into him, and nourished
and fostered. That life was in his blood. They could not eat that flesh
nor drink that blood unless they killed him. So he must die. But it was
not to give him up to the gods that they killed him, not to 'sacrifice'
him in our sense, but to have him, keep him, eat him, live *by* him and
through him, by his grace."

We have already had to deal with instances of the ceremonial eating of
the sacred he-Lamb or Ram, immolated in the Spring season of the year,
and partaken of in a kind of communal feast--not without reference (at
any rate in later times) to a supposed Lamb-god. Among the Ainos in the
North of Japan, as also among the Gilyaks in Eastern Siberia, the Bear
is the great food-animal, and is worshipped as the supreme giver of
health and strength. There also a similar ritual of sacrifice occurs. A
perfect Bear is caught and caged. He is fed up and even

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

pampered to the day of his death. "Fish, brandy and other delicacies are
offered to him. Some of the people prostrate themselves before him; his
coming into a house brings a blessing, and if he sniffs at the food that
brings a blessing too." Then he is led out and slain. A great feast
takes place, the flesh is divided, cupfuls of the blood are drunk by the
men; the tribe is united and strengthened, and the Bear-god blesses the
ceremony--the ideal Bear that has given its life for the people. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md)

That the eating of the flesh of an animal or a man conveys to you some
of the qualities, the life-force, the *mana*, of that animal or man, is
an idea which one often meets with among primitive folk. Hence the
common tendency to eat enemy warriors slain in battle against your
tribe. By doing so you absorb some of their valor and strength. Even the
enemy scalps which an Apache Indian might hang from his belt were
something magical to add to the Apache's power. As Gilbert Murray
says, <span id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68.md) "you devoured the holy animal
to get its mana, its swiftness, its strength, its great endurance, just
as the savage now will eat his enemy's brain or heart or hands to get
some particular quality residing there." Even--as he explains on the
earlier page--mere *contact* was often considered sufficient--"we have
holy pillars whose holiness consists in the fact that they have been
touched by the blood of a bull." And in this connection we may note that
nearly all the Christian Churches have a great belief in the virtue
imparted by the ere 'laying on of hands.'

In quite a different connection--we read <span
id="fr_69"></span>[3](#fn_69.md) that among the Spartans a warrior-boy
would often beg for the love of the elder warrior whom he admired (i. e.
the contact with

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

his body) in order to obtain in that way a portion of the latter's
courage and prowess. That through the mediation of the lips one's spirit
may be united to the spirit of another person is an idea not unfamiliar
to the modern mind; while the exchange of blood, clothes, locks of hair,
etc., by lovers is a custom known all over the world. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md)

To suppose that by eating another you absorb his or her soul is somewhat
naïve certainly. Perhaps it *is* more native, more primitive. Yet there
may be *some* truth even in that idea. Certainly the food that one eats
has a psychological effect, and the flesh-eaters among the human race
have a different temperament as a rule from the fruit and vegetable
eaters, while among the animals (though other causes may come in here)
the Carnivora are decidedly more cruel and less gentle than the
Herbivora.

To return to the rites of Dionysus, Gilbert Murray, speaking of
Orphism--a great wave of religious reform which swept over Greece and
South Italy in the sixth century B.C.--says: <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md) "A curious relic of primitive superstition
and cruelty remained firmly imbedded in Orphism, a doctrine irrational
and unintelligible, and for that very reason wrapped in the deepest and
most sacred mystery: a belief in the *sacrifice of Dionysus himself, and
the purification of man by his blood*. It seems possible that the savage
Thracians, in the fury of their worship on the mountains, when they were
possessed by the god and became 'wild beasts,' actually tore with their
teeth and hands any hares, goats, fawns or the like that they came
across. . . . The Orphic congregations of later times, in their most
holy gatherings, solemnly partook of the blood of a bull, which was by a
mystery the blood of Dionysus-Zagreus himself, the Bull of God, slain in
sacrifice for the purification of man." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72.md)

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

Such instances of early communal feasts, which fulfilled the double part
of confirming on the one hand the solidarity of the tribe, and on the
other of bringing the tribe, by the shedding of the blood of a divine
Victim into close relationship with the very source of its life, are
plentiful to find. "The sacramental rite," says Professor
Robertson-Smith, <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) "is also an atoning
rite, which brings the community again into harmony with its alienated
god--atonement being simply an act of communion designed to wipe out all
memory of previous estrangement." With this subject I shall deal more
specially in chapter vii below. Meanwhile as instances of early
Eucharists we may mention the following cases, remembering always that
as the blood is regarded as the *Life*, the drinking or partaking of, or
sprinkling with, blood is always an acknowledgment of the common life;
and that the juice of the grape being regarded as the blood of the Vine,
*wine* in the later ceremonials quite easily and naturally takes the
place of the blood in the early sacrifices.

Thus P. Andrada La Crozius, a French missionary, and one of the first
Christians who went to Nepaul and Thibet, says in his *History of
India*: "Their Grand Lama celebrates a species of sacrifice with *bread*
and *wine*, in which, after taking a small quantity himself, he
distributes the rest among the Lamas present at this ceremony." <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74.md)

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "The old Egyptians celebrated the resurrection
of Osiris by a sacrament, eating the sacred cake or wafer after it had
been consecrated by the priest, and thereby becoming veritable flesh of
his flesh." <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) As is well known, the
eating of bread or dough sacramentally (sometimes mixed with blood or
seed) as an emblem of community of life with the divinity, is an
extremely ancient practice or ritual. Dr. Frazer <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76.md) says of the Aztecs, that "twice a year, in
May and December, an image of the great god Huitzilopochtli was made of
dough, then broken in pieces and solemnly eaten by his worshipers." And
Lord Kingsborough in his *Mexican Antiquities* (vol. vi, p. 220) gives a
record of a "most Holy Supper" in which these people ate the flesh of
their god. It was a cake made of certain seeds, "and having made it,
they blessed it in their manner, and broke it into pieces, which the
high priest put into certain very clean vessels, and took a thorn of
maguey which resembles a very thick needle, with which he took up with
the utmost reverence single morsels, which he put into the mouth of each
individual in the manner of a communion." Acosta <span
id="fr_77"></span>[3](#fn_77.md) confirms this and similar accounts. The
Peruvians partook of a sacrament consisting of a pudding of coarsely
ground maize, of which a portion had been smeared on the idol. The
priest sprinkled it with the blood of the victim before distributing it
to the people." Priest and people then all took their shares in turn,
"with great care that no particle should be allowed to fall to the
ground--this being looked upon as a great sin." <span
id="fr_78"></span>[4](#fn_78.md)

Moving from Peru to China (instead of 'from China to Peru') we find that
"the Chinese pour wine (a very

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

general substitute for blood) on a straw image of Confucius, and then
all present drink of it, and taste the sacrificial victim, in order to
participate in the grace of Confucius." \[Here again the Corn and Wine
are blended in one rite.\] And of Tartary Father Grueber thus testifies:
"This only I do affirm, that the devil so mimics the Catholic Church
there, that although no European or Christian has ever been there, still
in all essential things they agree so completely with the Roman Church,
as even to celebrate the Host with bread and wine: *with my own eyes I
have seen it*." <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) These few instances
are sufficient to show the extraordinarily wide diffusion of
Totem-sacraments and Eucharistic rites all over the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[54:1](pcc05.htm#fr_55.md) See English translation
of certain chapters (published by David Nutt in 1912) entitled *Cults,
Myths and Religions*, pp. 1-25. The French original is in three large
volumes.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[54:2](pcc05.htm#fr_56.md) The same may be said of
the formulated statement of the subject in Morris Jastrow's *Handbooks
of the History of Religion*, vol. iv.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[56:1](pcc05.htm#fr_57.md) See Reinach, Eng.
trans., *op. cit*., pp. 20, 21.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[56:2](pcc05.htm#fr_58.md) *Far away and Long ago*
(1918) chs. xvi and xvii.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[57:1](pcc05.htm#fr_59.md) See *Orpheus* by S.
Reinach, p. 3.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[58:1](pcc05.htm#fr_60.md) See *The Golden Bough*,
vol. iv, p. 31.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[58:2](pcc05.htm#fr_61.md) See Andrew Lang, *Custom
and Myth*, p. 104, also *Myth, Ritual and Religion*, vol. i, pp. 71, 76,
etc.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[60:1](pcc05.htm#fr_62.md) See his *Religion of the
Semites*, p. 320.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[60:2](pcc05.htm#fr_63.md) They also recall the
rites of the Passover--though in this latter the blood was no longer
drunk, nor the flesh eaten raw.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[61:1](pcc05.htm#fr_64.md) *The Golden Bough* i,
85--with reference to Spencer and Gillen's *Native Tribes of Central
Australia*, pp. 179, 189.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[62:1](pcc05.htm#fr_65.md) *Themis*, p. 140.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[62:2](pcc05.htm#fr_66.md) Home University Library,
p. 87.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[64:1](pcc05.htm#fr_67.md) See *Art and Ritual*,
pp. 92-98; *The Golden Bough*, ii, 375 *seq.; Themis*, pp. 140, 141;
etc.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[64:2](pcc05.htm#fr_68.md) *Four Stages of Greek
Religion*, p. 36.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[64:3](pcc05.htm#fr_69.md) Aelian VII, iii, 12:
αὐτοῖ γοῦν (οἱ παῖδες) δέονται τῶν ἐραστῶν εἰσπνεῖν αὐτοῖς. See also E.
Bethe on "Die Dorische Knabenliebe" in the *Rheinisches Museum*, vol.
26, iii, 461.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[65:1](pcc05.htm#fr_70.md) See Crawley's *Mystic
Rose*, pp. 238, 242.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[65:2](pcc05.htm#fr_71.md) See Notes to his
translation of the *Bacchæ* of Euripides.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[65:3](pcc05.htm#fr_72.md) For a description of
this orgy see Theocritus, Idyll xxvi; also <span id="page_66">p.
66</span> for explanations of it, Lang's *Myth, Ritual and Religion*,
vol. ii, pp. 241-260, on Dionysus. The *Encyclopædia Brit*., article
"Orpheus," says:--"Orpheus, in the manner of his death, was considered
to personate the god Dionysus, and was thus representative of the god
torn to pieces every year--a ceremony enacted by the Bacchae in the
earliest times with a human victim, and afterwards with a bull, to
represent the bull-formed god. A distinct feature of this ritual was
ὠμοφαγία (eating the flesh of the victim raw), whereby the communicants
imagined that they consumed and assimilated the god represented by the
victim, and thus became filled with the divine ecstasy." Compare also
the Hindu doctrine of Prajápati, the dismembered Lord of Creation.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[66:1](pcc05.htm#fr_73.md) *Religion of the
Semites*, p. 302.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[66:2](pcc05.htm#fr_74.md) See Doane's *Bible
Myths*, p. 306.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[67:1](pcc05.htm#fr_75.md) From *The Great Law, of
religious origins*: by W. Williamson (1899), p. 177.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[67:2](pcc05.htm#fr_76.md) *The Golden Bough*, vol.
ii, p. 79.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[67:3](pcc05.htm#fr_77.md) *Natural and Moral
History of the Indies*. London (1604).

<span id="fn_78"></span>[67:4](pcc05.htm#fr_78.md) See Markham's *Rites and
laws of the Incas*, p. 27.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[68:1](pcc05.htm#fr_79.md) For these two quotations
see Jevons' *Introduction to the History of Religion*, pp. 148 and 219.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Food And Vegetation Magic](pcc06.md)
