[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc12)  [Next](pcc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

### XII.

### THE SEX-TABOO

In the course of the last few chapters I have spoken more than once of
the solidarity and continuity of Christianity, in its essential
doctrines, with the Pagan rites. There is, however, one notable
exception to this statement. I refer of course to Christianity's
treatment of Sex. It is certainly very remarkable that while the Pagan
cults generally made a great deal of all sorts of sex-rites, laid much
stress upon them, and introduced them in what we consider an unblushing
and shameless way into the instincts connected with it. I say 'the
Christian Church,' on the whole took quite the opposite line--ignored
sex, condemned it, and did much despite to the perfectly natural
instincts connected with it. I say 'the Christian Church,' because there
is nothing to show that Jesus himself (if we admit his figure as
historical) adopted any such extreme or *doctrinaire* attitude; and the
quite early Christian teachers (with the chief exception of Paul) do not
exhibit this bias to any great degree. In fact, as is well known, strong
currents of pagan usage and belief ran through the Christian assemblies
of the first three or four centuries. "The Christian art of this period
remained delightfully pagan. In the catacombs we see the Saviour as a
beardless youth, like a young Greek god; sometimes represented, like
Hermes the guardian of the flocks, bearing a ram or lamb round

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

his neck; sometimes as Orpheus tuning his lute among the wild
animals." <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) The followers of Jesus
were at times even accused--whether rightly or wrongly I know not--of
celebrating sexual mysteries at their love-feasts. But as the Church
through the centuries grew in power and scope--with its monks and their
mutilations and asceticisms, and its celibate clergy, and its absolute
refusal to recognize the sexual meaning of its own acclaimed symbols
(like the Cross, the three fingers of Benediction, the Fleur de Lys and
so forth)--it more and more consistently defined itself as anti-sexual
in its outlook, and stood out in that way in marked contrast to the
earlier Nature-religions.

It may be said of course that this anti-sexual tendency can be traced in
other of the pre-Christian Churches, especially the later ones, like the
Buddhist, the Egyptian, and so forth; and this is perfectly true; but it
would seem that in many ways the Christian Church marked the culmination
of the tendency; and the fact that other cults participated in the taboo
makes us all the more ready and anxious to inquire into its real cause.

To go into a disquisition on the Sex-rites of the various pre-Christian
religions would be 'a large order'--larger than I could attempt to fill;
but the general facts in this connection are fairly patent. We know, of
course, from the Bible that the Syrians in Palestine were given to
sexual worships. There were erect images (phallic) and "groves" (sexual
symbols) on every high hill and under every green tree; <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194) and these same images and the rites
connected with them crept into the Jewish Temple and were popular enough
to maintain their footing there for a long period from King Rehoboam
onwards, notwithstanding the efforts of Josiah <span
id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_195) and other reformers to extirpate them.
Moreover there were girls and men (*hierodouloi*) regularly attached
during this period to the Jewish Temple as to the heathen

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Temples, for the rendering of sexual services,
which were recognized in many cases as part of the ritual. Women were
persuaded that it was an honor and a privilege to be fertilized by a
'holy man' (a priest or other man connected with the rites), and
children resulting from such unions were often called "Children of
God"--an appellation which no doubt sometimes led to a legend of
miraculous birth! Girls who took their place as *hierodouloi* in the
Temple or Temple-precincts were expected to surrender themselves to
men-worshipers in the Temple, much in the same way, probably, as
Herodotus describes in the temple of the Babylonian Venus Mylitta, where
every native woman, once in her life, was supposed to sit in the Temple
and have intercourse with some stranger. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196) Indeed the Syrian and Jewish rites dated
largely from Babylonia. "The Hebrews entering Syria," says Richard
Burton <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197) "found it religionized, by
Assyria and Babylonia, when the Accadian Ishtar had passed West, and had
become Ashtoreth, Ashtaroth, or Ashirah, the Anaitis of Armenia, the
Phoenician Astarte, and the Greek Aphrodite, the great Moon-goddess who
is queen of Heaven and Love." The word translated "grove" as above, in
our Bible, is in fact Asherah, which connects it pretty clearly with the
Babylonian Queen of Heaven.

In India again, in connection with the Hindu Temples and their rites, we
have exactly the same institution of girls attached to the Temple
service--the Nautch-girls--whose functions in past times were certainly
sexual, and whose dances in honor of the god are, even down to the
present day, decidedly amatory in character. Then we have the very
numerous *lingams* (conventional representations of the male organ) to
be seen, scores and scores of them, in the arcades and cloisters of the
Hindu Temples--

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

to which women of all classes, especially those who wish to become
mothers, resort, anointing them copiously with oil, and signalizing
their respect and devotion to them in a very practical way. As to the
*lingam* as representing the male organ, in some form or other--as
upright stone or pillar or obelisk or slender round tower--it occurs all
over the, world, notably in Ireland, and forms such a memorial of the
adoration paid by early folk to the great emblem and instrument of human
fertility, as cannot be mistaken. The pillars set up by Solomon in front
of his temple were obviously from their names--Jachin and Boaz <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198)--meant to be emblems of this kind; and
the fact that they were crowned with pomegranates--the universally
accepted symbol of the female--confirms and clinches this
interpretation. The obelisks before the Egyptians' temples were signs of
the same character. The well-known T-shaped cross was in use in pagan
lands long before Christianity, as a representation of the male member,
and also at the same time of the 'tree' on which the god (Attis or
Adonis or Krishna or whoever it might be) was crucified; and the same
symbol combined with the oval (or *yoni*) formed *the* Crux Ansata ☥ of
the old Egyptian ritual--a figure which is to-day sold in Cairo as a
potent charm, and confessedly indicates the conjunction of the two sexes
in one design. <span id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_199) MacLennan in *The
Fortnightly Review* (Oct. 1869) quotes with approval the words of
Sanchoniathon, as saying that "men first worship plants, next the
heavenly bodies,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

supposed to be animals, then 'pillars' (emblems of the Procreator), and
last, the anthropomorphic gods.

It is not necessary to enlarge on this subject. The facts of the
connection of sexual rites with religious services nearly everywhere in
the early world are, as I say, sufficiently patent to every inquirer.
But it *is* necessary to try to understand the *rationale* of this
connection. To dispatch all such cases under the mere term "religious
prostitution" is no explanation. The term suggests, of course, that the
plea of religion was used simply as an excuse and a cover for sexual
familiarities; but though this kind of explanation commends itself, no
doubt, to the modern man--whose religion is as commercial as his
sex-relationships are--and though in *cases* no doubt it was a true
explanation--yet it is obvious that among people who took religion
seriously, as a matter of life and death and who did not need
hypocritical excuses or covers for sex-relationships, it cannot be
accepted as in general the *right* explanation. No, the real explanation
is--and I will return to this presently--that sexual relationships are
so deep and intimate a part of human nature that from the first it has
been simply impossible to keep them *out* of religion--it being of
course the object of religion to bring the whole human being into some
intelligible relation with the physical, moral, and if you like
supernatural order of the great world around him. Sex was felt from the
first to be part, and a foundational part, of the great order of the
world and of human nature; and therefore to separate it from Religion
was unthinkable and a kind of contradiction in terms. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200)

If that is true--it will be asked--how was it that that divorce *did*
take place--that the taboo did arise? How was it that the Jews, under
the influence of Josiah and the Hebrew prophets, turned their faces away
from sex and

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

strenuously opposed the Syrian cults? How was it that this reaction
extended into Christianity and became even more definite in the
Christian Church--that monks went by thousands into the deserts of the
Thebaid, and that the early Fathers and Christian apologists could not
find terms foul enough to hurl at Woman as the symbol (to them) of
nothing but sex-corruption and delusion? How was it that this contempt
of the body and degradation of sex-things went on far into the Middle
Ages of Europe, and ultimately created an organized system of hypocrisy,
and concealment and suppression of sex-instincts, which, acting as cover
to a vile commercial Prostitution and as a breeding ground for horrible
Disease, has lasted on even to the edge of the present day?

This is a fair question, and one which demands an answer. There must
have been a reason, and a deep-rooted one, for this remarkable reaction
and *volte-face* which has characterized Christianity, and, perhaps to a
lesser degree, other both earlier and later cults like those of the
Buddhists, the Egyptians, the Aztecs, <span
id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201) and so forth.

It may be said--and this is a fair answer on the *surface* of the
problem--that the main reason *was* something in the nature of a
reaction. The excesses and corruptions of sex in Syria had evidently
become pretty bad, and that very fact may have led to a pendulum-swing
of the Jewish Church in the opposite direction; and again in the same
way the general laxity of morals in the decay of the Roman empire may
have confirmed the Church of early Christendom in its determination to
keep along the great high road of asceticism. The Christian followed on
the Jewish and Egyptian Churches, and in this way a great tradition of
sexual continence and anti-pagan morality came right down the centuries
even into modern times.

This seems so far a reasonable theory; but I think we shall go farther
and get nearer the heart of the problem if

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

we revert to the general clue which I have followed already more than
once--the clue of the necessary evolution of human
[Consciousness](errata.htm#1). In the first or animal stage of human
evolution, Sex was (as among the animals) a perfectly necessary,
instinctive and unself-conscious activity. It was harmonious with
itself, natural, and unproductive of evil. But when the second stage set
in, in which man became preponderantly *self*-conscious, he inevitably
set about deflecting sex-activities to his own private pleasure and
advantage; he employed his budding intellect in scheming the derailment
of passion and desire from tribal needs and, Nature's uses to the poor
details of his own gratification. If the first stage of harmonious
sex-instinct and activity may be held as characteristic of the Golden
Age, the second stage must be taken to represent the Fall of man and his
expulsion from Paradise in the Garden of den story. The pleasure and
glory of Sex having been turned to self-purposes, Sex itself became the
great Sin. A sense of guilt overspread man's thoughts on the subject.
"He knew that he was naked," and he fled from the voice and face of the
Lord. From that moment one of the main objects of his life (in its inner
and newer activities) came to be the *denial* of Sex. Sex was conceived
of as the great Antagonist, the old Serpent lying ever in wait to betray
him; and there arrived a moment in the history of every race, and of
every representative religion, when the sexual rites and ceremonies of
the older time lost their naive and quasi-innocent character and became
afflicted with a sense of guilt and indecency. This extraordinarily
interesting and dramatic moment in human evolution was of course that in
which self-consciousness grew powerful enough to penetrate to the centre
of human vitality, the *sanctum* of man's inner life, his sexual
instinct, and to deal it a terrific blow--a blow from which it has never
yet recovered, and from which indeed it will not recover, until the very
nature of man's inner life is changed.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

It may be said that it was very foolish of Man to deny and to try to
expel a perfectly natural and sensible thing, a necessary and
indispensable part of his own nature. And that, as far as I can see, is
perfectly true. But sometimes it is unavoidable, it would seem, to do
foolish things--if only to convince oneself of one's own foolishness. On
the other hand, this policy on the part of Man was certainly very
wise--wiser than he knew--for in attempting to drive out Sex (which of
course he could not do) he entered into a conflict which was bound to
end in the expulsion of *something*; and that something was the
domination, within himself, of self-consciousness, the very thing which
makes and ever has made sex detestable. Man did not succeed in driving
the snake out of the Garden, but he drove himself out, taking the real
old serpent of self-greed and self-gratification with him. When some day
he returns to Paradise this latter will have died in his bosom and been
cast away, but he will find the good Snake there as of old, full of
healing and friendliness, among the branches of the Tree of Life.

Besides it is evident from other considerations that this moment of the
denial of sex *had* to come. When one thinks of the enormous power of
this passion, and its age-long, hold upon the human race, one realizes
that once liberated from the instinctive bonds of nature, and backed by
a self-conscious and self-seeking human intelligence it was on the way
to become a fearful curse.

A monstrous Eft was of old the Lord and Master of Earth;  
For him did his high sun flame, and his river billowing ran.

\[paragraph continues\] And this may have been all very well and
appropriate in the carboniferous Epoch, but *we* in the end of Time have
no desire to fall under any such preposterous domination, or to return
to the primal swamps from which organic nature has so slowly and
painfully emerged.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

I say it was the entry of self-consciousness into the sphere of Sex, and
the consequent use of the latter for private ends, which poisoned this
great race-power at its root. For above all, Sex, as representing
through Childbirth the life of the Race (or of the Tribe, or, if you
like, of Humanity at large) should be sacred and guarded from merely
selfish aims, and therefore to use it only for such aims is indeed a
desecration. And even if--as some maintain and I think rightly <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202)--sex is not *merely* for child-birth and
physical procreation, but for mutual vitalizing and invigoration, it
still subserves union and not egotism; and to use it egotistically is to
commit the sin of Separation indeed. It is to cast away and corrupt the
very bond of life and fellowship. The ancient peoples at any rate threw
an illumination of religious (that is, of communal and public) value
over sex-acts, and to a great extent made them into matters either of
Temple-ritual and the worship of the gods, or of communal and pandemic
celebration, as in the Saturnalia and other similar festivals. We have
certainly no right to regard these celebrations--of either kind--as
insincere. They were, at any rate in their inception, genuinely
religious or genuinely social and festal; and from either point of view
they were far better than the secrecy of private indulgence which
characterizes our modern world in these matters. The thorough and
shameless commercialism of Sex has alas! been reserved for what is
called "Christian civilization," and with it (perhaps as a necessary
consequence) Prostitution and Syphilis have grown into appalling evils,
accompanied by a gigantic degradation of social standards, and upgrowth
of petty Philistinism and *niaiserie*. Love, in fact, having in this
modern world-movement been denied, and its natural manifestations
affected with a sense of guilt and of sin, has really languished and
ceased to play its natural part in life; and a vast number

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

of people--both men and women, finding themselves barred or derailed
from the main object of existence, have turned their energies to
'business' or 'money-making' or 'social advancement' or something
equally futile, as the only poor substitute and *pis aller* open to
them.

 

Why (again we ask) did Christianity make this apparently great mistake?
And again we must reply: Perhaps the mistake was not so great as it
appears to be. Perhaps this was another case of the necessity of
learning by loss. Love had to be denied, in the form of sex, in order
that it might thus the better learn its own true values and needs. Sex
had to be rejected, or defiled with the sense of guilt and self-seeking,
in order that having cast out its defilement it might return one day,
transformed in the embrace of love. The whole process has had a deep and
strange world-significance. It has led to an immensely long period of
suppression--suppression of two great instincts--the physical instinct
of sex and the emotional instinct of love. Two things which should
naturally be conjoined have been separated; and both have suffered. And
we know from the Freudian teachings what suppressions in the
root-instincts necessarily mean. We know that they inevitably terminate
in diseases and distortions of proper action, either in the body or in
the mind, or in both; and that these evils can only be cured by the
liberation of the said instincts again to their proper expression and
harmonious functioning in the whole organism. No wonder then that, with
this agelong suppression (necessary in a sense though it may have been)
which marks the Christian dispensation, there should have been
associated endless Sickness and Crime and sordid Poverty, the
Crucifixion of animals in the name of Science and of human workers in
the name of Wealth, and wars and horrors innumerable! Hercules writhing
in the Nessus-shirt or Prometheus nailed to the

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

rocks are only as figures of a toy miniature compared with this vision
of the great and divine Spirit of Man caught in the clutches of those
dread Diseases which through the centuries have been eating into his
very heart and vitals.

It would not be fair to pile on the Christian Church the blame for all
this. It had, no doubt, its part to play in the whole great scheme,
namely, to accentuate the self-motive; and it played the part very
thoroughly and successfully. For it must be remembered (what I have
again and again insisted on) that in the pagan cults it was always the
salvation of the *clan*, the *tribe*, the *people* that was the main
consideration; the advantage of the individual took only a very
secondary part. But in Christendom--after the communal enthusiasms of
apostolic days and of the medieval and monastic brotherhoods and
sisterhoods had died down--religion occupied itself more and more with
each man or woman's *individual* salvation, regardless of what might
happen to the community; till, with the rise of Protestantism and
Puritanism, this tendency reached such an extreme that, as some one has
said, each man was absorbed in polishing up his own little soul in a
corner to himself, in entire disregard to the damnation which might co e
to his neighbor. Religion, and Morality too, under the commercial regime
became, as was natural, perfectly selfish. It was always: "Am *I* saved?
Am *I* doing the right thing? Am *I* winning the favor of God and man?
Will *my* claims to salvation be allowed? Did *I* make a good bargain in
allowing Jesus to be crucified for me?" The poison of a diseased
self-consciousness entered into the whole human system.

As I say, one must not blame the Christians too much for all
this--partly because, *after* the communal periods which I have just
mentioned, Christianity was evidently deeply influenced by the rise of
*commercialism*, to which during the last two centuries it has so
carefully and piously adapted itself; and partly because--if our view is
anywhere

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

near right--this microbial injection of self-consciousness was just the
necessary work which (in conjunction with commercialism) it *had* to
perform. But though one does not blame Christianity one cannot blind
oneself to its defects--the defects necessarily arising from the part it
had to play. When one compares a healthy Pagan ritual--say of Apollo or
Dionysus--including its rude and crude sacrifices if you like, but also
including its whole-hearted spontaneity and dedication to the common
life and welfare--with the morbid self-introspection of the Christian
and the eternally recurring question "What shall I do to be saved?"--the
comparison is not favorable to the latte . There is (at any rate in
modern days) a mawkish milk-and-wateriness about the Christian attitude,
and also a painful self-consciousness, which is not pleasant; and though
Nietzsche's blonde beast is a sufficiently disagreeable animal, one
almost thinks that it were better to be *that* than to go about with
one's head meekly hanging on one side, and talking always of altruism
and self-sacrifice, while in reality one's heart was entirely occupied
with the question of one's own salvation. There is besides a lamentable
want of grit and substance about the Christian doctrines and
ceremonials. Somehow under the sex-taboo they became spiritualized and
etherealized out of all human use. Study the initiation-rites of any
savage tribe--with their strict discipline of the young braves in
fortitude, and the overcoming of pain and fear; with their very detailed
lessons in the arts of war and life and the duties of the grown man to
his tribe; and with their quite practical instruction in matters of Sex;
and then read our little Baptismal and Confirmation services, which
ought to correspond thereto. How thin and attenuated and weak the latter
appear! Or compare the Holy Communion, as celebrated in the sentimental
atmosphere of a Protestant Church, with an ancient Eucharistic feast of
real jollity and community of life under the acknowledged presence of
the god; or the Roman Catholic service of the

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mass, including its genuflexions and mock
oblations and droning ritual sing-song, with the actual sacrifice in
early days of an animal-god-victim on a blazing altar; and I think my
meaning will be clear. We do not want, of course, to return to all the
crudities and barbarities of the past; but also we do not want to become
attenuated and spiritualized out of all mundane sense and recognition,
and to live in an otherworld Paradise void of application to earthly
affairs.

The sex-taboo in Christianity was apparently, as I have said, an effort
of the human soul to wrest itself free from the entanglement of physical
lust--which lust, though normal and appropriate and in a way gracious
among the animals, had through the domination of self-consciousness
become diseased and morbid or monstrous in Man. The work thus done has
probably been of the greatest value to the human race; but, just as in
other cases it has sometimes happened that the effort to do a certain
work has resulted in the end in an unbalanced exaggeration so here. We
are beginning to see now the harmful side of the repression of sex, and
are tentatively finding our way back again to a more pagan attitude. And
as this return-movement is taking place at a time when, from many
obvious signs, the self-conscious, grasping, commercial conception of
life is preparing to go on the wane, and the sense of solidarity to
re-establish itself, there is really good hope that our return-journey
may prove in some degree successful.

Man progresses generally, not both legs at once like a sparrow, but by
putting one leg forward first, and then the other. There was this
advantage in the Christian taboo of sex that by discouraging the
physical and sensual side of love it did for the time being allow the
spiritual side to come forward. But, as I have just now indicated, there
is a limit to that process. We cannot always keep one leg first in
walking, and we do not want, in life, always to put the spiritual first,
nor always the material and

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

sensual. The two sides in the long run have to keep pace with each
other.

And it may be that a great number of the very curious and seemingly
senseless taboos that we find among the primitive peoples can be partly
explained in this way: that is, that by ruling out certain directions of
activity they enabled people to concentrate more effectually, for the
time being, on other directions. To primitive folk the great world,
whose ways are puzzling enough in all conscience to us, must have been
simply bewildering in its dangers and complications. It was an amazement
of Fear and Ignorance. Thunderbolts might come at any moment out of the
blue sky, or a demon out of an old tree trunk, or a devastating plague
out of a bad smell--or apparently even out of nothing at all! Under
those circumstances it was perhaps wise, wherever there was the smallest
*suspicion* of danger or ill-luck, to create a hard and fast
*taboo*--just as we tell our children *on no account* to walk under a
ladder (thereby creating a superstition in their minds), partly because
it would take too long to explain all about the real dangers of
paint-pots and other things, and partly because for the children
themselves it seems simpler to have a fixed and inviolable law than to
argue over every case that occurs. The priests and elders among early
folk no doubt took the line of *forbiddal* of activities, as safer and
simpler, even if carried sometimes too far, than the opposite, of easy
permission and encouragement. Taboos multiplied--many of them quite
senseless--but perhaps in this perilous maze of the world, of which I
have spoken, it really *was* simpler to cut out a large part of the
labyrinth, as forbidden ground, thus rendering it easier for the people
to find their way in those portions of the labyrinth which remained. If
you read in Deuteronomy (ch. xiv) the list of birds and beasts and
fishes permitted for food among the Israelites, or tabooed, you will
find the list on the whole reasonable, but you will be struck by some
curious exceptions (according

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

to our ideas), which are probably to be explained by the necessity of
making the rules simple enough to be comprehended by everybody--even if
they included the forbiddal of some quite eatable animals.

At some early period, in Babylonia or Assyria, a very stringent taboo on
the Sabbath arose, which, taken up in turn by the Jewish and Christian
Churches, has ruled the Western World for three thousand years or more,
and still survives in a quite senseless form among some of our rural
populations, who will see their corn rot in the fields rather than save
it on a Sunday. <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203) It is quite likely
that this taboo in its first beginning was due not to any need of a
weekly rest-day (a need which could never be felt among nomad savages,
but would only occur in some kind of industrial and stationary
civilization), but to some superstitious fear, connected with such
things as the changes of the Moon, and the probable *ill-luck* of any
enterprise undertaken on the seventh day, or any day of Moon-change. It
is probable, however, that as time went on and Society became more
complex, the advantages of a weekly *rest-day* (or market-day) became
more obvious and that the priests and legislators deliberately turned
the taboo to a social use. <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_204) The
learned modern Ethnologists, however, will generally have none of this
latter idea. As a rule they delight in representing early peoples as
totally destitute of common sense (which is supposed to be a monopoly of
us moderns!); and if the Sabbath-arrangement has had any value or use
they insist on ascribing this to pure accident, and not to the
application of any sane argument or reason.

It is true indeed that a taboo--in order to be a proper taboo--must not
rest in the general mind on argument or reason. It may have had good
sense in the past or even

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

an underlying good sense in the present, but its foundation must rest on
something beyond. It must be an absolute *fiat*--something of the nature
of a Mystery <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) or of Religion or
Magic--and not to be disputed. This gives it its blood-curdling quality.
The rustic does not know what would happen to him if he garnered his
corn on Sunday, nor does the diner-out in polite society know what would
happen if he spooned up his food with his knife--but they both are
stricken with a sort of paralysis at the very suggestion of infringing
these taboos.

Marriage-customs have always been a fertile field for the generation of
taboos. It seems doubtful whether anything like absolute promiscuity
ever prevailed among the human race, but there is much to show that wide
choice and intercourse were common among primitive folk and that the
tendency of later marriage custom has been on the whole to *limit* this
range of choice. At some early period the forbiddal of marriage between
those who bore the same totem-name took place. Thus in Australia "no man
of the Emu stock might marry an Emu woman; no Blacksnake might marry a
Blacksnake woman, and so forth." <span id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206)
Among the Kamilaroi and the Arunta of S. Australia the tribe was divided
into classes or clans, sometimes four, sometimes eight, and a man of one
particular clan was only marriageable with a woman of another particular
clan--say (1) with (3) or (2) with (4), and so on. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[3](#fn_207) Customs with a similar tendency, but
different in detail, seem to have prevailed among native tribes in
Central Africa and N. America. And the regulations in all this matter
have been so (apparently) entirely arbitrary in the various cases that
it would almost appear as if the bar of kinship through the Totem had
been the *excuse*, originating perhaps in some superstition, but that
the real and more abiding object was simply limitation.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And this perhaps was a wise line to take. A
taboo on promiscuity had to be created, and for this purpose any current
prejudice could be made use of. <span id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208)

With us moderns the whole matter has taken a different complexion. When
we consider the enormous amount of suffering and disease, both of mind
and body, arising from the sex-suppression of which I have just spoken,
especially among women, we see that mere unreasoning taboos--which
possibly had their place and use in the past--can be tolerated no
longer. We are bound to turn the searchlight of reason and science on a
number of superstitions which still linger in the dark and musty places
of the Churches and the Law courts. Modern inquiry has shown
conclusively not only the foundational importance of sex in the
evolution of each human being, but also the very great *variety* of
spontaneous manifestations in different individuals and the vital
necessity that these should be recognized, if society is ever to expand
into a rational human form. It is not my object here to sketch the
future of marriage and sex-relations generally--a subject which is now
being dealt with very effectively from many sides; but only to insist on
our using our good sense in the whole matter, and refusing any longer to
be bound by senseless pre-judgments.

Something of the same kind may be said with regard to Nakedness, which
in modern Civilization has become the object of a very serious and
indeed harmful taboo; both of speech and act. As someone has said, it
became in the end of the nineteenth century almost a crime to mention by
name any portion of the human body within a radius of about twenty
inches from its centre (!) and as a matter of fact a few dress-reformers
of that period were actually brought into court and treated as criminals
for going about with legs bare up to the knees, and shoulders and chest

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

uncovered! Public follies such as these have been responsible for much
of the bodily and mental disease and suppression just mentioned, and the
sooner they are sent to limbo the better. No sensible person would
advocate promiscuous nakedness any more than promiscuous
sex-relationship; nor is it likely that aged and deformed people would
at any time wish to expose themselves. But surely there is enough good
sense and appreciation of grace and fitness in the average human mind
for it to be able to liberate the body from senseless concealment, and
give it its due expression. The Greeks of old, having on the whole clean
bodies, treated them with respect and distinction. The young men
appeared quite naked in the *palaestra*, and even the girls of Sparta
ran races publicly in the same condition; <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209) and some day when our bodies (and minds
too) have become clean we shall return to similar institutions. But that
will not be just yet. As long as the defilement of this commercial
civilization is on us we shall prefer our dirt and concealment. The
powers that be will protest against change. Heinrich Scham, in his
charming little pamphlet *Nackende Menschen*, <span
id="fr_210"></span>[2](#fn_210) describes the consternation of the
commercial people at such ideas:

"'What will become of us,' cried the tailors, 'if you go naked?'

"And all the lot of them, hat, cravat, shirt, and shoemakers joined in
the chorus.

"'*And where shall I carry my money*?' cried one who had just been made
a director."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[181:1](pcc13.htm#fr_193) *Angels' Wings*, by
E. Carpenter, p. 104.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[181:2](pcc13.htm#fr_194) 1 Kings xiv. 22-24.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[181:3](pcc13.htm#fr_195) 2 Kings xxiii.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[182:1](pcc13.htm#fr_196) See *Herodotus* i.
199; also a reference to this custom in the apocryphal *Baruch*, vi. 42,
43.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[182:2](pcc13.htm#fr_197) *The Thousand Nights
and a Night* (1886 edn.), vol. x, p. 229.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[183:1](pcc13.htm#fr_198) "He shall establish"
and "In it is strength'" are in the Bible the marginal interpretations
of these two words.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[183:2](pcc13.htm#fr_199) The connection
between the production of fire by means of the fire-drill and the
generation of life by sex-intercourse is a very obvious one, and lends
itself to magical ideas. J. E. Hewitt in his *Ruling Races of
Prehistoric Times* (1894) says (vol. i, p. 8) that "Magha, the
mother-goddess worshipped in Asia Minor, was originally the socket-block
from which fire was generated by the fire-drill." Hence we have, he
says, the Magi of Persia, and the Maghadas of Indian History, also the
word "Magic."

<span id="fn_200"></span>[184:1](pcc13.htm#fr_200) For further
development of this subject see ch. xv (pp.
[244](pcc16.htm#page_244)-248) *infra*.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[185:1](pcc13.htm#fr_201) For the Aztecs, see
*Acosta*, vol. ii, p. 324 (London, 1604).

<span id="fn_202"></span>[188:1](pcc13.htm#fr_202) See Havelock Ellis,
*The Objects of Marriage*, a pamphlet published by the "British Society
for the Study of Sex-psychology."

<span id="fn_203"></span>[194:1](pcc13.htm#fr_203) For other absurd
Sunday taboos see Westermarck on *The Moral Ideas*, vol. ii, p. 289.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[194:2](pcc13.htm#fr_204) For a tracing of this
taboo from useless superstition to practical utility see Hastings's
*Encycl. Religion and Ethics*, art. "The Sabbath."

<span id="fn_205"></span>[195:1](pcc13.htm#fr_205) See Westermarck,
*Ibid*., ii. 586.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[195:2](pcc13.htm#fr_206) *Myth, Ritual and
Religion*, i, p. 66.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[195:3](pcc13.htm#fr_207) See Spencer and
Gillen, *Native Tribes of Australia*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[196:1](pcc13.htm#fr_208) The author of *The
Mystic Rose* seems to take this view. See p. 214 of that book.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[197:1](pcc13.htm#fr_209) See Theocritus, Idyll
xviii.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[197:2](pcc13.htm#fr_210) Published at Leipzig
about 1893.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. The Genesis Of Christianity](pcc14)
