[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pcc09)  [Next](pcc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### IX.

### MYTH OF THE GOLDEN AGE

The tradition of a "Golden Age" is widespread over the world, and it is
not necessary to go at any length into the story of the *Garden of Eden*
and the other legends which in almost every country illustrate this
tradition. Without indulging in sentiment on the subject we may hold it
not unlikely that the tradition is justified by the remembrance, among
the people of every race, of a pre-civilization period of comparative
harmony and happiness when two things, which to-day we perceive to be
the prolific causes of discord and misery, were absent or only weakly
developed--namely, *property* and *self-consciousness*. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158)

During the first century B.C. there was a great spread of Messianic
Ideas over the Roman world, and Virgil's 4th Eclogue, commonly called
the Messianic Eclogue, reflects very clearly this state of the public
mind. The expected babe in the poem was to be the son of Octavian
(Augustus) the first Roman emperor, and a messianic halo surrounded it
in Virgil's verse. Unfortunately it turned out to be a *girl*! However
there is little doubt that Virgil did--in that very sad age of the
world, an age of "misery and massacre," and in common with thousands of
others--look for the coming of a great 'redeemer.' It was only

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

a few years earlier--about B.C. 70--that the great revolt of the
shamefully maltreated Roman slaves occurred, and that in revenge six
thousand prisoners from Spartacus' army were nailed on crosses all the
way from Rome to Capua (150 miles). But long before this Hesiod had
recorded a past Golden Age when life had been gracious in communal
fraternity and joyful in peace, when human beings and animals spoke the
same language, when death had followed on sleep, without old age or
disease, and after death men had moved as good *daimones* or *genii*
over the lands. Pindar, three hundred years after Hesiod, had confirmed
the existence of the Islands of the Blest, where the good led a
blameless, tearless, life. Plato the same, <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159) with further references to the fabled
island of Atlantis; the Egyptians believed in a former golden age under
the god Râ to which they looked back with regret and envy; the Persians
had a garden of Eden similar to that of the Hebrews; the Greeks a garden
of the Hesperides, in which dwelt the serpent whose head was ultimately
crushed beneath the heel of Hercules; and so on. The references to a
supposed far-back state of peace and happiness are indeed numerous.

So much so that latterly, and partly to explain their prevalence, a
theory has been advanced which may be worth while mentioning. It is
called the "Theory of intra-uterine Blessedness," and, remote as it may
at first appear, it certainly has some claim for attention. The theory
is that in the minds of mature people there still remain certain vague
memories of their *pre-natal* days in the maternal womb--memories of a
life which, though full of growing vigor and vitality, was yet at that
time one of absolute harmony with the surroundings, and of perfect peace
and contentment, spent within the body of the mother--the embryo indeed
standing in the same relation

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

to the mother as St. Paul says *we* stand to God, "*in* whom we live and
move and have our being"; and that these vague memories of the
intra-uterine life in the individual are referred back by the mature
mind to a past age in the life of the *race*. Though it would not be
easy at present to positively confirm this theory, yet one may say that
it is neither improbable nor unworthy of consideration; also that it
bears a certain likeness to the former ones about the Eden-gardens, etc.
The well-known parallelism of the Individual history with the
Race-history, the "recapitulation" by the embryo of the development of
the race, does in fact afford an additional argument for its favorable
reception.

These considerations, and what we have said so often in the foregoing
chapters about the unity of the Animals (and Early Man) with Nature, and
their instinctive and age-long adjustment to the conditions of the world
around them, bring us up hard and fast against the following
conclusions, which I think we shall find difficult to avoid.

We all recognize the extraordinary grace and beauty, in their different
ways, of the (wild) animals; and not only their beauty but the extreme
fitness of their actions and habits to their surroundings--their subtle
and penetrating Intelligence in fact. Only we do not generally use the
word "Intelligence." We use another word (Instinct)--and rightly
perhaps, because their actions are plainly not the result of definite
self-conscious reasoning, such as we use, carried out by each
individual; but are (as has been abundantly proved by Samuel Butler and
others) the systematic expression of experiences gathered up and sorted
out and handed down from generation to generation in the bosom of the
race--an Intelligence in fact, or Insight, of larger subtler scope than
the other, and belonging to the tribal or racial Being rather than to
the isolated individual--a super-consciousness in fact, ramifying afar
in space and time.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

But if we allow (as we must) this unity and perfection of nature, and
this somewhat cosmic character of the mind, to exist among the Animals,
we can hardly refuse to believe that there must have been a period when
Man, too, hardly as yet differentiated from them, did himself possess
these same qualities--perhaps even in greater degree than the
animals--of grace and beauty of body, perfection of movement and action,
instinctive perception and knowledge (of course in limited spheres); and
a period when he possessed above all a sense of unity with his fellows
and with surrounding Nature which became the ground of a common
consciousness between himself and his tribe, similar to that which
Maeterlinck, in the case of the Bees, calls the Spirit of the
Hive. <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160) It would be difficult, nay
impossible, to suppose that human beings on their first appearance
formed an entire exception in the process of evolution, or that they
were completely lacking in the very graces and faculties which we so
admire in the animals--only of course we see that (*like* the animals)
they would not be *self*-conscious in these matters, and what perception
they had of their relations to each other or to the world around them
would be largely inarticulate and *sub*-conscious--though none the less
real for that.

Let us then grant this preliminary assumption--and it clearly is not a
large or hazardous one--and what follows? It follows--since to-day
discord is the rule, and Man has certainly lost the grace, both physical
and mental, of the animals--that at some period a break must have
occurred in the evolution-process, a discontinuity--similar perhaps to
that which occurs in the life of a child at the moment when it is born
into the world. Humanity took a new departure; but a departure which for
the moment was signalized as a *loss*--the loss of its former

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

harmony and self-adjustment. And the cause or accompaniment of this
change was the growth of Self-consciousness. Into the general
consciousness of the tribe (in relation to its environment) which in
fact had constituted the mentality of the animals and of man up to this
stage, there now was intruded another kind of consciousness, a
consciousness centering round each little individual self and concerned
almost entirely with the interests of the latter. Here was evidently a
threat to the continuance of the former happy conditions. It was like
the appearance of innumerable little ulcers in a human body--a menace
which if continued would inevitably lead to the break-up of the body. It
meant loss of tribal harmony and nature-adjustment. It meant instead of
unity a myriad conflicting centres; it meant alienation from the spirit
of the tribe, the separation of man from man, discord, recrimination,
and the fatal unfolding of the sense of sin. The process symbolized
itself in the legend of the Fall. Man ate of the Tree of the knowledge
of good and evil. Sometimes people wonder why knowledge of any kind--and
especially the knowledge of good and evil--should have brought a curse.
But the reason is obvious. Into, the placid and harmonious life of the
animal and human tribes fulfilling their days in obedience to the slow
evolutions and age-long mandates of nature, Self-consciousness broke
with its inconvenient and impossible query: "How do these arrangements
suit *me*? Are they good or me, are they evil for me? I want to know. *I
will know*!" Evidently knowledge (such knowledge as we understand by the
word) only began, and could only begin, by queries relating to the
little local self. There was no other way for it to begin. Knowledge and
self-consciousness were born, as twins, together. Knowledge therefore
meant Sin; <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161) for self-consciousness
meant sin

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (and it means sin to-day). Sin is Separation.
That is probably (though disputed) the etymology of the word--that which
*sunders*. <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162) The essence of sin is
one's separation from the whole (the tribe or the god) of which one is a
part. And knowledge--which separates subject from object, and in its
inception is necessarily occupied with the 'good and evil' of the little
local self, is the great engine of this separation. \[Mark! I say
nothing *against* this association of Self-consciousness with 'Sin'
(so-called) and 'Knowledge' (so-called). The growth of all three
together is an absolutely necessary part of human evolution, and to rail
against it would be absurd. But we may as well open our eyes and see the
fact straight instead of blinking it.\] The culmination of the process
and the fulfilment of the 'curse' we may watch to-day in the towering
expansion of the self-conscious individualized Intellect--science as the
handmaid of human Greed devastating the habitable world and destroying
its unworthy civilization. And the process must go on--necessarily must
go on--until Self-consciousness, ceasing its vain quest (vain in both
senses) for the separate domination of life, surrenders itself back
again into the arms of the Mother-consciousness from which it originally
sprang--surrenders itself back, not to be merged in nonentity, but to be
affiliated in loving dependence on and harmony with the cosmic life.

All this I have dealt with in far more detail in Civilization: its
*Cause and Cure*, and in *The Art of Creation*; but I have only repeated
the outline of it as above, because some such outline is necessary for
the proper ordering and understanding of the points which follow.

We are not concerned now with the ultimate effects of the 'Fall' of Man
or with the present-day fulfilment of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the Eden-curse. What we want to understand is how the 'Fall' into
self-consciousness led to that great panorama of Ritual and Religion
which we have very briefly described and summarized in the preceding
chapters of this book. We want for the present to fix our attention on
the *commencement* of that process by which man lapsed away from his
living community with Nature and his fellows into the desert of discord
and toil, while the angels of the flaming sword closed the gates of
Paradise behind him.

It is evident I think that in that 'golden' stage when man was simply
the crown and perfection of the animals--and it is hardly possible to
refuse the belief in such a stage--he possessed in reality all the
essentials of Religion. It is not necessary to sentimentalize over him;
he was probably raw and crude in his lusts of hunger and of sex; he was
certainly ignorant and superstitious; he loved fighting with and
persecuting 'enemies' (which things of course all religions
to-day--except perhaps the Buddhist--love to do); he was dominated often
by unreasoning Fear, and was consequently cruel. Yet he was full of that
Faith which the animals have to such an admirable degree--unhesitating
faith in the inner promptings of his *own* nature; he had the joy which
comes of abounding vitality, springing up like a fountain whose outlet
is free and unhindered; he rejoiced in an untroubled and unbroken sense
of unity with his Tribe, and in elaborate social and friendly
institutions within its borders; he had a marvelous sense-acuteness
towards Nature and a gift in that direction verging towards
"second-sight"; strengthened by a conviction--which had never become
*conscious* because it had never been *questioned*-- of his own personal
relation

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

to the things outside him, the Earth, the Sky, the Vegetation, the
Animals. Of such a Man we get glimpses in the far past--though indeed
only glimpses, for the simple reason that all our knowledge of him comes
through civilized channels; and wherever civilization has touched these
early peoples it has already withered and corrupted them, even before it
has had the sense to properly observe them. It is sufficient, however,
just to mention peoples like some of the early Pacific Islanders, the
Zulus and Kafirs of South Africa, the Fans of the Congo Region (of whom
Winwood Reade <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163) speaks so highly),
some of the Malaysian and Himalayan tribes, the primitive Chinese, and
even the evidence with regard to the neolithic peoples of Europe, in
order to show what I mean. <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164)

Perhaps one of the best ideas of the gulf of difference between the
semi-civilized and the quite primal man is given by A. R. Wallace in his
*Life* (Vol. i, p. 288): "A most unexpected sensation of surprise and
delight was my first meeting and living with man in a state of nature
with absolute uncontaminated savages! This was on the Uaupes river. . .
. They were all going about their own work or pleasure, which had
nothing to do with the white men or their ways; they walked with the
free step of the independent forest-dweller . . . original and
self-sustaining as the wild animals of the forests, absolutely
independent of civilization . . . living their own lives in their own
way, as they had done for countless generations before America was
discovered. Indeed the true denizen of the Amazonian forests, like the
forest itself, is unique and not to be forgotten." Elsewhere <span
id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_165) Wallace speaks of the quiet,
good-natured, inoffensive character of these copper-colored peoples, and
of their quickness of hand and skill, and continues: "their figures are
generally superb;

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

and I have never felt so much pleasure in gazing at the finest statue as
at these living illustrations of the beauty of the human form."

Though some of the peoples just mentioned may be said to belong to
different grades or stages of human evolution and physically some no
doubt were far superior to others, yet they mostly exhibit this simple
grace of the bodily and mental organism, as well as that closeness of
tribal solidarity of which I have spoken. The immense antiquity, of the
clan *organization*, as shown by investigations into early marriage,
points to the latter conclusion. Travellers among Bushmen, Hottentots,
Fuegians, Esquimaux, Papuans and other peoples--peoples who have been
pushed aside into unfavorable areas by the invasion of more warlike and
better-equipped races, and who have suffered physically in
consequence--confirm this. Kropotkin, speaking of the Hottentots, quotes
the German author P. Kolben who travelled among them in 1275 or so. "He
knew the Hottentots well and did not pass by their defects in silence,
but could not praise their tribal morality highly enough. Their word is
sacred, he wrote, they know nothing of the corruption and faithless arts
of Europe. They live in great tranquillity and are seldom at war with
their neighbors, and are all kindness and goodwill to one
another." <span id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_166) Kropotkin further says:
"Let me remark that when Kolben says 'they are certainly the most
friendly, the most liberal and the most benevolent people to one another
that ever appeared on the earth' he wrote a sentence which has
continually appeared since in the description of savages. When first
meeting with primitive races, the Europeans usually make a caricature of
their life; but when an intelligent man has stayed among them

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

for a longer time he generally describes them as the 'kindest' or the
'gentlest' race on the earth. These very same words have been applied to
the Ostyaks, the Samoyedes, the Eskimos, the Dyaks, the Aleuts, the
Papuans, and so on, by the highest authorities. I also remember having
read them applied to the Tunguses, the Tchuktchis, the Sioux, and
several others. The very frequency of that high commendation already
speaks volumes in itself." <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167)

Many of the tribes, like the Aleuts, Eskimos, Dyaks, Papuans, Fuegians,
etc., are themselves in the Neolithic stage of culture--though for the
reason given above probably degenerated physically from the standard of
their neolithic ancestors; and so the conclusion is forced upon one that
there must have been an *immense period*, <span
id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168) prior to the first beginnings of
'civilization,' in which the human tribes in general led a peaceful and
friendly life on the earth, comparatively little broken up by
dissensions, in close contact with Nature and in that degree of sympathy
with and understanding of the Animals which led to the establishment of
the Totem system. Though it would be absurd to credit these tribes with
any great degree of comfort and well-being according to our modern
standards, yet we may well suppose that the memory of this long period
lingered on for generations and generations and was ultimately idealized
into the Golden Age, in contrast to the succeeding period of everlasting
warfare, rancor and strife which came in with the growth of Property
with its greeds and jealousies, and the accentuation

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

of Self-consciousness with all its vanities and ambitions.

I say that each tribe at this early stage of development had within it
the *essentials* of what we call Religion--namely a bedrock sense of its
community with Nature, and of the Common life among its members--a sense
so intimate and fundamental that it was hardly aware of itself (any more
than the fish is aware of the sea in which it lives), but yet was really
the matrix of tribal thought and the spring of tribal action. It was
this sense of unity which was destined by the growth of
*self-consciousness* to come to light and evidence in the shape of all
manner of rituals and ceremonials; and by the growth of the *imaginative
intellect* to embody itself in the figures and forms of all manner of
deities.

Let us examine into this a little more closely. A lark soaring in the
eye of the sun, and singing rapt between its "heaven and home" realizes
no doubt in actual fact all that those two words mean to us; yet its
realization is quite subconscious. It does not define its own
experience: it *feels* but it does not *think*. In order to come to the
stage of *thinking* it would perhaps be necessary that the lark should
be exiled from the earth and the sky, and confined in a cage. Early Man
*felt* the great truths and realities of Life--often I believe more
purely than we do--but he could not give form to his experience. *That*
stage came when he began to lose touch with these realities; and it
showed itself in rites and ceremonials. The inbreak of
self-consciousness brought *out* the facts of his inner life into
ritualistic and afterwards into intellectual forms.

Let me give examples. For a long time the Tribe is all in all; the
individual is completely subject to the 'Spirit of the Hive'; he does
not even *think* of contravening it. Then the day comes when
self-interest, as apart from the Tribe, becomes sufficiently strong to
drive him against some tribal custom. He breaks the *tabu*;

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

he eats the forbidden apple; he sins against the tribe, and is cast out.
Suddenly he finds himself an exile, lonely, condemned and deserted. A
horrible sense of distress seizes him--something of which he had no
experience before. He tries to think about it all, to understand the
situation, but is dazed and cannot arrive at any conclusion. His one
*necessity* is Reconciliation, Atonement. He finds he cannot *live*
outside of and alienated from his tribe. He makes a Sacrifice, an
offering to his fellows, as a seal of sincerity--an offering of his own
bodily suffering or precious blood, or the blood of some food-animal, or
some valuable gift or other--if only he may be allowed to return. The
off ring is accepted. The ritual is performed; and he is received back.
I have already spoken of this perfectly natural evolution of the
twin-ideas of Sin and Sacrifice, so I need not enlarge upon the subject.
But two things we may note here: (1) that the ritual, being so concrete
(and often severe), graves itself on the minds of those concerned, and
expresses the feelings of the tribe, with an intensity and sharpness of
outline which no words could rival, and (2) that such rituals may have,
and probably did, come into use even while language itself was in an
infantile condition and incapable of dealing with the psychological
situation except by symbols. They, the rituals, were the first effort of
the primitive mind to get beyond, subconscious feeling and emerge into a
world of forms and definite thought.

Let us carry the particular instance, given above, a stage farther, even
to the confines of abstract Thought and Philosophy. I have spoken of
"The Spirit of the Hive" as if the term were applicable to the Human as
well as to the Bee tribe. The individual bee obviously has never
*thought* about that 'Spirit,' nor mentally understood what Maeterlinck
means by it; and yet in terms of actual experience it is an intense
reality to the bee (ordaining for instance on some fateful day the
slaughter

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

of all the drones), controlling bee-movements and bee-morality
generally. The individual tribesman similarly steeped in the age-long
human life of his fellows has never thought of the Tribe as an ordaining
being or Spirit, separate from himself--*till* that day when he is
exiled and outcast from it. *Then* he sees himself and the tribe as two
opposing beings, himself of course an Intelligence or Spirit in his own
limited degree, the Tribe as a much greater Intelligence or Spirit,
standing against and over him. From that day the conception of a god
arises on him. It may be only a totem-god--a divine Grizzly-Bear or what
not--but still a god or supernatural Presence, embodied in the life of
the tribe. This is what Sin has taught him. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169) This is what Fear, founded on
self-consciousness, has revealed to him. The revelation may be true, or
it may be fallacious (I do not prejudge it); but there it is--the
beginning of that long series of human evolutions which we call
Religion.

\[For when the human mind has reached that stage of consciousness in
which each man realizes his own 'self' as a rational and consistent
being, "looking before and after," then, as I have said already, the
mind projects on the background of Nature similarly rational Presences
which we may call 'Gods'; and at that stage 'Religion' begins. Before
that, when the mind is quite unformed and dream-like, and consists
chiefly of broken and scattered rays, and when distinct
self-consciousness is hardly yet developed, then the presences imagined
in Nature are merely flickering and intermittent phantoms, and their
propitiation and placation comes more properly under, the head of
'Magic.'\]

 

So much for the genesis of the religious ideas of Sin

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

and Sacrifice, and the rites connected with these ideas--their genesis
through the in-break of self-consciousness upon the corporate
*sub*-consciousness of the life of the Community. But an exactly similar
process may be observed in the case of the other religious ideas.

I spoke of the doctrine of the *second birth*, and the rites connected
with it both in Paganism and in Christianity. There is much to show that
among quite primitive peoples there is less of shrinking from death and
more of certainty about a continued life after death than we generally
find among more intellectual and civilized folk. It is, or has been,
quite, common among many tribes for the old and decrepit, who are
becoming a burden to their fellows, to offer themselves for happy
dispatch, and to take willing part in the ceremonial preparations for
their own extinction; and this readiness is encouraged by their naive
and untroubled belief in a speedy transference to "happy
hunting-grounds" beyond the grave. The truth is that when, as in such
cases, the tribal life is very whole and unbroken--each individual
identifying himself completely with the tribe--the idea of the
individual's being dropped out at death, and left behind by the tribe,
hardly arises. The individual is the tribe, has no other existence. he
tribe goes on, living a life which is eternal, and only changes its
hunting-grounds; and the individual, identified with the tribe, feels in
some subconscious way the same about himself.

But when one member has broken faith with the tribe, when he has sinned
against it and become an outcast--ah! then the terrors of death and
extinction loom large upon him. "The wages of sin is death." There comes
a period in the evolution of tribal life when the primitive bonds are
loosening, when the tendency towards *self*-will and
*self*-determination (so necessary of course in the long run for the
evolution of humanity) becomes a real danger to the tribe, and a terror
to the wise men and elders of the

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

community. It is seen that the children inherit this tendency--even from
their infancy. They are no longer mere animals, easily herded; it seems
that they are born in sin--or at least in ignorance and neglect of their
tribal life and calling. The only cure is that they *must be born
again*. They must deliberately and of set purpose be adopted into the
tribe, and be made to realize, even severely, in their own persons what
is happening. They must go through the initiations necessary to impress
this upon them. Thus a whole series of solemn rites spring up, different
no doubt in every locality, but all having the same object and purpose.
\[And one can understand how the necessity of such initiations and
second birth may easily have been itself felt in every race, at some
stage of its evolution--and *that* quite as a spontaneous growth, and
independently of any contagion of example caught from other races.\]

 

The same may be said about the world-wide practice of the Eucharist. No
more effective method exists for impressing on the members of a body
their community of life with each other, and causing them to forget
their jangling self-interests, than to hold a feast in common. It is a
method which has been honored in all ages as well as to-day. But when
the flesh partaken of at the feast is that of the Totem--the guardian
and presiding genius of the tribe--or perhaps of one of its chief
food-animals--then clearly the feast takes on a holy and solemn
character. It becomes a sacrament of unity--of the unity of all with the
tribe, and with each other. Self-interests and self-consciousness are
for the time submerged, and the common life asserts itself; but here
again we see that a custom like this would not come into being as a
deliberate rite *until* self-consciousness and the divisions consequent
thereon had grown to be an obvious evil. The herd-animals (cows, sheep,
and so forth) do not have Eucharists,

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

simply because they are sensible enough to feed along the same pastures
without quarrelling over the richest tufts of grass.

When the flesh partaken of (either actually or symbolically) is not that
of a divinized animal, but the flesh of a human-formed god--as in the
mysteries of Dionysus or Osiris or Christ--then we are led to suspect
(and of course this theory is widely held and supported) that the rites
date from a very far-back period when a human being, as representative
of the tribe, was actually slain, dismembered and partly devoured;
though as time went on, the rite gradually became glossed over and
mitigated into a love-communion through the sharing of bread and wine.

It is curious anyhow that the dismemberment or division into fragments
of the body of a god (as in the case of Dionysus, Osiris, Attis,
Prajápati and others) should be so frequent a tenet of the old
religions, and so commonly associated with a love-feast of
reconciliation and resurrection. It may be fairly interpreted as a
symbol of Nature-dismemberment in Winter and resurrection in Spring; but
we must also not forget that it may (and indeed must) have stood as an
allegory of *tribal* dismemberment and reconciliation--the tribe,
conceived of as a divinity, having thus suffered and died through the
inbreak of sin and the self-motive, and risen again into wholeness by
the redemption of love and sacrifice. Whatever view the rank and file of
the tribe may have taken of the matter, I think it is incontestable that
the more thoughtful regarded these rites as full of mystic and spiritual
meaning. It is of the nature, as I have said before, of these early
symbols and ceremonies that they held so many meanings in solution; and
it is this fact which gave them a poetic or creative quality, and their
great hold upon the public mind.

I use the word "tribe" in many places here as a matter of convenience;
not forgetting however that in some

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

cases "clan" might be more appropriate, as referring to a section of a
tribe; or "people" or "folk" as referring to unions of *several* tribes.
It is impossible of course to follow out all the gradations of
organization from tribal up to national life; but it may be remembered
that while animal totems prevail as a rule in the earlier stages,
human-formed gods become more conspicuous in the later developments. All
through, the practice of the Eucharist goes on, in varying forms
adapting itself to the surrounding conditions; and where in the later
societies a religion like Mithraism or Christianity includes people of
very various race, the Rite loses quite naturally its tribal
significance and becomes a celebration of allegiance to a particular
god--of unity within a special Church, in fact. Ultimately it may
become--as for a brief moment in the history of the early Christians it
seemed likely to do--a celebration of allegiance to all Humanity,
irrespective of race or creed or color of skin or of mind: though
unfortunately that day seems still far distant and remains yet
unrealized. It must not be overlooked, however, that the religion of the
Persian Bâb, first promulgated in 1845 to 1850--and a subject I shall
deal with presently--had as a matter of fact this all embracing and
universal scope.

To return to the Golden Age or Garden of Eden. Our conclusion seems to
be that there really was such a period of comparative harmony in human
life--to which later generations were justified in looking back, and
looking back with regret. It corresponded in the psychology of human
Evolution to stage One. The second stage was that of the Fall; and so
one is inevitably led to the conjecture and the hope that a third stage
will redeem the earth and its inhabitants to a condition of comparative
blessedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[137:1](pcc10.htm#fr_158) For a fuller working
out of this, see *Civilisation: its Cause and Cure*, by E. Carpenter,
ch. i.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[138:1](pcc10.htm#fr_159) See arts. by Margaret
Scholes, *Socialist Review*, Nov. and Dec. 1912.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[140:1](pcc10.htm#fr_160) See *The Life of the
Bee* by Maurice Maeterlinck; and for numerous similar cases among other
animals, P. Kropotkin's *Mutual Aid: a factor in Evolution*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[141:1](pcc10.htm#fr_161) Compare also other
myths, like *Cupid and Psyche*, *Lohengrin* etc., in which a fatal
curiosity leads to tragedy.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[142:1](pcc10.htm#fr_162) German *Sünde*, sin,
and *sonder*, separated; Dutch *zonde*, sin; Latin *sons*, guilty. Not
unlikely that the German root *Sühn*, expiation, is connected;
*Sühn-bock*, a scape-goat.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[144:1](pcc10.htm#fr_163) *Savage Africa*, ch.
xxxvii.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[144:2](pcc10.htm#fr_164) See Kropotkin's
*Mutual Aid*, ch. iii.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[144:3](pcc10.htm#fr_165) *Travels on the
Amazon* (1853), ch. xvii.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[145:1](pcc10.htm#fr_166) P. Kropotkin, *Mutual
Aid*, p. 90. W. J. Solias also speaks in terms of the highest praise of
the Bushmen --"their energy, patience, courage, loyalty, affection, good
manners and artistic sense" (*Ancient Hunters*, 1915, p. 425).

<span id="fn_167"></span>[146:1](pcc10.htm#fr_167) *Ibid*, p. 91.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[146:2](pcc10.htm#fr_168) See for estimates of
periods *infra* ch. xiv; also, for the peacefulness of these early
peoples, Havelock Ellis on "The Origin of War," where he says "We do not
find the *weapons* of warfare or the *wounds* of warfare among these
Palaeolithic remains . . . it was with civilization that the art of
killing developed, i. e. within the last 10,000 or 12,000 years when
Neolithic men (who became our ancestors) were just arriving."

<span id="fn_169"></span>[149:1](pcc10.htm#fr_169) It is to be noted, in
that charming idyll of the Eden garden, that it is only *after* eating
of the forbidden fruit that Adam and Eve perceive the Lord God walking
in the garden, and converse with him (Genesis iii. 8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The Saviour-god And The Virgin-mother](pcc11)
