[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc17)  [Next](bosc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

# Chapter XVI

### The Character of the Indian

To complete this history, and to give a relation of all my observations
during a period of more than twenty years' residence in the province, it
will be important to delinate the character of the Indians, as I have
been enabled to learn it. The undertaking will be arduous, I know, and a
curate of forty years' residence among them, once told his bishop, "they
were incomprehensible"--to which I agree; but nevertheless, I will make
the attempt. My idea is that the natural, or Divine precepts implanted
in the heart of man by his Creator, are by the Indians observed in a
retrograde manner, or in the opposite sense--that is, the affirmative
with them, is negative, and the negative, the affirmative; and this
opposition appears innate among all classes of them. An Indian curate of
the Indians, appears to be of the same opinion, if we may judge from his
description. "The Indians," he said, lead a life of indolence, rather
than devote themselves to the enlightening of their souls with ideas of
civilization and catholicism; it is repugnant to their feelings, which
have become vitiated by the unrestricted customs among them. Their
inclinations, to possess themselves of the property of others, are
unbounded. Their hypocrisy, when they pray, is as much to be feared, as
their insolence, when in tumultuous disorder. They are never grateful
for any benefit, nor do they pardon an injury, and they never proffer
civilities, unless to accomplish some interested motive. They are

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

ready to expose themselves to the greatest danger, to satisfy their
predominant passions. The future from them, is ever veiled by the
present. Their inconstancy and want of confidence deprive them of
friends, and he, who, by deception, holds them in subjection, may reduce
them to almost abject slavery." Such is the picture of them drawn by
this Indian curate, who was of Mexico, and I think, although referring
to the Mexicans, it is sufficient to comprehend the general character of
the Indian. Those of California are less curious, and in no wise so
industrious; for the Mexicans, when in their gentilism, sowed and
prepared the *maize*, as well as other grain for eating, and the females
spun and wove a covering for the body, out of cotton, which they also
cultivated.

The Indians of California may be compared to a species of monkey; for in
naught do they express interest, except in imitating the actions of
others, and, particularly in copying the ways of the "*razon*," or white
men, whom they respect as beings much superior to themselves; but in so
doing, they are careful to select vice, in preference to virtue. This is
the result, undoubtedly, of their corrupt, and natural disposition.

The Indian, in his grave, humble and retired manner, conceals a
hypocritical and treacherous disposition. He will deceive the most
minute observer, as has been the case with many, or with all, who have
endeavored to learn his character, until time has revealed to them his
true qualities. He never looks at any one, while in conversation, but
has a wandering and malicious gaze. For benefits received, he is never
grateful; and instead of looking upon that which is given, be beholds
only that which is withheld. His eyes are never uplifted, but like those
of the swine, are cast to the earth. Truth is not in him, unless to the
injury of another, and he is exceedingly false.

MYTHOLOGY

These Indians had the same belief as the Ancients, regarding the course
of the sun, and believed that when he set, he went to repose in the arms
of Thetis. He had twelve Palaces, which were placed at equal distances
around the earth; in each of which, he was accustomed to pass a month.
These twelve palaces were marked by a circle, called the zodiac, but
with signs, which alluded to certain passages in the fable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Characteristic Anecdotes](bosc19)
