[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc00)  [Next](bosc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# Translator's Introduction

IN THE TRANSLATION OF THIS MANUSCRIPT, I HAVE endeavored to retain the
original style of the Spanish writer, and have adhered, as closely as
practicable, to a literal version of the same.

It is apparent that Father Boscana intended to confine his description
of the Indians to those who were made converts at the Point called St.
Juan Capistrano; but I presume the same will correspond with the
character of the natives generally, of Upper California. The mission of
St. Juan was first founded in 1776, and, like those which preceded it,
was conducted under the administration of two Friars of the St.
Franciscan Order. Its domains were large, and distributed into numerous
farms, for the purpose of domesticating cattle. A guard of three or four
soldiers, and a sergeant, enforced the will of the missionaries, and
kept in check such unfriendly Indians, as were not inclined to avail
themselves of the advantages of civilization. Under this kind of
administration, the natives were taught many trades; and became, not
only useful to themselves, but also to the community. Hardly any
attention was paid to the improvement of their minds, beyond the forms
and rules of their religious belief, so that scarcely any of them could
read, and none could write. They have been careful to preserve the
traditions and customs of their ancestors, and are permitted to indulge
in the observance of them, on their feast days, which occur several
times during the year. Thus, I have had frequent opportunities to
witness many of the absurdities, and extravagances, described by Father
Boscana.

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

The manuscript ends rather abruptly; and it is uncertain if the holy
Father ever intended it for publication. After his death, in 1831, it
was found among his effects, with other writings, which came into the
possession of the Syndic of the Missions, who kindly presented it to me.
The reader will decide as to its merits.

A. R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](bosc02)
