[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc04)  [Next](bosc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# Chapter III

### Of the Creation of the World According to Those Residing on the Sea-Coast

In the preceding chapter, we have been amused by the belief of the
Indians, *Serranos*, relative to the creation of the world. Now, let us
compare the same with that of the *Playanos*--that is, those who came to
settle in the valley of St. Juan Capistrano. An invisible and
all-powerful being called *Nocuma* made the world, the sea, and all that
is therein contained, such as animals, trees, plants and fishes. In its
form it was spherical, and rested upon his hands; but, being continually
in motion, he resolved to secure the same by placing in its centre a
black rock, called *Tosaut*, and it remained firm, and secure as at the
present time. This black rock, the Indians say, is from a small island
near the beach, and the fragments which they often collect, serve as
trowels, with which they smooth their mud walls.

The sea, at that time, was no more than a small stream of water, running
from the south to the north, encircling the world: so filled with fish,
that they were literally piled one on top of another, in such a state of
inconvenience, that they held a consultation, and some were for landing
upon the earth; others were of opinion that it would be impossible, for
they would perish when exposed to the air and the heat of the sun, and
besides they had no legs and feet as other animals have. While
conferring upon this matter, there came a large fish, bringing with him
the rock *Tosaut*, which, having broken, they found in its centre a ball
formed like a bladder, filled with gall. This they emptied into the
water, and from its fresh state it was converted into a bitter

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

condition. The water then immediately swelled, and overflowed upon the
earth, covering the space which it does now, and the fishes were
rejoiced to find themselves so amply supplied with room, and at the
change effected in the taste.

Nocumo having created all the things contained in the world, and secured
it with the rock *Tosaut*, as before remarked, created man, or the first
Indian, out of the earth, and called him *Ejoni*. Afterwards he created
woman, and gave her the name of *Aé*. It is not known of what she was
made, but the supposition is that she was created from the earth, like
the man. Many years after the creation of *Ejoni* and *Aé*, one of their
descendants, called *Sirout*, (which signifies a handful of tobacco) and
his wife called *Ycaiut*, (which signifies above) had a son, and they
gave him the name of *Ouiot*. This name, according to the explanation
given by the Indians, signifies something which has taken root, denoting
that in like manner, he would, in course of time, extend his power and
dominion over the earth, as the largest trees spread their roots in
every direction. I have not been enabled to ascertain if the name
*Ouiot*, properly implying dominator, was given to him at the time of
his birth, or at the time of his celebrity as the great Captain. Be it
as it may, let us examine his history, or life.

Out of the confines of a Rancheria, called *Pubuna*, distant from St.
Juan Capistrano N.E. about eight leagues, came the monster *Ouiot*, and
the Indians, at the present time, preserve the account in their annals.
At that time, all the inhabitants were at peace, and quietly following
their domestic pursuits; but *Ouiot*, being of a fierce disposition, a
warrior, ambitious, and haughty, soon managed to gain a supremacy over
many of the towns adjoining that where he originated. During the
commencement of his reign, he was pacific, kind and generous to such a
degree, that every one appeared happy, and contented with their chief;
but after the lapse of a few years, he gradually exposed his ferocity,
and persecuted many of his vassals; cruelly treating them, and some he
put to death. In fact, he soon became the detestation of all his
subjects.

Having suffered so much from *Ouiot*, they determined to rid themselves
of the tyrant, and release themselves from the oppression in which they
had lived for so long a period. A consultation was held by the elders,
and it was decided that he should receive his death by means

of poison. The rock *Tosaut* was procured, and whilst in the act of
pulverizing the ingredient, they were perceived by one called *Cucumel*,
who immediately gave information to *Ouiot*, that they wished to destroy
him by poison. Said *Cucumel* was a small animal inhabiting holes in the
ground, from which, in the daytime, he issued to obtain his sustenance.
The said *Ouiot*, believing he was hated and despised, and fearful of
the death revealed to him by *Cucumel*, despatched messengers in every
direction to ascertain the truth; threatening, at the same time, those
who might have been concerned in the conspiracy; but, obtaining no
information, he rather looked upon it as a jest. In the meantime, his
enemies had secretly prepared the mixture, and were consulting how to
administer the same, saying that it was so active and effective, that
the mere application of it to the flesh, would cause almost
instantaneous death. One of them was entrusted with its execution, and
at night, finding *Ouiot* asleep, he placed a small quantity upon his
breast. On waking, he experienced a sickness and weakness in his limbs,
and fearing very much that he should die, he immediately called in, all
the intelligent from the different towns. But the more they administered
for his relief, the worse he became, until, at length, he died.

After his death they sent off couriers to all the towns, and
settlements, which *Ouiot* had governed, summoning the people to the
interment of their Grand Captain; and in a few days, so great a
collection had assembled, that the City or Town of Pubuna could not
contain them, and they were obliged to encamp in the outskirts. They
consulted together as to the propriety of burning or interring the body,
and they decided upon the former. The funeral pile was made, the
deceased placed upon it, the pile was fired, and during the time of its
burning, they danced and sang songs of rejoicing.

These ceremonies concluded, and before the return of the people to their
different places of abode, a council was called to regulate the
collecting of grain or seeds of the fields, and flesh, to eat; for up to
this time they had fed upon a kind of clay. While conferring upon this
subject, there appeared to them one, called "*Attajen*," which name
implies man, or rational being; but they knew not from whence he came.
To his enquiry, "Why they were thus congregated?" they answered "that
their Grand Captain was dead, and that they had met together to assist
at the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

funeral ceremonies; and now, previous to their retirement, the elders
were consulting as to the manner they should subsist for the future,
without the necessity of living upon clay as they had heretofore."
"*Attajen*" was much pleased with the relation that he had heard, and
said unto them, "Ye are not capable, nor can ye do what ye think, or
wish to do. I am the only one that has power, and I will give it to ye,
that ye may have an abundance to eat, in your habitations." And,
accordingly, he selected from the multitude a few of the elders, and
endowed them with the power to cause the rain to fall, to make grain,
and others to make animals, such as rabbits, hares, deer, &c., &c. And
it was understood that such power was to descend to their successors.

Many years, and perhaps ages, having expired since the death of *Ouiot*,
there appeared in the same town of Pubuna, one called Ouiamot," son of
*Tacu* and *Auzar*. I imagine that this new character was not, or, at
least, his parents were not inhabitants of the place, but had originated
in some distant land. The said *Ouiamot* did not appear like *Ouiot*, as
a warrior, but as a God. To him they were to offer presents. And this
was the *God Chinigchinich*, so feared, venerated, and respected by the
Indians, who taught first in the town of Pubuna, and afterwards in all
the neighboring parts, explaining the laws, and establishing the rites
and ceremonies necessary to the preservation of life.

The manner in which he commenced to dogmatise, manifesting his
extravagances, was as follows. One day, at a very large congregation of
the people, he danced before them, adorned in the robes which have been
already described; his flesh painted black and red, and calling himself
*Tobet*. He said that he had come from the stars to teach them those
things of which they were ignorant. After dancing a considerable time,
he separated the chiefs and elders from among them, and directed that
they alone should wear the kind of dress which had adorned his person,
and then taught them how to dance. To these Indians was given the name
of *puplem*, who would know all things, and relieve the infirm and
diseased. In other words, they would become the sorcerers or
soothsayers, to whom the Indians might invariably apply for advice, and
relief from their necessities. In the event of a scarcity of food, or
any infirmity, they were told to appear, dressed like unto *Tobet*; that
is, after the manner in which he appeared to them, dancing; to
supplicate him, not in

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the name of *Ouiamot*, but of Chinigchinich, and their wants would be
relieved. The sick would be cured, and the hungry receive food. In all
cases they were to return thanks, and even now, to this day, whenever
they chance to secure an animal of any kind, they say, "guic
Chinigchinich," that is, "thanks to Chinigchinich, who has given me
this."

This Chinigchinich, as we shall style him hereafter, taught them how to
build the *Vanquech*, which means temple, or church, and how they were
to conduct themselves therein--forbidding any others than the chief and
puplem entering its sanctuary. Here they were to teach only the laws and
ceremonies, and those who entered, would be called *Tobet*, and the
remainder of the people *Saorem*, which signifies, persons who do not
know how to dance; that is, more properly, those who could not make use
of the vestments of Chinigchinich. The name of *Quaguar*, was given to
him when he died and ascended above, among the stars. This is the
explanation of the three terms which is given in the preceding relation
relative to Chinigchinich.

Chinigchinich having become seriously indisposed, and while instructing
the elders how to rear the young, as well as in the rules they were to
observe for the future, they enquired of him where, or to which one of
his rancherias he wished to go when he died? He answered, "to neither,
for they were inhabited by people, and he should go where be would be
alone, and could see the inhabitants of all the pueblos and rancherias."
They offered to bury him, placing him under the earth, but he said "no,"
that [they](errata.htm#1) would walk upon him, and he would have to
chastise them. "No!" said Chinigchinich, "when I die, I shall ascend
above, to the stars, and from thence, I shall always see you; and to
those who have kept my commandments, I shall give all they ask of me;
but those who obey not my teachings, nor believe them, I shall punish
severely. I will send unto them bears to bite, and serpents to sting
them; they shall be without food, and have diseases that they may die."
Chinigchinich, at length, died. His memory was so revered among the
Indians, that they ever besought him in all their undertakings, and
regarded him with fear and respect.

We have thus seen the belief of these Indians, respecting the creation
of the world, and their God, and from its narration, we comprehend their
religion, usages and customs. I do not understand why it is, that in

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

neither of the two narrations, is there any mention made of the heavens,
and that all their ideas of things appear to be confined to the earth,
with the exception of the stars. What I should like to know, is, from
whence they received such accounts? for, notwithstanding their
imperfect, as well as fabulous description, they have some allusion to
the truth. We have the six productions of the mother of *Ouiot*,
corresponding to the six days of the creation of the world--The Indian
formed of the earth or clay, like our first parent--and *Ouiot*,
analogous to Nimrod of the Holy Scripture. I do not know to whom we may
compare *Ouiamot*, unless it be to Simon Magus, as his teachings were
idolatrous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Description of the Vanquech or Temple](bosc06)
