[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bosc15)  [Next](bosc17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

# Chapter XIV

### The Immortality of the Soul

This chapter may cause some perplexity, from circumstance of its
treating of that which is imperceptible to the senses; of a substance
incorporeal and spiritual. Still, I can in a very few words make known
the belief of these Indians, relative to the rational soul, and what
they understood concerning its immortality. There are arguments pro and
con, which are of particular interest, inasmuch as they involve the
future destiny of man; I will be more explicit in my remarks here, than
in the preceding chapter, and recount all that I have been enabled to
acquire relative to the subject.

In their gentilism, they were undoubtedly materialists, for they
believed that the soul was the "*espiritu vital*," received from the
air, which they breathed, and which they called "*piuts*," signifying
"*to live*." They possessed no knowledge, nor did they believe in the
existence of any other substance than the material body. On this account
they said, (and many believe it at the present time,) that man was
composed of bones, flesh and blood only; for "*piuts*," which is the
breath, is another thing, like wind, that goes and comes. The body they
called "*petacan*," a term applied, to the brute creation as well as
man, or rather, to all living or animated beings. To designate the soul
belonging to the body from the "*espiritu vital*," they possessed no
term but "*pusuni*," which is general in its meaning, and signifies a
"substance within," applied to things

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

animate and inanimate, and to the heart, on account of its location, and
particular importance to the body.

They penetrated no farther than was perceptible to the sense, for the
reason that the spirituality of the soul was incomprehensible to them;
they only understanding the materials of the body. Thus they were
materialists, for they said that when the body died, and was burnt,
naught remained, for all was consumed. Death, they believed was an
entity, real and invisible, who, when in anger with any one, took away
by degrees his breath, until all was removed, and then the person died.
I have observed, in a previous chapter, that the punishments they so
much feared from Chinigchinich, were all corporeal, such as falling over
stones, and upon the earth--the bite of the serpent, bears, &c.; and
lastly, death--the termination, without reference to pain, punishment,
or glory afterwards. I think this sufficient to prove that they were
materialists, but as they relate a thousand novel accounts, relative to
the immortality of the soul, which have proceeded from dreams or
delirium, I will recount some of them, as they were related to me.

Materialists, as I have supposed them, (without adding other convincing
reasons, such as the great insensibility manifested at the hour of their
death--the little inclination for divine things, and desire for the
unholy, which go far to show plainly their want of knowledge of the
rational soul, and consequently of its immortality;) still, the words or
expressions, made use of in the tenth chapter relative to the moon, are
of opposing force--viz., "that as the moon dieth and cometh to life
again, so we, having to die, will again live." But, as I observed in the
chapter cited, I can not comprehend how they understood it-nor can I
think that their ancestors believed in the resurrection of the flesh.
They may have had such belief many ages back, and the tradition may have
been preserved in songs. Other verses are used in opposition, and are
frequently sung at their festivals--viz., "Let us eat, for we shall die,
and then all will be finished,"--words similar in sense to the passage
in the Holy Scriptures, referring to the expressions of the foolish
young men.

Let us refer now to some of the accounts respecting the soul's
immortality. It is affirmed by some, that "when an Indian died, he went
to the abode of his God Chinigchinich, a sort of earthly paradise,
called, *'tolmec*,' applicable, more properly, to *hell*; for it implies
a location below

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the earth, and since their conversion, the same word is made use of in
the catechism, to denote the abode of Satan. They believed that
Chinigchinich "resided in that region--that there was plenty to eat and
drink, and to wear-that there was constant dancing and festivity--that
no one labored--no one was sorrowful; but on the contrary, all were
contented and happy--every one did as they pleased, and selected the
number of wives they wished." The reader will compare this belief with
the doctrine of the immortality of the soul. It was taught by the
moderns, undoubtedly, and since their conversion to Christianity; for
the old men at the time of their gentilism, had no such idea; to confirm
which, I will relate the following account, as it was given to me by a
female, who had been many years a convert to Christianity.

In the year 1817, in the mission of St. Juan Capistrano, I visited this
woman, who was recovering from a severe attack of malignant fever. When
in the worst stage of the disease, and in a state of paroxysm, she said,
that she died, and the Indians, her relatives, carried her to
Chinigchinich, where she beheld a great number of men and women. Some
were dancing, some playing, and others were bathing in a stream of pure,
transparent water. The "rancheria" was large and beautiful, and the
houses were of different construction from those in modern use. Having
arrived at the house of Chinigchinich, she was informed that she could
not enter, to reside with them yet; that she must return to her home.
Food was given to her, of delicious quality, such as she had never eaten
before, soon after which, she returned without having beheld
Chinigchinich; but she could not recollect if she came alone, or if she
were accompanied by others. It is evident that this account was the
result of delirium, for I visited her during the paroxysm, when she
partook of a glass of warm water, sweetened, that I administered myself,
and of which she drank the whole. This water may have been the repast
which she referred to, as having been given to her in the house of
Chinigchinich; it caused her to perspire profusely, and broke the fever,
so that in a few days she recovered.

The ancients said, that when an Indian died, though the body was burnt,
still the heart did not consume--(which must be the *spirit* or soul,
for the heart of flesh, of course, would perish with the body)--that it
went to a place destined by Chinigchinich. If a chief, or one of the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

puplem, it went to dwell among the stars, and like them throw its light
upon the earth. For this reason, they said that the planets, and most
luminous bodies, were their hearts, or in other words, they were
themselves, in reality.

In the year 1821, there appeared in the N.E. a comet. The Indians
believed, with undoubted faith, that it was a chief of a *rancheria*,
who had died; and who, previous to his departure, had told them, that he
should in time behold them again from the heavens. This idea they
received from their ancient traditions, because, according to
*Seutonio*, the gentiles believed, that at the hour of the death of any
illustrious personage (as was seen at the death of Julius Caesar), there
appeared in the heavens some notable meteor, which was translated to the
stars, and arranged among the Gods. The reason given why the chiefs and
puplem, alone, went to the heaven of stars, and that the other people
did not, is this: because "*Tacue*," "the eater of human flesh," had
eaten of them previous to their being burnt; and if it happened that he
did not eat of them, in consequence of their dying in the power of their
enemies, or on account of their being drowned, then they did not go to
the stars, but to another place, to which they were destined by
Chinigchinich. Others, who were not of noble rank, were doomed to the
borders of the sea, or to the hills, mountains, valleys, or forests; and
there they remained an indefinite time, while Chinigchinich held them
doing penance for the faults they had committed, in not obeying his
precepts, but after the performance of said penance, whether they
returned to their former shape, or removed to any other location, they
could not tell.

The Indians, when they saw any strange thing, or imagined that they
beheld any extraordinary figure, said, that it was a ghost, and
considered it a bad omen--the forerunner of misfortune. They believed,
that if the dead appeared to any one, it was for the purpose of injury,
and particularly so, if appearing to females, whom, weak and timid as
they were, it required but little to terrify. On this account, there
were villains, who personated such figures to effect their brutal
purposes. This custom was not confined to the Indians in their heathen
state, but prevailed also among those who had become christianized. I
will relate an occurrence of the kind, which took place in this
neighborhood.

On a certain occasion, two females, mother and daughter-in-law,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

went out in search of wild fruits, which they called "*naut*." When in
the vicinity of a grove, they heard loud groans and lamentations--a
breaking of the shrubbery, and limbs of trees--then followed a voice,
calling upon the daughter, by her proper name, to come to the place, or
she would be murdered. The poor girl, filled with terror, and believing
it an apparition, went into the grove, where she beheld one, who
appeared, dressed in feathers from head to foot, with his face covered.
She was told that he was such a one, who died at such a time, and that
Chinigchinich confined him there. He told her to inform his widow, that
she must resort to a certain place at night. On her return home' she
gave the message to the woman, who immediately went to the spot
directed, to behold her departed husband, and to ascertain his wishes.
At first, she could find no one; but in a little while, she heard a
voice, which said to her that she must remain until night. Supposing
that in reality it was the voice of her deceased husband, she rejoiced
greatly, for, they had loved each other much in their youth. She
remained with him three nights--during which time, he spoke to her but
very little, and then in a low and disguised voice. She went about in
the daytime in search of fruits, and he, on return of evening, would
bring her meat, that she might eat. On the third day, in the morning,
after separating, she went out upon a hill, and beheld the same person
in conversation with another; she knew them both, and returned
immediately to the Mission, where she gave information, and many of her
friends went out to the place, and discovered them in a cave with three
hostile Indians.

Others remained about the houses of widows, and the houses of their
relatives, terrifying them and doing them injury; and on this account,
it was the custom whenever the deceased were burnt, to burn also the
houses, and rebuild in another direction, so that when the husbands
returned in search of them, there would be nothing remaining to denote
their existence, and thus they would escape their persecutions. The
converted Indians of the present day, have the same idea.

There is another case which I witnessed in the Mission of St. Luis Rey,
in the year 1813--a Christian died, and the Indians said that he was
poisoned or bewitched, by another Christian of the same mission--that
his death was the result of witchcraft. The deceased in his lifetime
possessed a small garden, where he was accustomed to sow yearly, certain

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

grain and seeds. This he left to a relative at a time when the plants
were in blossom; but immediately everything dried up and was destroyed,
so that nothing was harvested of either grain or fruit. The plants
whilst young were fresh and fruitful, like the plants in the surrounding
gardens, but the moment the blossoms appeared as if ready to produce
seed, they died; so that, in the course of one night, nearly all were
destroyed as if consumed by fire. The Indians said that the deceased was
seen moving about at night in every direction of the garden, and that
whatever he touched, perished. This was revealed to them by an old woman
who owned the adjoining garden, and who related the story to me, also,
so that I was induced to go to the place in order to witness the same,
and found, as she had stated, the greater part of the plants dead, or in
a perishing state; some, however, were still flourishing. These I took
particular notice of, and on the following day I returned, and found
seven of them, consisting of corn, pumpkins, and watermelons, dried up,
and consumed to their roots. In this way the whole was destroyed. Said
Indian died of *dysentery*, and not by witchcraft, nor poison as
believed. They were superstitious in their belief that whoever died in
this way, died of poison, and this accounts for the tradition of the
death of their grand captain Ouiot. We have seen that the story of the
garden was given by an old woman, and for this reason is entitled to but
little credit, but that which has caused me some difficulty to explain
is, why the plants were thus decayed. It was not from want of care, or
from disease received from insects, or animals either, because, if so,
there would have appeared spots about them, and they would not have been
diseased to their very roots. This may excite wonder in the reader, and
I have used every diligence possible, to ascertain the cause, but
without success. What I conjecture is this--that the Devil did all this,
that but few should escape from his hands, and the motive, I have for
believing so is, that at this time, there were many gentiles in the
mission, principally sorcerers, (some were catechumens, and others not)
who night after night performed their heathen ceremonies.

What has been said, I think is sufficient to prove, that these accounts
and stories relative to the immortality of the soul, are mere fables,
frauds and inventions to deceive the simple: that the first, and
original settlers in this region, had a knowledge of the spirituality of
the soul, and, consequently,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of its immortality; that by tradition, they have preserved the same
without believing it, and perhaps ages before, they had a totally
different account. We often perceive that a history, by numerous
editions and revisals, loses much of its originality; how much more
liable to corruption, tradition must be, among an ignorant race like the
Indians. But little respect is attached to their belief of the spiritual
substance with which we are adorned, not only by the rule, and ignorant
of the present day, but, by the wisest, and best instructed in our Holy
Religion. To remove all doubt from the reader, that he may not think my
ideas extravagant, I will relate two events which happened in places
where I have resided.

In the year 1808, I was a missionary in the mission of "La Purissima,"
when a young man of the establishment became seriously indisposed. His
age was 23 years, he had been reared from infancy by the fathers, and
was instructed in every thing appertaining to religion; often serving as
interpreter for them, and was almost always with them. When first
attacked, he refused to take medicine, nor could he be persuaded to do
so, by any advice of the fathers; but he went off in search of one of
the quack physicians, who practised upon him all his diabolical art. The
fathers, seeing that he became worse, daily exhorted him to confess, and
prepare for death like a Christian; but he declined, with the excuse
that he was weak, he required examination, and (as was the opinion of
the quack,) he did not think he should die. But, alas! he was deceived;
for when the *doctor* saw that his chicanery and witchcraft, had no
effect for the better, he forsook him, saying, "that as he had always
believed the teachings of the priests, his God, (or more properly his
devil), was angered and sent him death as a punishment." Hearing this,
the poor invalid concluded to confess--he did so, but not with that
satisfaction to the fathers which they had desired, and very soon after,
death followed.

In the year 1817, in the mission of St. Juan Capistrano, an Indian 35
years of age, who, like the one just mentioned, was well instructed,
became afflicted with a dangerous disease, and died. No persuasion on
the part of his friends, or exhortations of the priests, could prevail
upon him to confess, and partake of the holy sacrament; at the bare
proposal, he became frantic, and uttered expressions, which were
contemptuous and blasphemous. A short time previous to his death, I
called to see him, to

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

give him that consolation, which the promises of our holy religion
impart to the penitent soul, and I urged him, since he could do no more,
to receive the extreme unction, to ask pardon for his sins, for God was
infinite in his mercy to the repentant sinner. But all in vain! my words
were ineffectual, and they were spurned with disgust. His limbs were
extended--the froth came from his mouth--his eyes rolled back into his
head, presenting a true picture of the appearance of one condemned to
the torments of hell; and three persons were insufficient to confine
him. These demonstrations seemed to me, the effects of the violence of
the malady, but after a while his tranquillity returned, and some one
exclaimed, "Why do you not confess?" "Because I will not," he replied,
with anger. "If I have been deceived whilst living, I do not wish to die
in the delusion!" These were his last words; for soon after, he expired,
and there remained a corpse, truly horrible and revolting to the sight.
Consider, what must have been my feelings! Such a spectacle before me,
revealing to the letter the words of David, "*Pecator videbit et
irascetur, dentibus suis fremet et tabescet, desiderium peccatorum
peribit*."

I presume there may be some persons who will say, notwithstanding these
accounts, that they are not satisfactory evidences of a total want of
faith and belief; for rare occurrences happen every where, and God has
permitted them to take place for his own inexplicable purposes, and for
advantages resulting to others. To this I concede, but exceptions are
few. These accounts generally conform to each other in substance, and
he, who has perused them with attention, or is familiar with the
character of these Indians, knowing that when they appear the most
intelligent, and entitled to the greatest confidence, they are the least
to be trusted; he will, I say, agree with me, generally, regarding their
belief; as all their operations are accompanied by stratagems and
dissimulation, they easily gain our confidence, and at every pass we are
deluded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Origin of the Population of the Mission of St. Juan
Capistrano](bosc17)
