[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aof05)  [Next](aof07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# 4: THE PRACTICE OF THE MAHAYANA FAITH

HAVING illustrated the principles, we now discuss the practice of them.
This is on account of those who have not entered the ranks of the
upright ones, and so we explain the practice of Faith. What faith? What
practice? Briefly speaking, faith is of four kinds. First, belief in the
root of all things--that is, rejoicing to think of God, the True
Reality. Second, belief in the infinite merits of divinity (Buddhahood),
ever thinking of it, drawing near to it, supporting and adoring it,
growing in goodness, and seeking all wisdom from it. Third, belief in
the great benefit of the Law, always thinking how to practise all the
different means of salvation. Fourth, belief in the Priesthood's ability
to cultivate the right doctrine; having themselves found good, they help
others to obtain it; ever rejoicing to approach all the saints, and
seeking to learn and practise the truth as it is in the Eternal.

To realize the faith, practice consists of five *stages*. These five
are--

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

1\. The stage of charity.

2\. The stage of holiness.

3\. The stage of enduring wrong.

4\. The stage of perseverance.

5\. The stage of preventing vain thoughts, and the practice of divine
wisdom or judgements.

A. How to practise the state of charity. If one sees any coming to beg
in their need, money should be given them according to one's ability in
order to prevent covetousness in oneself and to make the poor glad. If
one sees men in trouble, fear, and danger, the fear should he relieved
according to one's power. If men come to inquire about religion, one
should explain the various means according to one's ability. In all
things one should not seek the honours of fame or wealth, but, simply
feeling that having received benefit oneself, one should impart the same
benefit to others, so that they may return to true wisdom.

B. How to practise the state of holiness. This is to observe the *Ten
Commandments*--

1\. Thou shalt not kill anything.

2\. Thou shalt not steal.

3\. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

4\. Thou shalt not be doublefaced.

5\. Thou shalt not curse.

6\. Thou shalt not lie.

7\. Thou shalt not speak vanity.

8\. Thou shalt keep far from coveting.

9\. Thou shalt not insult, deceive, flatter, or trick.

10\. Thou shalt be free from anger and heresy.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

As for the priests, in order to overcome the temptations of the world
they should keep far from the stir of the world and ever live in
quietness, cultivating few desires and satisfaction with their lot,
while mortifications should take place after committing the smallest
sin. Their hearts must be moved with fear and most sincere repentance,
and in no way must they regard the prohibitions of the Tathagata
lightly. They should also guard against appearances of evil, lest men
should commit the sin of speaking evil against the priesthood.

C. How to practise the state of bearing the cross (enduring wrong). This
is what is called the duty of enduring the aspersions of others without
a feeling of revenge through the eight storms of life. That is, to be
the same in prosperity, in adversity, in honour and dishonour, in good
and evil report, in trouble and in joy.

D. How to practise the state of perseverance. The heart must be never
weary in well-doing of all sorts, having a purpose firm and strong, far
from any weakness. Thinking of having passed in vain through all the
great sorrows of mind and body down through past ages without doing any
good is sad; to advance in the scale of being one should diligently
practise all sorts of good. Having obtained good oneself, one should
make this known to others, so as to speedily leave all sorrow.

Next, although some men practise faith, yet, as from former generations
they had many grave sins and delusions, they are troubled by all sorts
of evil spirits, or are bound by all sorts of affairs of the world, or
are troubled with sicknesses or with many other trials; they must
therefore have courage and diligence, and worship God (Buddha) night and
day at all the

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

appointed times, repent with all sincerity, seek light from Buddha,
rejoice with others' good so as to return towards true wisdom. This
should be done constantly without intermission, so as to escape from all
delusions and to grow in all goodness.

E. How to practise the state of checking idle thought and of cultivating
sound judgement. To check idle thought is to cease from being misled by
impressions and to follow and obey the rules. To reflect is to
differentiate between the different laws of temporary existence and to
obey the rules of sound judgement. How are these to be followed? These
two states are to be gradually cultivated, not independently, but
simultaneously.

i\. As to the practice of checking vain thoughts, it should be done in a
quiet place, properly seated and in a proper spirit. It is not the
practice of breathing air in a special manner into the body, as is the
custom of some religions, thinking thereby to get the vital spirit of
nature into the body, nor the use of anything that has form or colour,
whether of empty space or of the four elements earth, water, fire, and
wind, or even of the knowledge gained by any experience of the senses,
for all kinds of ideas as soon as thought of must be put away, even the
idea of banishing them must also be put away. As all existence
originally came to be without any idea of its own, it ceases to be also
without any idea of its own; any thoughts arising therefore must be from
being absolutely passive. Nor must one follow the mind in its excursions
to everything outside itself and then chase that thought away. If the
mind wanders far away, it must be brought back into its proper state.
One should know that the proper state is that of the soul alone without
anything outside of it. Again, even this soul

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

has no form and no thought by which we can conceive of it properly.

(*a*) Having risen from the sitting posture, whether in going out or
coming in, or in any work, at all times one should think of the means of
checking vain thoughts, and should examine whether he succeeds in it or
whether he follows them, In time one gets perfect in the practice and
the mind is at rest. As the mind is at rest it gradually gets courage to
proceed; in this way it reaches the peace of the Eternal, far beyond all
trouble with faith, increasing so that it will soon be so perfect as
never to fail any more. But doubters, unbelievers, blasphemers, great
sinners, those who are conceited, who will not persevere, and such-like
people, cannot obtain this peace of the Eternal.

(*b*) Note next that by this peace one knows that in the spiritual world
the peace of the spiritual bodies of all the Buddhas and of all living
bodies is one and the same, and is called the divine peace. Know that
the root of this peace is in the Eternal. If this is continued, there
gradually arises in the mind an infinite peace.

(*c*) If there should be some men without the strength which comes from
good deeds who are troubled with evil spirits and the gods and demons of
outside religions, appearing sometimes in ugly forms, causing fear to
them whilst sitting in contemplation, at other times appearing in lovely
forms to tempt them, they should think of the *One Eternal Soul*, then
these appearances will vanish and give no more trouble. These evil
spirits, whether taking the form of the heavenly beings, of
Bodhisattvas, or of the Tathagata, all fun of perfection, or using magic
formulae, or preaching charity,

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

morality, endurance of wrong, perseverance, contemplation, wisdom, or
discussing the one unseen reality, the formless reality, the passionless
reality, without enmity and without love, without cause and without
effect--nothing but pure emptiness--say that this is the true Nirvana!
They also teach men how to know the past and to know the future, and how
to know what is in the mind of others, and how to have unfailing gifts
of speech, causing men to covet the fame and wealth of this world.

Or, again, these evil spirits cause men to be frequently violently angry
or very happy, without anything to steady them; sometimes to have great
compassion, or to be sleepy or ill, or to be without perseverance; or
they cause men to persevere for a time and then to fall back worse than
ever, to lose faith, to have many doubts and fears, or give up their
practice of checking vain thoughts and make them follow miscellaneous
matters and be chained by the many affairs of the world, so as to give
men a certain kind of peace, somewhat similar to the true peace, but
which is the product of outside religions and not the true peace of the
Eternal.

Or, again, these evil spirits cause men for one, two, three, or even
seven days, to remain in contemplation, as if enjoying delicious food;
they are most happy in mind and body without any hunger or thirst; or
they may be led to eat without any control, sometimes much and sometimes
little, so that the countenance changes, and 'exhibits gladness or
sorrow accordingly.

As there are such things, religious people should always wisely examine
themselves, lest their minds should fall into the nets of heresy. They
should carefully rectify their thoughts

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

and neither adopt nor he attached to them, but keep themselves far from
all delusions.

One should know that the peace of outside religions is of the senses, of
the affections, to gratify self, desiring the honours of fame and the
wealth of the world.

But the true peace is not in the realms of the senses or in possessions,
and even after contemplation there is neither the feeling of having
attained perfection with no further effort, nor conceit for what has
been accomplished. All trials gradually diminish.

If men do not cultivate this peace, there is no other way to get the
seed of the Tathagata, the Incarnate Lord.

As the peace of this world mostly arises from the pleasure which is
given to the senses, it is bound to the three worlds of form, of desire,
and of no-form, like that of the outside religions. Once men leave the
guidance of sound wisdom, false doctrines at once arise.

(*d*) Next note that those who diligently set their minds on securing
this peace, should, in the present generation, obtain ten advantages--

\(1\) All the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas throughout all space always
protect them.

\(2\) None of the evil spirits can cause them any fear.

\(3\) They cannot be deceived by any of the ninety-five kinds of outside
religions.

\(4\) They are far beyond questioning the deep things of the Buddhist
religion, and great sins gradually diminish.

\(5\) There is an end to all doubt and all kinds of heresies.

\(6\) Faith in the world of the Tathagata (God Incarnate) grows.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

\(7\) They leave sorrow far behind in the minds of mortals, while they
themselves have no fear.

\(8\) Their spirits become gentle and peaceable, they put off pride and
conceit, and are not troubled by other people's opinions.

\(9\) Although they have not obtained full peace at all times and in
every place, they are able to lessen their trials, and do not covet the
world's pleasures.

\(10\) When their peace is secured, they are unmoved by any seductions
of outside attractions.

2\. Now, if men practise only contemplation, the mind is damped, or gets
weary, and does not rejoice in all goodness, but is far from pity;
therefore it is necessary to cultivate reasoning or reflection.

(*a*) One should reflect that nothing made throughout the universe can
last long; in a moment it may be destroyed.

(*b*) One should reflect that all thought rises and vanishes again like
a wave, and is therefore a sorrow.

(*c*) One should reflect that all the past is misty like a dream, that
all the present is like lightning, that all the future rises suddenly
like a cloud in the sky.

(*d*) One should reflect that the bodies of all living beings are
unclean, full of all kinds of uncleanness, and therefore not to be
rejoiced in.

(*e*) Thus one should reflect that all living beings, from eternity down
the ages, being influenced by ignorance, live and die and endure all the
great sorrows of mind and body; and reflect on the endless trials of the
present and on the immeasurable sorrows of the future, which cannot be
got rid of and which men are scarcely aware of. When all

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

men's lives are so full of sorrow, they are greatly to be pitied.

(*f*) Having thought of these things, one should stir oneself up to make
a GREAT VOW to lead one's own soul to leave the finite and gain the
infinite, cultivate every means of grace to deliver all men for ever
from their sorrows and obtain the highest joys of Nirvana.

(*g*) Having made this great vow, one must not give up practising it or
be weary in it, but at all times and all places engage in every good
that is in one's power.

3\. Whilst sitting in meditation, one's mind should be bent on checking
vain thoughts. At other times one should reflect carefully in regard to
everything whether it should or should not be done. Whether walking or
resting, lying down or rising up, both reflecting and checking vain
thoughts should go together. This is what is meant by the saying that
although we practise all these things, our perfection is not really
produced by ourselves, but by the nature of the Eternal working through
us.

Again, thinking of the never-failing law of cause and effect, and joy
and sorrow as the reward of good and evil, when we think of law we must
also think of this goal so difficult to attain.

The practice of checking vain thoughts is to sever attachment to the
world, and to put away the fears and weaknesses of the two lower schools
of Buddhism.

The practice of reflection is to deliver from the narrow sin of the two
lower schools, who do not have the vow of great pity for others, and who
do not keep far from ordinary men who do not practise goodness.

In this way the two methods of reflection and the checking of

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

vain thoughts are mutually helpful to one another and inseparable. If
both are not practised, one cannot then enter on the way of wisdom.

4\. Next consider those who begin to learn the five methods of this
chapter, [p. 81](#page_81), and desire to get right faith, but are timid
and weak. As they live in this world of extreme suffering, they fear
they cannot constantly approach God (Buddha) and personally contribute
to His service. Thus they fear they cannot attain to this perfect faith,
and have a mind to renounce their search after it.

These should know that the Tathagata has most excellent means to
strengthen their faith. It is by having the mind set only on the things,
of God (Buddha), and by desiring that one may be born in another world
of Buddha and be constantly with Him forever, far from all evil, that
one may attain this end. As the Sutra says, if a man sets his mind to
think only of God (the Amitabha Buddha), who is in the happiest realm of
the west (Paradise), and if his good deeds are in the right direction,
and if he desires to get to that happy Paradise, he will then get there;
and as he is always in the presence of Buddha, he will never fall back.

If we reflect on the eternal nature of God (the Amitabha Buddha), and
constantly practise this method, we will in the end reach the place of
true wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5: The Advantages of the Practice of the Mahayana Faith](aof07)
