[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kam02)  [Next](kam04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 6: Tracts Baba Kama (First Gate), Part II and
Baba Metzia (Middle Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

# TRACT BABA KAMA (THE FIRST GATE). <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

### CHAPTER IX.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *III*. If a change on the face of an article gives title
to the possessor and if it is biblically? Would all the above-mentioned
Tanaim trouble themselves to teach us a Halakha of the Beth Shammai?
Robbers and usurers, if they make a restitution of their own accord, it
should not be accepted, etc. There are three cases in which the increase
is appraised and the payment is with money. I and the King Sabura are
brothers in regard to court cases. (See foot-note.) Did not I tell you,
You shall not change names? R. Joseph bar Hama used to compel slaves of
his debtors to labor for him, etc. What were the coins of Jerusalem and
what were the coins of Abraham the patriarch? Labor which cannot be
recognized on the body of the animal as damaging, the civil court cannot
make him liable for. Is a germon considered a direct pecuniary loss? May
the court decide a case of a goring ox in its absence? If a specialist
took a thing to repair it and he spoiled it. A builder who undertook to
take apart a wall, and he broke the stones or bricks, A butcher
specialist, if he has spoiled the meat he is a tort-feasor, and is also
considered wilful, etc. Why so many reasons?" I think your brain is not
in regular order." "Rabh did two good things regarding you. He prevented
you from using a doubtful thing, and also restrained you from possible
robbery." There was a woman who showed a coin to R. Hyya, etc. Resh
Lakish showed a dinar to R. Elazar, and he told him it was a good one.
He said then: "See, I rely upon you," etc.,
[211](kam04.htm#page_211)-228

MISHNAS *IV*. TO *VII*. If one gave wool to the dyer, and it was
spoiled. To be dyed red, and it is dyed black, or conversely. To make a
chair of it, and he has made a bench. Is the color of the dyes to be
considered as existing upon the wool or not? In one tract is the order
of the Mishna not to be taken in consideration, but in two different
tracts it must be considered? The whole of Section Damages is considered
as one tract. If one has given money to his messenger to buy wheat, and
he buys barley. If one buys a field in the name of his neighbor. Kahana
paid money for flax. In the mean time

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

the flax became dearer and the seller sold it (for Kahana's benefit).
One who has stolen the value of a coin swears falsely and afterwards
confesses. The same is the case in a deposit. If one has robbed one of
five persons, and he does not know which of them. It happened with one
pious man who bought of one of two persons, and he did not know from
which of them. A messenger must not be made in his absence. It happened
with R. Abba, who was the creditor of R. Joseph bar Hama, and the former
asked R. Safra to bring, etc. "My master, do you mean to deduce from
this Scripture that it must be paid, or you say is it common?" If one
has robbed two bunches of the value of a parutha and had returned one of
them, how is the law? He who denies a deposit is considered as a robber.
As soon as the owner has taken an oath, he has not to pay. One who
claims "stolen" on a deposit, or of a lost article he has found, must
pay double, etc. The three oaths--first, that I have done all my duty in
taking care of it; second, that I did not make use of it; and third,
that it is not under my control. If a gratuitous bailee swore it was
stolen, and, nevertheless, he paid: and then the thief was found. Where
is my bailment? Lost! Do you swear by God? Amen. Witnesses testified
that he himself had stolen it. If one robbed his father and swore
falsely, and after his death he confessed. "I swear you shall have not
any benefit from my estate." If one robbed a proselyte and swore, and
afterwards the proselyte died. The priests who receive the robbery of
the proselyte, are they considered heirs, or only receivers of a
donation? [228](kam04.htm#page_228)-250

### CHAPTER X.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *VI*. If one left money made by usury for his heirs,
although they know of it, they are not obliged to return it. The
brother-in law of R. Jeremiah, who was a minor, shut the door in his
face, etc. The testimony of witnesses can be taken even in the absence
of the parties. May a document be approved even not in the presence of
the party, or it must not? It is an obligation on the court to give
notice to the defendant that his property will be sold. A messenger of
the court should be trusted as two witnesses, etc. One must not be
summoned by the court on the eve of a Sabbath. Money must not be changed
from the treasury of duties, etc. Why contractors of duty are counted
among murderers. R. Ashi happened to be on the road, and saw a vineyard
in which some grapes were ripe, etc. A contractor of the government has
the right to pledge a fellow-citizen for the duty of another citizen of
the same city, etc. If the contractors returned him instead of his ass
another one, etc. If one saved an estate from the stream or from
robbers, etc. Are a woman and a minor qualified to be witnesses? A child
was telling: It happened that my mother and I were prisoners among the
heathens, and I did not turn away my eyes from my mother, etc.,
[250](kam04.htm#page_250)-262

MISHNAS *IV*. TO *VI*. If one recognizes his utensils or books by
another. If a thief has sold out his stolen articles, and later it was
recognized that he is the thief. If the thief was a notorious one. If
one destroys his own goods for the sake of saving the goods of his
neighbors. The redemption money of a caravan in a desert is to be
charged proportionately to the amount each of

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

them possesses, etc. If a robbed field was taken away by land robbers.
There was a man who showed to the contractor a heap of wheat belonging
to the Exilarch. There was a man by whom a silver goblet was deposited,
he presented it when he was attacked by robbers,
[262](kam05.htm#page_262)-270

MISHNAS *VII*. TO *XII*. If a stream has overflowed the robbed field. If
one says, I have robbed you, and I don't know if I have returned it to
you. One must not buy from the shepherds kids of goats, etc. And not
fruits from the watchman. One who robs his neighbor, even the value of a
parutha, is considered as if he would take away his life. One shall not
buy from the carder flocks, because they are not his property. What
about the splinters which fall out by the carpenter
[270](kam05.htm#page_270)-277

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[iv:1](kam03.htm#fr_1) Continuation of previous
volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](kam04)
