[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](me202)  [Next](me204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Bablyonian Talmud, Book 6: Tracts Baba Kama (First Gate), Part II and
Baba Metzia (Middle Gate)*, tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

# TRACT BABA METZIA (MIDDLE GATE).

### CHAPTER V.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *IV*. What is considered usury, and what increase? Why
does the Scripture mention separately a negative commandment regarding
usury, robbery, and cheating? A small liquid measure one shall not fill
up in a manner to make foam. Why is the redemption from Egypt mentioned
in the Scripture in conjunction with usury, zizith, and weight? Usurers
are equalled to shedders of blood. "That thy brother may live *with
thee*" (but shall not die with thee, *i.e.*, the life of thyself is
preferred to, etc.). One must not fix a price on fruit before the market
prices are announced. The many things which may be done in a sale, but
not in a loan, as they may appear usurious. The rule of usury in
transactions is: If one sells the article cheaper because it is not yet
in his possession, etc. If one has returned robbed money with an account
of other money he had to give, he has done his duty. A lender must not
dwell in his debtor's house "for nothing," or even for decreased rent.
Hiring may be increased, but not sale. How so? One is allowed to
increase the price of an article when the money is to be paid at a
certain time after delivery (provided he does not say: "If for cash, you
will have it cheaper"). There are cases in which the use of the fruit is
permitted to both, prohibited to both, permitted to the seller only.
Stipulations which may or may not be made in selling real estate. What
is to be considered gossip. Does an *asmakhta* (for definition see [p.
160](me204.htm#page_160)) give title or not? There was a man who sold an
estate with the security of his very best estates, finally they were
overflooded. Is usufruct considered direct or indirect usury? In places
where it is the usage for the lender to use the fruit from a pledged
estate without any deduction of the debt, and the borrower has a right
to return the money at any time, then is the law, etc. A scholar,
however, must not do even this. From pledged estates a creditor of the
lender has no right to collect in case he dies. Also a first-born of the
lender cannot claim the double amount prescribed to him biblically. If
the borrower say to the lender: Stop using the fruit, etc. The different
customs in pledging real estate at Papuna, Mehusa, Narsha. Why a pledge
is called *mashkhantha* [145](me204.htm#page_145)-166

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

MISHNAS *V*. TO *XI*. The law about giving money or articles for half
profit. The proper payment for raising cattle. Why R. Papa decided
differently in the cases of the Samaritans who appeared before him. R.
Hama used to rent zuzes daily for the smallest coin for each zuz and he
lost his money. All animals which are laboring for their food may be
appraised, that the increase shall be divided equally. One may say to a
farmer: I shall give you twelve kur of grain instead of the ten you
demand, if you will lend me some money to manure your field. One may
rent a boat on the condition that should it break he shall be
responsible. One may say: I take your cow for the price of thirty dinars
in case it should die, etc. May money belonging to orphans be lent for
usury or not? One who lends money for a business which is very likely to
bring profit with little chance of loss is wicked; for one which is
likely to bring loss and far from profit, is pious, etc. An iron sheep
must not be accepted from an Israelite, etc. (for explanation see Mishna
*VII*.). An Israelite may lend to his race money belonging to
non-Israelites for usury, etc. The interpretation of verse 8, Prov.
xxviii. The meaning of verse 24, Ex. xxii. He who takes usury will lose
all his possessions. What is to be done with the usury promised by or to
a heathen, after he has been proselyted. A quote in which usury is
mentioned the lender must not be allowed to collect even the principal,
which he must forfeit as a fine. Articles for delivery during the year
must not be bought for a certain price before the market price is fixed.
If one travelled with stock from one place to another, and while on the
road his neighbor asked him to sell to him at the price of the place he
intends to go to, etc. What Samuel ordered the grain dealers, who used
to advance money for grain to the farmers, to do. Also the order of
Rabha to the watchmen. Are the rabbis consuming "usury" by paying in
*Tishri* for the wine they will choose in *Teveth* when it is already in
good condition? I call your attention, master, to the rabbis, who pay
head-tax charges for those who cannot pay them, etc. Seuram used to
compel doubtful characters to carry the palanquin of Rabha. If one of a
company of three partners has given money to a messenger to buy some.
thing, it is to be considered as for the company, and not as for
himself. If the grain was to be finished with two kinds of labor only,
one may fix the price, but not if he require three kinds of labor. There
was a man who paid a stipulated amount for an outfit to be delivered at
the house of his daughter's father-in-law, in the meantime the value of
the equipment was reduced, etc. One may lend his gardeners wheat to be
returned in the harvest-time the same measure, etc. (for meaning see [p.
184](me204.htm#page_184)). Hillel (the First) says: A woman must not
lend a loaf of bread to her neighbor unless a price is stipulated for
it, for fear wheat may become dearer, and then the return of the loaf
(of the same quality) will appear usurious. The Halakha, however, does
not so prevail. One may say to his neighbor: Help me in weeding or
digging to-day and I will help you on some other day, etc. There is a
kind of usury which may be called preceding usury, and another kind
which may be named succeeding usury. How so? If one owes his neighbor
money and it was not customary for him to greet him first, before the
loan, he must not do so after the loan took place. If one is aware that
his debtor has nothing with which to pay he must not pass him by. There
are three who cry for help and are not heard
[166](me204.htm#page_166)-187

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *IV*. He who hired day laborers and they deceived one
another, there is nothing but resentment, etc. (see [p.
189](me205.htm#page_189)). Whoever changes his words or retracts them
has to suffer for the injury caused. The rabbis hold that the laborers
have always the preference. R. Dossa, however, holds that the employer
has the preference. Said Rabh: The Halakha prevails in accordance with
R. Dossa. Did Rabh indeed say so? If one sold a field for a thousand
zuz, and the buyer gave him a deposit of two hundred, and the seller
retracts, etc. As to whether a deposit gives title or not Tanaim differ
in their opinions in pages [193](me205.htm#page_193)-4. How a Bill of
Sale must be written according to R. Simeon b. G. Payment in
installments is valid, though it was not so stipulated. If one hired an
ass for use on a mountain, and he used it in a valley, or *vice versa*,
although the distance for which it was hired was equal (in both ways),
the hirer is responsible for an accident. Who is responsible for an
*angaria*? (See [p. 195](me205.htm#page_195).) If one has hired an ass
for the purpose of riding, and it dies while in the middle of the way,
etc. If one hires a boat and it sinks in the middle of the way. If one
hires a boat for a certain place, and has unloaded it while in the
middle of the way. What may or may not be placed upon the ass which was
hired for riding only. If one hires an ass to be ridden by a male, the
same must not be ridden by a female. If one hires a cow for ploughing on
the mountain and he plough in a valley, etc. How is it if the
plough-handle breaks, and there has been no change in the agreement,
etc.? If one hired an ass to carry wheat and he used it for barley.
Which quantity of overloading makes one responsible to the bearing on
shoulders, to a skiff, to a larger boat, and to a ship
[187](me204.htm#page_187)-201

MISHNAS V. TO VI. All specialists are considered bailees for hire. One
may let out a pledge of a poor man and deduct the amount earned from his
indebtedness. If one hires a cow, how shall he pay in case it is lost?
(See [p. 202](me205.htm#page_202) for meaning). If one bought utensils
from a specialist to send to the house of one's father-in-law, etc.
There was a man who sold wine to his neighbor, and the buyer said: I
shall carry it to such a place, etc. Guard for me this article and I
will guard yours to-morrow; or, I will lend you, or *vice versa*. All
are considered bailees for hire, one to the other. The two cases in
which R. Papa and Rabha were embarrassed for their decisions and finally
it was found that their decisions were correct. If a depositary said:
Leave it here "for you," he has no responsibility whatever, but how is
the law if he said: Leave it "anonymously"? On a pledge he is considered
a bailee for hire. If one carries a barrel from one place to another and
breaks it, he must swear that there was no neglect, etc. R. Eliezer was
wondering how such a decision could hold good. What shall he swear? I
swear that I broke it unintentionally. There were carriers who broke a
barrel of wine belonging to Rabba b. b. Hana, while in his service, and
Rabh commanded Rabba to return their garments and pay them for their
labor, for this is the meaning of the verse, Prov. ii. 20
[201](me205.htm#page_201)-208

### CHAPTER VII.

MISHNA *I*. One cannot compel his employees to come earlier or depart
later than is customary at that place, although it was agreed upon. It
happened

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

with R. Johanan b. Mathea, who said to his son: Go and hire laborers for
us, etc. Resh Lakish's advice to laborers in general. The legend, how R.
Eliezer b. R. Simeon was appointed by the government to capture thieves.
He who would like to see a beauty similar to that of R. Johanan shall
take a silver goblet just out of the worker's, etc. The legend of R.
Johanan with Resh Lakish, and how the latter married the sister of the
former, and how the death of both Johanan and Resh Lakish occurred. The
continuation of the legend about R. Eliezer, how he accepted
chastisements upon himself, how he was kept unburied, in his attic, many
years; how finally he was buried; what his wife answered Rabbi (the
prince) when he asked her to marry him; how Rabbi has also accepted
chastisements, etc., etc. (wonderful legends from
[211](me206.htm#page_211)-219). He who is a scholar himself and his son
and grandson are also, the Torah does not depart from their children for
everlasting, etc. R. Zera, when he ascended to Palestine, fasted one
hundred days in order to forget the Gemara of the Babylonians, etc. Resh
Lakish used to mark the caves of the rabbis. R. Zera's dream. Elijah
(the Prophet) frequently appeared in the college of Rabbi. (See the
whole legend, pp. [222](me206.htm#page_222)-224.) The Hagadah about
Abraham with the Angels; the names of those Angels. Why did the Lord
change Sarah's words when telling them to Abraham? Until the time of
Abraham there was no mark of old age; until the time of Jacob there was
no sickness; until the time of Elisha there was no one who became cured
from sickness. [208](me205.htm#page_208)-229

MISHNAS *II*. TO *IX*. Who are the laborers who have a right, according
to the law of Scripture, to partake of the fruits of their labors?
Whence is all this deduced? The particular law about muzzling an ox
while laboring. How is the law if the animal is sick and the consuming
of grain injures it? May it be muzzled? When Gentiles steal bulls and
castrate them, and return them to their owners, may the Israelites use
them or not? (See footnote, [p. 235](me206.htm#page_235).) If one has
"muzzled" a cow only with his voice, or if one leads two kinds of
animals with his voice only, is he guilty or not? R. Papa and also R.
Ashi told in their colleges what they were questioned and decided not in
accordance with the existing laws and the reasons. Why the labor of a
workingman entitles him to consume the fruit of that with which he is
laboring. If one is occupied with pressing dates, he must not consume
*grapes*, and *vice versa*. A laborer must not consume more than his
wages, etc. Does the Scripture add to his wage the consuming of the
fruit with which he is engaged? Or is it a part of his wage? A laborer
has the right to make a stipulation that he shall not eat what he is
entitled to and take money for it instead. Watchmen of fruits are
permitted to eat, according to the custom of the country, etc. The
following laborers have a right to partake according to the law of
Scripture, etc. There are four kinds of bailees: A gratuitous bailee, a
borrower, a bailee for hire, and a hirer. For what loss must a hirer
pay? What is the extent of the duty of the bailee for hire? Abu placed
flocks at Rumnia, and Shabu, who was an errant robber, took them away.
Although Abu proved that this was the case, R. Na'hman held him
responsible, etc. A single wolf's coming among the flock is not
considered an accident. A robbery is considered an accident. A natural
death is an accident, but not if it is caused by cruelty. A gratuitous
bailee has the right to make a stipulation that in case of loss he shall
be

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

freed from taking an oath. A stipulation made contrary to that which is
written in the Scripture is of no avail. A bailee for hire may stipulate
that he shall be equal to a borrower. But how shall a stipulation of
this kind be made verbally, only? [230](me206.htm#page_230)-248

### CHAPTER VIII.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *IV*. If one borrows a cow, and at the same time hires
or borrows its owner, etc. There are four kinds of bailees, etc. Whence
do we deduce all this? How do we know that he is responsible in case of
confiscation also? There is no responsibility when the owner works
together with the borrowed article. (Expl., see
[252](me207.htm#page_252).) If one tells his messenger that he shall
substitute him in service to his neighbor, together with his cow, how is
the law if the cow breaks or dies while laboring? If one borrows
another's slave and cow, how is the law? What should a husband who uses
the estate of his wife be considered--a borrower or a hirer? If the body
of the animal becomes lean because of the labor, how is the law?
Maraimar b. Hanina hired mules from Huzai, and the former overworked
them, and they died, etc. If one borrowed a cow for half a day and for
the other half a day he hires it, etc. If one has borrowed a cow, and
the owner sends it to him by his son, slave, or messenger, or even by
the same persons of the borrower, and it dies while on the road? If one
borrows a hatchet; if he has done some work with it, he acquires title
to it for the time borrowed. Is the law concerning an ordinary man equal
to that of the sanctuary? If one exchanges an ass for a cow, and it
brought forth young. If one possesses two male slaves or two fields, one
large and one small, and the buyer claims: I bought the large one, etc.
[249](me207.htm#page_249)-264

MISHNAS *V*. TO *IX*. If one sold out his olive trees for fuel, and
there were still bad olives on them. Olive trees which were overflooded,
taken out and planted in another's field, etc. If one has planted trees
in a field belonging to another without the consent of the owner. If one
has rebuilt a ruin of one's neighbor without his consent. If one rents a
house (without appointing the time) in the rain season, etc. All the
terms are fixed only for giving notice. This notice is to be given by
the owner of the house as well as by the tenant. The owner of the house
is obliged to give to the tenant a door bolt, a lock, etc. However,
things which can be done by any one the tenant has to furnish himself.
Whose duty is it to furnish a mezuzah? The manure belongs to the owner,
etc. If the year was made a leap year the tenant reaps the benefit of
the intercalation. However, if he rented him the house monthly, the
intercalation belongs to the owner. In an agreement, which is to be
considered, the first expression, or the last? If the renter says: I
have paid; and the owner claims: I have not received it, who of them
must bring evidence? If one has rented out a house for ten years, and
has signed the lease without a date, etc. If a man rents out a house and
it falls, etc. [264](me207.htm#page_264)-272.

### CHAPTER IX

MISHNAS I. TO IV One who hires a field must do as it is customary in
that country, etc. If the stipulation was made on wine, etc. They must
also prepare together the sticks needed for the vineyard for the next
year. In Babylon there is a custom that the gardener is not given any
straw. If

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

one hires a field and it was a dry place, or a group of trees, and
thereafter the spring ceases to flow, etc. If the hirer told him: Rent
to me this dry field, etc. If one has undertaken to work up a field and
he has neglected to do so. Mair, Jehudah, Hillel, Jehoshua, and Jose,
these considered the language of the common people legal (although it
was not in accordance with the enactment of the sages). If one lends
money to some one, he has no right to pledge him through the court for
more than he owes him. Rabina used to double the amount in the marriage
contract, etc. There was one who undertook to work up a field, and he
said: Should I neglect, I will give you one thousand zuz, etc. There was
a man who undertook a field for poppy, sowing with wheat, and finally
the wheat was worth more than poppy. If one has given articles for
business without any stipulation, and took from him two notes, etc. If
the gardener did not want to weed the field, saying: I will give you
your due, he must not be listened to. [273](me208.htm#page_273)-279

MISHNAS *V*. TO *IX*. If one took a field in partnership and it was not
productive. If one hires a field and the locusts destroyed it, or it was
burned. If that year was a year of destruction or a year without rain,
etc. If this happened once, he has to sow it the second time, etc. If
one hires a field for ten kur wheat per annum, and the products are
poor. There was a man who hired a vineyard for ten barrels of wine, and
thereafter the wine became sour. If one takes a field for sowing barley,
he must not sow wheat in it, etc. The explanation of Deut. xxviii. 3-6.
Thirteen advantages can be gained by taking the early morning meal,
viz., etc. Get up early in the morning and eat, in the summer, because
of the heat; and in the winter, because of the cold? The advices given
by R. Jehudah to the land surveyor about measuring land, trenches, and
the space for anchoring. Correct thyself first, and then others. All the
inhabitants of the city must contribute to the repairing of the wall of
the city if it is destroyed. If one takes possession of a dock, he is a
rascal. If one takes possession of a field which was placed between two
brothers or partners, it is considered a piece of assurance. To a
presented estate the right of preëmption does not apply, etc. To a
pledged estate, and if it is sold for taxes, or for the support of a
widow, or for burial, this law does not apply. If one hires a field for
a few years (less than seven), he must not sow flax in it. R. Papa hired
fields for pasture, and some trees sprouted in them, etc. Because you
are descendants of frail people, you speak frail words. Joseph had a
planter who planted all his trees for half product, and he died and left
five sons-in-law, etc. The planter of Rabbina did damage and was
discharged and he came to complain to Rabha, etc. There was a planter
who said "Give me what I am entitled to of the improvements, as I want
to go to Palestine." There was one who pledged his vineyard for ten
years, and it became old in eight years. There was a note in which was
written the year without a number, etc. If the gardener claims: "I
worked for the half," and the owner says for a third, who should be
trusted? If orphans claim: "*We* have made the improvements on this
estate," and the creditor claims: "It was improved by your deceased
father," for whom is it to bring evidence? [279](me208.htm#page_279)-295

MISHNAS *X*. TO *XIV*. If one hires a field for the whole sabbatic
season for seven hundred zuz, the sabbatic year is included. A
day-laborer has to

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

collect his money the whole night after that day, etc. The transgression
of this commandment comes and ceases with the first morning. One who
withholds wages transgresses the commandments of five verses, etc. The
commandment: "In the same day you shall give his wage," and also the
negative, "There shall not abide . . . until morning," applies to men,
cattle, and vessels. To a proselyte who promised not to worship idols
and not to commit adultery, but not to conform to other Jewish laws, the
commandment applies. One who withholds wages is considered as if he
would take out the soul. If the storekeeper or the money-changer failed
to pay him, may he return his claim to the owner or not? Is piece-work
subject to that law or not? If a creditor has to pledge his debtor, he
may do so only by court, etc. If things belonging to a debtor are to be
sold out, has the court to consider which should be sold and which left
to him, or is all to be sold out? If one lends money to his neighbor, he
has no right to pledge him, is not obliged to return, transgresses all
the commandments which are in the Scripture concerning
\[pledging\]--what does this mean? If the pledge was returned and the
borrower died, etc. One who pledges a nether and upper millstone
transgresses a negative commandment and is guilty for two articles.
There was a man who pledged a butcher knife from his debtor, etc.
[295](me208.htm#page_295)-307

### CHAPTER X.

MISHNAS *I*. TO *VI*. If one owns a house, the upper chamber of which
belongs to another, and it falls. If the attic was ruined, and the owner
of the house declined to repair it. When the tenant goes to dwell in the
lower apartment, must the owner vacate it for the tenant, or should they
dwell together? Must the party doing the damage remove the cause of it,
or must the injured party remove the cause of the damage? One is
responsible for damage done to his fellow by things which come directly
from him (though it is the obligation of every one to keep aloof from
damaging things). A house with an attic, belonging to two persons, which
becomes ruined; the owner of the upper chamber requires the rebuilding,
and the owner of the house refuses, etc. The same is the case with an
olive-press which was placed under a garden, etc. A wall or a tree which
falls suddenly on a public thoroughfare and causes damage, etc. What
time is fixed for such a case by the court? The same is the case with a
laborer who was told by his employer to take the articles with which he
was engaged for payment. Whether looking gives title to an ownerless
article or not, the Tanaim differ. One must not place his manure upon a
public ground, unless it is immediately taken away by those who want to
use it. If a hewer of stones has transferred them to the polisher, and
they cause damage while under his control, the latter is responsible.
When two gardens were placed one above the other, and some herbs were
grown between them, the upper one may use that which he can reach with
his hand, provided he does not exert himself to reach them. This was
reported to the King Sabura. [307](me208.htm#page_307)-316

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](me204)
