[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans042)  [Next](ans044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.X"></span>

### <span id="v.X-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER X.

<span id="v.X-p1"></span>

<span id="v.X-p2"></span>This tbought is a kind of expression of the
objects created (<span id="v.X-p2.3"></span>locutio rerum), like the
expression which an artisan forms in his mind for what he intends to
make.

<span id="v.X-p3"></span>

<span id="v.X-p4"></span>BUT this model of things, which preceded their
creation in the thought of the creator, what else is it than a kind of
expression of these things in his thought itself; just as when an
artisan is about to make something after the manner of his craft, he
first expresses it to himself through a concept? But by the *expression*
of the mind or reason I mean, here, not the conception of words
signifying the objects, but the general view in the mind, by the vision
of conception, of the objects themselves, whether destined to be, or
already existing.

<span id="v.X-p5"></span>For, from frequent usage, it is recognised that
we can express the same object in three ways. For we express objects
either by the sensible use of sensible signs, that is, signs which are
perceptible to the bodily senses; or by thinking within ourselves
insensibly of these signs which, when outwardly used, are sensible; or
not by employing these signs, either sensibly or <span id="page_56">p.
56</span> <span id="v.X-Page_56"></span>insensibly, but by expressing
the things themselves inwardly in our mind, whether by the power of
imagining material bodies or of understanding thought, according to the
diversity of these objects themselves.

<span id="v.X-p6"></span>For I express a man in one way, when I signify
him by pronouncing these words, a man; in another, when I think of the
same words in silence; and in another, when the mind regards the man
himself, either through the image of his body, or through the reason;
through the image of his body, when the mind imagines his visible form;
through the reason, however, when it thinks of his universal essence,
which is a rational, mortal animal.

<span id="v.X-p7"></span>Now, the first two kinds of expression are in
the language of one’s race. But the words of that kind of expression,
which I have put third and last, when they concern objects well known,
are natural, and are the same among all nations. And, since all other
words owe their invention to these, where these are, no other word is
necessary for the recognition of an object, and where they cannot be, no
other word is of any use for the description of an object.

<span id="v.X-p8"></span>For, without absurdity, they may also be said
to be the truer, the more like they are to the objects to which they
correspond, and the more expressively they signify these objects. For,
with the exception of those objects, which we employ as their own names,
in order to signify them, like certain sounds , the vowel a for instance
‑‑ with the exception of these, I say, no other word appears so similar
to the object to which it is applied, or expresses it as does that
likeness which is expressed by the vision of the mind thinking of the
object itself.

<span id="v.X-p9"></span>This last, then, should be called the
especially <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="v.X-Page_57"></span>proper and primary *word*, corresponding to the
thing. Hence, if no expression of any object whatever so nearly
approaches the object as that expression which consists of this sort of
*words,* nor can there be in the thought of any another word so like the
object, whether destined to be, or already existing, not without reason
it may be thought that such an expression of objects existed with
(*apud*) the supreme Substance before their creation, that they might be
created; and exists, now that they have been created, that they may be
known through it.

<span id="v.X-p10"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI.](ans044)
