[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans054)  [Next](ans056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXII"></span>

### <span id="v.XXII-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XXII.

<span id="v.XXII-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p2"></span>How it exists in every place and time, and
in none.

<span id="v.XXII-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p4"></span>HOW, then, shall these prepositions, that
are so necessary according to our exposition, and so necessary according
to our proof, be reconciled? Perhaps the supreme Nature exists in place
and time in some such way, that it is not prevented from so existing
simultaneously, as a whole, in different places or times, that there are
not more wholes than one; and that its age, which does not exist, except
as true eternity, is not distributed among past, present, and future.

<span id="v.XXII-p5"></span>For, to this law of space and time, nothing
seems to be subject, except the beings which so exist in space or time
that they do not transcend extent of space or duration of time. Hence,
though of beings of this class it is with all truth asserted that one
and the same whole cannot exist simultaneously, as a whole, in different
places or times; in the case of those beings which are not of this
class, no such conclusion is necessarily reached.

<span id="v.XXII-p6"></span>For it seems to be rightly said, that place
is predicable only of objects whose magnitude place contains by
including it, and includes by containing it; and that time is predicable
only of objects whose duration<span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_78"></span> time ends by measuring it, and measures by
ending it. Hence, to any being, to whose spatial extent or duration no
bound can be set, either by space or time, no place or time is properly
attributed. For, seeing that place does not act upon it as place, nor
time as time, it is not irrational to say, that no place is its place,
and no time its time.

<span id="v.XXII-p7"></span>But, what evidently has no place or time is
doubtless by no means compelled to submit to the law of place or time.
No law of place or time, then, in any way governs any nature, which no
place or time limits by some kind of restraint. But what rational
consideration can by any course of reasoning fail to reach the
conclusion, that the Substance which creates and is supreme among all
beings, which must be alien to, and free from, the nature and law of all
things which itself created from nothing, is limited by no restraint of
space or time; since, more truly, its power, which is nothing else than
its essence, contains and includes under itself all these things which
it created? Is it not impudently foolish, too, to say either, that space
circumscribes the magnitude of truth, or, that time measures its
duration ‑‑truth, which regards no greatness or smallness of spatial or
temporal extent at all?

<span id="v.XXII-p8"></span>Seeing, then, that this is the condition of
place or time; that only whatever is limited by their bounds neither
escapes the law of parts ‑‑ such as place follows, according to
magnitude, or such as time submits to, according to duration ‑‑ nor can
in any way be contained, as a whole, simultaneously by different places
or times; but whatever is in no wise confined by the restraint of place
or time, is not compelled by any law of places or times to multiplicity
of parts, <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="v.XXII-Page_79"></span>nor is it prevented from being present, as a
whole and simultaneously, in more places or times than one ‑‑seeing, I
say, that this is the condition governing place or time, no doubt the
supreme Substance, which is encompassed by no restraint of place or
time, is bound by none of their laws.

<span id="v.XXII-p9"></span>Hence, since inevitable necessity requires
that the supreme Being, as a whole, be lacking to no place or time, and
no law of place or time prevents it from being simultaneously in every
place or time; it must simultaneously present in every individual place
or time. For, because it is present in one place, it is not therefore
prevented from being present at the same time, and in like manner in
this, or that other, place or time.

<span id="v.XXII-p10"></span>Nor, because it was, or is, or shall be,
has any part of its eternity therefore vanished from the present, with
the past, which no longer is; nor does it pass with the present, which
is, for an instant; nor is it to come with the future, which is not yet.

<span id="v.XXII-p11"></span>For, by no means is that Being compelled or
forbidden by a law of space or time to exist, or not to exist, at any
place or time ‑‑ the Being which, in no wise, includes its own existence
in space or time. For, when the supreme Being is said to exist in space
or time, although the form of expression regarding it, and regarding
local and temporal natures, is the same, because of the usage of
language, yet the sense is different, because of the unlikeness of the
objects of discussion. For in the latter case the same expression has
two meanings, namely: (1) that these objects are present in those places
and times in which they are said to be, and (2) that they are contained
by these places and times themselves.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="v.XXII-Page_80"></span>

<span id="v.XXII-p12"></span>But in the case of the supreme Being, the
first sense only is intended, namely, that it is present; not that it is
also contained. If the usage of language permitted, it would, therefore,
seem to be more fittingly said, that it exists *with* place or time,
than that it exists *in* place or time. For the statement that a thing
exists *in* another implies that it is *contained*, more than does the
statement that it exists with another.

<span id="v.XXII-p13"></span>In no place or time, then, is this Being
properly said to exist, since it is contained by no other at all. And
yet it may be said, after a manner of its own, to be in every place or
time, since whatever else exists is sustained by its presence, lest it
lapse into nothingness. It exists in every place and time, because it is
absent from none; and it exists in none, because it has no place or
time, and has not taken to itself distinctions of place or time, neither
here nor there, nor anywhere, nor then, nor now, nor at any time; nor
does it exist in terms of this fleeting present, in which we live, nor
has it existed, nor will it exist, in terms of past or future, since
these are restricted to things finite and mutable, which it is not.

<span id="v.XXII-p14"></span>And yet, these properties of time and place
can, in some sort, be ascribed to it, since it is just as truly present
in all finite and mutable beings as if it were circumscribed by the same
places, and suffered change by the same times.

<span id="v.XXII-p15"></span>We have sufficient evidence, then, to
dispel the contradiction that threatened us; as to how the highest Being
of all exists, everywhere and always, and nowhere and never, that is, in
every place and time, and in no place or time, according to the
consistent truth of different senses of the terms employed.

<span id="v.XXII-p16"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.](ans056)
