[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans040)  [Next](ans042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.VIII"></span>

### <span id="v.VIII-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER VIII.

<span id="v.VIII-p1"></span>

<span id="v.VIII-p2"></span>How it is to be understood that this Nature
created all things from nothing.

<span id="v.VIII-p3"></span>

<span id="v.VIII-p4"></span>BUT we are confronted with a doubt regarding
this term *nothing.* For, from whatever source anything is created, that
source is the cause of what is created from it, and, necessarily, every
cause affords some assistance to the being of what it effects. This is
so firmly believed, as a result of experience, by every one, that the
belief can be wrested from no one by argument, and can scarcely be
purloined by sophistry.

<span id="v.VIII-p5"></span>Accordingly, if anything was created from
nothing, this very nothing was the cause of what was created from it.
But how could that which had no existence, assist anything in coming
into existence? If, however, no aid to the existence of anything ever
had its source in nothing, who can be convinced, and how, that anything
is created out of nothing?

<span id="v.VIII-p6"></span>Moreover, nothing either means something, or
does not mean something. But if nothing is something, whatever has been
created from nothing has been created from something. If, however,
nothing is not <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="v.VIII-Page_52"></span>something; since it is inconceivable that
anything should be created from what does not exist, nothing is created
from nothing; just as all agree that nothing comes from nothing. Whence,
it evidently follows, that whatever is created is created from
something; for it is created either from something or from nothing.
Whether, then, nothing is something, or nothing is not something, it
apparently follows, that whatever has been created was created from
something.

<span id="v.VIII-p7"></span>But, if this is posited as a truth, then it
is so posited in opposition to the whole argument propounded in the
preceding chapter. Hence, since what was nothing will thus be something,
that which was something in the highest degree will be nothing. For,
from the discovery of a certain Substance existing in the greatest
degree of all existing beings, my reasoning had brought me to this
conclusion, that all other beings were so created by this Substance,
that that from which they were created was nothing. Hence, if that from
which they were created, which I supposed to be nothing, is something,
whatever I supposed to have been ascertained regarding the supreme
Being, is nothing.

<span id="v.VIII-p8"></span>What, then, is to be our understanding of
the term *nothing?* ‑‑ For I have already determined not to neglect in
this meditation any possible objection, even if it be almost foolish.
‑‑In three ways, then ‑‑ and this suffices for the removal of the
present obstacle ‑‑ can the statement that any substance was created
from nothing be explained.

<span id="v.VIII-p9"></span>There is one way, according to which we wish
it to be understood, that what is said to have been created from nothing
has not been created at all; just <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="v.VIII-Page_53"></span>as, to one who asks regarding a dumb man, of
what he speaks, the answer is given, “of nothing,” that is, he does not
speak at all. According to this interpretation, to one who enquires
regarding the supreme Being, or regarding what never has existed and
does not exist at all, as to whence it was created, the answer, “from
nothing” may properly be given; that is, it never was created. But this
answer is unintelligible in the case of any of those things that
actually were created.

<span id="v.VIII-p10"></span>There is another interpretation which is,
indeed, capable of supposition, but cannot be true; namely, that if
anything is said to have been created from nothing, it was created from
nothing itself (*de nihilo ipso*), that is, from what does not exist at
all, as if this very nothing were some existent being, from which
something could be created. But, since this is always false, as often as
it is assumed an irreconcilable contradiction follows.

<span id="v.VIII-p11"></span>There is a third interpretation, according
to which a thing is said to have been created from nothing, when we
understand that it was indeed created, but that there is not anything
whence it was created. Apparently it is said with a like meaning, when a
man is afflicted without cause, that he is afflicted “over nothing.”

<span id="v.VIII-p12"></span>If, then, the conclusion reached in the
preceding chapter is understood in this sense, that with the exception
of the supreme Being all things have been created by that Being from
nothing, that is, not from anything; just as this conclusion
consistently follows the preceding arguments, so, from it, nothing
inconsistent is inferred; although it may be said, without inconsistency
or any contradiction, that what has been <span id="page_54">p. 54</span>
<span id="v.VIII-Page_54"></span>created by the creative Substance was
created from nothing, in the way that one frequently says a rich man has
been made from a poor man, or that one has recovered health from
sickness; that is, he who was poor before, is rich now, as he was not
before; and he who was ill before, is well now, as he was not before.

<span id="v.VIII-p13"></span>In this way, then, we can understand,
without inconsistency, the statement that the creative Being created all
things from nothing, or that all were created through it from nothing;
that is, those things which before were nothing, are now something. For,
indeed, from the very word that we use, saying that it *created* them or
that they were *created*, we understand that when this Being created
them, it created something, and that when they were created, they were
created only as something. For so, beholding a man of very lowly
fortunes exalted with many riches and honors by some one, we say, “Lo,
he has made that man out of nothing”; that is, the man who was before
reputed as nothing is now, by virtue of that other’s making, truly
reckoned as something.

<span id="v.VIII-p14"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.](ans042)
