[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans033)  [Next](ans035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="I_1"></span>

### <span id="I_1-p0.1_1"></span>CHAPTER I.

<span id="I_1-p1_1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p2_1"></span>There is a being which is best, and greatest,
and highest of all existing beings.

<span id="I_1-p3_1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p4_1"></span>IF any man, either from ignorance or
unbelief, has no knowledge of the existence of one Nature which is
highest of all existing beings, which is also sufficient <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span id="I_1-Page_37"></span>to itself in its
eternal blessedness, and which confers upon and effects in all other
beings, through its omnipotent goodness, the very fact of their
existence, and the fact that in any way their existence is good; and if
he has no knowledge of many other things, which we necessarily believe
regarding God and his creatures, he still believes that he can at least
convince himself of these truths in great part, even if his mental
powers are very ordinary, by the force of reason alone.

<span id="I_1-p5_1"></span>And, although he could do this in many ways,
I shall adopt one which I consider easiest for such a man. For, since
all desire to enjoy only those things which they suppose to be good, it
is natural that this man should, at some time, turn his mind’s eye to
the examination of that cause by which these things are good, which he
does not desire, except as he judges them to be good. So that, as reason
leads the way and follows up these considerations, he advances
rationally to those truths of which, without reason, he has no
knowledge. And if, in this discussion, I use any argument which no
greater authority adduces, I wish it to be received in this way:
although, on the grounds that I shall see fit to adopt, the conclusion
is reached as if necessarily, yet it is not, for this reason, said to be
absolutely necessary, but merely that it can appear so for the time
being.

<span id="I_1-p6_1"></span>It is easy, then, for one to say to himself:
Since there are goods so innumerable, whose great diversity we
experience by the bodily senses, and discern by our mental faculties,
must we not believe that there is some one thing, through which all
goods whatever are good? Or are they good one through one thing and
another through another? To be sure, it is most <span id="page_38">p.
38</span> <span id="I_1-Page_38"></span>certain and clear, for all who
are willing to see, that whatsoever things are said to possess any
attribute in such a way that in mutual comparison they may be said to
possess it in greater, or less, or equal degree, are said to possess it
by virtue of some fact, which is not understood to be one thing in one
case and another in another, but to be the same in different cases,
whether it is regarded as existing in these cases in equal or unequal
degree. For, whatsoever things are said to be *just,* when compared one
with another, whether equally, or more, or less, cannot be understood as
just, except through the quality of *justness,* which is not one thing
in one instance, and another in another.

<span id="I_1-p7_1"></span>Since it is certain, then, that all goods, if
mutually compared, would prove either equally or unequally good,
necessarily they are all good by virtue of something which is conceived
of as the same in different goods, although sometimes they seem to be
called good, the one by virtue of one thing, the other by virtue of
another. For, apparently it is by virtue of one quality, that a horse is
called *good,* because he is strong, and by virtue of another, that he
is called *good,* because he is swift. For, though he seems to be called
good by virtue of his strength, and good by virtue of his swiftness, yet
swiftness and strength do not appear to be the same thing.

<span id="I_1-p8_1"></span>But if a horse, because he is strong and
swift, is therefore good, how is it that a strong, swift robber is bad?
Rather, then, just as a strong, swift robber is bad, because he is
harmful, so a strong, swift horse is good, because he is useful. And,
indeed, nothing is ordinarily regarded as good, except either for some
utility ‑‑ as, for instance, safety is called good, and <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span id="I_1-Page_39"></span>those things
which promote safety ‑‑or for some honorable character ‑‑ as, for
instance, beauty is reckoned to be good, and what promotes beauty.

<span id="I_1-p9_1"></span>But, since the reasoning which we have
observed is in no wise refutable, necessarily, again, all things,
whether useful or honorable, if they are truly good, are good through
that same being through which all goods exist, whatever that being is.
But who can doubt this very being, through which all goods exist, to be
a great good? This must be, then, a good through itself, since ever
other good is through it.

<span id="I_1-p10_1"></span>It follows, therefore, that all other goods
are good through another being than that which they themselves are, and
this being alone is good through itself. Hence, this alone is supremely
good, which is alone good through itself. For it is supreme, in that it
so surpasses other beings, that it is neither equalled nor excelled. But
that which is supremely good is also supremely great. There is,
therefore, some one being which is supremely good, and supremely great,
that is, the highest of all existing beings.

<span id="I_1-p11_1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](ans035)
