[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans074)  [Next](ans076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XLII"></span>

<span id="v.XLII-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.XLII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XLII.

<span id="v.XLII-p2"></span>

<span id="v.XLII-p3"></span>It is the property of the one to be most
truly progenitor and Father, and of the other to be the begotten and
Son.

<span id="v.XLII-p4"></span>

<span id="v.XLII-p5"></span>I should certainly be glad, and perhaps
able, now to reach the conclusion, that he is most truly the Father<span
id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span id="v.XLII-Page_103"></span>, while
this Word is most truly his Son. But I think that even this question
should not be neglected: whether it is more fitting to call them Father
and Son, than mother and daughter, since in them there is no distinction
of sex.

<span id="v.XLII-p6"></span>For, if it is consistent with the nature of
the one to be the Father, and of his offspring to be the Son, because
both are Spirit (*Spiritus*, masculine); why is it not, with equal
reason, consistent with the nature of the one to be the mother, and the
other the daughter, since both are truth and wisdom (*veritas et
sapientia*, feminine)?

<span id="v.XLII-p7"></span>Or, is it because in these natures that have
a difference of sex, it belongs to the superior sex to be father or son,
and to the inferior to be mother or daughter? And this is certainly a
natural fact in most instances, but in some the contrary is true, as
among certain kinds of birds, among which the female is always larger
and stronger, while the male is smaller and weaker.

<span id="v.XLII-p8"></span>At any rate, it is more consistent to call
the supreme Spirit father than mother, for this reason, that the first
and principal cause of offspring is always in the father. For, if the
maternal cause is ever in some way preceded by the paternal, it is
exceedingly inconsistent that the name *mother* should be attached to
that parent with which, for the generation of offspring, no other cause
is associated, and which no other precedes. It is, therefore, most true
that the supreme Spirit is Father of his offspring. But, if the son is
always more like the father than is the daughter, while nothing is more
like the supreme Father than his offspring; then it is most true that
this offspring is not a daughter, but a Son.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span id="v.XLII-Page_104"></span>

<span id="v.XLII-p9"></span>Hence, just as it is the property of the one
most truly to beget, and of the other to be begotten, so it is the
property of the one to be most truly progenitor, and of the other to be
most truly begotten. And as the one is most truly the parent, and the
other his offspring, so the one is most truly Father, and the other most
truly Son.

<span id="v.XLII-p10"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](ans076)
