[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans002)  [Next](ans004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span><span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>CRITICISMS OF
ANSELM’S ONTOLOGICAL

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span><span id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>ARGUMENT FOR THE
BEING OF GOD.

<span id="ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p2"></span><span
id="ii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>DESCARTES<span id="ii.ii.i-p2.2"></span>. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="ii.ii.i-p5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p6"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p7"></span>“But now, if from the simple fact that I
can draw from my thought the idea of anything it follows that all that I
recognise clearly and distinctly to pertain to this thing pertains to it
in reality, can I not draw from this an argument and a demonstration of
the existence of God? It is certain that I do not find in me the less
the idea of him, that is, of a being supremely perfect, than that of any
figure or of any number whatever; and I do not know less clearly and
distinctly that an actual and eternal existence belongs to his nature
than I know that all that I can demonstrate of any figure or of any
number belongs truly to the nature of that figure or that number: and
accordingly, although all that I have concluded in the preceding
meditations may not turn out to be true, the existence of God ought to
pass in my mind as being at least as certain as I have up to this time
regarded the truths of mathematics to be, which have to do only with
numbers and figures: although, indeed, that might not seem at first to
be perfectly evident, but might appear to have some appearance of
sophistry. For being accustomed in all other things to make a
distinction between existence and essence, I easily persuade myself that
existence may perhaps be separated from the essence of God, and thus God
might be conceived as not existent actually. But nevertheless, when I
think more attentively, I find that existence can no more be separated
from the essence of God than from the essence of a rectilinear triangle
can be separated the equality of its three <span id="page_x">p. x</span>
<span id="ii.ii.i-Page_x"></span>angles to two right angles, or, indeed,
if you please, from the idea of a mountain the idea of a valley; so that
there would be no less contradiction in conceiving of a God ‑‑that is,
of a being supremely perfect, to whom existence was wanting, that is to
say, to whom there was wanting any perfection ‑‑than in conceiving of a
mountain which had no valley.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p8"></span>“But although, in reality, I might not be
able to conceive of a God without existence, no more than of a mountain
without a valley, nevertheless, as from the simple fact that I conceive
a mountain with a valley, it does not follow that there exists any
mountain in the world, so likewise, although I conceive God as existent,
it does not follow, it seems, from that, that God exists, for my thought
does not impose any necessity on things; and as there is nothing to
prevent my imagining a winged horse, although there is none which has
wings, so I might, perhaps, be able to attribute existence to God,
although there might not be any God which existed. So far from this
being so, it is just here under the appearance of this objection that a
sophism lies hid; for from the fact that I cannot conceive a mountain
without a valley, it does not follow that there exists in the world any
mountain or any valley, but solely that the mountain and the valley,
whether they exist or not, are inseparable from one another; whereas
from the fact alone that I cannot conceive God except as existent, it
follows that existence is inseparable from him, and, consequently, that
he exists in reality; not that my thought can make it to be so, or that
it can impose any necessity upon things; but on the contrary the
necessity which is in the thing itself, that is to say, the necessity of
the existence of God, determines me to have this thought.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p9"></span>“For it is not at my will to conceive of a
God without existence, that is to say, a being supremely perfect without
a supreme perfection, as it is at my will to conceive a horse with wings
or without wings.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p10"></span>“And it must not also be said here that it
is necessarily true that I should affirm that God exists, after I have
supposed him to possess all kinds of perfection, since existence is one
of these, but that my first supposition is not necessary, no more than
it is necessary to affirm that all figures of four sides may be
inscribed in the circle, but that, supposing I had this thought, I
should be constrained to admit that the rhombus can be inscribed there,
since it is a figure of four sides, and thus I should be constrained to
admit something false. One ought not, I say, to allege this; for
although <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="ii.ii.i-Page_xi"></span>it may not be necessary that I should ever
fall to thinking about God, nevertheless, when it happens that I think
upon a being first and supreme, and draw, so to speak, the idea of him
from the store‑house of mind, it is necessary that I attribute to him
every sort of perfection, although I may not go on to enumerate them
all, and give attention to each one in particular. And this necessity is
sufficient to bring it about (as soon as I recognise that I should next
conclude that existence is a perfection) that this first and supreme
being exists: while, just as it is not necessary that I ever imagine a
triangle, but whenever I choose to consider a rectilinear figure,
composed solely of three angles, it is absolutely necessary that I
attribute to it all the things which serve for the conclusion that there
three angles are not greater than two right angles, although, perhaps, I
did not then consider this in particular.”

<span id="ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>SPINOZA<span id="ii.ii.ii-p1.2"></span>. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p4"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p5"></span>PROP. XI. God, or substance, consisting,
of infinite attributes, of which each expresses eternal and infinite
essentiality, necessarily exists.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p6"></span>“Proof.‑‑If this be denied, conceive, if
possible, that God does not exist: then his essence does not involve
existence. But this (by Prop. vii.) is absurd. Therefore God necessarily
exists.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p7"></span>“Another Proof. ‑‑Of everything whatsoever
a cause or reason must be assigned, either for its existence, or for its
non‑existence ‑‑e. g., if a triangle exist, a reason or cause must be
granted for its existence; if, on the contrary, it does not exist, a
cause must also be granted, which prevents it from existing, or annuls
its existence. This reason or cause must either be contained in the
nature of the thing in question, or be external to it. For instance, the
reason for the non‑existence of a square circle is indicated in its
nature, namely, because it would involve a contradiction. On the other
hand, the existence of substance follows also solely from its nature,
inasmuch as its nature involves existence. (See Prop. vii.)

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p8"></span>“But the reason for the existence of a
triangle or a circle does not follow from the nature of those figures,
but from the order of universal nature in extension. From the latter it
must follow, either that a triangle necessarily exists, or that it is
impossible <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii-Page_xii"></span>that it should exist. So much is
self‑evident. It follows therefrom that a thing necessarily exists, if
no cause or reason be granted which prevents its existence.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>“If, then, no cause or reason can be
given, which prevents the existence of God, or which destroys his
existence, we must certainly conclude that he necessarily does exist. If
such a reason or cause, should be given, it must either be drawn from
the very nature of God, or be external to him ‑‑that is, drawn from
another substance of another nature. For if it were of the same nature,
God, by that very fact, would be admitted to exist. But substance of
another nature could have nothing in common with God (by Prop. ii.), and
therefore would be unable either to cause or to destroy his existence.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p10"></span>“As, then, a reason or cause which would
annul the divine existence cannot be drawn from anything external to the
divine nature, such cause must perforce, if God does not exist, be drawn
from God’s own nature, which would involve a contradiction. To make such
an affirmation about a being absolutely infinite and supremely perfect,
is absurd; therefore, neither in the nature of God, nor externally to
his nature, can a cause or reason be assigned which would annul his
existence. Therefore, God necessarily exists. Q. E. D.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p11"></span>“Another proof. ‑‑The potentiality of
non‑existence is a negation of power, and contrariwise the potentiality
of existence is a power, as is obvious. If, then, that which necessarily
exists is nothing but finite beings, such finite beings are more
powerful than a being absolutely infinite, which is obviously absurd;
therefore, either nothing exists, or else a being absolutely infinite
necessarily exists also. Now we exist either in ourselves, or in
something else which necessarily exists (see Axiom i. and Prop. vii.).
Therefore a being absolutely infinite ‑‑in other words, God (Def. vi.)
‑‑necessarily exists. Q. E. D.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p12"></span>“Note. ‑‑In this last proof, I have
purposely shown God’s existence a posteriori, so that the proof might be
more easily followed, not because, from the same premises, God’s
existence does not follow a priori. For, as the potentiality of
existence is a power, it follows that, in proportion as reality
increases in the nature of a thing, so also will it increase its
strength for existence. Therefore a being absolutely infinite, such as
God, has from himself an absolutely infinite power of existence, and
hence he does absolutely exist. Perhaps there will be many who will be
unable <span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii-Page_xiii"></span>to see the force of this proof, inasmuch
as they are accustomed only to consider those things which flow from
external causes. Of such things, they see that those which quickly come
to pass ‑‑that is, quickly come into existence ‑‑quickly also disappear;
whereas they regard as more difficult of accomplishment ‑‑that is, not
so easily brought into existence ‑‑those things which they conceive as
more complicated.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p13"></span>“However, to do away with this
misconception, I need not here show the measure of truth in the proverb,
‘What comes quickly, goes quickly,’ nor discuss whether, from the point
of view of universal nature, all things are equally easy, or otherwise:
I need only remark, that I am not here speaking of things, which come to
pass through causes external to themselves, but only of substances which
(by Prop. vi.) cannot be produced by any external cause. Things which
are produced by external causes, whether they consist of many parts or
few, owe whatsoever perfection or reality they possess solely to the
efficacy of their external cause, and therefore their existence arises
solely from the perfection by their external cause, not from their own.
Contrariwise, whatsoever perfection is possessed by substance is due to
no external cause; wherefore the existence of substance must arise
solely from its own nature, which is nothing else but its essence. Thus,
the perfection of a thing does not annul its existence, but, on the
contrary, asserts it. Imperfection, on the other hand, does annul it;
therefore we cannot be more certain of the existence of anything, than
of the existence of a being absolutely infinite or perfect ‑‑that is, of
God. For inasmuch as his essence excludes all imperfection, and involves
absolute perfection, all cause for doubt concerning his existence is
done away, and the utmost certainty on the question is given. This, I
think, will be evident to every moderately attentive reader.”

<span id="ii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>LOCKE<span id="ii.ii.iii-p1.2"></span>. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p4"></span>“*Our idea of a most perfect being, not
the sole proof of a God.* ‑‑How far the idea of a most perfect being
which a man may frame in his mind, does or does not prove the existence
of a God, I will not here examine. For, in the different make of men’s
tempers, and application of their thoughts, some arguments prevail <span
id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span id="ii.ii.iii-Page_xiv"></span>more on
one, and some on another, for the confirmation of the same truth. But
yet, I think this I may say, that it is an ill way of establishing this
truth and silencing atheists, to lay the whole stress of so important a
point as this upon that sole foundation: and take some men’s having that
idea of God in their minds (for it is evident some men have none, and
some worse than none, and the most very different) for the only proof of
a Deity; and out of an over‑fondness of that darling invention, cashier,
or at least endeavor to invalidate, all other arguments, and forbid us
to hearken to those proofs, as being weak or fallacious, which our own
existence and the sensible parts of the universe offer so clearly and
cogently to our thoughts, that I deem it impossible for a considering
man to withstand them.”

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p6"></span> <span id="ii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>LEIBNITZ<span
id="ii.ii.iv-p1.2"></span>. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p4"></span>“Although I am for innate ideas, and in
particular for that of God, I do not think that the demonstrations of
the Cartesians drawn from the idea of God are perfect. I have shown
fully elsewhere (in the <span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>Actes de
Leipsic, and in the <span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>Memoires de Trevoux)
that what <span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.3"></span>Descartes has borrowed from
<span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.4"></span>Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, is
very beautiful and really very ingenious, but that there is still a gap
therein to be filled. This celebrated archbishop, who was without doubt
one of the most able men of his time, congratulates himself, not without
reason, for having discovered a means of proving the existence of God *a
priori,* by means of its own notion, without recurring to its effects.
And this is very nearly the force of his argument: God is the greatest
or (as <span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.5"></span>Descartes says) the most perfect
of beings, or rather a being of supreme grandeur and perfection,
including all degrees thereof. That is the notion of God. See now how
existence follows from this notion. To exist is something more than not
to exist, or rather, existence adds a degree to grandeur and perfection,
and as <span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.6"></span>Descartes states it, existence is
itself a perfection. Therefore this degree of grandeur and perfection,
or rather this perfection which consists in existence, is in this
supreme all‑great, all‑perfect being: for otherwise some degree would be
wanting to it, contrary to its definition. Consequently this supreme
being exists. The Scholastics, not excepting even their <span
id="ii.ii.iv-p4.7"></span>Doctor Angelicus, have misunderstood <span
id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span id="ii.ii.iv-Page_xv"></span>this
argument, and have taken it as a paralogism; in which respect they were
altogether wrong, and <span id="ii.ii.iv-p4.8"></span>Descartes, who
studied quite a long time the scholastic philosophy at the Jesuit
College of La Fleche, had great reason for re‑establishing it. It is not
a paralogism, but it is an imperfect demonstration, which assumes
something that must still be proved in order to render it mathematically
evident; that is, it is tacitly assumed that this idea of the all‑great
or all‑perfect being is possible, and implies no contradiction. And it
is already something that by this remark it is proved that, *assuming
that God is Possible, he exists,* which is the privilege of divinity
alone. We have the right to presume the possibility of every being, and
especially that of God, until some one proves the contrary. So that this
metaphysical argument already gives a morally demonstrative conclusion,
which declares that according to the present state of our knowledge we
must judge that God exists, and act in conformity thereto. But it is to
be desired, nevertheless, that clever men achieve the demonstration with
the strictness of a mathematical proof, and I think I have elsewhere
said something that may serve this end.”

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p5"></span> <span id="ii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>KANT<span
id="ii.ii.v-p1.2"></span>. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="ii.ii.v-p4"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p5"></span>“*Being* is evidently not a real predicate,
or a concept of something that can be added to the concept of a thing.
It is merely the admission of a thing, and of certain determinations in
it. Logically, it is merely the copula of a judgment. The proposition,
*God is almighty*, contains two concepts, each having its object,
namely, God and almightiness. The small word *is*, is not an additional
predicate, but only serves to put the predicate *in relation* to the
subject. If, then, I take the subject (God) with all its predicates
(including that of almightiness), and say, *God is*, or there is a God,
I do not put a new predicate to the concept of God, but I only put the
subject by itself, with all its predicates, in relation to my concept,
as its object. Both must contain exactly the same kind of thing, and
nothing can have been added to the concept, which expresses possibility
only, by my thinking its object as simply, given and saying, it is. And
thus the real does not contain more than the possible. A hundred real
dollars do not contain a penny more than a hundred possible dollars. For
as the latter signify <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="ii.ii.v-Page_xvi"></span>the concept, the former the object and its
position by itself, it is clear that, in case the former contained more
than the latter, my concept would not express the whole object, and
would not therefore be its adequate concept. In my financial position no
doubt there exists more by one hundred real dollars, than by their
concept only (that is their possibility), because in reality the object
is not only contained analytically in my concept, but is added to my
concept (which is a determination of my state), synthetically: but the
conceived hundred dollars are not in the least increased through the
existence which is outside my concept.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p6"></span>“By whatever and by however many predicates
I may think a thing (even in completely determining it), nothing is
really added to it, if I add that the thing exists. Otherwise, it would
not be the same that exists, but something more than was contained in
the concept, and I could not say that the exact object of my concept
existed. Nay, even if I were to think in a thing all reality, except
one, that one missing reality would not be supplied by my saying that so
defective a thing exists, but it would exist with the same defect with
which I thought it; or what exists would be different from what I
thought. If, then, I try to conceive a being, as the highest reality
(without any defect), the question still remains, whether it exists or
not. For though in my concept there may be wanting nothing of the
possible real content of a thing in general, something is wanting in its
relation to my whole state of thinking, namely, that the knowledge of
that object should be possible *a posteriori* also. And here we perceive
the cause of our difficulty. If we were concerned with an object of our
senses, I could not mistake the existence of a thing for the mere
concept of it; for by the concept the object is thought as only in
harmony with the general conditions of a possible empirical knowledge,
while by its existence it is thought as contained in the whole content
of experience. Through this connection with the content of the whole
experience, the concept of an object is not in the least increased; our
thought has only received through it one more possible perception. If,
however, we are thinking existence through the pure category alone, we
need not wonder that we cannot find any characteristic to distinguish it
from mere possibility.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p7"></span>“Whatever, therefore, our concept of an
object may contain, we must always step outside it, in order to
attribute to it existence. With objects of the senses, this takes place
through their connection with any one of my perceptions, according to
empirical laws; <span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span
id="ii.ii.v-Page_xvii"></span>with objects of pure thought, however,
there is no means of knowing their existence, because it would have to
be known entirely *a priori*, while our consciousness of every kind of
existence, whether immediately by perception, or by conclusions which
connect something with perception, belongs entirely to the unity of
experience, and any existence outside that field, though it cannot be
declared to be absolutely impossible, is a presupposition that cannot be
justified by anything.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p8"></span>“The concept of a Supreme Being is, in many
respects, a very useful idea, but, being an idea only, it is quite
incapable of increasing, by itself alone, our knowledge with regard to
what exists. It cannot even do so much as to inform us any further as to
its possibility. The analytical characteristic of possibility, which
consists in the absence of contradiction in mere positions (realities),
cannot be denied to it; but the connection of all real properties in one
and the same thing is a synthesis the possibility of which we cannot
judge *a priori* because these realities are not given to us as such,
and because, even if this were so, no judgment whatever takes place, it
being necessary to look for the characteristic of the possibility of
synthetical knowledge in experience only, to which the object of an idea
can never belong. Thus we see that the celebrated <span
id="ii.ii.v-p8.3"></span>Leibnitz is far from having achieved what we
thought he had, namely, to understand *a priori* the possibility of so
sublime an ideal Being.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p9"></span>“Time and labor therefore are lost on the
famous ontological (Cartesian) proof of the existence of a Supreme Being
from mere concepts; and a man might as well imagine that he could become
richer in knowledge by mere ideas, as a merchant in capital, if, in
order to improve his position, he were to add a few noughts to his cash
account.”

<span id="ii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>HEGEL<span
id="ii.ii.vi-p1.2"></span>. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p4"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p5"></span>“This proof was included among the various
proofs up to the time of <span id="ii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>Kant, and ‑‑by
some who have not yet reached the Kantian standpoint ‑‑it is so included
even to the present day. It is different from what we find and read of
amongst the ancients. For it was said that God is absolute thought as
objective; for because things in the world are contingent, they are not
the truth in and for itself ‑‑but this is found in the infinite. The
scholastics also <span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span
id="ii.ii.vi-Page_xviii"></span>knew well from the Aristotelian
philosophy the metaphysical proposition that potentiality is nothing by
itself, but is clearly one with actuality. Later, on the other hand, the
opposition between thought itself and Being began to appear with Anselm.
It is noteworthy that only now for the first time through the Middle
Ages and in Christianity, the universal Notion and Being, as it is to
ordinary conception, became established in this pure abstraction as
these infinite extremes; and thus the highest law has come to
consciousness. But we reach our profoundest depths in bringing the
highest opposition into consciousness. Only no advance was made beyond
the division as such, although Anselm also tried to find the connection
between the sides. But while hitherto God appeared as the absolute
existent, and the universal was attributed to Him as predicate, an
opposite order begins with Anselm ‑‑Being becomes predicate, and the
absolute Idea is first of all established as the subject, but the
subject of thought. Thus if the existence of God is once abandoned as
the first hypothesis, and established as a result of thought,
self‑consciousness is on the way to turn back within itself. Then we
have the question coming in, Does God exist? while on the other side the
question of most importance was, What is God?

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p6"></span>“The ontological proof, which is the first
properly metaphysical proof of the existence of God, consequently came
to mean that God as the Idea of existence which unites all reality in
itself, also has the reality of existence within Himself; this proof
thus follows from the Notion of God, that He is the universal essence of
all essence. The drift of this reasoning is, according to Anselm
(*Proslogium,* C. 2), as follows: ‘It is one thing to say that a thing
is in the understanding, and quite another to perceive that it exists.
Even an ignorant person (*insipiens*) will thus be quite convinced that
in thought there is something beyond which nothing greater can be
thought ; for when he hears this he understands it, and everything that
is understood is in the understanding. But that beyond which nothing
greater can be thought cannot certainly be in the understanding alone.
For if it is accepted as in thought alone, we may go on farther to
accept it as existent; that, however, is something greater’ than what is
merely thought. ‘Thus were that beyond which nothing greater can be
thought merely in the understanding, that beyond which nothing greater
can be thought would be something beyond which something greater can be
thought. But that is truly impossible; there thus <span id="page_xix">p.
xix</span> <span id="ii.ii.vi-Page_xix"></span>without doubt exists both
in the understanding and in reality something beyond which nothing
greater can be thought.’ The highest conception cannot be in the
understanding alone; it is essential that it should exist. Thus it is
made clear that Being is in a superficial way subsumed under the
universal of reality, that to this extent Being does not enter into
opposition with the Notion. That is quite right; only the transition is
not demonstrated ‑‑that the subjective understanding abrogates itself.
This, however, is just the question which gives the whole interest to
the matter. When reality or completion is expressed in such a way that
it is not yet posited as existent, it is something thought, and rather
opposed to Being than that this is subsumed under it.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p7"></span>“This mode of arguing held good until the
time of <span id="ii.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>Kant; and we see in it the
endeavor to apprehend the doctrine of the Church through reason. This
opposition between Being and thought is the starting‑point in
philosophy, the absolute that contains the two opposites within itself
‑‑a conception, according to <span id="ii.ii.vi-p7.2"></span>Spinoza,
which involves its existence likewise. Of Anselm it is however to be
remarked that the formal logical mode of the understanding, the process
of scholastic reasoning is to be found in him; the content indeed is
right, but the form faulty. For in the first place the expression ‘the
thought of a Highest’ is assumed as *prius*. Secondly, there are two
sorts of objects of thought ‑‑one that is and another that is not; the
object that is only thought and does not exist, is as imperfect as that
which only is without being thought. The third point is that what is
highest must likewise exist. But what is highest, the standard to which
all else must conform, must be no mere hypothesis, as we find it
represented in the conception of a highest acme of perfection, as a
content which is thought and likewise *is.* This very content, the unity
of Being and thought, is thus indeed the true content, but because
Anselm has it before him only in the form of the understanding, the
opposites are identical and conformable to unity in a third
determination only ‑‑the Highest ‑‑which, in as far as it is regulative,
is outside of them. In this it is involved that we should first of all
have subjective thought, and then distinguished from that, Being. We
allow that if we think a content (and it is apparently indifferent
whether this is God or any other), it may be the case that this content
does not exist. The assertion ‘Something that is thought does not exist’
is now subsumed under the above standard and is not conformable to it.
We grant that the truth is that which is not merely thought <span
id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span id="ii.ii.vi-Page_xx"></span>but which
likewise is. But of this opposition nothing here is said. Undoubtedly
God would be imperfect, if He were merely thought and did not also have
the determination of Being. But in relation to God we must not take
thought as merely subjective; thought here signifies the absolute, pure
thought, and thus we must ascribe to Him the quality of Being. On the
other hand if God were merely Being, if He were not conscious of Himself
as self‑consciousness, He would not be Spirit, a thought that thinks
itself.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p8"></span>“Kant, on the other hand, attacked and
rejected Anselm’s proof ‑‑which rejection the whole world afterwards
followed up ‑‑on the ground of its being an assumption that the unity of
Being and thought is the highest perfection. What Kant thus demonstrates
in the present day ‑‑that Being is different from thought and that Being
is not by any means posited with thought ‑‑was a criticism offered even
in that time by a monk named Gaunilo. He combated this proof of Anselm’s
in a <span id="ii.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>Liber pro insipiente to which
Anselm himself directed a reply in his <span
id="ii.ii.vi-p8.2"></span>Liber apologeticus adversus insipientem*.*
Thus Kant says (<span id="ii.ii.vi-p8.3"></span>Kritik der reinen
Vernunft, P. 464 of the sixth edition): If we think a hundred dollars,
this conception does not involve existence. That is certainly true: what
is only a conception does not exist, but it is likewise not a true
content, for what does not exist, is merely an untrue conception. Of
such we do not however here speak, but of pure thought; it is nothing
new to say they are different ‑‑Anselm knew this just as well as we do.
God is the infinite, just as body and soul, Being and thought are
eternally united; this is the speculative, true definition of God. To
the proof which <span id="ii.ii.vi-p8.4"></span>Kant criticises in a
manner which it is the fashion to follow now‑a‑days, there is thus
lacking only the perception of the unity of thought and of existence in
the infinite; and this alone must form the commencement.”

<span id="ii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>J. A.
DORNER<span id="ii.ii.vii-p1.2"></span>. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p4"></span>“According to the *Monologium*, we arrive
at the mental representation of God by the agency of faith and
conscience, therefore by a combined religious and moral method; by the
same means we arrive at the representation of the relativity of the
world. But as there seemed to Anselm something inadequate in making the
Being of the Absolute dependent upon the existence <span
id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span id="ii.ii.vii-Page_xxi"></span>of the
Relative, as if the latter were more certain than the former, he has
interpolated in the *Proslogium* (*Alloquium Dei*) the Ontological
method. The thought of God, which is always given, and the being of
which is to be proved, claims, at any rate, to be the highest thought
possible; indeed, upon close comparison with all other thoughts which
come and go, with thoughts of such things as may just as well not exist
as exist, it has the essential peculiarity, the prerogative, so to
speak, ‑‑and this is Anselm’s discovery, ‑‑that, if it is actually
thought of as the highest conceivable thought, it is also thought of as
existent. Were it not thought of as being, it would not for a moment be
actually thought. Anselm then proceeds with his proof as follows: ‘We
believe Thou art something, beyond which nothing greater can be thought.
The fool (<span id="ii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>[Ps.
xiv.](../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#000)<span id="ii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>)
denies the existence of such a Being. Is He therefore non‑existent? But
the very fool hears and understands what I say, “something, greater than
which there is nothing,” and what he understands is in his
understanding. That it also exists without him would thus have to be
proved. But that, beyond which nothing greater can be thought, cannot
exist in mere intellect. For did it exist only in intellect, the thought
might be framed that it was realised, and that would be a greater
thought. Consequently, were that, a greater than which cannot be
thought, existent in mere intellect, the thought *quo majus cogitari non
potest* would at the same time be *quo majus cogitari potest*, which is
impossible. Consequently, there exists, in reality as well as in the
understanding, something a greater than which cannot be thought. And
this is so true that its non‑existence cannot be thought. Something may
be thought which is only to be thought as existent, and that is a
*majus* than that the non‑existence of which may be thought, and that
Thou art, O Lord, my God, I must think though I did not believe.’ The
nerve of the Anselmic argument lies therefore in the notion that an idea
which has an objective existence is a *majus* than that to which mere
subjective existence appertains; that, consequently, as under the idea
of God the highest thought possible is at any rate expressed, the idea
of God is not thought unless it is thought as existent. For, he says in
another place, it may be thought of everything that it does not exist,
with the exception of that *quod summe est* to which being pre‑eminently
belongs. That is, the non‑existence may be thought of everything which
has beginning or end, or which is constituted of parts and is nowhere
whole. But that, and it alone, cannot be thought as non‑existent which
has neither beginning nor end, and is not constituted of parts, but is
thought of as <span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> <span
id="ii.ii.vii-Page_xxii"></span>everywhere existing whole. <span
id="ii.ii.vii-p4.12"></span>Gaunilo, Count of Montigny, makes a twofold
answer in defence of the atheist. He says that that highest essence has
no being in the understanding; it only exists therein by the ear, not by
being; it only exists as a man who has heard a sound endeavors to
embrace a thing wholly unknown to him in an image. And therein, he says,
it is concluded that the mental representation of God in mankind is
already a purely contingent one, and is produced from without by the
sound of words; its necessary presence in the spirit is not proved.
Thus, he adds, much is wanting to the ability of inferring its existence
from the finding of such an image in the spirit. In the sphere of mere
imagination no one thing has a less or a greater existence than any
other thing; each has equally no existence at all. Therefore, he writes,
granted that the presence of the idea of God in the spirit is not
contingent, still the thought or the concept of God does not essentially
argue the being of God. Similarly says <span
id="ii.ii.vii-p4.13"></span>Kant later on: ‘We are no richer if we think
of our ability as one cipher more.’ That Anselm also undoubtedly knew,
but he opined that the concept of God is different to any other thought,
which remains unaltered, whether it is thought of as existent or
non‑existent; the concept of God is that thought, which is no longer
thought unless it is thought as existent, and which, therefore,
essentially involves being. But, of course, it is insufficiently
established by Anselm that a concept of God which does not necessarily
include existence, is not the highest thought, and therefore is not the
concept of God, and that, consequently, the really highest thought must
also be thought of as existent. To this the following objection
attaches. Inasmuch as Anselm treated existence as a *majus* compared
with non‑existence, he treated existence as an attribute, whereas it is
the bearer of all attributes. So it is not proved by Anselm that the
origin of this idea, which, when thought, is thought as existent, is not
contingent to the reason, but necessary; and that reason only remains
reason by virtue of this idea. Finally, Anselm thinks, thus overrating
the Ontological moment, that he has already attained therein the full
concept of God. These shortcomings were to be obviated, stage by stage,
by his successors.”

<span id="ii.ii.viii"></span> <span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>
<span id="ii.ii.viii-Page_xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>LOTZE<span
id="ii.ii.viii-p1.2"></span>. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)

<span id="ii.ii.viii-p3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.viii-p4"></span>“To conclude that because the notion of
a most perfect Being includes reality as one of its perfections,
therefore a most perfect Being necessarily *exists*, is so obviously to
conclude falsely, that after <span id="ii.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>Kant’s
incisive refutation any attempt to defend such reasoning would be
useless. Anselm, in his more free and spontaneous reflection, has here
and there touched the thought that the greatest which we can think, if
we think it as *only* thought, is less than the same greatest if we
think it as existent. It is not possible that from this reflection
either any one should develop a logically cogent proof, but the way in
which it is put seems to reveal another fundamental thought which is
seeking for expression. For what would it matter if that which is
thought as most perfect were, as thought, less than the least reality?
Why should this thought disturb us? Plainly for this reason, that it is
an immediate certainty that what is greatest, most beautiful, most
worthy is not a mere thought, but must be a reality, because it would be
intolerable to believe of our ideal that it is an idea produced by the
action of thought but having no existence, no power, and no validity in
the world of reality. We do not from the perfection of that which is
perfect immediately deduce its reality as a logical consequence; but
without the circumlocution of a deduction we directly feel the
impossibility of its non‑existence, and all semblance of syllogistic
proof only serves to make more clear the directness of this certainty.
If what is greatest did not *exist,* then what is *greatest* would not
be, and it is not impossible that that which is greatest of all
conceivable things should *not* be.”

<span id="ii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>PROFESSOR
ROBERT FLINT<span id="ii.ii.ix-p1.2"></span>. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p4"></span>“Anselm was the founder of that kind of
argumentation which, in the opinion of many, is alone entitled to be
described as *a priori* or ontological. He reasoned thus: ‘The fool may
say in his heart, There is no God; but he only proves thereby that he is
a fool, for what he says is self‑contradictory. Since he denies that
there is a God, he has in his mind the idea of God, and that idea
implies the <span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ix-Page_xxiv"></span>existence of God, for it is the idea of a
Being than which a higher cannot be conceived. That than which a higher
cannot be conceived cannot exist merely as an idea, because what exists
merely as an idea is inferior to what exists in reality as well as in
idea. The idea of a highest Being which exists merely in thought, is the
idea of a highest Being which is not the highest even in thought, but
inferior to a highest Being which exists in fact as well as in thought.’
This reasoning found unfavorable critics even among the contemporaries
of Anselm, and has commended itself completely to few. Yet it may fairly
be doubted whether it has been conclusively refuted, and some of the
objections most frequently urged against it are certainly inadmissible.
It is no answer to it, for example, to deny that the idea of God is
innate or universal. The argument merely assumes that be who denies that
there is a God must have an idea of God. There is also no force, as
Anselm showed, in the objection of <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p4.3"></span>Gaunilo, that the existence of God can no more
be inferred from the idea of a perfect being, than the existence of a
perfect island is to be inferred from the idea of such an island. There
neither is nor can be an idea of an island which is greater and better
than any other that can ever be conceived. Anselm could safely promise
that he would make <span id="ii.ii.ix-p4.4"></span>Gaunilo a present of
such an island when he had really imagined it. Only one being ‑‑an
infinite, independent, necessary being ‑‑can be perfect in the sense of
being greater and better than every other conceivable being. The
objection that the ideal can never logically yield the real ‑‑that the
transition from thought to fact must be in every instance illegitimate
‑‑is merely an assertion that the argument is fallacious. It is an
assertion which cannot fairly be made until the argument has been
exposed and refuted. The argument is that a certain thought of God is
found necessarily to imply His existence. The objection that existence
is not a predicate, and that the idea of a God who exists is not more
complete and perfect than the idea of a God who does not exist, is,
perhaps, not incapable of being satisfactorily repelled. Mere existence
is not a predicate, but specifications or determinations of existence
are predicable. Now the argument nowhere implies that existence is a
predicate; it implies only that reality, necessity, and independence of
existence are predicates of existence; and it implies this on the ground
that existence *in re* can be distinguished from existence *in
conceptu,* necessary from contingent existence, self‑existence from
derived existence. Specific distinctions must surely admit of being
<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ix-Page_xxv"></span>predicated. That the exclusion of
existence ‑‑which here means real and necessary existence ‑‑from the
idea of God does not leave us with an incomplete idea of God, is not a
position, I think, which can be maintained. Take away existence from
among the elements in the idea of a perfect being, and the idea becomes
either the idea of a nonentity or the idea of an idea, and not the idea
of a perfect being at all. Thus, the argument of Anselm is unwarrantably
represented as an argument of four terms instead of three. Those who
urge the objection seem to me to prove only that if our thought of God
be imperfect, a being who merely realised that thought would be an
imperfect being; but there is a vast distance between this truism and
the paradox that an unreal being may be an ideally perfect being.”

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p5"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p6"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p7"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p8"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ix:2](ans003.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p3"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>The
Philosophy of Descartes in Extracts from His Writings.*<span
id="ii.ii.i-p3.2"></span> H. A. P. Torrey. New York, 1892. P. 161 et
seq.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p4"></span>

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:3](ans003.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.ii.ii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>The
Chief Works of Benedict de Spinoza.*<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>
Translated by R.H.M.Elwes. London, 1848. VoI. II., P. 51 at seq.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p3"></span>

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiii:4](ans003.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.ii.iii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iii-p2"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>An
Fssay Concerning Human Understanding.*<span id="ii.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>
London: Ward, Lock, Co. P. 529 et seq.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiv:5](ans003.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.ii.iv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p2"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>New
Essays Concerning Human Understanding.*<span id="ii.ii.iv-p2.2"></span>
Translated by A.G. Langley. New York, 1896. P. 502 at seq.

<span id="ii.ii.iv-p3"></span>

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xv:6](ans003.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.ii.v-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p2"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.v-p2.1"></span>Critique
of Pure Reason.*<span id="ii.ii.v-p2.2"></span> Translated by F. Max
Muller. New York, 1896. P‑483 et seq.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p3"></span>

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xvii:7](ans003.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.ii.vi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p2"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>Lectures
on the History of Philosophy.*<span id="ii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>
Translated by E. S. Haldane and F.H. Simson. London, 1896. Vol. III., p.
62 et seg.

<span id="ii.ii.vi-p3"></span>

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xx:8](ans003.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.ii.vii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p2"></span> *<span id="ii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>A
System of Christian Doctrine.* <span
id="ii.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>Translated by A. Cave and J. S. Banks,
Edinburgh, 1880. Vol. I., p. 216 et seq

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxiii:9](ans003.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.ii.viii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.viii-p2"></span> *<span
id="ii.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>Microcosmus.*<span
id="ii.ii.viii-p2.2"></span> Translated by E. Hamilton and E. E. C.
Jones. Edinburgh, 1887. Vol. II., p. 669 et seq.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxiii:10](ans003.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.ii.ix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ix-p2"></span> *<span
id="ii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>Theism.*<span id="ii.ii.ix-p2.2"></span> New
York, 1893. Seventh edition. P. 278 et seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](ans004)
