[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans095)  [Next](ans097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXIII"></span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="v.LXIII-Page_123"></span>

<span id="v.LXIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.LXIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER LXIII.

<span id="v.LXIII-p2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIII-p3"></span>How among them there is only one Son of one
Father, that is, one Word, and that from the Father alone.

<span id="v.LXIII-p4"></span>

<span id="v.LXIII-p5"></span>ON these grounds, therefore, there
apparently are in that Being, not only many fathers and sons and beings
proceeding from it, but other necessary attributes as well; or else
Father and Son and their Spirit, of whom it is already certain that they
truly exist, are not three expressive beings, although each taken
separately is expressive, nor are there more beings than one expressed,
when each one expresses himself and the other two.

<span id="v.LXIII-p6"></span>For, just as it is an inherent property of
the supreme Wisdom to know and conceive, so it is assuredly natural to
eternal and immutable knowledge and intelligence ever to regard as
present what it knows and conceives of. For, to such a supreme Spirit
expressing and beholding through conception, as it were, are the same,
just as the expression of our human mind is nothing but the intuition of
the thinker.

<span id="v.LXIII-p7"></span>But reasons already considered have shown
most convincingly that whatever is essentially inherent in the supreme
Nature is perfectly consistent with the nature of the Father and the Son
and their Spirit taken separately; and that, nevertheless, this, if
attributed to the three at once, does not admit of plurality. Now, it is
established that as knowledge and intelligence are attributes of his
being, so his knowing and conceiving is nothing else than his
expression, that is, his ever beholding as present what he knows and
conceives of. Necessarily, therefore, just as the Father separately, and
the Son separately, and their <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="v.LXIII-Page_124"></span>Spirit separately, is a knowing and
conceiving being, and yet the three at once are not more knowing and
conceiving beings than one, but one knowing and one conceiving being:
so, each taken separately is expressive, and yet there are not three
expressive beings at once, but one expressive being.

<span id="v.LXIII-p8"></span>Hence, this fact may also be clearly
recognised, that when these three are expressed, either by themselves or
by another, there are not more beings than one expressed. For what is
therein expressed except their being? If, then, that Being is one and
only one, then what is expressed is one and only one; therefore, if it
is in them one and only one which expresses, and one which is expressed
‑‑for it is one wisdom which expresses and one substance which is
expressed ‑‑it follows that there are not more words than one, but one
alone. Hence, although each one expresses himself and all express one
another, nevertheless there cannot be in the supreme Being another Word
than that already shown to be born of him whose is the Word, so that it
may be called his true image and his Son.

<span id="v.LXIII-p9"></span>And in this truth I find a strange and
inexplicable factor. For observe: although it is manifest that each one,
that is, Father and Son, and the Spirit of Father and Son equally
expresses himself and both the others, and that there is one Word alone
among them; yet it appears that this Word itself can in no wise be
called the Word of all three, but only of one.

<span id="v.LXIII-p10"></span>For it has been proved that it is the
image and Son of him whose Word it is. And it is plain that it cannot
properly be called either the image or son of itself, or of the Spirit
proceeding from it. For, neither of itself nor of a being proceeding
from it, is it born, <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="v.LXIII-Page_125"></span>nor does it in its existence imitate itself
or a being proceeding from itself. For it does not imitate itself, or
take on a like existence to itself, because imitation and likeness are
impossible where only one being is concerned, but require plurality of
beings; while it does not imitate the spirit, nor does it exist in his
likeness, because it has not its existence from that Spirit, but the
Spirit from it. It is to be concluded that this sole Word corresponds to
him alone, from whom it has existence by generation, and after whose
complete likeness it exists.

<span id="v.LXIII-p11"></span>One Father, then, and not more than one
Father; one Son, and not more than one Son; one Spirit proceeding from
them, and not more than one such Spirit, exist in the supreme Being.
And, although there are three, so that the Father is never the Son or
the Spirit proceeding from them, nor the Son at any time the Father or
the Spirit, nor the Spirit of Father and Son ever the Father or the Son;
and each separately is so perfect that he is self‑sufficient, needing
neither of the others; yet what they are is in such a way one that just
as it cannot be attributed to them taken separately as plural, so,
neither can it be attributed to them as plural, when the three are taken
at once. And though each one expresses himself and all express one
another, yet there are not among them more words than one, but one; and
this Word corresponds not to each separately, nor to all together, but
to one alone.

<span id="v.LXIII-p12"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIV](ans097)
