[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans063)  [Next](ans065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXXI"></span>

<span id="v.XXXI-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.XXXI-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XXXI.

<span id="v.XXXI-p2"></span>

<span id="v.XXXI-p3"></span>This Word itself is not the likeness of
created beings, but the reality of their being, while created beings are
a kind of likeness of reality. ‑‑What natures are greater and more
excellent than others.

<span id="v.XXXI-p4"></span>

<span id="v.XXXI-p5"></span>BUT here, it seems to me, there arises a
question that is not easy to answer, and yet must not be left in any
ambiguity. For all words of that sort by which we express any objects in
our mind, that is, conceive of them, are likenesses and images of the
objects to which they correspond; and every likeness or image is more or
less true, according as it more or less closely imitates the object of
which it is the likeness.

<span id="v.XXXI-p6"></span>What, then, is to be our position regarding
the Word by which all things are expressed, and through which all were
created? Will it be, or will it not be, the likeness of the things that
have been created through itself? For, if it is itself the true likeness
of mutable things, it is not consubstantial with supreme immutability;
which is false. But, if it is not altogether true, and is merely a sort
of likeness of mutable things, then the Word of supreme Truth is not
altogether true; which is absurd. But if it has no likeness to mutable
things, how were they created after its example?

<span id="v.XXXI-p7"></span>But perhaps nothing of this ambiguity will
remain if ‑‑ as the reality of a man is said to be the living <span
id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="v.XXXI-Page_90"></span>man, but the
likeness or image of a man in his picture ‑‑ so the reality of being is
conceived of as in the Word, whose essence exists so supremely that in a
certain sense it alone exists; while in these things which, in
comparison with that Essence, are in some sort non‑existent, and, yet
were made something through, and according to, that Word, a kind of
imitation of that supreme Essence is found.

<span id="v.XXXI-p8"></span>For, in this way the Word of supreme Truth,
which is also itself supreme Truth, will experience neither gain nor
loss, according as it is more or less like its creatures. But the
necessary inference will rather be, that every created being exists in
so much the greater degree, or is so much the more excellent, the more
like it is to what exists supremely, and is supremely great.

<span id="v.XXXI-p9"></span>For on this account, perhaps, ‑‑ nay, not
perhaps, but certainly, ‑‑ does every mind judge natures in any way
alive to excel those that are not alive, the sentient to excel the
non‑sentient, the rational the irrational. For, since the supreme
Nature, after a certain unique manner of its own, not only exists, but
lives, and is sentient and rational, it is clear that, of all existing
beings, that which is in some way alive is more like this supreme
Nature, than that which is not alive at all; and what, in any way, even
by a corporeal sense, cognises anything, is more like this Nature than
what is not sentient at all; and what is rational, more than what is
incapable of reasoning.

<span id="v.XXXI-p10"></span>But it is clear, for a like reason, that
certain natures exist in a greater or less degree than others. For, just
as that is more excellent by nature which, through its natural essence,
is nearer to the most excellent Being, so certainly that nature exists
in a <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="v.XXXI-Page_91"></span>greater degree, whose essence is more like
the supreme Essence. And I think that this can easily be ascertained as
follows. If we should conceive any substance that is alive, and
sentient, and rational, to be deprived of its reason, then of its
sentience, then of its life, and finally of the bare existence that
remains, who would fail to understand that the substance that is thus
destroyed, little by little, is gradually brought to smaller and smaller
degrees of existence, and at last to non‑existence? But the attributes
which, taken each by itself, reduce an essence to less and less degrees
of existence, if assumed in order, lead it to greater and greater
degrees.

<span id="v.XXXI-p11"></span>It is evident, then, that a living
substance exists in a greater degree than one that is not living, a
sentient than a non‑sentient, and a rational than a nonrational. So,
there is no doubt that every substance exists in a greater degree, and
is more excellent, according as it is more like that substance which
exists supremely and is supremely excellent.

<span id="v.XXXI-p12"></span>It is sufficiently clear, then, that in the
Word, through which all things were created, is not their likeness, but
their true and simple essence; while, in the things created, there is
not a simple and absolute essence, but an imperfect imitation of that
true Essence. Hence, it necessarily follows, that this Word is not more
nor less true, according to its likeness to the things created, but
every created nature has a higher essence and dignity, the more it is
seen to approach that Word.

<span id="v.XXXI-p13"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII](ans065)
