[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans102)  [Next](ans104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXX"></span>

<span id="v.LXX-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.LXX-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER LXX.

<span id="v.LXX-p2"></span>

<span id="v.LXX-p3"></span>This Being gives itself in return to the
creature that loves it, that that creature may be eternally blessed.

<span id="v.LXX-p4"></span>

<span id="v.LXX-p5"></span>THEREFORE it cannot be made to appear true
that he who is most just and most powerful makes no return to the being
that loves him perseveringly, to which although it neither existed nor
loved him, he gave existence that it might be able to be a loving being.
For, if he makes no return to the loving soul, the most just does not
distinguish between the soul that loves, and the soul that despises what
ought to be supremely loved, nor does he love the soul that loves him;
or else it does not avail to be loved by him; all of which suppositions
are inconsistent with his nature; hence he does make a return to every
soul that perseveres in loving him.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="v.LXX-Page_134"></span>

<span id="v.LXX-p6"></span>But what is this return? For, if he gave to
what was nothing, a rational being, that it might be a loving soul, what
shall he give to the loving soul, if it does not cease to love? If what
waits upon love is so great, how great is the recompense given to love?
And if the sustainer of love is such as we declare, of what character is
the profit? For, if the rational creature, which is useless to itself
without this love, is with it preeminent among all creatures, assuredly
nothing can be the reward of love except what is preeminent among all
natures.

<span id="v.LXX-p7"></span>For this same good, which demands such love
toward itself, also requires that it be desired by the loving soul. For,
who can love justice, truth, blessedness, incorruptibility, in such a
way as not to wish to enjoy them? What return, then, shall the supreme
Goodness make to the being that loves and desires it, except itself?
For, whatever else it grants, it does not give in return, since all such
bestowals neither compensate the love, nor console the loving being, nor
satisfy the soul that desires this supreme Being.

<span id="v.LXX-p8"></span>Or, if it wishes to be loved and desired, so
as to make some other return than its love, it wishes to be loved and
desired, not for its own sake, but for the sake of another; and does not
wish to be loved itself, but wishes another to be loved; which it is
impious to suppose.

<span id="v.LXX-p9"></span>So, it is most true that every rational soul,
if, as it should, it earnestly devotes itself through love to longing
for supreme blessedness, shall at some time receive that blessedness to
enjoy, that what it now sees as *through a glass* and *in a riddle*, it
may then see *face to face*. But it is most foolish to doubt whether it
enjoys that blessedness eternally; since, <span id="page_135">p.
135</span> <span id="v.LXX-Page_135"></span>in the enjoyment of that
blessedness, it will be impossible to turn the soul aside by any fear,
or to deceive it by false security; nor, having once experienced the
need of that blessedness, will it be able not to love it; nor will that
blessedness desert the soul that loves it; nor shall there be anything
powerful enough to separate them against their will. Hence, the soul
that has once begun to enjoy supreme Blessedness will be eternally
blessed.

<span id="v.LXX-p10"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXI](ans104)
