[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans117)  [Next](ans119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

## <span id="viii.iii-p0.1"></span>BOOK SECOND.

<span id="viii.iii.I"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.I-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.I-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER I.

<span id="viii.iii.I-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.I-p3"></span>How man was made holy by God, so as to
be happy in the enjoyment of God.

<span id="viii.iii.I-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.I-p5"></span>*Anselm.* It ought not to be disputed
that rational nature was made holy by God, in order to be happy in
enjoying Him. For to this end is it rational, in order to discern
justice and injustice, good and evil, and between the greater and the
lesser good. Otherwise<span id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span
id="viii.iii.I-Page_237"></span> it was made rational in vain. But God
made it not rational in vain. Wherefore, doubtless, it was made rational
for this end. In like manner is it proved that the intelligent creature
received the power of discernment for this purpose, that he might hate
and shun evil, and love and choose good, and especially the greater
good. For else in vain would God have given him that power of
discernment, since man’s discretion would be useless unless he loved and
avoided according to it. But it does not befit God to give such power in
vain. It is, therefore, established that rational nature was created for
this end, viz., to love and choose the highest good supremely, for its
own sake and nothing else; for if the highest good were chosen for any
other reason, then something else and not itself would be the thing
loved. But intelligent nature cannot fulfil this purpose without being
holy. Therefore that it might not in vain be made rational, it was made,
in order to fulfil this purpose, both rational and holy. Now, if it was
made holy in order to choose and love the highest good, then it was made
such in order to follow sometimes what it loved and chose, or else it
was not. But if it were not made holy for this end, that it might follow
what it loves and chooses, then in vain was it made to love and choose
holiness; and there can be no reason why it should be ever bound to
follow holiness. Therefore, as long as it will be holy in loving and
choosing the supreme good, for which it was made, it will be miserable;
because it will be impotent despite of its will, inasmuch as it does not
have what it desires. But this is utterly absurd. Wherefore rational
nature was made holy, in order to be happy in enjoying the supreme good,
which is God. Therefore man, whose <span id="page_238">p. 238</span>
<span id="viii.iii.I-Page_238"></span>nature is rational, was made holy
for this end, that he might be happy in enjoying God.

<span id="viii.iii.I-p6"></span> <span id="viii.iii.II"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.II-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.II-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER II.

<span id="viii.iii.II-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.II-p3"></span>How man would never have died, unless
he had sinned.

<span id="viii.iii.II-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.II-p5"></span>*Anselm.* Moreover, it is easily proved
that man was so made as not to be necessarily subject to death; for, as
we have already said, it is inconsistent with God’s wisdom and justice
to compel man to suffer death without fault, when he made him holy to
enjoy eternal blessedness. It therefore follows that had man never
sinned he never would have died.

<span id="viii.iii.II-p6"></span> <span id="viii.iii.III"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.III-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.III-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER III.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.III-p3"></span>How man will rise with the same body
which he has in this world.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.III-p5"></span>*Anselm.* From this the future
resurrection of the dead is clearly proved. For if man is to be
perfectly restored, the restoration should make him such as he would
have been had he never sinned.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p6"></span>*Boso.* It must be so.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p7"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore, as man, had he
not sinned, was to have been transferred with the same body to an
immortal state, so when he shall be restored, it must properly be with
his own body as he lived in this world.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p8"></span>*Boso.* But what shall we say to one
who tells us that this is right enough with regard to those in whom
humanity shall be perfectly restored, but is not necessary as respects
the reprobate?

<span id="viii.iii.III-p9"></span>*Anselm.* We know of nothing more just
or proper than this, that as man, had he continued in holiness, would
have been perfectly happy for eternity, both in <span id="page_239">p.
239</span> <span id="viii.iii.III-Page_239"></span>body and in soul; so,
if he persevere in wickedness, he shall be likewise completely miserable
forever.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p10"></span>*Boso.* You have promptly satisfied
me in these matters.

<span id="viii.iii.III-p11"></span> <span id="viii.iii.IV"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.IV-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER IV.

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p3"></span>How God will complete, in respect to
human nature, what he has begun.

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p5"></span>*Anselm.* From these things, we can
easily see that God will either complete what he has begun with regard
to human nature, or else he has made to no end so lofty a nature,
capable of so great good. Now if it be understood that God has made
nothing more valuable than rational existence capable of enjoying him;
it is altogether foreign from his character to suppose that he will
suffer that rational existence utterly to perish.

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p6"></span>*Boso.* No reasonable being can think
otherwise.

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p7"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore is it necessary for
him to perfect in human nature what he has begun. But this, as we have
already said, cannot be accomplished save by a complete expiation of
sin, which no sinner can effect for himself.

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p8"></span>*Boso.* I now understand it to be
necessary for God to complete what he has begun, lest there be an
unseemly falling off from his design.

<span id="viii.iii.IV-p9"></span> <span id="viii.iii.V"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.V-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.V-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER V.

<span id="viii.iii.V-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.V-p3"></span>How, although the thing may be
necessary, God may not do it by a compulsory necessity; and what is the
nature of that necessity which removes or lessens gratitude, and what
necessity increases it.

<span id="viii.iii.V-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.V-p5"></span>*Boso.* But if it be so, then God seems
as it were compelled, for the sake of avoiding what is unbecoming<span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="viii.iii.V-Page_240"></span>, to
secure the salvation of man. How, then, can it be denied that he does it
more on his own account than on ours? But if it be so, what thanks do we
owe him for what he does for himself? How shall we attribute our
salvation to his grace, if he saves us from necessity?

<span id="viii.iii.V-p6"></span>*Anselm.* There is a necessity which
takes away or lessens our gratitude to a benefactor, and there is also a
necessity by which the favor deserves still greater thanks. For when one
does a benefit from a necessity to which he is unwillingly subjected,
less thanks are due him, or none at all. But when he freely places
himself under the necessity of benefiting another, and sustains that
necessity without reluctance, then he certainly deserves greater thanks
for the favor. For this should not be called necessity but grace,
inasmuch as he undertook or maintains it, not with any constraint, but
freely. For if that which to‑day you promise of your own accord you will
give to‑morrow, you do give to‑morrow with the same willingness; though
it be necessary for you, if possible, to redeem your promise, or make
yourself a liar; notwithstanding, the recipient of your favor is as much
indebted for your precious gift as if you had not promised it, for you
were not obliged to make yourself his debtor before the time of giving
it: just so is it when one undertakes, by a vow, a design of holy
living. For though after his vow he ought necessarily to perform, lest
he suffer the judgment of an apostate, and, although he may be compelled
to keep it even unwillingly, yet, if he keep his vow cheerfully, he is
not less but more pleasing to God than if he had not vowed. For he has
not only given up the life of the world, but also his personal liberty,
for the sake of God; and <span id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span
id="viii.iii.V-Page_241"></span>he cannot be said to live a holy life of
necessity, but with the same freedom with which he took the vow. Much
more, therefore, do we owe all thanks to God for completing his intended
favor to man; though, indeed, it would not be proper for him to fail in
his good design, because wanting nothing in himself he begun it for our
sake and not his own. For what man was about to do was not hidden from
God at his creation; and yet by freely creating man, God as it were
bound himself to complete the good which he had begun. In fine, God does
nothing by necessity, since he is not compelled or restrained in
anything. And when we say that God does anything to avoid dishonor,
which he certainly does not fear, we must mean that God does this from
the necessity of maintaining his honor; which necessity is after all no
more than this, viz., the immutability of his honor, which belongs to
him in himself, and is not derived from another; and therefore it is not
properly called necessity. Yet we may say, although the whole work which
God does for man is of grace, that it is necessary for God, on account
of his unchangeable goodness, to complete the work which he has begun.

<span id="viii.iii.V-p7"></span>*Boso.* I grant it.

<span id="viii.iii.V-p8"></span> <span id="viii.iii.VI"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.VI-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER VI.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p3"></span>How no being, except the God‑man, can
make the atonement by which man is saved.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p5"></span>*Anselm.* But this cannot be effected,
except the price paid to God for the sin of man be something greater
than all the universe besides God.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p6"></span>*Boso.* So it appears.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p7"></span>*Anselm.* Moreover, it is necessary
that he who can <span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="viii.iii.VI-Page_242"></span>give God anything of his own which is
more valuable than all things in the possession of God, must be greater
than all else but God himself.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p8"></span>*Boso.* I cannot deny it.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p9"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore none but God can
make this satisfaction.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p10"></span>*Boso.* So it appears.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p11"></span>*Anselm.* But none but a man ought to
do this, other wise man does not make the satisfaction.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p12"></span>*Boso.* Nothing seems more just.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p13"></span>*Anselm.* If it be necessary,
therefore, as it appears, that the heavenly kingdom be made up of men,
and this cannot be effected unless the aforesaid satisfaction be made,
which none but God can make and none but man ought to make, it is
necessary for the God‑man to make it.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p14"></span>*Boso.* Now blessed be God! we have
made a great discovery with regard to our question. Go on, therefore, as
you have begun. For I hope that God will assist you.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p15"></span>*Anselm.* Now must we inquire how God
can become man.

<span id="viii.iii.VI-p16"></span> <span id="viii.iii.VII"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.VII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER VII.

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p3"></span>How necessary it is for the same being
to be perfect God and perfect man.

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p5"></span>*Anselm.* The Divine and human natures
cannot alternate, so that the Divine should become human or the human
Divine; nor can they be so commingled as that a third should be produced
from the two which is neither wholly Divine nor wholly human. For,
granting that it were possible for either to be changed into the other,
it would in that case be only God and not man, or man only and not God.
Or, if they were <span id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span
id="viii.iii.VII-Page_243"></span>so commingled that a third nature
sprung from the combination of the two (as from two animals, a male and
a female of different species, a third is produced, which does not
preserve entire the species of either parent, but has a mixed nature
derived from both), it would neither be God nor man. Therefore the
God‑man, whom we require to be of a nature both human and Divine, cannot
be produced by a change from one into the other, nor by an imperfect
commingling of both in a third; since these things cannot be, or, if
they could be, would avail nothing to our purpose. Moreover, if these
two complete natures are said to be joined somehow, in such a way that
one may be Divine while the other is human, and yet that which is God
not be the same with that which is man, it is impossible for both to do
the work necessary to be accomplished. For God will not do it, because
he has no debt to pay; and man will not do it, because he cannot.
Therefore, in order that the God‑man may perform this, it is necessary
that the same being should perfect God and perfect man, in order to make
this atonement. For he cannot and ought not to do it, unless he be very
God and very man. Since, then, it is necessary that the God‑man preserve
the completeness of each nature, it is no less necessary that these two
natures be united entire in one person, just as a body and a reasonable
soul exist together in every human being; for otherwise it is impossible
that the same being should be very God and very man.

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p6"></span>*Boso.* All that you say is
satisfactory to me.

<span id="viii.iii.VII-p7"></span> <span id="viii.iii.VIII"></span>
<span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="viii.iii.VIII-Page_244"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.VIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER VIII.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p3"></span>How it behoved God to take a man of
the race of Adam, and born of a woman.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p5"></span>*Anselm.* It now remains to inquire
whence and how God shall assume human nature. For he will either take it
from Adam, or else he will make a new man, as he made Adam originally.
But, if he makes a new man, not of Adam’s race, then this man will not
belong to the human family, which descended from Adam, and therefore
ought not to make atonement for it, because he never belonged to it.
For, as it is right for man to make atonement for the sin of man, it is
also necessary that he who makes the atonement should be the very being
who has sinned, or else one of the same race. Otherwise, neither Adam
nor his race would make satisfaction for themselves. Therefore, as
through Adam and Eve sin was propagated among all men, so none but
themselves, or one born of them, ought to make atonement for the sin of
men. And, since they cannot, one born of them must fulfil this work.
Moreover, as Adam and his whole race, had he not sinned, would have
stood firm without the support of any other being, so, after the fall,
the same race must rise and be exalted by means of itself. For, whoever
restores the race to its place, it will certainly stand by that being
who has made this restoration. Also, when God created human nature in
Adam alone, and would only make woman out of man, that by the union of
both sexes there might be increase, in this he showed plainly that he
wished to produce all that he intended with regard to human <span
id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="viii.iii.VIII-Page_245"></span>nature from man alone. Wherefore, if
the race of Adam be reinstated by any being not of the same race, it
will not be restored to that dignity which it would have had, had not
Adam sinned, and so will not be completely restored; and, besides, God
will seem to have failed of his purpose, both which suppositions are
incongruous: It is, therefore, necessary that the man by whom Adam’s
race shall be restored be taken from Adam.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p6"></span>*Boso.* If we follow reason, as we
proposed to do, this is the necessary result.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p7"></span>*Anselm.* Let us now examine the
question, whether the human nature taken by God must be produced from a
father and mother, as other men are, or from man alone, or from woman
alone. For, in whichever of these three modes it be, it will be produced
from Adam and Eve, for from these two is every person of either sex
descended. And of these three modes, no one is easier for God than
another, that it should be selected on this account.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p8"></span>*Boso.* So far, it is well.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p9"></span>*Anselm.* It is no great toil to show
that that man will be brought into existence in a nobler and purer
manner, if produced from man alone, or woman alone, than if springing
from the union of both, as do all other men.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p10"></span>*Boso.* I agree with you.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p11"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore must he be taken
either from man alone, or woman alone.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p12"></span>*Boso.* There is no other source.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p13"></span>*Anselm.* In four ways can God
create man, viz., either of man and woman, in the common way; or neither
of man nor woman, as he created Adam; or of man without woman, as he
made Eve; or of woman <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="viii.iii.VIII-Page_246"></span>without man, which thus far he has
never done. Wherefore, in order to show that this last mode also under
his power, and was reserved for this very purpose, what more fitting
than that he should take that man whose origin we are seeking from a
woman without a man? Now whether it be more worthy that he be born of a
virgin, or one not a virgin, we need not discuss, but must affirm,
beyond all doubt, that the God‑man should be born of a virgin.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p14"></span>*Boso.* Your speech gratifies my
heart.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p15"></span>*Anselm.* Does what we have said
appear sound, or is it unsubstantial as a cloud, as you have said
infidels declare?

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p16"></span>*Boso.* Nothing can be more sound.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p17"></span>*Anselm.* Paint not, therefore, upon
baseless emptiness, but upon solid truth, and tell how clearly fitting
it is that, as man’s sin and the cause of our condemnation sprung from a
woman, so the cure of sin and the source of our salvation should also be
found in a woman. And that women may not despair of attaining the
inheritance of the blessed, because that so dire an evil arose from
woman, it is proper that from woman also so great a blessing should
arise, that their hopes may be revived. Take also this view. If it was a
virgin which brought all evil upon the race, it is much more appropriate
that a virgin should be the occasion of all good. And this also. If
woman, whom God made from man alone, was made of a virgin (*de
virgine*), it is peculiarly fitting for that man also, who shall spring
from a woman, to be born of a woman without man. Of the pictures which
can be superadded to this, showing that the God‑man ought to be born of
a virgin, we will say nothing. These are sufficient.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p18"></span>*Boso.* They are certainly very
beautiful and reasonable.

<span id="viii.iii.VIII-p19"></span> <span id="viii.iii.IX"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.IX-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER IX.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p3"></span>How of necessity the Word only can
unite in one person with man.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p5"></span>*Anselm.* Now must we inquire further,
in what person God, who exists in three persons, shall take upon himself
the nature of man. For a plurality of persons cannot take one and the
same man into a unity of person. Wherefore in one person only can this
be done. But, as respects this personal unity of God and man, and in
which of the Divine persons this ought to be effected, I have expressed
myself, as far as I think needful for the present inquiry, in a letter
on the Incarnation of the Word, addressed to my lord, the Pope Urban.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p6"></span>*Boso.* Yet briefly glance at this
matter, why the person of the Son should be incarnated rather than that
of the Father or the Holy Spirit.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p7"></span>*Anselm.* If one of the other persons
be incarnated, there will be two sons in the Trinity, viz., the Son of
God, who is the Son before the incarnation, and he also who, by the
incarnation, will be the son of the virgin; and among the persons which
ought always to be equal there will be an inequality as respects the
dignity of birth. For the one born of God will have a nobler birth than
he who is born of the virgin. Likewise, if the Father become incarnate,
there will be two grandsons in the Trinity; for the Father, by assuming
humanity, will be the grandson of the parents of the virgin, and the
Word, though having nothing to do with man, will yet be the grandson of
the virgin, since he will be the son of her son. But all these <span
id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="viii.iii.IX-Page_247"></span>things are incongruous and do not
pertain to the incarnation of the Word. And there is yet another reason
which renders it more fitting for the Son to become incarnate than the
other persons. It is, that for the Son to pray to the Father is more
proper than for any other person of the Trinity to supplicate his
fellow. Moreover, man, for whom he was to pray, and the devil, whom he
was to vanquish, have both put on a false likeness to God by their own
will. Wherefore they have sinned, as it were, especially against the
person of the Son, who is believed to be the very image of God.
Wherefore the punishment or pardon of guilt is with peculiar propriety
ascribed to him upon whom chiefly the injury was inflicted. Since,
therefore, infallible reason has brought us to this necessary
conclusion, that the Divine and human natures must unite in one person,
and that this is evidently more fitting in respect to the person of the
Word than the other persons, we determine that God the Word must unite
with man in one person.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p8"></span>*Boso.* The way by which you lead me is
so guarded by reason that I cannot deviate from it to the right or left.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p9"></span>*Anselm.* It is not I who lead you, but
he of whom we are speaking, without whose guidance we have no power to
keep the way of truth.

<span id="viii.iii.IX-p10"></span> <span id="viii.iii.X"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.X-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.X-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER X.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.X-p3"></span>How this man dies not of debt; and in
what sense he can or cannot sin; and how neither he nor an angel
deserves praise for their holiness, if it is impossible for them to sin.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.X-p5"></span>*Anselm.* We ought not to question
whether this man was about to die as a debt, as all other men do. <span
id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="viii.iii.X-Page_248"></span>For,
if Adam would not have died had he not committed sin, much less should
this man suffer death, in whom there can be no sin, for he is God.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p6"></span>*Boso.* Let me delay you a little on
this point. For in either case it is no slight question with me whether
it be said that he can sin or that he cannot. For if it be said that he
cannot sin, it should seem hard to be believed. For to say a word
concerning him, not as of one who never existed in the manner we have
spoken hitherto, but as of one whom we know and whose deeds we know;
who, I say, will deny that he could have done many things which we call
sinful? For, to say nothing of other things, how shall we say that it
was not possible for him to commit the sin of lying? For, when he says
to the Jews, of his Father: “If I say that I know him not, I shall be a
liar, like unto you,” and, in this sentence, makes use of the words : “I
know him not,” who says that he could not have uttered these same four
words, or expressing the same thing differently, have declared, “I know
him not?” Now had he done so, he would have been a liar, as he himself
says, and therefore a sinner. Therefore, since he could do this, he
could sin.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p7"></span>*Anselm.* It is true that he could say
this, and also that he could not sin.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p8"></span>*Boso.* How is that?

<span id="viii.iii.X-p9"></span>*Anselm.* All power follows the will.
For, when I say that I can speak or walk, it is understood, if I choose.
For, if the will be not implied as acting, there is no power, but only
necessity. For, when I say that I can be dragged or bound unwillingly,
this is not my power, but necessity and the power of another; since I am
able to be dragged or bound in no other sense than this, that another
can drag or bind <span id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span
id="viii.iii.X-Page_249"></span>me. So we can say of Christ, that he
could lie, so long as we understand, if he chose to do so. And, since he
could not lie unwillingly and could not wish to lie, none the less can
it be said that he could not lie. So in this way it is both true that he
could and could not lie.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p10"></span>*Boso.* Now let us return to our
original inquiry with regard to that man, as if nothing were known of
him. I say, then, if he were unable to sin, because, according to you,
he could not wish to sin, he maintains holiness of necessity, and
therefore he will not be holy from free will. What thanks, then, will he
deserve for his holiness? For we are accustomed to say that God made man
and angel capable of sinning on this account, that, when of their own
free will they maintained holiness, though they might have abandoned it,
they might deserve commendation and reward, which they would not have
done had they been necessarily holy.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p11"></span>*Anselm.* Are not the angels worthy of
praise, though unable to commit sin?

<span id="viii.iii.X-p12"></span>*Boso.* Doubtless they are, because
they deserved this present inability to sin from the fact that when they
could sin they refused to do so.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p13"></span>*Anselm.* What say you with respect to
God, who cannot sin, and yet has not deserved this, by refusing to sin
when he had the power? Must not he be praised for his holiness?

<span id="viii.iii.X-p14"></span>*Boso.* I should like to have you
answer that question for me; for if I say that he deserves no praise, I
know that I speak falsely. If, on the other hand, I say that he does
deserve praise, I am afraid of invalidating my reasoning with respect to
the angels.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p15"></span>*Anselm.* The angels are not to be
praised for their <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="viii.iii.X-Page_250"></span>holiness because they could sin, but
because it is owing to themselves, in a certain sense, that now they
cannot sin. And in this respect are they in a measure like God, who has,
from himself, whatever he possesses. For a person is said to give a
thing, who does not take it away when he can; and to do a thing is but
the same as not to prevent it, when that is in one’s power. When,
therefore, the angel could depart from holiness and yet did not, and
could make himself unholy yet did not, we say with propriety that he
conferred virtue upon himself and made himself holy. In this sense,
therefore, has he holiness of himself (for the creature cannot have it
of himself in any other way), and, therefore, should be praised for his
holiness, because he is not holy of necessity but freely; for that is
improperly called necessity which involves neither compulsion nor
restraint. Wherefore, since whatever God has he has perfectly of
himself, he is most of all to be praised for the good things which he
possesses and maintains not by any necessity, but, as before said, by
his own infinite unchangeableness. Therefore, likewise, that man who
will be also God since every good thing which he possesses comes from
himself, will be holy not of necessity but voluntarily, and, therefore,
will deserve praise. For, though human nature will have what it has from
the Divine nature, yet it will likewise have it from itself, since the
two natures will be united in one person.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p16"></span>*Boso.* You have satisfied me on this
point; and I see clearly that it is both true that he could not sin, and
yet that he deserves praise for his holiness. But now I think the
question arises, since God could make such a man, why he did not create
angels and our <span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="viii.iii.X-Page_251"></span>first parents so as to be incapable of
sin, and yet praiseworthy for their holiness?

<span id="viii.iii.X-p17"></span>*Anselm.* Do you know what you are
saying?

<span id="viii.iii.X-p18"></span>*Boso.* I think I understand, and it is
therefore I ask why he did not make them so.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p19"></span>*Anselm.* Because it was neither
possible nor right for any one of them to be the same with God, as we
say that man was. And if you ask why he did not bring the three persons,
or at least the Word, into unity with men at that time, I answer:
Because reason did not at all demand any such thing then, but wholly
forbade it, for God does nothing without reason.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p20"></span>*Boso.* I blush to have asked the
question. Go on with what you have to say.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p21"></span>*Anselm.* We must conclude, then, that
he should not be subject to death, inasmuch as he will not be a sinner.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p22"></span>*Boso.* I must agree with you.

<span id="viii.iii.X-p23"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XI"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XI-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XI.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p3"></span>How Christ dies of his own power, and
how mortality does not inhere in the essential nature of man.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p5"></span>*Anselm.* Now, also, it remains to
inquire whether, as man’s nature is, it is possible for that man to die?

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p6"></span>*Boso.* We need hardly dispute with
regard to this, since he will be really man, and every man is by nature
mortal.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p7"></span>*Anselm.* I do not think mortality
inheres in the essential nature of man, but only as corrupted. Since,
had man never sinned, and had his immortality been unchangeably
confirmed, he would have been as really man; and, when the dying rise
again, incorruptible, <span id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XI-Page_252"></span>they will no less be really men. For,
if mortality was an essential attribute of human nature, then he who was
immortal could not be man. Wherefore, neither corruption nor
incorruption belong essentially to human nature, for neither makes nor
destroys a man; but happiness accrues to him from the one, and misery
from the other. But since all men die, mortality is included in the
definition of man, as given by philosophers, for they have never even
believed in the possibility of man’s being immortal in all respects. And
so it is not enough to prove that that man ought to be subject to death,
for us to say that he will be in all respects a man.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p8"></span>*Boso.* Seek then for some other
reason, since I know of none, if you do not, by which we may prove that
he can die.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p9"></span>*Anselm.* We may not doubt that, as he
will be God, he will possess omnipotence.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p10"></span>*Boso.* Certainly.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p11"></span>*Anselm.* He can, then, if he chooses,
lay down his life and take it again.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p12"></span>*Boso.* If not, he would scarcely seem
to be omnipotent.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p13"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore is he able to
avoid death if he chooses, and also to die and rise again. Moreover,
whether he lays down his life by the intervention of no other person, or
another causes this, so that he lays it down by permitting it to be
taken, it makes no difference as far as regards his power.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p14"></span>*Boso.* There is no doubt about it.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p15"></span>*Anselm.* If, then, he chooses to
allow it, he could be slain; and if he were unwilling to allow it, he
couId not be slain.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XI-Page_253"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p16"></span>*Boso.* To this we are unavoidably
brought by reason.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p17"></span>Anselin. Reason has also taught us
that the gift which he presents to God, not of debt but freely, ought to
be something greater than anything in the possession of God.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p18"></span>*Boso.* Yes.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p19"></span>Anselin. Now this can neither be found
beneath him nor above him.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p20"></span>*Boso.* Very true.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p21"></span>*Anselm.* In himself, therefore, must
it be found.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p22"></span>*Boso.* So it appears.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p23"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore will he give
himself, or something pertaining to himself.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p24"></span>*Boso.* I cannot see how it should be
otherwise.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p25"></span>*Anselm.* Now must we inquire what
sort of a gift this should be? For he may not give himself to God, or
anything of his, as if God did not have what was his own. For every
creature belongs to God.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p26"></span>*Boso.* This is so.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p27"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore must this gift be
understood in this way, that he somehow gives up himself, or something
of his, to the honor of God, which he did not owe as a debtor.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p28"></span>*Boso.* So it seems from what has been
already said.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p29"></span>*Anselm.* If we say that he will give
himself to God by obedience, so as, by steadily maintaining holiness, to
render himself subject to his will, this will not be giving a thing not
demanded of him by God as his due. For every reasonable being owes his
obedience to God.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p30"></span>*Boso.* This cannot be denied.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p31"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore must it be in some
other way <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XI-Page_254"></span>that he gives himself, or something
belonging to him, to God.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p32"></span>*Boso.* Reason urges us to this
conclusion.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p33"></span>Anslem. Let us see whether, perchance,
this may be to give up his life or to lay down his life, or to deliver
himself up to death for God’s honor. For God will not demand this of him
as a debt; for, as no sin will be found, he ought not to die, as we have
already said.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p34"></span>*Boso.* Else I cannot understand it.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p35"></span>*Anselm.* But let us further observe
whether this is according to reason.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p36"></span>*Boso.* Speak you, and I will listen
with pleasure.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p37"></span>*Anselm.* If man sinned with ease, is
it not fitting for him to atone with difficulty? And if he was overcome
by the devil in the easiest manner possible, so as to dishonor God by
sinning against him, is it not right that man, in making satisfaction
for his sin, should honor God by conquering the devil with the greatest
possible difficulty? Is it not proper that, since man has departed from
God as far as possible in his sin, he should make to God the greatest
possible satisfaction?

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p38"></span>*Boso.* Surely, there is nothing more
reasonable.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p39"></span>*Anselm.* Now, nothing can be more
severe or difficult for man to do for God’s honor, than to suffer death
voluntarily when not bound by obligation; and man cannot give himself to
God in any way more truly than by surrendering himself to death for
God’s honor.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p40"></span>*Boso.* All these things are true.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p41"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore, he who wishes to
make atonement for man’s sin should be one who can die if he chooses.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p42"></span>*Boso.* I think it is plain that the
man whom we <span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XI-Page_255"></span>seek for should not only be one who is
not necessarily subject to death on account of his omnipotence, and one
who does not deserve death on account of his sin, but also one who can
die of his own free will, for this will be necessary.

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p43"></span>*Anselm.* There are also many other
reasons why it is peculiarly fitting for that man to enter into the
common intercourse of men, and maintain a likeness to them, only without
sin. And these things are more easily and clearly manifest in his life
and actions than they can possibly be shown to be by mere reason without
experience. For who can say how necessary and wise a thing it was for
him who was to redeem mankind, and lead them back by his teaching from
the way of death and destruction into the path of life and eternal
happiness, when he conversed with men, and when he taught them by
personal intercourse, to set them an example himself of the way in which
they ought to live? But how could he have given this example to weak and
dying men, that they should not deviate from holiness because of
injuries, or scorn, or tortures, or even death, had they not been able
to recognise all these virtues in himself?

<span id="viii.iii.XI-p44"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XII"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XII.

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p3"></span>How, though he share in our weakness,
he is not therefore miserable.

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p5"></span>*Boso.* All these things plainly show
that he ought to be mortal and to partake of our weaknesses. But all
these things are our miseries. Will he then be miserable?

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p6"></span>*Anselm.* No, indeed! For as no
advantage which one has apart from his choice constitutes happiness,
<span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XII-Page_256"></span>so there is no misery in choosing to
bear a loss, when the choice is a wise one and made without compulsion.

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p7"></span>*Boso.* Certainly, this must be
allowed.

<span id="viii.iii.XII-p8"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XIII"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XIII.

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p3"></span>How, along with our other weaknesses,
he does not partake of our ignorance.

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p5"></span>*Boso.* But tell me whether, in this
likeness to men which he ought to have, he will inherit also our
ignorance, as he does our other infirmities?

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p6"></span>*Anselm.* Do you doubt the
omnipotence of God?

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p7"></span>*Boso.* No! but, although this man be
immortal in respect to his Divine nature, yet will he be mortal in his
human nature. For why will he not be like them in their ignorance, as he
is in their mortality?

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p8"></span>*Anselm.* That union of humanity with
the Divine person will not be effected except in accordance with the
highest wisdom; and, therefore, God will not take anything belonging to
man which is only useless, but even a hindrance to the work which that
man must accomplish. For ignorance is in no respect useful, but very
prejudicial. How can he perform works, so many and so great, without the
highest wisdom? Or, how will men believe him if they find him ignorant?
And if he be ignorant, what will it avail him? If nothing is loved
except as it is known, and there be no good thing which he does not
love, then there can be no good thing of which be is ignorant. But no
one perfectly understands good, save he who can distinguish it from
evil; and no one can make this distinction who does not know what evil
is. Therefore, as he of whom we are speaking perfectly comprehends <span
id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XIII-Page_257"></span>what is good, so there can be no evil
with which he is unacquainted. Therefore must he have all knowledge,
though he do not openly show it in his intercourse with men.

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p9"></span>*Boso.* In his more mature years,
this should seem to he as you say; but, in infancy, as it will not be a
fit time to discover wisdom, so there will be no need, and therefore no
propriety, in his having it.

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p10"></span>*Anselm.* Did not I say that the
incarnation will be made in wisdom? But God will in wisdom assume that
mortality, which he makes use of so widely, because for so great an
object. But he could not wisely assume ignorance, for this is never
useful, but always injurious, except when an evil will is deterred from
acting, on account of it. But, in him an evil desire never existed. For
if ignorance did no harm in any other respect, yet does it in this, that
it takes away the good of knowing. And to answer your question in a
word: that man, from the essential nature of his being, will be always
full of God; and, therefore, will never want the power, the firmness or
the wisdom of God.

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p11"></span>*Boso.* Though wholly unable to
doubt the truth of this with respect to Christ, yet, on this very
account, have I asked for the reason of it. For we are often certain
about a thing, and yet cannot prove it by reason.

<span id="viii.iii.XIII-p12"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XIV"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XIV-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XIV.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p3"></span>How his death outweighs the number and
greatness of our sins.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p5"></span>*Boso.* Now I ask you to tell me how
his death can outweigh the number and magnitude of our sins, when the
least sin we can think of you have shown to be so monstrous that, were
there an infinite number of <span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XIV-Page_258"></span>worlds as full of created existence as
this, they could not stand, but would fall back into nothing, sooner
than one look should be made contrary to the just will of God.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p6"></span>*Anselm.* Were that man here before
you, and you knew who he was, and it were told you that, if you did not
kill him, the whole universe, except God, would perish, would you do it
to preserve the rest of creation?

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p7"></span>*Boso.* No! not even were an infinite
number of worlds displayed before me.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p8"></span>*Anselm.* But suppose you were told:
“If you do not kill him, all the sins of the world will be heaped upon
you.”

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p9"></span>*Boso.* I should answer, that I would
far rather bear all other sins, not only those of this world, past and
future, but also all others that can be conceived of, than this alone.
And I think I ought to say this, not only with regard to killing him,
but even as to the slightest injury which could be inflicted on him.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p10"></span>*Anselm.* You judge correctly; but
tell me why it is that your heart recoils from one injury inflicted upon
him as more heinous than all other sins that can be thought of, inasmuch
as all sins whatsoever are committed against him?

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p11"></span>*Boso.* A sin committed upon his
person exceeds beyond comparison all the sins which can be thought of,
that do not affect his person.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p12"></span>*Anselm.* What say you to this, that
one often suffers freely certain evils in his person, in order not to
suffer greater ones in his property?

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p13"></span>*Boso.* God has no need of such
patience, for all things lie in subjection to his power, as you answered
a certain question of mine above.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XIV-Page_259"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p14"></span>*Anselm.* You say well; and hence we
see that no enormity or multitude of sins, apart from the Divine person,
can for a moment be compared with a bodily injury inflicted upon that
man.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p15"></span>*Boso.* This is most plain.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p16"></span>*Anselm.* How great does this good
seem to you, if the destruction of it is such an evil?

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p17"></span>*Boso.* If its existence is as great
a good as its destruction is an evil, then is it far more a good than
those sins are evils which its destruction so far surpasses.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p18"></span>*Anselm.* Very true. Consider, also,
that sins are as hateful as they are evil, and that life is only amiable
in proportion as it is good. And, therefore, it follows that that life
is more lovely than sins are odious.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p19"></span>*Boso.* I cannot help seeing this.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p20"></span>*Anselm.* And do you not think that
so great a good in itself so lovely, can avail to pay what is due for
the sins of the whole world?

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p21"></span>*Boso.* Yes! it has even infinite
value.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p22"></span>*Anselm.* Do you see, then, how this
life conquers all sins, if it be given for them?

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p23"></span>*Boso.* Plainly.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p24"></span>*Anselm.* If, then, to lay down life
is the same as to suffer death, as the gift of his life surpasses all
the sins of men, so will also the suffering of death.

<span id="viii.iii.XIV-p25"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XV"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XV-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XV.

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p3"></span>How this death removes even the sins of
his murderers.

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p5"></span>*Boso.* This is properly so with regard
to all sins not affecting the person of the Deity. But let me ask you
one thing more. If it be as great an evil to slay him as his life is a
good, how can his death overcome <span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XV-Page_260"></span>and destroy the sins of those who slew
him? Or, if it destroys the sin of any one of them, how can it not also
destroy any sin committed by other men? For we believe that many men
will be saved, and a vast many will not be saved.

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p6"></span>*Anselm.* The Apostle answers the
question when he says: “Had they known it, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory.” For a sin knowingly committed and a sin
done ignorantly are so different that an evil which they could never do,
were its full extent known, may be pardonable when done in ignorance.
For no man could ever, knowingly at least, slay the Lord; and,
therefore, those who did it in ignorance did not rush into that
transcendental crime with which none others can be compared. For this
crime, the magnitude of which we have been considering as equal to the
worth of his life, we have not looked at as having been ignorantly done,
but knowingly; a thing which no man ever did or could do.

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p7"></span>*Boso.* You have reasonably shown that
the murderers of Christ can obtain pardon for their sin.

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p8"></span>*Anselm.* What more do you ask? For now
you, see how reason of necessity shows that the celestial state must be
made up from men, and that this can only be by the forgiveness of sins,
which man can never have but by man, who must be at the same time
Divine, and reconcile sinners to God by his own death. Therefore have we
clearly found that Christ, whom we confess to be both God and man, died
for us; and, when this is known beyond all doubt, all things which he
says of himself must be acknowledged as true, for God cannot lie, and
all he does must be received as wisely done, though we do not understand
the reason of it.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XV-Page_261"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p9"></span>*Boso.* What you say is true; and I do
not for a moment doubt that his words are true, and all that he does
reasonable. But I ask this in order that you may disclose to me, in
their true rationality, those things in Christian faith which seem to
infidels improper or impossible; and this, not to strengthen me in the
faith, but to gratify one already confirmed by the knowledge of the
truth itself.

<span id="viii.iii.XV-p10"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XVI"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XVI-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XVI.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p3"></span>How God took that man from a sinful
substance, and yet without sin; and of the salvation of Adam and Eve.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p5"></span>*Boso.* As, therefore, you have
disclosed the reason of those things mentioned above, I beg you will
also explain what I am now about to ask. First, then, how does God, from
a sinful substance, that is, of human species, which was wholly tainted
by sin, take, a man without sin, as an unleavened lump from that which
is leavened? For, though the conception of this man be pure, and free
from the sin of fleshly gratification, yet the virgin herself, from whom
he sprang, was conceived in iniquity, and in sin did her mother bear
her, since she herself sinned in Adam, in whom all men sinned.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p6"></span>*Anselm.* Since it is fitting for that
man to be God, and also the restorer of sinners, we doubt not that he is
wholly without sin; yet will this avail nothing, unless he be taken
without sin and yet of a sinful substance. But if we cannot comprehend
in what manner the wisdom of God effects this, we should be surprised,
but with reverence should allow of a thing of so great magnitude to
remain hidden from us. For the restoring of human nature by God is more
wonderful<span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVI-Page_262"></span> than its creation; for either was
equally easy for God; but before man was made he had not sinned so that
he ought not to be denied existence But after man was made he deserved,
by his sin, to lose his existence together with its design; though he
never has wholly lost this, viz., that he should be one capable of being
punished, or of receiving God’s compassion. For neither of these things
could take effect if he were annihilated. Therefore God’s restoring man
is more wonderful than his creating man, inasmuch as it is done for the
sinner contrary to his deserts; while the act of creation was not for
the sinner, and was not in opposition to man’s deserts. How great a
thing it is, also, for God and man to unite in one person, that, while
the perfection of each nature is preserved, the same being may be both
God and man! Who, then, will dare to think that the human mind can
discover how wisely, how wonderfully, so incomprehensible a work has
been accomplished?

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p7"></span>*Boso.* I allow that no man can wholly
discover so great a mystery in this life, and I do not desire you to do
what no man can do, but only to explain it according to your ability.
For you will sooner convince me that deeper reasons lie concealed in
this matter, by showing some one that you know of, than if, by saying
nothing, you make it appear that you do not understand any reason.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p8"></span>*Anselm.* I see that I cannot escape
your importunity; but if I have any power to explain what you wish, let
us thank God for it. But if not, let the things above said suffice. For,
since it is agreed that God ought to become man, no doubt He will not
lack the wisdom or the power to effect this without sin.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p9"></span>*Boso.* This I readily allow.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVI-Page_263"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p10"></span>*Anselm.* It was certainly proper
that that atonement which Christ made should benefit not only those who
lived at that time but also others. For, suppose there were a king
against whom all the people of his provinces had rebelled, with but a
single exception of those belonging to their race, and that all the rest
were irretrievably under condemnation. And suppose that he who alone is
blameless had so great favor with the king, and so deep love for us, as
to be both able and willing to save all those who trusted in his
guidance; and this because of a certain very pleasing service which he
was about to do for the king, according to his desire; and, inasmuch as
those who are to be pardoned cannot all assemble upon that day, the king
grants, on account of the greatness of the service performed, that
whoever, either before or after the day appointed, acknowledged that he
wished to obtain pardon by the work that day accomplished, and to
subscribe to the condition there laid down, should be freed from all
past guilt; and, if they sinned after this pardon, and yet wished to
render atonement and to be set right again by the efficacy of this plan,
they should again be pardoned, only provided that no one enter his
mansion until this thing be accomplished by which his sins are removed.
In like manner, since all who are to be saved cannot be present at the
sacrifice of Christ, yet such virtue is there in his death that its
power is extended even to those far remote in place or time. But that it
ought to benefit not merely those present is plainly evident, because
there could not be so many living at the time of his death as are
necessary to complete the heavenly state, even if all who were upon the
earth at that time were admitted to the benefits of redemption. For the
number of evil <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVI-Page_264"></span>angels which must be made up from men
is greater than the number of men at that time living. Nor may we
believe that, since man was created, there was ever a time when the
world, with the creatures made for the use of man, was so unprofitable
as to contain no human being who had gained the object for which he was
made. For it seems unfitting that God should even for a moment allow the
human race, made to complete the heavenly state, and those creatures
which he made for their use, to exist in vain.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p11"></span>*Boso.* You show by correct
reasoning, such as nothing can oppose, that there never was a time since
man was created when there has not been some one who was gaining that
reconciliation without which every man was made in vain. So that we rest
upon this as not only proper but also necessary. For if this is more fit
and reasonable than that at any time there should be no one found
fulfilling the design for which God made man, and there is no further
objection that can be made to this view, then it is necessary that there
always be some person partaking of this promised pardon. And, therefore,
we must not doubt that Adam and Eve obtained part in that forgiveness,
though Divine authority makes no mention of this.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p12"></span>*Anselm.* It is also incredible that
God created them, and unchangeably determined to make all men from them,
as many as were needed for the celestial state, and yet should exclude
these two from this design.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p13"></span>*Boso.* Nay, undoubtedly we ought to
believe that God made them for this purpose, viz., to belong to the
number of those for whose sake they were created.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p14"></span>*Anselm.* You understand it well. But
no soul, before the death of Christ, could enter the heavenly <span
id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVI-Page_265"></span>kingdom, as I said above, with regard
to the palace of the king.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p15"></span>*Boso.* So we believe.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p16"></span>*Anselm.* Moreover, the virgin, from
whom that man was taken of whom we are speaking, was of the number of
those who were cleansed from their sins before his birth, and he was
born of her in her purity.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p17"></span>*Boso.* What you say would satisfy
me, were it not that he ought to be pure of himself, whereas he appears
to have his purity from his mother and not from himself.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p18"></span>*Anselm.* Not so. But as the mother’s
purity, which he partakes, was only derived from him, he also was pure
by and of himself.

<span id="viii.iii.XVI-p19"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XVII"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XVII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XVII.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p3"></span>How he did not die of necessity,
though he could not be born, except as destined to suffer death.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p5"></span>*Boso.* Thus far it is well. But
there is yet another matter that needs to be looked into. For we have
said before that his death was not to be a matter of necessity; yet now
we see that his mother was purified by the power of his death, when
without this he could not have been born of her. How, then, was not his
death necessary, when he could not have been, except in view of future
death? For if he were not to die, the virgin of whom he was born could
not be pure, since this could only be effected by true faith in his
death, and, if she were not pure, he could not be born of her. If,
therefore, his death be not a necessary consequence of his being born of
the virgin, he never could have been born of her at all; but this is an
absurdity.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVII-Page_266"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p6"></span>*Anselm.* If you had carefully noted
the remarks made above, you would easily have discovered in them, I
think, the answer to your question.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p7"></span>*Boso.* I see not how.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p8"></span>*Anselm.* Did we not find, when
considering the question whether he would lie, that there were two
senses of the word *power* in regard to it, the one referring to his
disposition, the other to the act itself; and that, though having the
power to lie, he was so constituted by nature as not to wish to lie,
and, therefore, deserved praise for his holiness in maintaining the
truth?

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p9"></span>*Boso.* It is so.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p10"></span>*Anselm.* In like manner, with
regard to the preservation of his life, there is the power of preserving
and the power of wishing to preserve it. And when the question is asked
whether the same God‑man could preserve his life, so as never to die, we
must not doubt that he always had the power to preserve his life, though
he could not wish to do so for the purpose of escaping death. And since
this disposition, which forever prevents him from wishing this, arises
from himself, he lays down his life not of necessity, but of free
authority.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p11"></span>*Boso.* But those powers were not in
all respects similar, the power to lie and the power to preserve his
life. For, if he wished to lie, he would of course be able to; but, if
he wished to avoid the other, he could no more do it than he could avoid
being what he is. For he became man for this purpose, and it was on the
faith of his coming death that he could receive birth from a virgin, as
you said above.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p12"></span>*Anselm.* As you think that he could
not lie, or that his death was necessary, because be could not avoid
<span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVII-Page_267"></span>being what he was, so you can assert
that he could not wish to avoid death, or that he wished to die of
necessity, because he could not change the constitution of his being;
for he did not become man in order that he should die, any more than for
this purpose, that he should wish to die. Wherefore, as you ought not to
say that he could not help wishing to die, or that it was of necessity
that he wished to die, it is equally improper to say that he could not
avoid death, or that he died of necessity.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p13"></span>*Boso.* Yes, since dying and wishing
to die are included in the same mode of reasoning, both would seem to
fall under a like necessity.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p14"></span>*Anselm.* Who freely wished to
become man, that by the same unchanging desire he should suffer death,
and that the virgin from whom that man should be born might be pure,
through confidence in the certainty of this?

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p15"></span>*Boso.* God, the Son of God.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p16"></span>*Anselm.* Was it not above shown,
that no desire of God is at all constrained; but that it freely
maintains itself in his own unchangeableness, as often as it is said
that he does anything necessarily?

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p17"></span>*Boso.* It has been clearly shown.
But we see, on the other hand, that what God unchangeably wishes cannot
avoid being so, but takes place of necessity. Wherefore, if God wished
that man to die, he could but die.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p18"></span>*Anselm.* Because the Son of God
took the nature of man with this desire, viz., that he should suffer
death, you prove it necessary that this man should not be able to avoid
death.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p19"></span>*Boso.* So I perceive.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p20"></span>*Anselm.* Has it not in like manner
appeared from <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVII-Page_268"></span>the things which we have spoken that
the Son of God and the man whose person he took were so united that the
same being should be both God and man, the Son of God and the son of the
virgin?

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p21"></span>*Boso.* It is so.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p22"></span>*Anselm.* Therefore the same man
could possibly both die and avoid death.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p23"></span>*Boso.* I cannot deny it.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p24"></span>*Anselm.* Since, then, the will of
God does nothing by any necessity, but of his own power, and the will of
that man was the same as the will of God, he died not necessarily, but
only of his own power.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p25"></span>*Boso.* To your arguments I cannot
object; for neither your propositions nor your inferences can I
invalidate in the least. But yet this thing which I have mentioned
always recurs to my mind: that, if he wished to avoid death, he could no
more do it than he could escape existence. For it must have been fixed
that he was to die, for had it not been true that he was about to die,
faith in his coming death would not have existed, by which the virgin
who gave him birth and many others also were cleansed from their sin.
Wherefore, if he could avoid death, he could make untrue what was true.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p26"></span>*Anselm.* Why was it true, before he
died, that he was certainly to die?

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p27"></span>*Boso.* Because this was his free
and unchangeable desire.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p28"></span>*Anselm.* If, then, as you say, he
could not avoid death because he was certainly to die, and was on this
account certainly to die because it was his free and unchangeable
desire, it is clear that his inability to avoid death is nothing else
but his fixed choice to die.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p29"></span>*Boso.* This is so; but whatever be
the reason, it <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XVII-Page_269"></span>still remains certain that he could
not avoid death, but that it was a necessary thing for him to die.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p30"></span>*Anselm.* You make a great ado about
nothing, or, as the saying is, you stumble at a straw.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p31"></span>*Boso.* Are you not forgetting my
reply to the excuses you made at the beginning of our discussion, viz.,
that you should explain the subject, not as to learned men, but to me
and my fellow inquirers? Suffer me, then, to question you as my slowness
and dullness require, so that, as you have begun thus far, you may go on
to settle all our childish doubts.

<span id="viii.iii.XVII-p32"></span> <span id="XVIIIA"></span>

<span id="XVIIIA-p1"></span>

### <span id="XVIIIA-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XVIII (a). <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

<span id="XVIIIA-p3"></span>

<span id="XVIIIA-p4"></span>How, with God there is neither necessity nor
impossibility, and what is a coercive necessity, and what one that is
not so.

<span id="XVIIIA-p5"></span>

<span id="XVIIIA-p6"></span>*Anselm.* We have already said that it is
improper to affirm of God that he does anything, or that he cannot do
it, of necessity. For all necessity and impossibility is under his
control. But his choice is subject to no necessity nor impossibility.
For nothing is necessary or impossible save as He wishes it. Nay, the
very choosing or refusing anything as a necessity or an impossibility is
contrary to truth. Since, then, he does what he chooses and nothing
else, as no necessity or impossibility exists before his choice or
refusal, so neither do they interfere with his acting or not acting,
though it be true that his choice and action are immutable. And as, when
God does a thing, since it has been done it cannot be undone, but must
remain an actual fact; still, we are not correct in saying that it is
impossible for God to prevent a past action <span id="page_270">p.
270</span> <span id="XVIIIA-Page_270"></span>from being what it is. For
there is no necessity or impossibility in the case whatever but the
simple will of God, which chooses that truth should be eternally the
same, for he himself is truth. Also, if he has a fixed determination to
do anything, though his design must be destined to an accomplishment
before it comes to pass, yet there is no coercion as far as he is
concerned, either to do it or not to do it, for his will is the sole
agent in the case. For when we say that God cannot do a thing, we do not
deny his power; on the contrary, we imply that he has invincible
authority and strength. For we mean simply this, that nothing can compel
God to do the thing which is said to be impossible for him. We often use
an expression of this kind, that a thing can be when the power is not in
itself, but in something else; and that it cannot be when the weakness
does not pertain to the thing itself, but to something else. Thus we say
“Such a man can be bound,” instead of saying, “Somebody can bind him,”
and, “He cannot be bound,” instead of, “Nobody can bind him.” For to be
able to be overcome is not power but weakness, and not to be able to be
overcome is not weakness but power. Nor do we say that God does anything
by necessity, because there is any such thing pertaining to him, but
because it exists in something else, precisely as I said with regard to
the affirmation that he cannot do anything. For necessity is always
either compulsion or restraint; and these two kinds of necessity operate
variously by turn, so that the same thing is both necessary and
impossible. For whatever is obliged to exist is also prevented from
non‑existence; and that which is compelled not to exist is prevented
from existence. So that whatever exists from necessity cannot<span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span id="XVIIIA-Page_271"></span> avoid
existence, and it is impossible for a thing to exist which is under a
necessity of nonexistence, and *vice versa*. But when we say with regard
to God, that anything is necessary or not necessary, we do not mean
that, as far as he is concerned, there is any necessity either coercive
or prohibitory, but we mean that there is a necessity in everything
else, restraining or driving them in a particular way. Whereas we say
the very opposite of God. For, when we affirm that it is necessary for
God to utter truth, and never to lie, we only mean that such is his
unwavering disposition to maintain the truth that of necessity nothing
can avail to make him deviate from the truth, or utter a lie. When,
then, we say that that man (who, by the union of persons, is also God,
the Son of God) could not avoid death, or the choice of death, after he
was born of the virgin, we do not imply that there was in him any
weakness with regard to preserving or choosing to preserve his life, but
we refer to the unchangeableness of his purpose, by which he freely
became man for this design, viz., that by persevering in his wish he
should suffer death. And this desire nothing could shake. For it would
be rather weakness than power if he could wish to lie, or deceive, or
change his disposition, when before he had chosen that it should remain
unchanged. And, as I said before, when one has freely determined to do
some good action, and afterwards goes on to complete it, though, if
unwilling to pay his vow, he could be compelled to do so, yet we must
not say that he does it of necessity, but with the same freedom with
which he made the resolution. For we ought not to say that anything is
done, or not done, by necessity or weakness, when free choice is the
only agent in the case. And, if this <span id="page_272">p. 272</span>
<span id="XVIIIA-Page_272"></span>is so with regard to man, much less
can we speak of necessity or weakness in reference to God; for he does
nothing except according to his choice, and his will no force can drive
or restrain. For this end was accomplished by the united natures of
Christ, viz., that the Divine nature should perform that part of the
work needful for man’s restoration which the human nature could not do;
and that in the human should be manifested what was inappropriate to the
Divine. Finally, the virgin herself, who was made pure by faith in him,
so that he might be born of her, even she, I say, never believed that he
was to die, save of his own choice. For she knew the words of the
prophet, who said of him: “He was offered of his own will.” Therefore,
since her faith was well founded, it must necessarily turn out as she
believed. And, if it perplexes you to have me say that it is necessary,
remember that the reality of the virgin’s faith was not the cause of his
dying by his own free will; but, because this was destined to take
place, therefore her faith was real. If, then, it be said that it was
necessary for him to die of his single choice, because the antecedent
faith and prophecy were true, this is no more than saying that it must
be because it was to be. But such a necessity as this does not compel a
thing to be, but only implies a necessity of its existence. There is an
antecedent necessity which is the cause of a thing, and there is also a
subsequent necessity arising from the thing itself. Thus, when the
heavens are said to revolve, it is an antecedent and efficient
necessity, for they must revolve. But when I say that you speak of
necessity, because you are speaking, this is nothing but a subsequent
and inoperative necessity. For I only mean that it is impossible<span
id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span id="XVIIIA-Page_273"></span> for you
to speak and not to speak at the same time, and not that some one
compels you to speak. For the force of its own nature makes the heaven
revolve; but no necessity obliges you to speak. But wherever there is an
antecedent necessity, there is also a subsequent one; but not vice
versa. For we can say that the heaven revolves of necessity, because it
revolves; but it is not likewise true that, because you speak, you do it
of necessity. This subsequent necessity pertains to everything, so that
we say: Whatever has been, necessarily has been. Whatever is, must be.
Whatever is to be, of necessity will be. This is that necessity which
Aristotle treats of (“*de propositionibus singularibus et futuris*“),
and which seems to destroy any alternative and to ascribe a necessity to
all things. By this subsequent and imperative necessity, was it
necessary (since the belief and prophecy concerning Christ were true,
that he would die of his own free will), that it should be so. For this
he became man; for this he did and suffered all things undertaken by
him; for this he chose as he did. For therefore were they necessary,
because they were to be, and they were to be because they were, and they
were because they were; and, if you wish to know the real necessity of
all things which he did and suffered, know that they were of necessity,
because he wished them to be. But no necessity preceded his will.
Wherefore if they were not save by his will, then, had he not willed
they would not have existed. So then, no one took his life from him, but
he laid it down of himself and took it again; for he had power to lay it
down and to take it again, as he himself said.

<span id="XVIIIA-p7"></span>*Boso.* You have satisfied me that it cannot
be proved that he was subjected to death by any necessity<span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="XVIIIA-Page_274"></span>; and I
cannot regret my importunity in urging you to make this explanation.

<span id="XVIIIA-p8"></span>*Anselm.* I think we have shown with
sufficient clearness how it was that God took a man without sin from a
sinful substance; but I would on no account deny that there is no other
explanation than this which we have given, for God can certainly do what
human reason cannot grasp. But since this appears adequate, and since in
search of other arguments we should involve ourselves in such questions
as that of original sin, and how it was transmitted by our first parents
to all mankind, except this man of whom we are speaking; and since,
also, we should be drawn into various other questions, each demanding
its own separate consideration; let us be satisfied with this account of
the matter, and go on to complete our intended work.

<span id="XVIIIA-p9"></span>*Boso.* As you choose; but with this
condition that, by the help of God, you will sometime give this other
explanation, which you owe me, as it were, but which now you avoid
discussing.

<span id="XVIIIA-p10"></span>*Anselm.* Inasmuch as I entertain this
desire myself, I will not refuse you; but because of the uncertainty of
future events, I dare not promise you, but commend it to the will of
God. But say now, what remains to be unravelled with regard to the
question which you proposed in the first place, and which involves many
others with it?

<span id="XVIIIA-p11"></span>*Boso.* The substance of the inquiry was
this, why God became man, for the purpose of saving men by his death,
when he could have done it in some other way. And you, by numerous and
positive reasons, have shown that the restoring of mankind ought not to
take place, and could not, without man paid the <span id="page_275">p.
275</span> <span id="XVIIIA-Page_275"></span>debt which he owed God for
his sin. And this debt was so great that, while none but man must solve
the debt, none but God was able to do it; so that he who does it must be
both God and man. And hence arises a necessity that God should take man
into unity with his own person; so that he who in his own nature was
bound to pay the debt, but could not, might be able to do it in the
person of God. In fine, you have shown that that man, who was also God,
must be formed from the virgin, and from the person of the Son of God,
and that he could be taken without sin, though from a sinful substance.
Moreover, you have clearly shown the life of this man to have been so
excellent and so glorious as to make ample satisfaction for the sins of
the whole world, and even infinitely more. It now, therefore, remains to
be shown how that payment is made to God for the sins of men.

<span id="XVIIIA-p12"></span> <span id="XVIIIB"></span>

### <span id="XVIIIB-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XVIII (b.)

<span id="XVIIIB-p1"></span>

<span id="XVIIIB-p2"></span>How Christ’s life is paid to God for the
sins of men, and in what sense Christ ought, and in what sense he ought
not, or was not bound, to suffer.

<span id="XVIIIB-p3"></span>

<span id="XVIIIB-p4"></span>*Anselm.* If he allowed himself to be slain
for the sake of justice, he did not give his life for the honor of God?

<span id="XVIIIB-p5"></span>*Boso.* It should seem so, but I cannot
understand, although I do not doubt it, how he could do this reasonably.
If I saw how he could be perfectly holy, and yet forever preserve his
life, I would acknowledge that he freely gave, for the honor of God,
such a gift as surpasses all things else but God himself, and is able to
atone for all the sins of men.

<span id="XVIIIB-p6"></span>*Anselm.* Do you not perceive that when he
bore <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="XVIIIB-Page_276"></span>with gentle patience the insults put upon
him, violence and even crucifixion among thieves that he might maintain
strict holiness; by this he set men an example that they should never
turn aside from the holiness due to God on account of personal
sacrifice? But how could he have done this, had he, as he might have
done, avoided the death brought upon him for such a reason?

<span id="XVIIIB-p7"></span>*Boso.* But surely there was no need of
this, for many persons before his coming, and John the Baptist after his
coming but before his death, had sufficiently enforced this example by
nobly dying for the sake of the truth.

<span id="XVIIIB-p8"></span>*Anselm.* No man except this one ever gave
to God what he was not obliged to lose, or paid a debt he did not owe.
But he freely offered to the Father what there was no need of his ever
losing, and paid for sinners what he owed not for himself. Therefore he
set a much nobler example, that each one should not hesitate to give to
God, for himself, what he must at any rate lose before long, since it
was the voice of reason; for he, when not in want of anything for
himself and not compelled by others, who deserved nothing of him but
punishment, gave so precious a life, even the life of so illustrious a
personage, with such willingness.

<span id="XVIIIB-p9"></span>*Boso.* You very nearly meet my wishes; but
suffer me to make one inquiry, which you may think foolish, but which,
nevertheless, I find no easy thing to answer. You say that when he died
he gave what he did not owe. But no one will deny that it was better for
him, or that so doing he pleased God more than if he had not done it.
Nor will any one say that he was not bound to do what was best to be
done, and what <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="XVIIIB-Page_277"></span>he knew would be more pleasing to God. How
then can we affirm that he did not owe God the thing which he did, that
is, the thing which he knew to be best and most pleasing to God, and
especially since every creature owes God all that he is and all that he
knows and all that he is capable of?

<span id="XVIIIB-p10"></span>*Anselm.* Though the creature has nothing
of himself, yet when God grants him the liberty of doing or not doing a
thing, he leaves the alternative with him, so that, though one is better
than the other, yet neither is positively demanded. And, whichever he
does, it may be said that he ought to do it; and if he takes the better
choice, he deserves a reward; because he renders freely what is his own.
For, though celibacy be better than marriage, yet neither is absolutely
enjoined upon man; so that both he who chooses marriage and he who
prefers celibacy, may be said to do as they ought. For no one says that
either celibacy or marriage ought not to be chosen; but we say that what
a man esteems best before taking action upon any of these things, this
he ought to do. And if a man preserves his celibacy as a free gift
offered to God, he looks for a reward. When you say that the creature
owes God what he knows to be the better choice, and what he is able to
do, if you mean that he owes it as a debt, without implying any command
on the part of God, it is not always true. Thus, as I have already said,
a man is not bound to celibacy as a debt, but ought to marry if he
prefers it. And if you are unable to understand the use of this word
“*debere*,” when no debt is implied, let me inform you that we use the
word “*debere*“ precisely as we sometimes do the words “*posse*, ” and
“*non posse*, ” and also “*necessitas*,” when the ability, etc., is not
in the things <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="XVIIIB-Page_278"></span>themselves, but in something else. When, for
instance, we say that the poor ought to receive alms from the rich, we
mean that the rich ought to bestow alms upon the poor. For this is a
debt not owed by the poor but by the rich. We also say that God ought to
be exalted over all, not because there is any obligation resting upon
him, but because all things ought to be subject to him. And he wishes
that all creatures should be what they ought; for what God wishes to be
ought to be. And, in like manner, when any creature wishes to do a thing
that is left entirely at his own disposal, we say that he ought to do
it, for what he wishes to be ought to be. So our Lord Jesus, when he
wished, as we have said, to suffer death, ought to have done precisely
what he did; because he ought to be what he wished, and was not bound to
do anything as a debt. As he is both God and man, in connection with his
human nature, which made him a man, he must also have received from the
Divine nature that control over himself which freed him from all
obligation, except to do as he chose. In like manner, as one person of
the Trinity, he must have had whatever he possessed of his own right, so
as to be complete in himself, and could not have been under obligations
to another, nor have need of giving anything in order to be repaid
himself.

<span id="XVIIIB-p11"></span>*Boso.* Now I see clearly that he did not
give himself up to die for the honor of God, as a debt; for this my own
reason proves, and yet he ought to have done what he did.

<span id="XVIIIB-p12"></span>*Anselm.* That honor certainly belongs to
the whole Trinity; and, since he is very God, the Son of God, he offered
himself for his own honor, as well as for that of the Father and the
Holy Spirit; that is, he <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="XVIIIB-Page_279"></span>gave his humanity to his divinity, which is
one person of the Triune God. But, though we express our idea more
definitely by clinging to the precise truth, yet we may say, according
to our custom, that the Son freely gave himself to the Father. For thus
we plainly affirm that in speaking of one person we understand the whole
Deity, to whom as man he offered himself. And, by the names of Father
and Son, a wondrous depth of devotion is excited in the hearts of the
hearers, when it is said that the Son supplicates the Father on our
behalf.

<span id="XVIIIB-p13"></span>*Boso.* This I readily acknowledge.

<span id="XVIIIB-p14"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XIX"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XIX-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XIX.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p2"></span>How human salvation follows upon his
death.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p4"></span>*Anselm.* Let us now observe, if we
can, how the salvation of men rests on this.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p5"></span>*Boso.* This is the very wish of my
heart. For, although I think I understand you, yet I wish to get from
you the close chain of argument.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p6"></span>*Anselm.* There is no need of
explaining how precious was the gift which the Son freely gave.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p7"></span>*Boso.* That is clear enough already.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p8"></span>*Anselm.* But you surely will not
think that he deserves no reward, who freely gave so great a gift to
God.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p9"></span>*Boso.* I see that it is necessary for
the Father to reward the Son; else he is either unjust in not wishing to
do it, or weak in not being able to do it; but neither of these things
can be attributed to God.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p10"></span>*Anselm.* He who rewards another
either gives him something which he does not have, or else remits some
rightful claim upon him. But anterior to the <span id="page_280">p.
280</span> <span id="viii.iii.XIX-Page_280"></span>great offering of the
Son, all things belonging to the Father were his, nor did he ever owe
anything which could be forgiven him. How then can a reward be bestowed
on one who needs nothing, and to whom no gift or release can be made?

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p11"></span>*Boso.* I see on the one hand a
necessity for a reward, and on the other it appears impossible; for God
must necessarily render payment for what he owes, and yet there is no
one to receive it.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p12"></span>*Anselm.* But if a reward so large
and so deserved is not given to him or any one else, then it will almost
appear as if the Son had done this great work in vain.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p13"></span>*Boso.* Such a supposition is
impious.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p14"></span>*Anselm.* The reward then must be
bestowed upon some one else, for it cannot be upon him.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p15"></span>*Boso.* This is necessarily so.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p16"></span>*Anselm.* Had the Son wished to give
some one else what was due to him, could the Father rightfully prevent
it, or refuse to give it to the other person?

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p17"></span>*Boso.* No! but I think it would be
both just and necessary that the gift should be given by the Father to
whomsoever the Son wished; because the Son should be allowed to give
away what is his own, and the Father cannot bestow it at all except upon
some other person.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p18"></span>*Anselm.* Upon whom would he more
properly bestow the reward accruing from his death, than upon those for
whose salvation, as right reason teaches, he became man; and for whose
sake, as we have already said, he left an example of suffering death to
preserve holiness? For surely in vain will men imitate him, if they be
not also partakers of his reward. Or whom could he more justly make
heirs of the inheritance, which he does not need, and of the superfluity
of his <span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XIX-Page_281"></span>possessions, than his parents and
brethren? What more proper than that, when he beholds so many of them
weighed down by so heavy a debt, and wasting through poverty, in the
depth of their miseries, he should remit the debt incurred by their
sins, and give them what their transgressions had forfeited?

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p19"></span>*Boso.* The universe can hear of
nothing more reasonable, more sweet, more desirable. And I receive such
confidence from this that I cannot describe the joy with which my heart
exults. For it seems to me that God can reject none who come to him in
his name.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p20"></span>*Anselm.* Certainly not, if he come
aright. And the Scriptures, which rest on solid truth as on a firm
foundation, and which, by the help of God, we have somewhat examined, ‑‑
the Scriptures, I say, show us how to approach in order to share such
favor, and how we ought to live under it.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p21"></span>*Boso.* And whatever is built on this
foundation is founded on an immovable rock.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p22"></span>*Anselm.* I think I have nearly
enough answered your inquiry, though I might do it still more fully, and
there are doubtless many reasons which are beyond me and which mortal
ken does not reach. It is also plain that God had no need of doing the
thing spoken of, but eternal truth demanded it. For though God is said
to have done what that man did, on account of the personal union made;
yet God was in no need of descending from heaven to conquer the devil,
nor of contending against him in holiness to free mankind. But God
demanded that man should conquer the devil, so that he who had offended
by sin should atone by holiness. As God owed nothing to the devil but
punishment, so man must only make amends by <span id="page_282">p.
282</span> <span id="viii.iii.XIX-Page_282"></span>conquering the devil
as man had already been conquered by him. But whatever was demanded of
man, he owed to God and not to the devil.

<span id="viii.iii.XIX-p23"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XX"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XX-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XX.

<span id="viii.iii.XX-p1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XX-p2"></span>How great and how just is God’s
compassion.

<span id="viii.iii.XX-p3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XX-p4"></span>NOW we have found the compassion of God
which appeared lost to you when we were considering God’s holiness and
man’s sin; we have found it, I say, so great and so consistent with his
holiness, as to be incomparably above anything that can be conceived.
For what compassion can excel these words of the Father, addressed to
the sinner doomed to eternal torments and having no way of escape: “Take
my only begotten Son and make him an offering for yourself;” or these
words of the Son: “Take me, and ransom your souls.” For these are the
voices they utter, when inviting and leading us to faith in the Gospel.
Or can anything be more just than for him to remit all debt since he has
earned a reward greater than all debt, if given with the love which he
deserves.

<span id="viii.iii.XX-p5"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XXI"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XXI-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XXI-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XXI.

<span id="viii.iii.XXI-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XXI-p3"></span>How it is impossible for the devil to
be reconciled.

<span id="viii.iii.XXI-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XXI-p5"></span>IF you carefully consider the scheme
of human salvation, you will perceive the reconciliation of the devil,
of which you made inquiry, to be impossible. For, as man could not be
reconciled but by the death of the God‑man, by whose holiness the loss
occasioned by man’s sin should be made up; so fallen angels cannot be
saved but by the death of a God‑angel who by his holiness may repair the
evil occasioned by the <span id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XXI-Page_283"></span>sins of his companions. And as man
must not be restored by a man of a different race, though of the same
nature, so no angel ought to be saved by any other angel, though all
were of the same nature, for they are not like men, all of the same
race. For all angels were not sprung from one, as all men were. And
there is another objection to their restoration, viz , that, as they
fell with none to plot their fall, so they must rise with none to aid
them; but this is impossible. But otherwise they cannot be restored to
their original dignity. For, had they not sinned, they would have been
confirmed in virtue without any foreign aid, simply by the power given
to them from the first. And, therefore, if any one thinks that the
redemption of our Lord ought to be extended even to the fallen angels,
he is convinced by reason, for by reason he has been deceived. And I do
not say this as if to deny that the virtue of his death far exceeds all
the sins of men and angels, but because infallible reason rejects the
reconciliation of the fallen angels.

<span id="viii.iii.XXI-p6"></span> <span id="viii.iii.XXII"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p1"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.XXII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XXII.

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p3"></span>How the truth of the Old and New
Testament is shown in the things which have been said.

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p5"></span>*Boso.* All things which you have
said seem to me reasonable and incontrovertible. And by the solution of
the single question proposed do I see the truth of all that is contained
in the Old and New Testament. For, in proving that God became man by
necessity, leaving out what was taken from the Bible, viz., the remarks
on the persons of the Trinity, and on Adam, you convince both Jews and
Pagans by the mere force of reason. And the God‑man himself originates
<span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="viii.iii.XXII-Page_284"></span>the New Testament and approves the
Old. And, as we must acknowledge him to be true, so no one can dissent
from anything contained in these books.

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p6"></span>*Anselm.* If we have said anything
that needs correction, I am willing to make the correction if it be a
reasonable one. But, if the conclusions which we have arrived at by
reason seem confirmed by the testimony of the truth, then ought we to
attribute it, not to ourselves, but to God, who is blessed forever. ‑‑

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p7"></span>Amen.

<span id="viii.iii.XXII-p8"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[269:11](ans118.htm#fr_10) <span
id="XVIIIA-p1.2"></span>

<span id="XVIIIA-p2"></span> <span id="XVIIIA-p2.1"></span>This and the
succeeding chapter are numbered differently in the different editions of
Anselm’s texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Scripture References](ans119)
