[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans101)  [Next](ans103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXIX"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.LXIX-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER LXIX.

<span id="v.LXIX-p2"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p3"></span>The soul that ever loves this Essence lives
at some time in true blessedness.

<span id="v.LXIX-p4"></span>

<span id="v.LXIX-p5"></span>BUT there is no doubt that the human soul is
a rational creature. Hence, it must have been created for this end, that
it might love the supreme Being. It must, therefore, have been created
either for this end, that it might love that Being eternally; or for
this, that at some time it might either voluntarily, or by violence,
lose this love.

<span id="v.LXIX-p6"></span>But it is impious to suppose that the
supreme Wisdom created it for this end, that at some time, either it
should despise so great a good, or, though wishing to keep it, should
lose it by some violence. We infer, then, that it was created for this
end, that it might love the supreme Being eternally. But this it cannot
do unless it lives forever. It was so created, then, that it lives
forever, if it forever wills to do that for which it was created.

<span id="v.LXIX-p7"></span>Hence, it is most incompatible with the
nature of the supremely good, supremely wise, and omnipotent Creator,
that what he has made to exist that it might love him, he should make
not to exist, so long as it truly loves him; and that what he
voluntarily gave to a non‑loving being that it might ever love, he
should take away, or permit to be taken away, from the loving being, so
that necessarily it should not love; especially since it should by no
means be doubted that he himself loves every nature that loves him.
Hence, it is manifest that the human soul is never deprived <span
id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span id="v.LXIX-Page_133"></span>of its
life, if it forever devotes itself to loving the supreme life.

<span id="v.LXIX-p8"></span>How, then, shall it live? For is long life
so important a matter, if it is not secure from the invasion of
troubles? For whoever, while he lives, is either through fear or through
actual suffering subject to troubles, or is deceived by a false
security, does he not live in misery? But, if any one lives in freedom
from these troubles, he lives in blessedness. But it is most absurd to
suppose that any nature that forever loves him, who is supremely good
and omnipotent, forever lives in misery. So, it is plain, that the human
soul is of such a character that, if it diligently observes that end for
which it exists, it at some time lives in blessedness, truly secure from
death itself and from every other trouble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXX](ans103)
