[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_372.md) 
[Next](bh4_374.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:369

*Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:*

While I was standing in the row on the day (of the battle) of Badr, I
looked to my right and my left and saw two young Ansari boys, and I
wished I had been stronger than they. One of them called my attention
saying, "O Uncle! Do you know Abu Jahl?" I said, "Yes, What do you want
from him, O my nephew?" He said, "I have been informed that he abuses
Allah's Apostle. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, if I should see him,
then my body will not leave his body till either of us meet his fate." I
was astonished at that talk. Then the other boy called my attention
saying the same as the other had said. After a while I saw Abu Jahl
walking amongst the people. I said (to the boys), "Look! This is the man
you asked me about." So, both of them attacked him with their swords and
struck him to death and returned to Allah'S Apostle to inform him of
that. Allah's Apostle asked, "Which of you has killed him?" Each of them
said, "I Have killed him." Allah's Apostle asked, "Have you cleaned your
swords?" They said, "No. " He then looked at their swords and said, "No
doubt, you both have killed him and the spoils of the deceased will be
given to Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh." The two boys were Muadh bin 'Afra
and Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:370: Abu Qatada: We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle
on the day (of the ...](bh4_374.md)
