[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [ ](../../index)
[ ](../index) [ ](index) [ ](bh4_560)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:558

*Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:*

The Prophet said, "I have been made victorious with As-Saba (i.e. an
easterly wind) and the people of 'Ad were destroyed by Ad-Dabur (i.e.
Prophet who distributed it among four persons: Al-Aqra' bin Habis
Al-Hanzali from the tribe of Mujashi, 'Uyaina bin Badr Al-Fazari, Zaid
At-Ta'i who belonged to (the tribe of) Bani Nahban, and 'Alqama bin
Ulatha Al-'Amir who belonged to (the tribe of) Bani Kilab. So the
Quraish and the Ansar became angry and said, "He (i.e. the Prophet, )
gives the chief of Najd and does not give us." The Prophet said, "I give
them) so as to attract their hearts (to Islam)." Then a man with sunken
eyes, prominent checks, a raised forehead, a thick beard and a shaven
head, came (in front of the Prophet ) and said, "Be afraid of Allah, O
Muhammad!" The Prophet ' said "Who would obey Allah if I disobeyed Him?
(Is it fair that) Allah has trusted all the people of the earth to me
while, you do not trust me?" Somebody who, I think was Khalid bin
Al-Walid, requested the Prophet to let him chop that man's head off, but
he prevented him. When the man left, the Prophet said, "Among the
off-spring of this man will be some who will recite the Qur'an but the
Qur'an will not reach beyond their throats (i.e. they will recite like
parrots and will not understand it nor act on it), and they will
renegade from the religion as an arrow goes through the game's body.
They will kill the Muslims but will not disturb the idolaters. If I
should live up to their time' I will kill them as the people of 'Ad were
killed (i.e. I will kill all of them)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------
