[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_417) 
[Next](bh4_419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:414

*Narrated Imran bin Husain:*

I went to the Prophet and tied my she-camel at the gate. The people of
Bani Tamim came to the Prophet who said "O Bani Tamim! Accept the good
tidings." They said twice, 'You have given us the good tidings, now give
us something" Then some Yemenites came to him and he said, "Accept the
good tidings, O people of Yemem, for Bani Tamim refused them." They
said, "We accept it, O Allah's Apostle! We have come to ask you about
this matter (i.e. the start of creations)." He said, "First of all,
there was nothing but Allah, and (then He created His Throne). His
throne was over the water, and He wrote everything in the Book (in the
Heaven) and created the Heavens and the Earth." Then a man shouted, "O
Ibn Husain! Your she-camel has gone away!" So, I went away and could not
see the she-camel because of the mirage. By Allah, I wished I had left
that she-camel (but not that gathering).

period and informed us about the beginning of creation (and talked about
everything in detail) till he mentioned how the people of Paradise will
enter their places and the people of Hell will enter their places. Some
remembered what he had said, and some forgot it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:415: Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, Allah the Most Superior
said, The son of Adam ...](bh4_419)
