[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_252) 
[Next](bh4_254) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:251

*Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Rafi:*

I heard 'Ali saying, "Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair and Al-Miqdad
somewhere saying, 'Proceed till you reach Rawdat Khakh. There you will
find a lady with a letter. Take the letter from her.' " So, we set out
and our horses ran at full pace till we got at Ar-Rawda where we found
the lady and said (to her). "Take out the letter." She replied, "I have
no letter with me." We said, "Either you take out the letter or else we
will take off your clothes." So, she took it out of her braid. We
brought the letter to Allah's Apostle and it contained a statement from
Hatib bin Abi Balta a to some of the Meccan pagans informing them of
some of the intentions of Allah's Apostle. Then Allah's Apostle said, "O
Hatib! What is this?" Hatib replied, "O Allah's Apostle! Don't hasten to
give your judgment about me. I was a man closely connected with the
Quraish, but I did not belong to this tribe, while the other emigrants
with you, had their relatives in Mecca who would protect their
dependents and property . So, I wanted to recompense for my lacking
blood relation to them by doing them a favor so that they might protect
my dependents. I did this neither because of disbelief not apostasy nor
out of preferring Kufr (disbelief) to Islam." Allah's Apostle, said,
"Hatib has told you the truth." Umar said, O Allah's Apostle! Allow me
to chop off the head of this hypocrite." Allah's Apostle said, "Hatib
participated in the battle of Badr, and who knows, perhaps Allah has
already looked at the Badr warriors and said, 'Do whatever you like, for
I have forgiven you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:252: Jabir bin 'Abdullah: When it was the day (of the battle)
of Badr, prisoners of war were ...](bh4_254)
