[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh4_295) 
[Next](bh4_297) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 4:292

*Narrated Aslam:*

Umar bin Al-Khattab appointed a freed slave of his, called Hunai,
manager of the Hima (i.e. a pasture devoted for grazing the animals of
the Zakat or other specified animals). He said to him, "O Hunai! Don't
oppress the Muslims and ward off their curse (invocations against you)
for the invocation of the oppressed is responded to (by Allah); and
allow the shepherd having a few camels and those having a few sheep (to
graze their animals), and take care not to allow the livestock of
'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and the livestock of ('Uthman) bin 'Affan, for if
their livestock should perish, then they have their farms and gardens,
while those who own a few camels and those who own a few sheep, if their
livestock should perish, would bring their dependents to me and appeal
for help saying, 'O chief of the believers! O chief of the believers!'
Would I then neglect them? (No, of course). So, I find it easier to let
them have water and grass rather than to give them gold and silver (from
the Muslims' treasury). By Allah, these people think that I have been
unjust to them. This is their land, and during the pre-lslamic period,
they fought for it and they embraced Islam (willingly) while it was in
their possession. By Him in Whose Hand my life is! Were it not for the
animals (in my custody) which I give to be ridden for striving in
Allah's Cause, I would not have turned even a span of their land into a
Hima."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4:293: Hudhaifa: The Prophet said (to us), List the names of
those people who have ...](bh4_297)
