[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah12)  [Next](mah14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER X.

### MARS IS RULED BY LOVE

"And now abideth Faith, Hope and Love: these three; but the greatest of
these is LOVE." Paul to the Corinthians.

THERE IS BUT ONE LAW ON MARS. THAT LAW IS LOVE.

This law is not written in a code for the guidance of the people.

It is graven in the hearts of the inhabitants, and is reflected in the
countenance of every individual.

This law is the incentive before the entire population and urges each
individual onward to the completion of the task before him.

There are no rulers to bow before: neither is anyone better than his
brother. There is no evil, for all are good: all are equal. God endows
every individual expression of life with the Divine Heritage of a pure
soul. It is the individual's concern to keep this heavenly gift
unstained in its descent into matter. The love force of the Spirit is
the potent agent that does this for the individual when allowed to
permeate and radiate the entire being. When individuals have learned to
bathe their innermost beings in the Father's love, then it must follow
that a nation made up of such individuals will be governed only by such
precepts as are evolved from this dominating Love-force.

It is of no import to the individual on this planet what his particular
task may be, for all work is for the Father; and the humblest vocation
(humbler from the point of view of the dwellers on your Earth) is as
important and as honorable as the highest. MARS IS RULED BY LOVE, which
is in accordance with the Divine Intent. It is the desire of the Father
that every world in limitless space inhabited by His children be ruled
by that Divine Principle. For when Love is the supreme law of a world,
as it is of the Universe, there is no need of a system of complex laws
and a horde of judicial officers to interpret and enforce them.

When Love enters into the life of a community selfishness makes its
exit: misery becomes a stranger and pain and sickness vanish.

From the cradle to transition the Martian is dominated by Love and
guided by the Father's will. The result of this Love-rule is individual
and communal happiness. But above all, a Spiritual progress that unfolds
the individual in accordance with the Cosmic Intent.

To die, in the sense of passing out of one's physical environment, is
the destiny of every created being. Hence, in that sense, death exists
on Mars as it does on your Earth. But the real death referred to by
Christ: a Spiritual death imposed on man by his fall from Grace, a
penalty for having forgotten God, is unknown on this planet Mars. We are
in harmony with the Father. Those who are spiritually dead are cut off
from the Father as a result of their indifference and ignorance of
Spiritual Truth.

The religion of the Martian may be expressed in two thoughts: "LOVE" and
"THY WILL BE DONE, NOT MINE." The true definition of Religion is a "RULE
OF LIFE," and as our lives are guided entirely by Love and the Father's
Will. WE HAVE A RELIGION.

You, on your Earth, have created a Religion to satisfy your
conventionalities. Truth is simple, but you have made it intricate. It
is free, yet you buy it from the would-be disciples. Both you and we
must approach Him in simple faith: "Unless ye become as little children
ye cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven."

Speaking of children, I desire to give expression to a thought that may
appear to be outside the subject: it is this: The beauty and simplicity
of youth is wonderful, and to be admired by all: but in the sight of the
Heavenly Father, and those who have progressed to higher realms, it is
not so wonderful as those older characters who have waded the marshes of
life, as it were, and who have trod the dirty steps without losing
faith.

This is to encourage those who sometimes think when they look back on
their lives that all is dark. Their strength is being tried in the
darkness. Therefore their courage and faith is so much more.

We who are giving you these messages have passed beyond the stage you
are in, and do not have to be tried on every hand. We look upon you who
are struggling through the pitfalls created by your false systems with
pity, knowing how great your trials are. Do not think that because we
have gone on to higher planes of life that we are out of sympathy with
you. The more we bask in the sunshine of Love the more tender we become
to those in the shadow. And if you would only realize how strong you
are, with the Father's love and His real consideration for you, you
would try so much harder to better your condition by meeting His Love
with Love.

We of Mars have learnt to keep the right pictures before the minds of
our youth that they may not be so sorely tried, but on your planet you
have not even the beginning of a system whereby there could be kept
continually before the minds of your children the real goal to be
striven for. I make exception of the few homes on your planet where the
parents are in spiritual growth, but these homes are not ideal--just a
beginning of Idealism. But they are better far than the masses in their
home conditions on your planet.

Now, we are ready to do all we can towards stimulating the living of the
Christ-life among all souls in the Universe when it can be so arranged:
but it will take aeons of time on some planets, and many decades on
yours before we can scientifically teach you. To be sure, we are giving
you all we can for this book, but it will not be universally accepted,
although it will bring great joy to those who have faith.

If you can keep some of the pictures we are giving you of the wonderful
happiness we possess it will help you in the sordidness of your own
life. Picture beautiful things and your heart must be beautiful. Strive
with all your mind to hold beautiful thoughts, for it is well worth your
every effort towards faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper XI: Education And Training Of The Individual](mah14)
