[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Mars](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mah19)  [Next](mah21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVII.

### PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT THE RESULT OF SPIRITUAL CAUSES

"For they have sown the wind and they shall reap the whirlwind." (Hosea,
8:7)

The Creator and Dominator of the entire Universe is DIVINE MENTALITY.

The only real actuality that confronts sentient beings is MIND. We are
born, live and have our being amidst physical surroundings that in final
analysis are mere illusions. This idea is not new.

It forms the base of most systems of philosophy from the dawn of
civilization to the present day.

Our physical environment is the result of our mental attitude. Mars is
blessed with a climatic tranquility that would surpass the understanding
of an Earth dweller. But this was not always so.

In proportion to the spiritual unfoldment of the inhabitants of a planet
so is the degree of climatic tranquility enjoyed by them. This may, at
first reading, appear far-fetched, but it is true nevertheless.

Those who live on a material plane are immersed in the Effect world. The
dominating and primary influence that gives rise to all material
phenomena have their inception in the Cause world--the world of Spirit.
Hence the turbulence of the elements originate, through the law of
Vibration, deep down in the mentalities of those who make up the
population of a planet. Cloudbursts, severe wind storms and other
disturbances of Nature are all adjuncts of the spirit of war and rapine.

When a race has discarded the pursuit of false ideals and comes into
harmony with the Father then there occurs a corresponding change in its
physical environment by reason of the vibratory influences at work.
These influences have their inception in the mentalities of sentient
beings who are doing the Father's work in the advancement of the races
of men throughout the entire physical universe.

This same vibratory law is at work throughout all physical planes, and a
knowledge of this law was referred to by Christ when He said: "THE
KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU."

On Mars, owing to the high spiritual state of its inhabitants, who are
in harmony with their Creator, climatic conditions are, compared with
your world, most perfect. However, there was a time, measured in terms
of your millions of years, when the elements on Mars were as agitated
and capricious as they are today on your blood-stained globe. That was
before man on Mars had enfolded spiritually,

As the Martians progressed and unfolded spiritually there occurred a
subsidence in the roughness of the elements: and today our planet is
blessed with a tranquility proportionate to the high Mental state of its
inhabitants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII: Material Life A Lesson](mah21)
