[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst017)  [Next](inst019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.v"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.v-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 4.

<span id="iv.i.v-p1"></span>THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD STIFLED OR CORRUPTED,
IGNORANTLY OR MALICIOUSLY.

<span id="iv.i.v-p2"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.v-p3"></span>1. The knowledge of God suppressed by
ignorance, many falling away into superstition. Such persons, however,
inexcusable, because their error is accompanied with pride and
stubbornness.

<span id="iv.i.v-p4"></span>2. Stubbornness the companion of impiety.

<span id="iv.i.v-p5"></span>3. No pretext can justify superstition. This
proved, first, from reason; and, secondly, from Scripture.

<span id="iv.i.v-p6"></span>4. The wicked never willingly come into the
presence of God. Hence their hypocrisy. Hence, too, their sense of Deity
leads to no good result.

<span id="iv.i.v-p7"></span>1. But though experience testifies that a
seed of religion is divinely sown in all, scarcely one in a hundred is
found who cherishes it in his heart, and not one in whom it grows to
maturity so far is it from yielding fruit in its season. Moreover, while
some lose themselves in superstitious observances, and others, of set
purpose, wickedly revolt from God, the result is that, in regard to the
true knowledge of him, all are so degenerate, that in no part of the
world can genuine godliness be found. In saying that some fall away into
superstition, I mean not to insinuate that their excessive absurdity
frees them from guilt; for the blindness under which they labour is
almost invariably accompanied with vain pride and stubbornness. Mingled
vanity and pride appear in this, that when miserable men do seek after
God, instead of ascending higher than themselves as they ought to do,
they measure him by their own carnal stupidity, and, neglecting solid
inquiry, fly off to indulge their curiosity in vain speculation. Hence,
they do not conceive of him in the character in which he is manifested,
but imagine him to be whatever their own rashness has devised. This
abyss standing open, they cannot move one footstep without rushing
headlong to destruction. With such an idea of God, nothing which they
may attempt to offer in the way of worship or obedience can have any
value in his sight, because it is not him they worship, but, instead of
him, the dream and figment of their own heart. This corrupt procedure is
admirably described by Paul, when he says, that “thinking to be wise,
they became fools” (<span id="iv.i.v-p7.1"></span>[Rom.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.v-p7.1"></span>).
He had previously said that “they became vain in their imaginations,”
but lest any should suppose them blameless, he afterwards adds that they
were deservedly blinded, because, not contented with sober inquiry,
because, arrogating to themselves more than they have any title to do,
they of their own accord court darkness, nay, bewitch themselves with
perverse, empty show. Hence it is that their folly, the result not only
of vain curiosity, but of licentious desire and overweening confidence
in the pursuit of forbidden knowledge, cannot be excused.

<span id="iv.i.v-p8"></span>2. The expression of David (<span
id="iv.i.v-p8.1"></span>[Ps. 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#053)<span id="iv.i.v-p8.1"></span>:1),
“The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God,” is primarily applied
to those who, as will shortly farther appear, stifle the light of
nature, and intentionally stupefy themselves. We see many, after they
have become hardened in a daring course of sin, madly banishing all
remembrance of God, though spontaneously suggested to them from within,
by natural sense. To show how detestable this madness is, the Psalmist
introduces them as distinctly denying that there is a God, because
although they do not disown his essence, they rob him of his justice and
providence, and represent him as sitting idly in heaven. Nothing being
less accordant with the nature of God than to cast off the government of
the world, leaving it to chance, and so to wink at the crimes of men
that they may wanton with impunity in evil courses; it follows, that
every man who indulges in security, after extinguishing all fear of
divine Judgment, virtually denies that there is a God. As a just
punishment of the wicked, after they have closed their own eyes, God
makes their hearts dull and heavy, and hence, seeing, they see not.
David, indeed, is the best interpreter of his own meaning, when he says
elsewhere, the wicked has “no fear of God before his eyes,” (<span
id="iv.i.v-p8.2"></span>[Psalm
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.v-p8.2"></span>);
and, again, “He has said in his heart, God has forgotten; he hideth his
face; he will never see it.” Thus although they are forced to
acknowledge that there is some God, they, however, rob him of his glory
by denying his power. For, as Paul declares, “If we believe not, he
abideth faithful, he cannot deny himself,” (<span
id="iv.i.v-p8.3"></span>[2 Tim.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.v-p8.3"></span>);
so those who feign to themselves a dead and dumb idol, are truly said to
deny God. It is, moreover, to be observed, that though they struggle
with their own convictions, and would fain not only banish God from
their minds, but from heaven also, their stupefaction is never so
complete as to secure them from being occasionally dragged before the
divine tribunal. Still, as no fear restrains them from rushing violently
in the face of God, so long as they are hurried on by that blind
impulse, it cannot be denied that their prevailing state of mind in
regard to him is brutish oblivion.

<span id="iv.i.v-p9"></span>3. In this way, the vain pretext which many
employ to clothe their superstition is overthrown. They deem it enough
that they have some kind of zeal for religion, how preposterous soever
it may be, not observing that true religion must be conformable to the
will of God as its unerring standard; that he can never deny himself,
and is no spectra or phantom, to be metamorphosed at each individual’s
caprice. It is easy to see how superstition, with its false glosses,
mocks God, while it tries to please him. Usually fastening merely on
things on which he has declared he sets no value, it either
contemptuously overlooks, or even undisguisedly rejects, the things
which he expressly enjoins, or in which we are assured that he takes
pleasure. Those, therefore, who set up a fictitious worship, merely
worship and adore their own delirious fancies; indeed, they would never
dare so to trifle with God, had they not previously fashioned him after
their own childish conceits. Hence that vague and wandering opinion of
Deity is declared by an apostle to be ignorance of God: “Howbeit, then,
when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no
gods.” And he elsewhere declares, that the Ephesians were “without God”
(<span id="iv.i.v-p9.1"></span>[Eph.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="iv.i.v-p9.1"></span>) at
the time when they wandered without any correct knowledge of him. It
makes little difference, at least in this respect, whether you hold the
existence of one God, or a plurality of gods, since, in both cases
alike, by departing from the true God, you have nothing left but an
execrable idol. It remains, therefore, to conclude with Lactantius
(*Instit. Div.* lib 1:2, 6), “No religion is genuine that is not in
accordance with truth.”

<span id="iv.i.v-p10"></span>4. To this fault they add a second—viz.
that when they do think of God it is against their will; never
approaching him without being dragged into his presence, and when there,
instead of the voluntary fear flowing from reverence of the divine
majesty, feeling only that forced and servile fear which divine Judgment
extorts Judgment which, from the impossibility of escape, they are
compelled to dread, but which, while they dread, they at the same time
also hate. To impiety, and to it alone, the saying of Statius properly
applies: “Fear first brought gods into the world,” (*Theb.* lib. 1).
Those whose inclinations are at variance with the justice of God,
knowing that his tribunal has been erected for the punishment of
transgression, earnestly wish that that tribunal were overthrown. Under
the influence of this feeling they are actually warring against God,
justice being one of his essential attributes. Perceiving that they are
always within reach of his power, that resistance and evasion are alike
impossible, they fear and tremble. Accordingly, to avoid the appearance
of condemning a majesty by which all are overawed, they have recourse to
some species of religious observance, never ceasing meanwhile to defile
themselves with every kind of vice, and add crime to crime, until they
have broken the holy law of the Lord in every one of its requirements,
and set his whole righteousness at nought; at all events, they are not
so restrained by their semblance of fear as not to luxuriate and take
pleasure in iniquity, choosing rather to indulge their carnal
propensities than to curb them with the bridle of the Holy Spirit. But
since this shadow of religion (it scarcely even deserves to be called a
shadow) is false and vain, it is easy to infer how much this confused
knowledge of God differs from that piety which is instilled into the
breasts of believers, and from which alone true religion springs. And
yet hypocrites would fain, by means of tortuous windings, make a show of
being near to God at the very time they are fleeing from him. For while
the whole life ought to be one perpetual course of obedience, they rebel
without fear in almost all their actions, and seek to appease him with a
few paltry sacrifices; while they ought to serve him with integrity of
heart and holiness of life, they endeavour to procure his favour by
means of frivolous devices and punctilios of no value. Nay, they take
greater license in their grovelling indulgences, because they imagine
that they can fulfil their duty to him by preposterous expiations; in
short, while their confidence ought to have been fixed upon him, they
put him aside, and rest in themselves or the creatures. At length they
bewilder themselves in such a maze of error, that the darkness of
ignorance obscures, and ultimately extinguishes, those sparks which were
designed to show them the glory of God. Still, however, the conviction
that there is some Deity continues to exist, like a plant which can
never be completely eradicated, though so corrupt, that it is only
capable of producing the worst of fruit. Nay, we have still stronger
evidence of the proposition for which I now contend—viz. that a sense of
Deity is naturally engraven on the human heart, in the fact, that the
very reprobate are forced to acknowledge it. When at their ease, they
can jest about God, and talk pertly and loquaciously in disparagement of
his power; but should despair, from any cause, overtake them, it will
stimulate them to seek him, and dictate ejaculatory prayers, proving
that they were not entirely ignorant of God, but had perversely
suppressed feelings which ought to have been earlier manifested.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 5. - THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD CONSPICUOUS IN THE CREATION,
AND CONTINUAL GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD.](inst019)
