[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst045)  [Next](inst047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xiii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 12.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span>CHRIST, TO PERFORM THE OFFICE OF
MEDIATOR, BEHOVED TO BECOME MAN.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p2"></span>The two divisions of this chapter are,
I. The reasons why our Mediator behoved to be very God, and to become
man, sec. 1–3. II. Disposal of various objections by some fanatics, and
especially by Osiander, to the orthodox doctrine concerning the
Mediator, sec. 4–7.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p4"></span>1. Necessary, not absolutely, but by
divine decree, that the Mediator should be God, and become man. Neither
man nor angel, though pure, could have sufficed. The Son of God behoved
to come down. Man in innocence could not penetrate to God without a
Mediator, much less could he after the fall.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p5"></span>2. A second reason why the Mediator
behoved to be God and man—viz. that he had to convert those who were
heirs of hell into children of God.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p6"></span>3. Third reason, that in our flesh he
might yield a perfect obedience, satisfy the divine justice, and pay the
penalty of sin. Fourth reason, regarding the consolation and
confirmation of the whole Church.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7"></span>4. First objection against the orthodox
doctrine: Answer to it. Conformation from the sacrifices of the Law, the
testimony of the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and even Christ
himself.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p8"></span>5. Second objection: Answer: Answer
confirmed. Third objection: Answer. Fourth objection by Osiander:
Answer.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9"></span>6. Fifth objection, forming the basis of
Osiander’s errors on this subject: Answer. Nature of the divine image in
Adam. Christ the head of angels and men.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p10"></span>7. Sixth objection: Answer. Seventh
objection: Answer. Eighth objection: Answer. Ninth objection: Answer.
Tenth objection: Answer. Eleventh objection: Answer. Twelfth objection:
Answer. The sum of the doctrine.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p11"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12"></span>1. It deeply concerned us, that he who
was to be our Mediator should be very God and very man. If the necessity
be inquired into, it was not what is commonly termed simple or absolute,
but flowed from the divine decree on which the salvation of man
depended. What was best for us, our most merciful Father determined. Our
iniquities, like a cloud intervening between Him and us, having utterly
alienated us from the kingdom of heaven, none but a person reaching to
him could be the medium of restoring peace. But who could thus reach to
him? Could any of the sons of Adam? All of them, with their parents,
shuddered at the sight of God. Could any of the angels? They had need of
a head, by connection with which they might adhere to their God entirely
and inseparably. What then? The case was certainly desperate, if the
Godhead itself did not descend to us, it being impossible for us to
ascend. Thus the Son of God behoved to become our Emmanuel, the God with
us; and in such a way, that by mutual union his divinity and our nature
might be combined; otherwise, neither was the proximity near enough, nor
the affinity strong enough, to give us hope that God would dwell with
us; so great was the repugnance between our pollution and the spotless
purity of God. Had man remained free from all taint, he was of too
humble a condition to penetrate to God without a Mediator. What, then,
must it have been, when by fatal ruin he was plunged into death and
hell, defiled by so many stains, made loathsome by corruption; in fine,
overwhelmed with every curse? It is not without cause, therefore, that
Paul, when he would set forth Christ as the Mediator, distinctly
declares him to be man. There is, says he, “one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>[1 Tim.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>). He might have called him God, or at
least, omitting to call him God he might also have omitted to call him
man; but because the Spirit, speaking by his mouth, knew our infirmity,
he opportunely provides for it by the most appropriate remedy, setting
the Son of God familiarly before us as one of ourselves. That no one,
therefore, may feel perplexed where to seek the Mediator, or by what
means to reach him, the Spirit, by calling him man, reminds us that he
is near, nay, contiguous to us, inasmuch as he is our flesh. And,
indeed, he intimates the same thing in another place, where he explains
at greater length that he is not a high priest who “cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>[Heb.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p13"></span>2. This will become still clearer if we
reflect, that the work to be performed by the Mediator was of no common
description: being to restore us to the divine favour, so as to make us,
instead of sons of men, sons of God; instead of heirs of hell, heirs of
a heavenly kingdom. Who could do this unless the Son of God should also
become the Son of man, and so receive what is ours as to transfer to us
what is his, making that which is his by nature to become ours by grace?
Relying on this earnest, we trust that we are the sons of God, because
the natural Son of God assumed to himself a body of our body, flesh of
our flesh, bones of our bones, that he might be one with us; he declined
not to take what was peculiar to us, that he might in his turn extend to
us what was peculiarly his own, and thus might be in common with us both
Son of God and Son of man. Hence that holy brotherhood which he commends
with his own lips, when he says, “I ascend to my Father, and your
Father, to my God, and your God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>[John
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>). In this way, we have a sure inheritance
in the heavenly kingdom, because the only Son of God, to whom it
entirely belonged, has adopted us as his brethren; and if brethren, then
partners with him in the inheritance (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p13.2"></span>[Rom.
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p13.2"></span>). Moreover, it was especially necessary
for this cause also that he who was to be our Redeemer should be truly
God and man. It was his to swallow up death: who but Life could do so?
It was his to conquer sin: who could do so save Righteousness itself? It
was his to put to flight the powers of the air and the world: who could
do so but the mighty power superior to both? But who possesses life and
righteousness, and the dominion and government of heaven, but God alone?
Therefore, God, in his infinite mercy, having determined to redeem us,
became himself our Redeemer in the person of his only begotten Son.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p14"></span>3. Another principal part of our
reconciliation with God was, that man, who had lost himself by his
disobedience, should, by way of remedy, oppose to it obedience, satisfy
the justice of God, and pay the penalty of sin. Therefore, our Lord came
forth very man, adopted the person of Adam, and assumed his name, that
he might in his stead obey the Father; that he might present our flesh
as the price of satisfaction to the just judgment of God, and in the
same flesh pay the penalty which we had incurred. Finally, since as God
only he could not suffer, and as man only could not overcome death, he
united the human nature with the divine, that he might subject the
weakness of the one to death as an expiation of sin, and by the power of
the other, maintaining a struggle with death, might gain us the victory.
Those, therefore, who rob Christ of divinity or humanity either detract
from his majesty and glory, or obscure his goodness. On the other hand,
they are no less injurious to men, undermining and subverting their
faith, which, unless it rest on this foundation, cannot stand. Moreover,
the expected Redeemer was that son of Abraham and David whom God had
promised in the Law and in the Prophets. Here believers have another
advantage. Tracing up his origin in regular series to David and Abraham,
they more distinctly recognise him as the Messiah celebrated by so many
oracles. But special attention must be paid to what I lately explained,
namely, that a common nature is the pledge of our union with the Son of
God; that, clothed with our flesh, he warred to death with sin that he
might be our triumphant conqueror; that the flesh which he received of
us he offered in sacrifice, in order that by making expiation he might
wipe away our guilt, and appease the just anger of his Father.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p15"></span>4. He who considers these things with
due attention, will easily disregard vague speculations, which attract
giddy minds and lovers of novelty. One speculation of this class is,
that Christ, even though there had been no need of his interposition to
redeem the human race, would still have become man. I admit that in the
first ordering of creation, while the state of nature was entire, he was
appointed head of angels and men; for which reason Paul designates him
“the first-born of every creature,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>[Col.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>). But since the whole Scripture proclaims
that he was clothed with flesh in order to become a Redeemer, it is
presumptuous to imagine any other cause or end. We know well why Christ
was at first promised—viz. that he might renew a fallen world, and
succour lost man. Hence under the Law he was typified by sacrifices, to
inspire believers with the hope that God would be propitious to them
after he was reconciled by the expiation of their sins. Since from the
earliest age, even before the Law was promulgated, there was never any
promise of a Mediator without blood, we justly infer that he was
destined in the eternal counsel of God to purge the pollution of man,
the shedding of blood being the symbol of expiation. Thus, too, the
prophets, in discoursing of him, foretold that he would be the Mediator
between God and man. It is sufficient to refer to the very remarkable
prophecy of Isaiah (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p15.2"></span>[Isa.
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p15.2"></span>), in which he foretells that he was
“smitten for our iniquities;” that “the chastisement of our peace was
upon him;” that as a priest “he was made an offering for sin;” “that by
his stripes we are healed;” that as all “like lost sheep have gone
astray,” “it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief,” that
he might “bear our iniquities.” After hearing that Christ was divinely
appointed to bring relief to miserable sinners, whose overleaps these
limits gives too much indulgence to a foolish curiosity.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p16"></span>Then when he actually appeared, he
declared the cause of his advent to be, that by appeasing God he might
bring us from death unto life. To the same effect was the testimony of
the Apostles concerning him (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>[John
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>; 10:14). Thus John, before teaching that
the Word was made flesh, narrates the fall of man. But above all, let us
listen to our Saviour himself when discoursing of his office: “God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” Again,
“The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.” “I am the resurrection
and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live.” “The Son of man is come to save that which was lost.” Again,
“They that be whole need not a physician.”24  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) I should never have done were I to
quote all the passages. Indeed, the Apostles, with one consent, lead us
back to this fountain; and assuredly, if he had not come to reconcile
God, the honour of his priesthood would fall, seeing it was his office
as priest to stand between God and men, and “offer both gifts and
sacrifices for sins,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.3"></span>[Heb.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.3"></span>); nor could he be our righteousness, as
having been made a propitiation for us in order that God might not
impute to us our sins (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.4"></span>[2 Cor.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.4"></span>). In short, he would be stript of all the
titles with which Scripture invests him. Nor could Paul’s doctrine stand
“What the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.5"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.5"></span>). Nor what he states in another passage:
“The grace of God that bringeth salvation has appeared to all men,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.6"></span>[Tit.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.6"></span>). In fine, the only end which the
Scripture uniformly assigns for the Son of God voluntarily assuming our
nature, and even receiving it as a command from the Father, is, that he
might propitiate the Father to us by becoming a victim. “Thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer;”—“and that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name.” “Therefore does my
Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it
again.”—“This commandment have I received of my Father.” “As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be
lifted up.” “Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I
unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name.”24  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md) Here he distinctly assigns as the
reason for assuming our nature, that he might become a propitiatory
victim to take away sin. For the same reason Zacharias declares (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.3"></span>[Luke
1:79](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#079.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.3"></span>), that he came “to perform the mercy
promised to our fathers,” “to give light to them that sit in darkness,
and in the shadow of death.” Let us remember that all these things are
affirmed of the Son of God, in whom, as Paul elsewhere declares, were
“hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” and save whom it was
his determination “not to know any thing,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.4"></span>[Col.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.5"></span>[1
Cor. 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p19"></span>5. Should any one object, that in this
there is nothing to prevent the same Christ who redeemed us when
condemned from also testifying his love to us when safe by assuming our
nature, we have the brief answer, that when the Spirit declares that by
the eternal decree of God the two things were connected together—viz.
that Christ should be our Redeemer, and, at the same time, a partaker of
our nature, it is unlawful to inquire further. He who is tickled with a
desire of knowing something more, not contented with the immutable
ordination of God, shows also that he is not even contented with that
Christ who has been given us as the price of redemption. And, indeed,
Paul not only declares for what end he was sent, but rising to the
sublime mystery of predestination, seasonably represses all the
wantonness and prurience of the human mind. “He has chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of
his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made
us accepted in the Beloved: In whom we have redemption through his
blood,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>[Eph.
1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>). Here certainly the fall of Adam is not
presupposed as anterior in point of time, but our attention is directed
to what God predetermined before all ages, when he was pleased to
provide a cure for the misery of the human race. If, again, it is
objected that this counsel of God depended on the fall of man, which he
foresaw, to me it is sufficient and more to reply, that those who
propose to inquire, or desire to know more of Christ than God
predestinated by his secret decree, are presuming with impious audacity
to invent a new Christ. Paul, when discoursing of the proper office of
Christ, justly prays for the Ephesians that God would strengthen them
“by his Spirit in the inner man,” that they might “be able to comprehend
with all saints what is the breadth and length, and depth and height;
and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.2"></span>[Eph.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.2"></span>); as if he intended of set purpose to set
barriers around our minds, and prevent them from declining one iota from
the gift of reconciliation whenever mention is made of Christ.
Wherefore, seeing it is as Paul declares it to be, “a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.3"></span>[1 Tim.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.3"></span>), in it I willingly acquiesce. And since
the same Apostle elsewhere declares that the grace which is now
manifested by the Gospel “was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.4"></span>[2 Tim.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.4"></span>), I am resolved to adhere to it firmly
even to the end. This moderation is unjustly vituperated by Osiander,
who has unhappily, in the present day, again agitated this question,
which a few had formerly raised. He brings a charge of overweening
confidence against those who deny that the Son of God would have
appeared in the flesh if Adam had not fallen, because this notion is not
repudiated by any passage of Scripture. As if Paul did not lay a curb on
perverse curiosity when after speaking of the redemption obtained by
Christ, he bids us “avoid foolish questions,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.5"></span>[Tit.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.5"></span>). To such insanity have some proceeded in
their preposterous eagerness to seem acute, that they have made it a
question whether the Son of God might not have assumed the nature of an
ass. This blasphemy, at which all pious minds justly shudder with
detestation, Osiander excuses by the pretext that it is no where
distinctly refuted in Scripture; as if Paul, when he counted nothing
valuable or worth knowing “save Jesus Christ and him crucified,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.6"></span>[I Cor.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.6"></span>), were admitting, that the author of
salvation is an ass. He who elsewhere declares that Christ was by the
eternal counsel of the Father appointed “head over all things to the
church,” would never have acknowledged another to whom no office of
redemption had been assigned.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p20"></span>6. The principle on which Osiander
founds is altogether frivolous. He will have it that man was created in
the image of God, inasmuch as he was formed on the model of the future
Messiah, in order to resemble him whom the Father had already determined
to clothe with flesh. Hence he infers, that though Adam had never fallen
from his first and pure original, Christ would still have been man. How
silly and distorted this view is, all men of sound judgment at once
discern; still he thinks he was the first to see what the image of God
was, namely, that not only did the divine glory shine forth in the
excellent endowments with which he was adorned, but God dwelt in him
essentially. But while I grant that Adam bore the image of God, inasmuch
as he was united to God (this being the true and highest perfection of
dignity), yet I maintain, that the likeness of God is to be sought for
only in those marks of superiority with which God has distinguished Adam
above the other animals. And likewise, with one consent, acknowledge
that Christ was even then the image of God, and, accordingly, whatever
excellence was engraven on Adam had its origin in this, that by means of
the only begotten Son he approximated to the glory of his Maker. Man,
therefore, was created in the image of God (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>[Gen.
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>), and in him the Creator was pleased to
behold, as in a mirror, his own glory. To this degree of honour he was
exalted by the kindness of the only begotten Son. But I add, that as the
Son was the common head both of men and angels, so the dignity which was
conferred on man belonged to the angels also. For when we hear them
called the sons of God (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.2"></span>[Ps.
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.2"></span>), it would be incongruous to deny that
they were endued with some quality in which they resembled the Father.
But if he was pleased that his glory should be represented in men and
angels, and made manifest in both natures, it is ignorant trifling in
Osiander to say, that angels were postponed to men, because they did not
bear the image of Christ. They could not constantly enjoy the immediate
presence of God if they were not like to him; nor does Paul teach (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.3"></span>[Col.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.3"></span>) that men are renewed in the image of God
in any other way than by being associated with angels, that they may be
united together under one head. In fine, if we believe Christ, our
felicity will be perfected when we shall have been received into the
heavens, and made like the angels. But if Osiander is entitled to infer
that the primary type of the image of God was in the man Christ, on the
same ground may any one maintain that Christ behoved to partake of the
angelic nature, seeing that angels also possess the image of God.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p21"></span>7. Osiander has no reason to fear that
God would be found a liar, if the decree to incarnate the Son was not
previously immutably fixed in his mind. Even had Adam not lost his
integrity, he would, with the angels, have been like to God; and yet it
would not therefore have been necessary that the Son of God should
become either a man or an angel. In vain does he entertain the absurd
fear, that unless it had been determined by the immutable counsel of
God, before man was created, that Christ should be born, not as the
Redeemer, but as the first man, he might lose his precedence, since he
would not have been born, except for an accidental circumstance, namely,
that he might restore the lost race of man; and in this way would have
been created in the image of Adam. For why should he be alarmed at what
the Scripture plainly teaches, that “he was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin?” (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>[Heb.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>). Hence Luke, also, hesitates not to
reckon him in his genealogy as a son of Adam (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.2"></span>[Luke
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.2"></span>). I should like to know why Christ is
termed by Paul the second Adam (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.3"></span>[1
Cor. 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.3"></span>), unless it be that a human condition was
decreed him, for the purpose of raising up the ruined posterity of Adam.
For if in point of order, that condition was antecedent to creation, he
ought to have been called the first Adam. Osiander confidently affirms,
that because Christ was in the purpose of God foreknown as man, men were
formed after him as their model. But Paul, by calling him the second
Adam, gives that revolt which made it necessary to restore nature to its
primitive condition an intermediate place between its original formation
and the restitution which we obtain by Christ: hence it follows, that it
was this restitution which made the Son of God be born, and thereby
become man. Moreover, Osiander argues ill and absurdly, that as long as
Adam maintained his integrity, he would have been the image of himself,
and not of Christ. I maintain, on the contrary, that although the Son of
God had never become incarnate, nevertheless the image of God was
conspicuous in Adam, both in his body and his soul; in the rays of this
image it always appeared that Christ was truly head, and had in all
things the pre-eminence. In this way we dispose of the futile sophism
put forth by Osiander, that the angels would have been without this
head, had not God purposed to clothe his Son with flesh, even
independent of the sin of Adam. He inconsiderately assumes what no
rational person will grant, that Christ could have had no supremacy over
the angels, so that they might enjoy him as their prince, unless in so
far as he was man. But it is easy to infer from the words of Paul (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.4"></span>[Col.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.4"></span>), that inasmuch as he is the eternal Word
of God, he is the first-born of every creature, not because he is
created, or is to be reckoned among the creatures, but because the
entire structure of the world, such as it was from the beginning, when
adorned with exquisite beauty had no other beginning; then, inasmuch as
he was made man, he is the first-born from the dead. For in one short
passage (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.5"></span>[Col.
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.5"></span>), the Apostle calls our attention to both
views: that by the Son all things were created, so that he has dominion
over angels; and that he became man, in order that he might begin to be
a Redeemer. Owing to the same ignorance, Osiander says that men would
not have had Christ for their king unless he had been a man; as if the
kingdom of God could not have been established by his eternal Son,
though not clothed with human flesh, holding the supremacy while angels
and men were gathered together to participate in his celestial life and
glory. But he is always deluded, or imposes upon himself by this false
principle, that the church would have been akefalon—without a head—had
not Christ appeared in the flesh. In the same way as angels enjoyed him
for their head, could he not by his divine energy preside over men, and
by the secret virtue of his Spirit quicken and cherish them as his body,
until they were gathered into heaven to enjoy the same life with the
angels? The absurdities which I have been refuting, Osiander regards as
infallible oracles. Taking an intoxicating delight in his own
speculations, his wont is to extract ridiculous plans out of nothing. He
afterwards says that he has a much stronger passage to produce, namely,
the prophecy of Adam, who, when the woman was brought to him, said,
“This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.6"></span>[Gen.
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.6"></span>). But how does he prove it to be a
prophecy? Because in Matthew Christ attributes the same expression to
God! as if every thing which God has spoken by man contained a prophecy.
On the same principle, as the law proceeded from God, let Osiander in
each precept find a prophecy. Add, that our Saviour’s exposition would
have been harsh and grovelling, had he confined himself to the literal
meaning. He was not referring to the mystical union with which he has
honoured the Church, but only to conjugal fidelity, and states, that the
reason why God declared man and wife to be one flesh, was to prevent any
one from violating that indissoluble tie by divorce. If this simple
meaning is too low for Osiander, let him censure Christ for not leading
his disciples to the hidden sense, by interpreting his Father’s words
with more subtlety. Paul gives no countenance to Osiander’s dream, when,
after saying that “we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones,” he immediately adds, “This is a great mystery,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.7"></span>[Eph.
5:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.7"></span>). For he meant not to refer to the sense
in which Adam used the words, but sets forth, under the figure and
similitude of marriage, the sacred union which makes us one with Christ.
His words have this meaning; for reminding us that he is speaking of
Christ and the Church, he, by way of correction, distinguishes between
the marriage tie and the spiritual union of Christ with his Church.
Wherefore, this subtlety vanishes at once. I deem it unnecessary to
discuss similar absurdities: for from this very brief refutation, the
vanity of them all will be discovered. Abundantly sufficient for the
solid nurture of the children of God is this sober truth, that “when the
fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them who were under the law,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.8"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p21.8"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](inst046.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p17"></span>43 243 <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.1"></span>[John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.1"></span>; 5:25; <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.2"></span>[Mt.
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.2"></span>; 9:12.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](inst046.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p17.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p18"></span>44 244 <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>[Luke
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.2"></span>[John
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p18.2"></span>; 3:14; 12:27, 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 13. - CHRIST CLOTHED WITH THE TRUE SUBSTANCE OF HUMAN
NATURE.](inst047.md)
