[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst101)  [Next](inst103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

## <span id="v.i-p0.1"></span>BOOK 1

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>1. The true wisdom of man consists in the
knowledge of God the Creator and Redeemer.

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>2. This knowledge is naturally implanted in us,
and the end of it ought to be the worship of God rightly performed, or
reverence for the Deity accompanied by fear and love.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>3. But this seed is corrupted by ignorance,
whence arises superstitious worship; and by wickedness, whence arise
slavish dread and hatred of the Deity.

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>4. It is also from another source that it is
derived namely, from the structure of the whole world, and from the Holy
Scriptures.

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>5. This structure teaches us what is the
goodness, power, justice, and wisdom of God in creating all things in
heaven and earth, and in preserving them by ordinary and extraordinary
government, by which his Providence is more clearly made known. It
teaches also what are our wants, that we may learn to place our
confidence in the goodness, power, and wisdom of God, to obey his
commandments, to flee to him in adversity, and to offer thanksgiving to
him for the gifts which we enjoy.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>6. By the Holy Scriptures, also, God the
Creator is known. We ought to consider what these Scriptures are; that
they are true, and have proceeded from the Spirit of God; which is
proved by the testimony of the Holy Spirit, by the efficacy and
antiquity of the Scriptures, by the certainty of the Prophecies, by the
miraculous preservation of the Law, by the calling and writings of the
Apostles, by the consent of the Church, and by the steadfastness of the
martyrs, whence it is evident that all the principles of piety are
overthrown by those fanatics who, laying aside the Scripture, fly to
revelations.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>7. Next, what they teach; or, what is the
nature of God in himself, and in the creation and government of all
things.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>8. The nature of God in himself is infinite,
invisible, eternal, almighty; whence it follows that they are mistaken
who ascribe to God a visible form. In his one essence there are three
persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>9. In the creation of all things there are
chiefly considered, 1. Heavenly and spiritual substances, that is,
angels, of which some are good and the protectors of the godly, while
others are bad, not by creation, but by corruption; 2. Earthly
substances, and particularly man, whose perfection is displayed in soul
and in body.

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>10. In the government of all things the nature
of God is manifested. Now his government is, in one respect, universal,
by which he directs all the creatures according to the properties which
he bestowed on each when he created them.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>11. In another respect, it is special; which
appears in regard to contingent events, so that if any person is visited
either by adversity or by any prosperous result, he ought to ascribe it
wholly to God; and with respect to those things which act according to a
fixed law of nature, though their peculiar properties were naturally
bestowed on them, still they exert their power only so far as they are
directed by the immediate hand of God.

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>12. It is viewed also with respect to time
past and future. *Past*, that we may learn that all things happen by the
appointment of God, who acts either by means, or without means, or
contrary to means; so that everything which happens yields good to the
godly and evil to the wicked. *Future*, to which belong human
deliberations, and which shows that we ought to employ lawful means;
since that Providence on which we rely furnishes its own means.

<span id="v.i-p13"></span>13. Lastly, by attending to the advantage
which the godly derive from it. For we know certainly, 1. That God takes
care of the whole human race, but especially of his Church. 2. That God
governs all things by his will, and regulates them by his wisdom. 3.
That he has most abundant power of doing good; for in his hand are
heaven and earth, all creatures are subject to his sway, the godly rest
on his protection, and the power of hell is restrained by his authority.
That nothing happens by chance, though the causes may be concealed, but
by the will of God; by his secret will which we are unable to explore,
but adore with reverence, and by his will which is conveyed to us in the
Law and in the Gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: BOOK 2](inst103)
