[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst070)  [Next](inst072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xix"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xix-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 18.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p1"></span>THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF WORKS IMPROPERLY
INFERRED FROM REWARDS.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p2"></span>There are three divisions in this
chapter,—I. A solution of two general objections which are urged in
support of justification by works. First, That God will render to every
one according to his works, sec. 1. Second, That the reward of works is
called eternal, sec. 2-6. II. Answer to other special objections derived
from the former, and a perversion of passages of Scripture, sec. 6-9.
III. Refutation of the sophism that faith itself is called a work, and,
therefore, justification by it is by works, sec. 10.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p4"></span>1. Two general objections. The former
solved and explained. What meant by the term *working*.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p5"></span>2. Solution of the second general
objection. 1. Works not the cause of salvation. This shown from the name
and nature of inheritance. 2. A striking example that the Lord rewards
the works of believers with blessings which he had promised before the
works were thought of.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p6"></span>3. First reason why eternal life said to
be the reward of works. This confirmed by passages of Scripture. The
concurrence of Ambrose. A rule to be observed. Declarations of Christ
and an Apostle.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p7"></span>4. Other four reasons. Holiness the way
to the kingdom, not the cause of obtaining it. Proposition of the
Sophists.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p8"></span>5. Objection that God crowns the works
of his people. Three answers from Augustine. A fourth from Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p9"></span>6. First special objection—viz. that we
are ordered to lay up treasure in heaven. Answer, showing in what way
this can be done.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p10"></span>7. Second objection—viz. that the
righteous enduring affliction are said to be worthy of the kingdom of
heaven. Answer. What meant by righteousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p11"></span>8. A third objection founded on three
passages of Paul. Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p12"></span>9. Fourth objection founded on our
Savior’s words, “If ye would enter into life, keep the commandments.”
Answer, giving an exposition of the passage.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p13"></span>10. Last objection—viz. that faith
itself is called a work. Answer—it is not as a work that faith
justifies.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p14"></span>1. Let us now proceed to those passages
which affirm that God will render to every one according to his deeds.
Of this description are the following: “We must all appear before the
judgment-seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in
his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad;”
“Who will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality, eternal life;” but “tribulation and anguish upon every soul
of man that does evil;” “They that have done good, unto the resurrection
of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation;” “Come, ye blessed of my Father;” “For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink,” &c. To these we
may add the passages which describe eternal life as the reward of works,
such as the following: “The recompense of a man’s hands shall be
rendered unto him;” “He that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded;”
“Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven;”
“Every man shall receive his own rewards according to his own labour.”45
 <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md) The passages in which it is
said that God will reward every man according to his works are easily
disposed of. For that mode of expression indicates not the cause but the
order of sequence. Now, it is beyond a doubt that the steps by which the
Lord in his mercy consummates our salvation are these, “Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.10"></span>[Rom.
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.10"></span>). But though it is by mercy alone that
God admits his people to life, yet as he leads them into possession of
it by the course of good works, that he may complete his work in them in
the order which he has destined, it is not strange that they are said to
be crowned according to their works, since by these doubtless they are
prepared for receiving the crown of immortality. Nay, for this reason
they are aptly said to work out their own salvation (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.11"></span>[Phil.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.11"></span>), while by exerting themselves in good
works they aspire to eternal life, just as they are elsewhere told to
labour for the meat which perisheth not (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.12"></span>[John
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.12"></span>), while they acquire life for themselves
by believing in Christ; and yet it is immediately added, that this meat
“the Son of man shall give unto you.” Hence it appears, that *working*
is not at all opposed to *grace*, but refers to pursuit,45  <span
id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md) and, therefore, it follows not that
believers are the authors of their own salvation, or that it is the
result of their works. What then? The moment they are admitted to
fellowship with Christ, by the knowledge of the gospel, and the
illumination of the Holy Spirit, their eternal life is begun, and then
He which has begun a good work in them “will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p16.1"></span>[Phil.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p16.1"></span>). And it is performed when in
righteousness and holiness they bear a resemblance to their heavenly
Father, and prove that they are not degenerate sons.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p17"></span>2. There is nothing in the term
*reward* to justify the inference that our works are the cause of
salvation. First, let it be a fixed principle in our hearts, that the
kingdom of heaven is not the hire of servants, but the inheritance of
sons (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p17.1"></span>[Eph.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.1"></span>); an inheritance obtained by those only
whom the Lord has adopted as sons, and obtained for no other cause than
this adoption, “The son of the bond-women shall not be heir with the son
of the free-woman,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p17.2"></span>[Gal.
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.2"></span>). And hence in those very passages in
which the Holy Spirit promises eternal glory as the reward of works, by
expressly calling it an inheritance, he demonstrates that it comes to us
from some other quarter. Thus Christ enumerates the works for which he
bestows heaven as a recompense, while he is calling his elect to the
possession of it, but he at the same time adds, that it is to be
possessed by right of inheritance (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.3"></span>[Mt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.3"></span>). Paul, too, encourages servants, while
faithfully doing their duty, to hope for reward from the Lord, but adds,
“of the inheritance,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p17.4"></span>[Col.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.4"></span>). You see how, as it were, in formal terms
they carefully caution us to attribute eternal blessedness not to works,
but to the adoption of God. Why, then, do they at the same time make
mention of works? This question will be elucidated by an example from
Scripture (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p17.5"></span>[Gen.
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.5"></span>; 17:1). Before the birth of Isaac, Abraham
had received promise of a seed in whom all the families of the earth
should be blessed; the propagation of a seed that for number should
equal the stars of heaven, and the sand of the sea, &c. Many years after
he prepares, in obedience to a divine message, to sacrifice his son.
Having done this act of obedience, he receives the promise, “By myself
have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and
hast not withheld thy son, thine only son; that in blessing I will bless
thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the
heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea-shore, and thy seed shall
possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.6"></span>[Gen.
22:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p17.6"></span>). What is it we hear? Did Abraham by his
obedience merit the blessing which had been promised him before the
precept was given? Here assuredly we see without ambiguity that God
rewards the works of believers with blessings which he had given them
before the works were thought of, there still being no cause for the
blessings which he bestows but his own mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p18"></span>3. And yet the Lord does not act in
vain, or delude us when he says, that he renders to works what he had
freely given previous to works. As he would have us to be exercised in
good works, while aspiring to the manifestation, or, if I may so speak,
the fruition of the things which he has promised, and by means of them
to hasten on to the blessed hope set before us in heaven, the fruit of
the promises is justly ascribed to those things by which it is brought
to maturity. Both things were elegantly expressed by the Apostle, when
he told the Colossians to study the offices of charity, “for the hope
which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word
of the truth of the gospel,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p18.1"></span>[Col.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p18.1"></span>). For when he says that the gospel
informed them of the hope which was treasured up for them in heaven, he
declares that it depends on Christ alone, and not at all upon works.
With this accords the saying of Peter, that believers “are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the
last time,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p18.2"></span>[1 Pet.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p18.2"></span>). When he says that they strive on account
of it, he intimates that believers must continue running during the
whole course of their lives in order that they may attain it. But to
prevent us from supposing that the reward which is promised becomes a
kind of merit, our Lord introduced a parable, in which he represented
himself as a householder, who sent all the laborers whom he met to work
in his vineyard, some at the first hour of the day, others at the
second, others at the third, some even at the eleventh; at evening he
paid them all alike. The interpretation of this parable is briefly and
truly given by that ancient writer (whoever he was) who wrote the book
*De Vocatione Gentium*, which goes under the name of Ambrose. I will
give it in his words rather than my own:45  <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) “By means of this comparison, our Lord
represented the many various modes of calling as pertaining to grace
alone, where those who were introduced into the vineyard at the eleventh
hour and made equal to those who had toiled the whole day, doubtless
represent the case of those whom the indulgence of God, to commend the
excellence of grace, has rewarded in the decline of the day and the
conclusion of life; not paying the price of labor, but shedding the
riches of his goodness on those whom he chose without works; in order
that even those who bore the heat of the day, and yet received no more
than those who came last, may understand that they received a gift of
grace, not the hire of works,” (Lib. 1, cap. 5). Lastly, it is also
worthy of remark, that in those passages in which eternal life is called
the reward of works, it is not taken simply for that communion which we
have with God preparatory to a blessed immortality, when with paternal
benevolence he embraces us in Christ, but for the possession, or, as it
is called, the fruition of blessedness, as the very words of Christ
express it, “in the world to come eternal life,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p19.1"></span>[Mark
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p19.1"></span>), and elsewhere, “Come, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p19.2"></span>[Mt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p19.2"></span>). For this reasons also, Paul gives the
name of *adoption* to that revelation of adoption which shall be made at
the resurrection; and which adoption he afterwards interprets to mean,
the redemption of our body (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p19.3"></span>[Rom.
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p19.3"></span>). But, otherwise, as alienation from God
is eternal death,—so when man is received into favor by God that he may
enjoy communion with him and become one with him, he passes from death
unto life. This is owing to adoption alone. Although after their manner
they pertinaciously urge the term *reward*, we can always carry them
back to the declaration of Peter, that eternal life is the reward of
faith (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p19.4"></span>[1 Pet.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p19.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p20"></span>4. Let us not suppose, then, that the
Holy Spirit, by this promise, commends the dignity of our works, as if
they were deserving of such a reward. For Scripture leaves us nothing of
which we may glory in the sight of God. Nay, rather its whole object is
to repress, humble, cast down, and completely crush our pride. But in
this way help is given to our weakness, which would immediately give way
were it not sustained by this expectation, and soothed by this comfort.
First, let every man reflect for himself how hard it is not only to
leave all things, but to leave and abjure one’s self. And yet this is
the training by which Christ initiates his disciples, that is, all the
godly. Secondly, he thus keeps them all their lifetime under the
discipline of the cross, lest they should allow their heart to long for
or confide in present good. In short, his treatment is usually such,
that wherever they turn their eyes, as far as this world extends, they
see nothing before them but despair; and hence Paul says “If in this
life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xix-p20.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p20.1"></span>). That they may not fail in these great
straits, the Lord is present reminding them to lift their head higher
and extend their view farther, that in him they may find a happiness
which they see not in the world: to this happiness he gives the name of
reward, hire, recompense, not as estimating the merit of works, but
intimating that it is a compensation for their straits, sufferings, and
affronts, &c. Wherefore, there is nothing to prevent us from calling
eternal life a recompense after the example of Scripture, because in it
the Lord brings his people from labour to quiet, from affliction to a
prosperous and desirable condition, from sorrow to joy, from poverty to
affluence, from ignominy to glory; in short, exchanges all the evils
which they endured for blessings. Thus there will be no impropriety in
considering holiness of life as the way, not indeed the way which gives
access to the glory of the heavenly kingdom; but a way by which God
conducts his elect to the manifestation of that kingdom, since his good
pleasure is to glorify those whom he has sanctified (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p20.2"></span>[Rom.
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p20.2"></span>). Only let us not imagine that merit and
hire are correlative terms, a point on which the Sophists absurdly
insist, from not attending to the end to which we have adverted. How
preposterous is it when the Lord calls us to one end to look to another?
Nothing is clearer than that a reward is promised to good works, in
order to support the weakness of our flesh by some degree of comfort;
but not to inflate our minds with vain glory. He, therefore, who from
merit infers reward, or weighs works and reward in the same balance,
errs very widely from the end which God has in view.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p21"></span>5. Accordingly, when the Scripture
speaks of “a crown of righteousness which God the righteous Judge shall
give” “at that day,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p21.1"></span>[2 Tim.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p21.1"></span>), I not only say with Augustine, “To whom
could the righteous Judge give the crown if the merciful Father had not
given grace, and how could there have been righteousness but for the
precedence of grace which justified the ungodly? how could these be paid
as things due were not things not due previously given?” (August. ad
Valent. de Grat. et Lib. Art.); but I also add, how could he impute
righteousness to our works, did not his indulgence hide the
unrighteousness that is in them? How could he deem them worthy of
reward, did he not with boundless goodness destroy what is unworthy in
them? Augustine is wont to give the name of grace to eternal life,
because, while it is the recompense of works, it is bestowed by the
gratuitous gifts of God. But Scripture humbles us more, and at the same
time elevates us. For besides forbidding us to glory in works, because
they are the gratuitous gifts of God, it tells us that they are always
defiled by some degrees of impurity, so that they cannot satisfy God
when they are tested by the standard of his justice; but that lest our
activity should be destroyed, they please merely by pardon. But though
Augustine speaks somewhat differently from us, it is plain from his
words that the difference is more apparent than real. After drawing a
contrast between two individuals the one with a life holy and perfect
almost to a miracle; the other honest indeed, and of pure morals, yet
not so perfect as not to leave much room for desiring better, he at
length infers, “He who seems inferior in conduct, yet on account of the
true faith in God by which he lives (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p21.2"></span>[Hab.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p21.2"></span>), and in conformity to which he accuses
himself in all his faults, praises God in all his good works, takes
shame to himself, and ascribes glory to God, from whom he receives both
forgiveness for his sins, and the love of well-doing, the moment he is
set free from this life is translated into the society of Christ. Why,
but just on account of his faith? For though it saves no man without
works (such faith being reprobate and not working by love), yet by means
of it sins are forgiven; for the just lives by faith: without it works
which seem good are converted into sins,” (August. ad Bonifac., Lib. 3,
c. 5). Here he not obscurely acknowledges what we so strongly maintains
that the righteousness of good works depends on their being approved by
God in the way of pardon.45  <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md)

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p23"></span>6. In a sense similar to the above
passages our opponents quote the following: “Make to yourselves friends
of the mammon of unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive
you into everlasting habitations,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.1"></span>[Luke
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.1"></span>). “Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but
in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy: that they
do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate; laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xix-p23.2"></span>[1 Tim.
6:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.2"></span>). For the good works which we enjoy in
eternal blessedness are compared to riches. I answer, that we shall
never attain to the true knowledge of these passages unless we attend to
the scope of the Spirit in uttering them. If it is true, as Christ says,
“Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.3"></span>[Mt.
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.3"></span>), then, as the children of the world are
intent on providing those things which form the delight of the present
life, so it is the duty of believers, after they have learned that this
life will shortly pass away like a dream, to take care that those things
which they would truly enjoy be transmitted thither where their entire
life is to be spent. We must, therefore, do like those who begin to
remove to any place where they mean to fix their abode. As they send
forward their effects, and grudge not to want them for a season, because
they think the more they have in their future residence, the happier
they are; so, if we think that heaven is our country, we should send our
wealth thither rather than retain it here, where on our sudden departure
it will be lost to us. But how shall we transmit it? By contributing to
the necessities of the poor, the Lord imputing to himself whatever is
given to them. Hence that excellent promise, “He that has pity on the
poor lendeth to the Lord,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p23.4"></span>[Prov.
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p23.5"></span>[Mt.
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.5"></span>); and again, “He which soweth bountifully
shall reap also bountifully,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p23.6"></span>[2
Cor. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.6"></span>). What we give to our brethren in the
exercise of charity is a deposit with the Lord, who, as a faithful
depositary, will ultimately restore it with abundant interest. Are our
duties, then, of such value with God that they are as a kind of treasure
placed in his hand? Who can hesitate to say so when Scripture so often
and so plainly attests it? But if any one would leap from the mere
kindness of God to the merit of works,45  <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450.md) his error will receive no support from
these passages. For all you can properly infer from them is the
inclination on the part of God to treat us with indulgence. For, in
order to animate us in well-doing, he allows no act of obedience,
however unworthy of his eye, to pass unrewarded.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p25"></span>7. But they insist more strongly on the
words of the apostle when, in consoling the Thessalonians under their
tribulations, he tells them that these were sent, “that ye may be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer; seeing
it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.1"></span>[2 Thess.
1:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.1"></span>). The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
says, “God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love,
which ye have showed towards his name, in that ye have ministered to the
saints, and do minister,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p25.2"></span>[Heb.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.2"></span>). To the former passage I answer, that the
worthiness spoken of is not that of merit, but as God the Father would
have those whom he has chosen for sons to be conformed to Christ the
first born, and as it behaved him first to suffer, and then to enter
into his glory, so we also, through much tribulation, enter the kingdom
of heaven. Therefore, while we suffer tribulation for the name of
Christ, we in a manner receive the marks with which God is wont to stamp
the sheep of his flock (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p25.3"></span>[Gal.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.3"></span>). Hence we are counted worthy of the
kingdom of God, because we bear in our body the marks of our Lord and
Master, these being the insignia of the children of God. In this sense
are we to understand the passages: “Always bearing about in the body the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made
manifest in our body,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p25.4"></span>[2 Cor.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.4"></span>). “That I may know him and the power of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable unto his death,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p25.5"></span>[Phil.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.5"></span>). The reason which is subjoined is
intended not to prove any merit, but to confirm our hope of the kingdom
of God; as if he had said, As it is befitting the just judgment of God
to take vengeance on your enemies for the tribulation which they have
brought upon you, so it is also befitting to give you release and rest
from these tribulations. The other passage, which speaks as if it were
becoming the justice of God not to overlook the services of his people,
and almost insinuates that it were unjust to forget them, is to be thus
explained: God, to arouse us from sloth, assures us that every labour
which we undertake for the glory of his name shall not be in vain. Let
us always remember that this promise, like all other promises, will be
of no avail unless it is preceded by the free covenant of mercy, on
which the whole certainty of our salvation depends. Trusting to it,
however, we ought to feel secure that however unworthy our services, the
liberality of God will not allow them to pass unrewarded. To confirm us
in this expectation, the Apostle declares that God is not unrighteous;
but will act consistently with the promise once given. Righteousness,
therefore, refers rather to the truth of the divine promise than to the
equity of paying what is due. In this sense there is a celebrated saying
of Augustine, which, as containing a memorable sentiment, that holy man
declined not repeatedly to employ, and which I think not unworthy of
being constantly remembered: “Faithful is the Lord, who has made himself
our debtor, not by receiving any thing from us, but by promising us all
things,” (August. in <span id="iv.iii.xix-p25.6"></span>[Ps.
32:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#000.md), [Ps.
109:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p25.6"></span>, *et alibi*).

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p26"></span>8. Our opponents also adduce the
following passages from Paul: “Though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.1"></span>[1 Cor.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.1"></span>). Again, “Now abideth faith, hope,
charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.2"></span>[1 Cor.
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.2"></span>). “Above all these things put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.3"></span>[Col.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.3"></span>). From the two first passages our
Pharisees45  <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451.md) contend that we are
justified by charity rather than by faith, charity being, as they say,
the better virtue. This mode of arguing is easily disposed of I have
elsewhere shown that what is said in the first passage refers not to
true faith. In the second passage we admit that charity is said to be
greater than true faith, but not because charity is more meritorious,
but because it is more fruitful, because it is of wider extent, of more
general service, and always flourishes, whereas the use of faith is only
for a time. If we look to excellence, the love of God undoubtedly holds
the first place. Of it, however, Paul does not here speak; for the only
thing he insists on is, that we should by mutual charity edify one
another in the Lord. But let us suppose that charity is in every respect
superior to faith, what man of sound judgment, nay, what man with any
soundness in his brain, would argue that it therefore does more to
justify? The power of justifying which belongs to faith consists not in
its worth as a work. Our justification depends entirely on the mercy of
God and the merits of Christ: when faith apprehends these, it is said to
justify. Now, if you ask our opponents in what sense they ascribe
justification to charity, they will answer, Being a duty acceptable to
God, righteousness is in respect of its merit imputed to us by the
acceptance of the divine goodness. Here you see how beautifully the
argument proceeds. We say that faith justifies not because it merits
justification for us by its own worth, but because it is an instrument
by which we freely obtain the righteousness of Christ. They overlooking
the mercy of God, and passing by Christ, the sum of righteousness,
maintain that we are justified by charity as being superior to faith;
just as if one were to maintain that a king is fitter to make a shoe
than a shoemaker, because the king is infinitely the superior of the
two. This one syllogism is ample proof that all the schools of Sorbonne
have never had the slightest apprehension of what is meant by
justification by faith. Should any disputant here interpose, and ask why
we give different meanings to the term faith as used by Paul in passages
so near each other, I can easily show that I have not slight grounds for
so doing. For while those gifts which Paul enumerates are in some degree
subordinate to faith and hope, because they relate to the knowledge of
God, he by way of summary comprehends them all under the name of faith
and hope; as if he had said, Prophecy and tongues, and the gift of
interpreting, and knowledge, are all designed to lead us to the
knowledge of God. But in this life it is only by faith and hope that we
acknowledge God. Therefore, when I name faith and hope, I at the same
time comprehend the whole. “Now abideth faith, hope, charity, these
three;” that is, how great soever the number of the gifts, they are all
to be referred to them; but “the greatest of these is charity.” From the
third passage they infer, If charity is the bond of perfection, it must
be the bond of righteousness, which is nothing else than perfection.
First, without objecting that the name of perfection is here given by
Paul to proper union among the members of a rightly constituted church,
and admitting that by charity we are perfected before God, what new
result do they gain by it? I will always object in reply, that we never
attain to that perfection unless we fulfill all the parts of charity;
and will thence infer, that as all are most remote from such
fulfillment, the hope of perfection is excluded.

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p28"></span>9. I am unwilling to discuss all the
things which the foolish Sorbonnists have rashly laid hold of in
Scripture as it chanced to come in their way, and throw out against us.
Some of them are so ridiculous, that I cannot mention them without
laying myself open to a charge of trifling. I will, therefore, conclude
with an exposition of one of our Savior’s expressions with which they
are wondrously pleased. When the lawyer asked him, “Good Master, what
good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?” he answers, “If
thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p28.1"></span>[Matt.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p28.1"></span>). What more (they ask) would we have, when
the very author of grace bids us acquire the kingdom of heaven by the
observance of the commandments? As if it were not plain that Christ
adapted his answers to the characters of those whom he addressed. Here
he is questioned by a Doctor of the Law as to the means of obtaining
eternal life; and the question is not put simply, but is, What can men
do to attain it? Both the character of the speaker and his question
induced our Lord to give this answer. Imbued with a persuasion of legal
righteousness, the lawyer had a blind confidence in works. Then all he
asked was, what are the works of righteousness by which salvation is
obtained? Justly, therefore, is he referred to the law, in which there
is a perfect mirror of righteousness. We also distinctly declare, that
if life is sought in works, the commandments are to be observed. And the
knowledge of this doctrine is necessary to Christians; for how should
they retake themselves to Christ, unless they perceived that they had
fallen from the path of life over the precipice of death? Or how could
they understand how far they have wandered from the way of life unless
they previously understand what that way is? Then only do they feel that
the asylum of safety is in Christ when they see how much their conduct
is at variance with the divine righteousness, which consists in the
observance of the law. The sum of the whole is this, If salvation is
sought in works, we must keep the commandments, by which we are
instructed in perfect righteousness. But we cannot remain here unless we
would stop short in the middle of our course; for none of us is able to
keep the commandments. Being thus excluded from the righteousness of the
law, we must retake ourselves to another remedy—viz. to the faith of
Christ. Wherefore, as a teacher of the law, whom our Lord knew to be
puffed up with a vain confidence in works, was here directed by him to
the law, that he might learn he was a sinner exposed to the fearful
sentence of eternal death; so others, who were already humbled with this
knowledge, he elsewhere solaces with the promise of grace, without
making any mention of the law. “Come unto me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” “Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest
unto your souls,” (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p28.2"></span>[Matt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p28.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p29"></span>10. At length, after they have wearied
themselves with perverting Scripture, they have recourse to subtleties
and sophisms. One cavil is, that faith is somewhere called a work (<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p29.1"></span>[John
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p29.1"></span>); hence they infer that we are in error in
opposing faith to works; as if faith, regarded as obedience to the
divine will, could by its own merit procure our justification, and did
not rather, by embracing the mercy of God, thereby seal upon our hearts
the righteousness of Christ, which is offered to us in the preaching of
the gospel. My readers will pardon me if I stay not to dispose of such
absurdities; their own weakness, without external assault, is sufficient
to destroy them. One objection, however, which has some semblance of
reason, it will be proper to dispose of in passing, lest it give any
trouble to those less experienced. As common sense dictates that
contraries must be tried by the same rule, and as each sin is charged
against us as unrighteousness, so it is right (say our opponents) that
each good work should receive the praise of righteousness. The answer
which some give, that the condemnation of men proceeds on unbelief
alone, and not on particular sins does not satisfy me. I agree with
them, indeed, that infidelity is the fountain and root of all evil; for
it is the first act of revolt from God, and is afterwards followed by
particular transgressions of the law. But as they seem to hold, that in
estimating righteousness and unrighteousness, the same rule is to be
applied to good and bad works, in this I dissent from them.45  <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md) The righteousness of works consists in
perfect obedience to the law. Hence you cannot be justified by works
unless you follow this straight line (if I may so call it) during the
whole course of your life. The moment you decline from it you have
fallen into unrighteousness. Hence it appears, that righteousness is not
obtained by a few works, but by an indefatigable and inflexible
observance of the divine will. But the rule with regard to
unrighteousness is very different. The adulterer or the thief is by one
act guilty of death, because he offends against the majesty of God. The
blunder of these arguers of ours lies here: they attend not to the words
of James, “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all. For he that said, Do not commit adultery,
said also, Do not kill,” &c. (<span id="iv.iii.xix-p30.1"></span>[Jas.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p30.1"></span>). Therefore, it should not seem absurd
when we say that death is the just recompense of every sin, because each
sin merits the just indignation and vengeance of God. But you reason
absurdly if you infer the converse, that one good work will reconcile a
man to God notwithstanding of his meriting wrath by many sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](inst071.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p15"></span>53 453 <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.1"></span>[Mt.
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.2"></span>[2
Cor. 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.3"></span>[Rom.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.4"></span>[John
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.5"></span>[Mt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.5"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.6"></span>[Prov.
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.6"></span>; 13:13; <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.7"></span>[Mt.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.7"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.8"></span>[Luke
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.8"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xix-p15.9"></span>[1
Cor. 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.9"></span>.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](inst071.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p15.13"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p16"></span>54 454 French, “mais seulement emporte
zele et estude;”—but only imports zeal and study.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](inst071.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p19"></span>55 455 French, “Pource que c’est un
Docteur ancien, j’aime mieux user de ses paroles que des
miennes;”—Because he is an ancient Doctor, I prefer making use of his
words rather than my own.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](inst071.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p22"></span>56 456 The French adds, “C’est à dire,
en misericorde, et non pas en jugement;”—that is to say, in mercy, and
not in judement.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](inst071.htm#fr_450.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p23.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p24"></span>57 457 French, “Mais si quelcun pour
obscurcir la benignité de Dieu veut establir la dignité des œuvres;”—but
if any one to obscure the benignity of God would establish the dignity
of works.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](inst071.htm#fr_451.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p27"></span>58 458 See Calvin’s Answer to Sadolet,
who had said that chairty is the first and principal cause of our
salvation.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](inst071.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p30"></span>59 459 French, “Mais touchant ce qu’ils
semblent advis contrepoiser en une mesme balance les bonnes œuvres et
les mauvaises, pour estimer la justice ou l’injustice de l’homme, en
cela je suis contreint de leur repugner.”—But as they seem disposed to
put good and bad works into the opposite scales of the same balance, in
order to estimate the righteousness or unrighteousness of man, in this I
am forced to dissent from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 19. - OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.](inst072.md)
