[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst035)  [Next](inst037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 2.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span>MAN NOW DEPRIVED OF FREEDOM OF WILL, AND
MISERABLY ENSLAVED.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>Having in the first chapter treated of
the fall of man, and the corruption of the human race, it becomes
necessary to inquire, Whether the sons of Adam are deprived of all
liberty; and if any particle of liberty remains, how far its power
extends? The four next chapters are devoted to this question. This
second chapter may be reduced to three general heads: I. The foundation
of the whole discussion. II. The opinions of others on the subject of
human freedom, see. 2–9. III. The true doctrine on the subject, see.
10–27.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>1. Connection of the previous with the
four following chapters. In order to lay a proper foundation for the
discussion of free will, two obstacles in the way to be removed—viz.
sloth and pride. The basis and sum of the whole discussion. The solid
structure of this basis, and a clear demonstration of it by the argument
*a majori ad minus*. Also from the inconveniences and absurdities
arising from the obstacle of pride.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>2. The second part of the chapter
containing the opinions of others. 1. The opinions of philosophers.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>3. The labyrinths of philosophers. A
summary of the opinion common to all the philosophers.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>4. The opinions of others continued—viz.
The opinions of the ancient theologians on the subject of free will.
These composed partly of Philosophy and partly of Theology. Hence their
falsehood, extravagance, perplexity, variety, and contradiction. Too
great fondness for philosophy in the Church has obscured the knowledge
of God and of ourselves. The better to explain the opinions of
philosophers, a definition of Free Will given. Wide difference between
this definition and these opinions.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>5. Certain things annexed to Free Will by
the ancient theologians, especially the Schoolmen. Many kinds of Free
Will according to them.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>6. Puzzles of scholastic divines in the
explanation of this question.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>7. The conclusion that so trivial a
matter ought not to be so much magnified. Objection of those who have a
fondness for new terms in the Church. Objection answered.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>8. Another answer. The Fathers, and
especially Augustine, while retaining the term Free Will, yet condemned
the doctrine of the heretics on the subject, as destroying the grace of
God.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>9. The language of the ancient writers
on the subject of Free Will is, with the exception of that of Augustine,
almost unintelligible. Still they set little or no value on human
virtue, and ascribe the praise of all goodness to the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>10. The last part of the chapter,
containing a simple statement of the true doctrine. The fundamental
principle is, that man first begins to profit in the knowledge of
himself when he becomes sensible of his ruined condition. This
confirmed, 1. by passages of Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>11. Confirmed, 2. by the testimony of
ancient theologians.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span>12. The foundation being laid, to show
how far the power both of the intellect and will now extends, it is
maintained in general, and in conformity with the views of Augustine and
the Schoolmen, that the natural endowments of man are corrupted, and the
supernatural almost entirely lost. A separate consideration of the
powers of the Intellect and the Will. Some general considerations, 1.
The intellect possesses some powers of perception. Still it labours
under a twofold defect.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>13. Man’s intelligence extends both to
things terrestrial and celestial. The power of the intellect in regard
to the knowledge of things terrestrial. First, with regard to matters of
civil polity.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span>14. The power of the intellect,
secondly, with regard to the arts. Particular gifts in this respect
conferred on individuals, and attesting the grace of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span>15. The rise of this knowledge of things
terrestrial, first, that we may see how human nature, notwithstanding of
its fall, is still adorned by God with excellent endowments.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span>16. Use of this knowledge continued.
Secondly, that we may see that these endowments bestowed on individuals
are intended for the common benefit of mankind. They are sometimes
conferred even on the wicked.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span>17. Some portion of human nature still
left. This, whatever be the amount of it, should be ascribed entirely to
the divine indulgence. Reason of this. Examples.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span>18. Second part of the discussion,
namely, that which relates to the power of the human intellect in regard
to things celestial. These reducible to three heads, namely, divine
knowledge, adoption, and will. The blindness of man in regard to these
proved and thus tested by a simile.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>19. Proved, moreover, by passages of
Scripture, showing, 1. That the sons of Adam are endued with some light,
but not enough to enable them to comprehend God. Reasons.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p23"></span>20. Adoption not from nature, but from
our heavenly Father, being sealed in the elect by the Spirit of
regeneration. Obvious from many passages of Scripture, that, previous to
regeneration, the human intellect is altogether unable to comprehend the
things relating to regeneration. This fully proved. First argument.
Second argument. Third argument.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p24"></span>21. Fourth argument. Scripture ascribes
the glory of our adoption and salvation to God only. The human intellect
blind as to heavenly things until it is illuminated. Disposal of a
heretical objection.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p25"></span>22. Human intellect ignorant of the true
knowledge of the divine law. This proved by the testimony of an Apostle,
by an inference from the same testimony, and from a consideration of the
end and definition of the Law of Nature. Plato obviously mistaken in
attributing all sins to ignorance.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p26"></span>23. Themistius nearer the truth in
maintaining, that the delusion of the intellect is manifested not so
much in generals as in particulars. Exception to this rule.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p27"></span>24. Themistius, however, mistaken in
thinking that the intellect is so very seldom deceived as to generals.
Blindness of the human intellect when tested by the standard of the
Divine Law, in regard both to the first and second tables. Examples.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p28"></span>25. A middle view to be taken—viz. that
all sins are not imputable to ignorance, and, at the same time, that all
sins do not imply intentional malice. All the human mind conceives and
plans in this matter is evil in the sight of God. Need of divine
direction every moment.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p29"></span>26. The will examined. The natural
desire of good, which is universally felt, no proof of the freedom of
the human will. Two fallacies as to the use of terms, *appetite* and
good.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p30"></span>27. The doctrine of the Schoolmen on
this subject opposed to and refuted by Scripture. The whole man being
subject to the power of sin, it follows that the will, which is the
chief seat of sin, requires to be most strictly curbed. Nothing ours but
sin.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p31"></span>1. Having seen that the dominion of sin,
ever since the first man was brought under it, not only extends to the
whole race, but has complete possession of every soul, it now remains to
consider more closely, whether from the period of being thus enslaved,
we have been deprived of all liberty; and if any portion still remains,
how far its power extends. In order to facilitate the answer to this
questions it may be proper in passing to point out the course which our
inquiry ought to take. The best method of avoiding error is to consider
the dangers which beset us on either side. Man being devoid of all
uprightness, immediately takes occasion from the fact to indulge in
sloth, and having no ability in himself for the study of righteousness,
treats the whole subject as if he had no concern in it. On the other
hand, man cannot arrogate any thing, however minute, to himself, without
robbing God of his honour, and through rash confidence subjecting
himself to a fall. To keep free of both these rocks,15  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) our proper course will be, first, to
show that man has no remaining good in himself, and is beset on every
side by the most miserable destitution; and then teach him to aspire to
the goodness of which he is devoid, and the liberty of which he has been
deprived: thus giving him a stronger stimulus to exertion than he could
have if he imagined himself possessed of the highest virtue. How
necessary the latter point is, everybody sees. As to the former, several
seem to entertain more doubt than they ought. For it being admitted as
incontrovertible that man is not to be denied any thing that is truly
his own, it ought also to be admitted, that he is to be deprived of
every thing like false boasting. If man had no title to glory in
himself, when, by the kindness of his Maker, he was distinguished by the
noblest ornaments, how much ought he to be humbled now, when his
ingratitude has thrust him down from the highest glory to extreme
ignominy? At the time when he was raised to the highest pinnacle of
honour, all which Scripture attributes to him is, that he was created in
the image of God, thereby intimating that the blessings in which his
happiness consisted were not his own, but derived by divine
communication. What remains, therefore, now that man is stript of all
his glory, than to acknowledge the God for whose kindness he failed to
be grateful, when he was loaded with the riches of his grace? Not having
glorified him by the acknowledgment of his blessings, now, at least, he
ought to glorify him by the confession of his poverty. In truth, it is
no less useful for us to renounce all the praise of wisdom and virtue,
than to aim at the glory of God. Those who invest us with more than we
possess only add sacrilege to our ruin. For when we are taught to
contend in our own strength, what more is done than to lift us up, and
then leave us to lean on a reed which immediately gives way? Indeed, our
strength is exaggerated when it is compared to a reed. All that foolish
men invent and prattle on this subject is mere smoke. Wherefore, it is
not without reason that Augustine so often repeats the well-known
saying, that free will is more destroyed than established by its
defenders (August. in Evang. Joann. Tract. 81). It was necessary to
premise this much for the sake of some who, when they hear that human
virtue is totally overthrown, in order that the power of God in man may
be exalted, conceive an utter dislike to the whole subject, as if it
were perilous, not to say superfluous, whereas it is manifestly both
most necessary and most useful.15  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p34"></span>2. Having lately observed, that the
faculties of the soul are seated in the mind and the heart, let us now
consider how far the power of each extends. Philosophers generally
maintain, that reason dwells in the mind like a lamp, throwing light on
all its counsels, and like a queen, governing the will—that it is so
pervaded with divine light as to be able to consult for the best, and so
endued with vigour as to be able perfectly to command; that, on the
contrary, sense is dull and short-sighted, always creeping on the
ground, grovelling among inferior objects, and never rising to true
vision; that the appetite, when it obeys reason, and does not allow
itself to be subjugated by sense, is borne to the study of virtue, holds
a straight course, and becomes transformed into will; but that when
enslaved by sense, it is corrupted and depraved so as to degenerate into
lust. In a word, since, according to their opinion, the faculties which
I have mentioned above, namely, intellect, sense, and appetite, or will
(the latter being the term in ordinary use), are seated in the soul,
they maintain that the intellect is endued with reason, the best guide
to a virtuous and happy life, provided it duly avails itself of its
excellence, and exerts the power with which it is naturally endued;
that, at the same time, the inferior movement, which is termed sense,
and by which the mind is led away to error and delusion, is of such a
nature, that it can be tamed and gradually subdued by the power of
reason. To the will, moreover, they give an intermediate place between
reason and sense, regarding it as possessed of full power and freedom,
whether to obey the former, or yield itself up to be hurried away by the
latter.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p35"></span>3. Sometimes, indeed, convinced by their
own experience, they do not deny how difficult it is for man to
establish the supremacy of reason in himself, inasmuch as he is at one
time enticed by the allurements of pleasure; at another, deluded by a
false semblance of good; and, at another, impelled by unruly passions,
and pulled away (to use Plato’s expression) as by ropes or sinews
(Plato, De Legibus, lib. 1). For this reason, Cicero says, that the
sparks given forth by nature are immediately extinguished by false
opinions and depraved manners (Cicero, Tusc, Quæst. lib. 3). They
confess that when once diseases of this description have seized upon the
mind, their course is too impetuous to be easily checked, and they
hesitate not to compare them to fiery steeds, which, having thrown off
the charioteer, scamper away without restraint. At the same time, they
set it down as beyond dispute, that virtue and vice are in our own
power. For (say they), If it is in our choice to do this thing or that,
it must also be in our choice not to do it: Again, If it is in our
choice not to act, it must also be in our choice to act: But both in
doing and abstaining we seem to act from free choice; and, therefore, if
we do good when we please, we can also refrain from doing it; if we
commit evil, we can also shun the commission of it (Aristot. Ethic. lib.
3 c. 5). Nay, some have gone the length of boasting (Seneca, *passim*),
that it is the gift of the gods that we live, but our own that we live
well and purely. Hence Cicero says, in the person of Cotta, that as
every one acquires virtue for himself, no wise man ever thanked the gods
for it. “We are praised,” says he, “for virtue, and glory in virtue, but
this could not be, if virtue were the gift of God, and not from
ourselves,” (Cicero, De Nat. Deorum). A little after, he adds, “The
opinion of all mankind is, that fortune must be sought from God, wisdom
from ourselves.” Thus, in short, all philosophers maintain, that human
reason is sufficient for right government; that the will, which is
inferior to it, may indeed be solicited to evil by sense, but having a
free choice, there is nothing to prevent it from following reason as its
guide in all things.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p36"></span>4. Among ecclesiastical writers,
although there is none who did not acknowledge that sound reason in man
was seriously injured by sin, and the will greatly entangled by vicious
desires, yet many of them made too near an approach to the philosophers.
Some of the most ancient writers appear to me to have exalted human
strengths from a fear that a distinct acknowledgment of its impotence
might expose them to the jeers of the philosophers with whom they were
disputing, and also furnish the flesh, already too much disinclined to
good, with a new pretext for sloth. Therefore, to avoid teaching
anything which the majority of mankind might deem absurd, they made it
their study, in some measure, to reconcile the doctrine of Scripture
with the dogmas of philosophy, at the same time making it their special
care not to furnish any occasion to sloth. This is obvious from their
words. Chrysostom says, “God having placed good and evil in our power,
has given us full freedom of choice; he does not keep back the
unwilling, but embraces the willing,” (Homil. de Prodit. Judae). Again,
“He who is wicked is often, when he so chooses, changed into good, and
he who is good falls through sluggishness, and becomes wicked. For the
Lord has made our nature free. He does not lay us under necessity, but
furnishing apposite remedies, allows the whole to depend on the views of
the patient,” (Homily. 18, in Genesis). Again, “As we can do nothing
rightly until aided by the grace of God, so, until we bring forward what
is our own, we cannot obtain favour from above,” (Homily. 52). He had
previously said, “As the whole is not done by divine assistance, we
ourselves must of necessity bring somewhat.” Accordingly, one of his
common expressions is, “Let us bring what is our own, God will supply
the rest.” In unison with this, Jerome says, “It is ours to begin, God’s
to finish: it is ours to offer what we can, his to supply what we
cannot,” (Dialog. 3 Cont. Pelag).

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p37"></span>From these sentences, you see that they
have bestowed on man more than he possesses for the study of virtue,
because they thought that they could not shake off our innate
sluggishness unless they argued that we sin by ourselves alone. With
what skill they have thus argued we shall afterwards see. Assuredly we
shall soon be able to show that the sentiments just quoted are most
inaccurate.15  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) Moreover although
the Greek Fathers, above others, and especially Chrysostom, have
exceeded due bounds in extolling the powers of the human will, yet all
ancient theologians, with the exception of Augustine, are so confused,
vacillating, and contradictory on this subject, that no certainty can be
obtained from their writings. It is needless, therefore, to be more
particular in enumerating every separate opinion. It will be sufficient
to extract from each as much as the exposition of the subject seems to
require. Succeeding writers (every one courting applause for his
acuteness in the defence of human nature) have uniformly, one after the
other, gone more widely astray, until the common dogma came to be, that
man was corrupted only in the sensual part of his nature, that reason
remained entire, and will was scarcely impaired. Still the expression
was often on their lips, that man’s natural gifts were corrupted, and
his supernatural15  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) taken away.
Of the thing implied by these words, however, scarcely one in a hundred
had any distinct idea. Certainly, were I desirous clearly to express
what the corruption of nature is, I would not seek for any other
expression. But it is of great importance attentively to consider what
the power of man now is when vitiated in all the parts of his nature,
and deprived of supernatural gifts. Persons professing to be the
disciples of Christ have spoken too much like the philosophers on this
subject. As if human nature were still in its integrity, the term free
will has always been in use among the Latins, while the Greeks were not
ashamed to use a still more presumptuous term—viz. aujtexouvsion, as if
man had still full power in himself.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p40"></span>But since the principle entertained by
all, even the vulgar, is, that man is endued with free will, while some,
who would be thought more skilful, know not how far its power extends;
it will be necessary, first to consider the meaning of the term, and
afterwards ascertain, by a simple appeal to Scripture, what man’s
natural power for good or evil is. The thing meant by free will, though
constantly occurring in all writers, few have defined. Origin,15  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) however, seems to have stated the
common opinion when he said, It is a power of reason to discern between
good and evil; of will, to choose the one or other. Nor does Augustine
differ from him when he says, It is a power of reason and will to choose
the good, grace assisting,—to choose the bad, grace desisting. Bernard,
while aiming at greater acuteness, speaks more obscurely, when he
describes it as consent, in regard to the indestructible liberty of the
wills and the inalienable judgment of reason. Anselm’s definition is not
very intelligible to ordinary understandings. He calls it a power of
preserving rectitude on its own account. Peter Lombard, and the
Schoolmen, preferred the definition of Augustine, both because it was
clearer, and did not exclude divine grace, without which they saw that
the will was not sufficient of itself. They however add something of
their own, because they deemed it either better or necessary for clearer
explanation. First, they agree that the term *will* (arbitrium) has
reference to reason, whose office it is to distinguish between good and
evil, and that the epithet *free* properly belongs to the will, which
may incline either way. Wherefore, since liberty properly belongs to the
will, Thomas Aquinas says (Part 1 Quast. 83, Art. 3), that the most
congruous definition is to call free will an elective power, combining
intelligence and appetite, but inclining more to appetite. We now
perceive in what it is they suppose the faculty of free will to
consist—viz. in reason and will. It remains to see how much they
attribute to each.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p42"></span>5. In general, they are wont to place
under the free will of man only intermediate things—viz. those which
pertain not to the kingdom of God, while they refer true righteousness
to the special grace of God and spiritual regeneration. The author of
the work, “De Vocatione Gentium,” (On the Calling of the Gentiles),15
 <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) wishing to show this, describes
the will as threefold—viz. sensitive, animal, and spiritual. The two
former, he says, are free to man, but the last is the work of the Holy
Spirit. What truth there is in this will be considered in its own place.
Our intention at present is only to mention the opinions of others, not
to refute them. When writers treat of free will, their inquiry is
chiefly directed not to what its power is in relation to civil or
external actions, but to the obedience required by the divine law. The
latter I admit to be the great question, but I cannot think the former
should be altogether neglected; and I hope to be able to give the best
reason for so thinking (sec. 12 to 18). The schools, however, have
adopted a distinction which enumerates three kinds of freedom (see
Lombard, lib. 2 Dist. 25); the first, a freedom from necessity; the
second, a freedom from sin; and the third, a freedom from misery: the
first naturally so inherent in man, that he cannot possibly be deprived
of it; while through sin the other two have been lost. I willingly admit
this distinction, except in so far as it confounds *necessity* with
*compulsion*. How widely the things differ, and how important it is to
attend to the difference, will appear elsewhere.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p44"></span>6. All this being admitted, it will be
beyond dispute, that free will does not enable any man to perform good
works, unless he is assisted by grace; indeed, the special grace which
the elect alone receive through regeneration. For I stay not to consider
the extravagance of those who say that grace is offered equally and
promiscuously to all (Lomb. lib. 2 Dist. 26). But it has not yet been
shown whether man is entirely deprived of the power of well-doing, or
whether he still possesses it in some, though in a very feeble and
limited degree—a degree so feeble and limited, that it can do nothing of
itself, but when assisted by grace, is able also to perform its part.
The Master of the Sentences (Lombard, ibid). wishing to explain this,
teaches that a twofold grace is necessary to fit for any good work. The
one he calls Operating. To it, it is owing that we effectually will what
is good. The other, which succeeds this good will, and aids it, he calls
Co-operating. My objection to this division (see *infra*, chap. 3 sec.
10, and chap. 7 sec. 9) is, that while it attributes the effectual
desire of good to divine grace, it insinuates that man, by his own
nature, desires good in some degree, though ineffectually. Thus Bernard,
while maintaining that a good will is the work of God, concedes this
much to man—viz. that of his own nature he longs for such a good will.
This differs widely from the view of Augustine, though Lombard pretends
to have taken the division from him. Besides, there is an ambiguity in
the second division, which has led to an erroneous interpretation. For
it has been thought that we co-operate with subsequent grace, inasmuch
as it pertains to us either to nullify the first grace, by rejecting its
or to confirm it, by obediently yielding to it. The author of the work
De Vocatione Gentium expresses it thus: It is free to those who enjoy
the faculty of reason to depart from grace, so that the not departing is
a reward, and that which cannot be done without the co-operation of the
Spirit is imputed as merit to those whose will might have made it
otherwise (lib. 2 cap. 4). It seemed proper to make these two
observations in passing, that the reader may see how far I differ from
the sounder of the Schoolmen. Still further do I differ from more modern
sophists, who have departed even more widely than the Schoolmen from the
ancient doctrine. The division, however, shows in what respect free will
is attributed to man. For Lombard ultimately declares (lib. 2 Dist. 25),
that our freedom is not to the extent of leaving us equally inclined to
good and evil in act or in thought, but only to the extent of freeing us
from compulsion. This liberty is compatible with our being depraved, the
servants of sin, able to do nothing but sin.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p45"></span>7. In this way, then, man is said to
have free will, not because he has a free choice of good and evil, but
because he acts voluntarily, and not by compulsion. This is perfectly
true: but why should so small a matter have been dignified with so proud
a title? An admirable freedom! that man is not forced to be the servant
of sin, while he is, however, ejthelodou'lo" (a voluntary slave); his
will being bound by the fetters of sin. I abominate mere verbal
disputes, by which the Church is harassed to no purpose; but I think we
ought religiously to eschew terms which imply some absurdity, especially
in subjects where error is of pernicious consequence. How few are there
who, when they hear free will attributed to man, do not immediately
imagine that he is the master of his mind and will in such a sense, that
he can of himself incline himself either to good or evil? It may be said
that such dangers are removed by carefully expounding the meaning to the
people. But such is the proneness of the human mind to go astray, that
it will more quickly draw error from one little word, than truth from a
lengthened discourse. Of this, the very term in question furnishes too
strong a proof. For the explanation given by ancient Christian writers
having been lost sight of, almost all who have come after them, by
attending only to the etymology of the term, have been led to indulge a
fatal confidence.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p46"></span>8. As to the Fathers (if their authority
weighs with us), they have the term constantly in their mouths; but
they, at the same time, declare what extent of meaning they attach to
it. In particular, Augustine hesitates not to call the will *a slave*.15
 <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) In another passages he is
offended with those who deny free will; but his chief reason for this is
explained when he says, “Only lest any one should presume so to deny
freedom of will, from a desire to excuse sin.” It is certain he
elsewhere admits, that without the Spirit the will of man is not free,
inasmuch as it is subject to lusts which chain and master it. And again,
that nature began to want liberty the moment the will was vanquished by
the revolt into which it fell. Again, that man, by making a bad use of
free will, lost both himself and his will. Again, that free will having
been made a captive, can do nothing in the way of righteousness. Again,
that no will is free which has not been made so by divine grace. Again,
that the righteousness of God is not fulfilled when the law orders, and
man acts, as it were, by his own strength, but when the Spirit assists,
and the will (not the free will of man, but the will freed by God)
obeys. He briefly states the ground of all these observations, when he
says, that man at his creation received a great degree of free will, but
lost it by sinning. In another place, after showing that free will is
established by grace, he strongly inveighs against those who arrogate
any thing to themselves without grace. His words are, “How much soever
miserable men presume to plume themselves on free will before they are
made free, or on their strength after they are made free, they do not
consider that, in the very expression *free will*, liberty is implied.
‘Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty,’ (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p47.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p47.1"></span>). If, therefore, they are the servants of
sin, why do they boast of free will? He who has been vanquished is the
servant of him who vanquished him. But if men have been made free, why
do they boast of it as of their own work? Are they so free that they are
unwilling to be the servants of Him who has said, ‘Without me ye can do
nothing’?” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p47.2"></span>[John
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p47.2"></span>). In another passage he even seems to
ridicule the word, when he says,15  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) “That the will is indeed free, but not
freed—free of righteousness, but enslaved to sin.” The same idea he
elsewhere repeats and explains, when he says, “That man is not free from
righteousness save by the choice of his will, and is not made free from
sin save by the grace of the Saviour.” Declaring that the freedom of man
is nothing else than emancipation or manumission from righteousness, he
seems to jest at the emptiness of the name. If any one, then, chooses to
make use of this terms without attaching any bad meaning to it, he shall
not be troubled by me on that account; but as it cannot be retained
without very great danger, I think the abolition of it would be of great
advantage to the Church. I am unwilling to use it myself; and others if
they will take my advice, will do well to abstain from it.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p49"></span>9. It may, perhaps, seem that I have
greatly prejudiced my own view by confessing that all the ecclesiastical
writers, with the exception of Augustine, have spoken so ambiguously or
inconsistently on this subject, that no certainty is attainable from
their writings. Some will interpret this to mean, that I wish to deprive
them of their right of suffrage, because they are opposed to me. Truly,
however, I have had no other end in view than to consult, simply and in
good faith, for the advantage of pious minds, which, if they trust to
those writers for their opinion, will always fluctuate in uncertainty.
At one time they teach, that man having been deprived of the power of
free Will must flee to grace alone; at another, they equip or seem to
equip him in armour of his own. It is not difficult, however, to show,
that notwithstanding of the ambiguous manner in which those writers
express themselves, they hold human virtue in little or no account, and
ascribe the whole merit of all that is good to the Holy Spirit. To make
this more manifest, I may here quote some passages from them. What,
then, is meant by Cyprian in the passage so often lauded by Augustine,15
 <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) “Let us glory in nothing,
because nothing is ours,” unless it be, that man being utterly
destitute, considered in himself, should entirely depend on God? What is
meant by Augustine and Eucherius,16  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) when they expound that Christ is the
tree of life, and that whose puts forth his hand to it shall live; that
the choice of the will is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
and that he who, forsaking the grace of God, tastes of it shall die?
What is meant by Chrysostom, When he says, “That every man is not only
naturally a sinner, but is wholly sin?” If there is nothing good in us;
if man, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, is wholly
sin; if it is not even lawful to try how far the power of the will
extends,—how can it be lawful to share the merit of a good work between
God and man? I might quote many passages to the same effect from other
writers; but lest any caviller should say, that I select those only
which serve my purpose, and cunningly pass by those which are against
me, I desist. This much, however, I dare affirm, that though they
sometimes go too far in extolling free will, the main object which they
had in view was to teach man entirely to renounce all self-confidence,
and place his strength in God alone. I now proceed to a simple
exposition of the truth in regard to the nature of man.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p52"></span>10. Here however, I must again repeat
what I premised at the outset of this chapter,16  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) that he who is most deeply abased and
alarmed, by the consciousness of his disgrace, nakedness, want, and
misery, has made the greatest progress in the knowledge of himself. Man
is in no danger of taking too much from himself, provided he learns that
whatever he wants is to be recovered in God. But he cannot arrogate to
himself one particle beyond his due, without losing himself in vain
confidence, and, by transferring divine honour to himself, becoming
guilty of the greatest impiety. And, assuredly, whenever our minds are
seized with a longing to possess a somewhat of our own, which may reside
in us rather than in God, we may rest assured that the thought is
suggested by no other counsellor than he who enticed our first parents
to aspire to be like gods, knowing good and evil.16  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md) It is sweet, indeed, to have so much
virtue of our own as to be able to rest in ourselves; but let the many
solemn passages by which our pride is sternly humbled, deter us from
indulging this vain confidence: “Cursed be the man that trusteth in man,
and maketh flesh his arm.” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54.1"></span>[Jer.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.1"></span>). “He delighteth not in the strength of the
horse; he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lord taketh
pleasure in those that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54.2"></span>[Ps.
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.2"></span>). “He giveth power to the faint; and to
them that have no might he increaseth strength. Even the youths shall
faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: But they that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.3"></span>[Is.
40:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.3"></span>). The scope of all these passages is that
we must not entertain any opinion whatever of our own strength, if we
would enjoy the favour of God, who “resisteth the proud, but giveth
grace unto the humble,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54.4"></span>[James
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.4"></span>). Then let us call to mind such promises as
these, “I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry ground,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54.5"></span>[Is.
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.5"></span>); “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to
the waters,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54.6"></span>[Is.
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.6"></span>). These passages declare, that none are
admitted to enjoy the blessings of God save those who are pining under a
sense of their own poverty. Nor ought such passages as the following to
be omitted: “The sun shall no more be thy light by day; neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be
unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.7"></span>[Is.
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p54.7"></span>). The Lord certainly does not deprive his
servants of the light of the sun or moon, but as he would alone appear
glorious in them, he dissuades them from confidence even in those
objects which they deem most excellent.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p55"></span>11. I have always been exceedingly
delighted with the words of Chrysostom, “The foundation of our
philosophy is humility;”16  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md) and
still more with those of Augustine, “As the orator,16  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) when asked, What is the first precept
in eloquence? answered, Delivery: What is the second? Delivery: What the
third? Delivery: so, if you ask me in regard to the precepts of the
Christian Religion, I will answer, first, second, and third, Humility.”
By humility he means not when a man, with a consciousness of some
virtue, refrains from pride, but when he truly feels that he has no
refuge but in humility. This is clear from another passage,16  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) “Let no man,” says he, “flatter
himself: of himself he is a devil: his happiness he owes entirely to
God. What have you of your own but sin? Take your sin which is your own;
for righteousness is of God.” Again, “Why presume so much on the
capability of nature? It is wounded, maimed, vexed, lost. The thing
wanted is genuine confession, not false defence.” “When any one knows
that he is nothing in himself, and has no help from himself, the weapons
within himself are broken, and the war is ended.” All the weapons of
impiety must be bruised, and broken, and burnt in the fire; you must
remain unarmed, having no help in yourself. The more infirm you are, the
more the Lord will sustain you. So, in expounding the seventieth Psalm,
he forbids us to remember our own righteousness, in order that we may
recognise the righteousness of God, and shows that God bestows his grace
upon us, that we may know that we are nothing; that we stand only by the
mercy of God, seeing that in ourselves eve are altogether wicked. Let us
not contend with God for our right, as if anything attributed to him
were lost to our salvation. As our insignificance is his exaltation, so
the confession of our insignificance has its remedy provided in his
mercy. I do not ask, however, that man should voluntarily yield without
being convinced, or that, if he has any powers, he should shut his eyes
to them, that he may thus be subdued to true humility; but that getting
quit of the disease of self-love and ambition, filautiva kai;
filoneikiva, under the blinding of which he thinks of himself more
highly than he ought to think, he may see himself as he really is, by
looking into the faithful mirror of Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p59"></span>12. I feel pleased with the well-known
saying which has been borrowed from the writings of Augustine, that
man’s natural gifts were corrupted by sin, and his supernatural gifts
withdrawn; meaning by supernatural gifts the light of faith and
righteousness, which would have been sufficient for the attainment of
heavenly life and everlasting felicity. Man, when he withdrew his
allegiance to God, was deprived of the spiritual gifts by which he had
been raised to the hope of eternal salvation. Hence it follows, that he
is now an exile from the kingdom of God, so that all things which
pertain to the blessed life of the soul are extinguished in him until he
recover them by the grace of regeneration. Among these are faith, love
to God, charity towards our neighbour, the study of righteousness and
holiness. All these, when restored to us by Christ, are to be regarded
as adventitious and above nature. If so, we infer that they were
previously abolished. On the other hand, soundness of mind and integrity
of heart were, at the same time, withdrawn, and it is this which
constitutes the corruption of natural gifts. For although there is still
some residue of intelligence and judgment as well as will, we cannot
call a mind sound and entire which is both weak and immersed in
darkness. As to the will, its depravity is but too well known.
Therefore, since reason, by which man discerns between good and evil,
and by which he understands and judges, is a natural gift, it could not
be entirely destroyed; but being partly weakened and partly corrupted, a
shapeless ruin is all that remains. In this sense it is said (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p59.1"></span>[John
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p59.1"></span>), that “the light shineth in darkness, and
the darkness comprehended it not;” these words clearly expressing both
points—viz. that in the perverted and degenerate nature of man there are
still some sparks which show that he is a rational animal, and differs
from the brutes, inasmuch as he is endued with intelligence, and yet,
that this light is so smothered by clouds of darkness that it cannot
shine forth to any good effect. In like manner, the will, because
inseparable from the nature of man, did not perish, but was so enslaved
by depraved lusts as to be incapable of one righteous desire. The
definition now given is complete, but there are several points which
require to be explained. Therefore, proceeding agreeably to that primary
distinction (Book 1 c. 15 sec. 7 and 8), by which we divided the soul
into intellect and will, we will now inquire into the power of the
intellect.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p60"></span>To charge the intellect with perpetual
blindness, so as to leave it no intelligence of any description
whatever, is repugnant not only to the Word of God, but to common
experience. We see that there has been implanted in the human mind a
certain desire of investigating truth, to which it never would aspire
unless some relish for truth antecedently existed. There is, therefore,
now, in the human mind, discernment to this extent, that it is naturally
influenced by the love of truth, the neglect of which in the lower
animals is a proof of their gross and irrational nature. Still it is
true that this love of truth fails before it reaches the goal, forthwith
falling away into vanity. As the human mind is unable, from dullness, to
pursue the right path of investigation, and, after various wanderings,
stumbling every now and then like one groping in darkness, at length
gets completely bewildered, so its whole procedure proves how unfit it
is to search the truth and find it. Then it labours under another
grievous defect, in that it frequently fails to discern what the
knowledge is which it should study to acquire. Hence, under the
influence of a vain curiosity, it torments itself with superfluous and
useless discussions, either not adverting at all to the things necessary
to be known, or casting only a cursory and contemptuous glance at them.
At all events, it scarcely ever studies them in sober earnest. Profane
writers are constantly complaining of this perverse procedure, and yet
almost all of them are found pursuing it. Hence Solomon, throughout the
Book of Ecclesiastes, after enumerating all the studies in which men
think they attain the highest wisdom, pronounces them vain and
frivolous.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p61"></span>13. Still, however, man’s efforts are
not always so utterly fruitless as not to lead to some result,
especially when his attention is directed to inferior objects. Nay, even
with regard to superior objects, though he is more careless in
investigating them, he makes some little progress. Here, however, his
ability is more limited, and he is never made more sensible of his
weakness than when he attempts to soar above the sphere of the present
life. It may therefore be proper, in order to make it more manifest how
far our ability extends in regard to these two classes of objects, to
draw a distinction between them. The distinction is, that we have one
kind of intelligence of earthly things, and another of heavenly things.
By earthly things, I mean those which relate not to God and his kingdom,
to true righteousness and future blessedness, but have some connection
with the present life, and are in a manner confined within its
boundaries. By heavenly things, I mean the pure knowledge of God, the
method of true righteousness, and the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom.
To the former belong matters of policy and economy, all mechanical arts
and liberal studies. To the latter (as to which, see the eighteenth and
following sections) belong the knowledge of God and of his will, and the
means of framing the life in accordance with them. As to the former, the
view to be taken is this: Since man is by nature a social animal, he is
disposed, from natural instinct, to cherish and preserve society; and
accordingly we see that the minds of all men have impressions of civil
order and honesty. Hence it is that every individual understands how
human societies must he regulated by laws, and also is able to
comprehend the principles of those laws. Hence the universal agreement
in regard to such subjects, both among nations and individuals, the
seeds of them being implanted in the breasts of all without a teacher or
lawgiver. The truth of this fact is not affected by the wars and
dissensions which immediately arise, while some, such as thieves and
robbers, would invert the rules of justice, loosen the bonds of law, and
give free scope to their lust; and while others (a vice of most frequent
occurrence) deem that to be unjust which is elsewhere regarded as just,
and, on the contrary, hold that to be praiseworthy which is elsewhere
forbidden. For such persons do not hate the laws from not knowing that
they are good and sacred, but, inflamed with headlong passion, quarrel
with what is clearly reasonable, and licentiously hate what their mind
and understanding approve. Quarrels of this latter kind do not destroy
the primary idea of justice. For while men dispute with each other as to
particular enactments, their ideas of equity agree in substance. This,
no doubt, proves the weakness of the human mind, which, even when it
seems on the right path, halts and hesitates. Still, however, it is
true, that some principle of civil order is impressed on all. And this
is ample proof, that, in regard to the constitution of the present life,
no man is devoid of the light of reason.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p62"></span>14. Next come manual and liberal arts,
in learning which, as all have some degree of aptitude, the full force
of human acuteness is displayed. But though all are not equally able to
learn all the arts, we have sufficient evidence of a common capacity in
the fact, that there is scarcely an individual who does not display
intelligence in some particular art. And this capacity extends not
merely to the learning of the art, but to the devising of something new,
or the improving of what had been previously learned. This led Plato to
adopt the erroneous idea, that such knowledge was nothing but
recollection.16  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) So cogently
does it oblige us to acknowledge that its principle is naturally
implanted in the human mind. But while these proofs openly attest the
fact of a universal reason and intelligence naturally implanted, this
universality is of a kind which should lead every individual for himself
to recognise it as a special gift of God. To this gratitude we have a
sufficient call from the Creator himself, when, in the case of idiots,
he shows what the endowments of the soul would be were it not pervaded
with his light. Though natural to all, it is so in such a sense that it
ought to be regarded as a gratuitous gift of his beneficence to each.
Moreover, the invention, the methodical arrangement, and the more
thorough and superior knowledge of the arts, being confined to a few
individuals cannot be regarded as a solid proof of common shrewdness.
Still, however, as they are bestowed indiscriminately on the good and
the bad, they are justly classed among natural endowments.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p64"></span>15. Therefore, in reading profane
authors, the admirable light of truth displayed in them should remind
us, that the human mind, however much fallen and perverted from its
original integrity, is still adorned and invested with admirable gifts
from its Creator. If we reflect that the Spirit of God is the only
fountain of truth, we will be careful, as we would avoid offering insult
to him, not to reject or condemn truth wherever it appears. In despising
the gifts, we insult the Giver. How, then, can we deny that truth must
have beamed on those ancient lawgivers who arranged civil order and
discipline with so much equity? Shall we say that the philosophers, in
their exquisite researches and skilful description of nature, were
blind? Shall we deny the possession of intellect to those who drew up
rules for discourse, and taught us to speak in accordance with reason?
Shall we say that those who, by the cultivation of the medical art,
expended their industry in our behalf were only raving? What shall we
say of the mathematical sciences? Shall we deem them to be the dreams of
madmen? Nay, we cannot read the writings of the ancients on these
subjects without the highest admiration; an admiration which their
excellence will not allow us to withhold. But shall we deem anything to
be noble and praiseworthy, without tracing it to the hand of God? Far
from us be such ingratitude; an ingratitude not chargeable even on
heathen poets, who acknowledged that philosophy and laws, and all useful
arts were the inventions of the gods. Therefore, since it is manifest
that men whom the Scriptures term carnal, are so acute and clear-sighted
in the investigation of inferior things, their example should teach us
how many gifts the Lord has left in possession of human nature,
notwithstanding of its having been despoiled of the true good.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p65"></span>16. Moreover, let us not forget that
there are most excellent blessings which the Divine Spirit dispenses to
whom he will for the common benefit of mankind. For if the skill and
knowledge required for the construction of the Tabernacle behaved to be
imparted to Bezaleel and Aholiab, by the Spirit of God (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p65.1"></span>[Exod.
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p65.1"></span>; 35:30), it is not strange that the
knowledge of those things which are of the highest excellence in human
life is said to be communicated to us by the Spirit. Nor is there any
ground for asking what concourse the Spirit can have with the ungodly,
who are altogether alienated from God? For what is said as to the Spirit
dwelling in believers only, is to be understood of the Spirit of
holiness by which we are consecrated to God as temples. Notwithstanding
of this, He fills, moves, and invigorates all things by the virtue of
the Spirit, and that according to the peculiar nature which each class
of beings has received by the Law of Creation. But if the Lord has been
pleased to assist us by the work and ministry of the ungodly in physics,
dialectics, mathematics, and other similar sciences, let us avail
ourselves of it, lest, by neglecting the gifts of God spontaneously
offered to us, we be justly punished for our sloth. Lest any one,
however, should imagine a man to be very happy merely because, with
reference to the elements of this world, he has been endued with great
talents for the investigation of truth, we ought to add, that the whole
power of intellect thus bestowed is, in the sight of God, fleeting and
vain whenever it is not based on a solid foundation of truth. Augustine
(*supra*, sec. 4 and 12), to whom, as we have observed, the Master of
Sentences (lib. 2 Dist. 25), and the Schoolmen, are forced to subscribe,
says most correctly that as the gratuitous gifts bestowed on man were
withdrawn, so the natural gifts which remained were corrupted after the
fall. Not that they can be polluted in themselves in so far as they
proceed from God, but that they have ceased to be pure to polluted man,
lest he should by their means obtain any praise.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p66"></span>17. The sum of the whole is this: From a
general survey of the human race, it appears that one of the essential
properties of our nature is reason, which distinguishes us from the
lower animals, just as these by means of sense are distinguished from
inanimate objects. For although some individuals are born without
reason, that defect does not impair the general kindness of God, but
rather serves to remind us, that whatever we retain ought justly to be
ascribed to the Divine indulgence. Had God not so spared us, our revolt
would have carried along with it the entire destruction of nature. In
that some excel in acuteness, and some in judgment, while others have
greater readiness in learning some peculiar art, God, by this variety
commends his favour toward us, lest any one should presume to arrogate
to himself that which flows from His mere liberality. For whence is it
that one is more excellent than another, but that in a common nature the
grace of God is specially displayed in passing by many and thus
proclaiming that it is under obligation to none. We may add, that each
individual is brought under particular influences according to his
calling. Many examples of this occur in the Book of Judges, in which the
Spirit of the Lord is said to have come upon those whom he called to
govern his people (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p66.1"></span>[Judges
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.1"></span>). In short, in every distinguished act
there is a special inspiration. Thus it is said of Saul, that “there
went with him a band of men whose hearts the Lord had touched,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.2"></span>[1 Sam.
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.2"></span>). And when his inauguration to the kingdom
is foretold, Samuel thus addresses him, “The Spirit of the Lord will
come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned
into another man,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p66.3"></span>[1 Sam.
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.3"></span>). This extends to the whole course of
government, as it is afterwards said of David, “The Spirit of the Lord
came upon David from that day forward,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.4"></span>[1 Sam.
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.4"></span>). The same thing is elsewhere said with
reference to particular movements. Nay, even in Homer, men are said to
excel in genius, not only according as Jupiter has distributed to each,
but according as he leads them day by day, oJion ejp emma" a\[geisi. And
certainly experience shows when those who were most skilful and
ingenious stand stupefied, that the minds of men are entirely under the
control of God, who rules them every moment. Hence it is said, that “He
poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the
wilderness where there is no way,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.5"></span>[Ps.
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p66.5"></span>). Still, in this diversity we can trace
some remains of the divine image distinguishing the whole human race
from other creatures.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p67"></span>18. We must now explain what the power
of human reason is, in regard to the kingdom of God, and spiritual
discernments which consists chiefly of three things—the knowledge of
God, the knowledge of his paternal favour towards us, which constitutes
our salvation, and the method of regulating of our conduct in accordance
with the Divine Law. With regard to the former two, but more properly
the second, men otherwise the most ingenious are blinder than moles. I
deny not, indeed, that in the writings of philosophers we meet
occasionally with shrewd and apposite remarks on the nature of God,
though they invariably savour somewhat of giddy imagination. As observed
above, the Lord has bestowed on them some slight perception of his
Godhead that they might not plead ignorance as an excuse for their
impiety, and has, at times, instigated them to deliver some truths, the
confession of which should be their own condemnation. Still, though
seeing, they saw not. Their discernment was not such as to direct them
to the truth, far less to enable them to attain it, but resembled that
of the bewildered traveller, who sees the flash of lightning glance far
and wide for a moment, and then vanish into the darkness of the night,
before he can advance a single step. So far is such assistance from
enabling him to find the right path. Besides, how many monstrous
falsehoods intermingle with those minute particles of truth scattered up
and down in their writings as if by chance. In short, not one of them
even made the least approach to that assurance of the divine favour,
without which the mind of man must ever remain a mere chaos of
confusion. To the great truths, What God is in himself, and what he is
in relation to us, human reason makes not the least approach. (See Book
3 c. 2 sec. 14, 15, 16).

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p68"></span>19. But since we are intoxicated with a
false opinion of our own discernment, and can scarcely be persuaded that
in divine things it is altogether stupid and blind, I believe the best
course will be to establish the fact, not by argument, but by Scripture.
Most admirable to this effect is the passage which I lately quoted from
John, when he says, “In him was life; and the life was the light of men.
And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
not,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p68.1"></span>[John
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p68.1"></span>.md).
He intimates that the human soul is indeed irradiated with a beam of
divine light, so that it is never left utterly devoid of some small
flame, or rather spark, though not such as to enable it to comprehend
God. And why so? Because its acuteness is, in reference to the knowledge
of God, mere blindness. When the Spirit describes men under the term
*darkness*, he declares them void of all power of spiritual
intelligence. For this reason, it is said that believers, in embracing
Christ, are “born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p68.2"></span>[John
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p68.2"></span>); in other words, that the flesh has no
capacity for such sublime wisdom as to apprehend God, and the things of
God, unless illumined by His Spirit. In like manner our Saviour, when he
was acknowledged by Peter, declared that it was by special revelation
from the Father (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p68.3"></span>[Mt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p68.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p69"></span>20. If we were persuaded of a truth
which ought to be beyond dispute—viz. that human nature possesses none
of the gifts which the elect receive from their heavenly Father through
the Spirit of regeneration, there would be no room here for hesitation.
For thus speaks the congregation of the faithful, by the mouth of the
prophet: “With thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see
light,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p69.1"></span>[Ps.
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.1"></span>). To the same effect is the testimony of
the Apostle Paul, when he declares, that “no man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p69.2"></span>[1
Cor. 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.2"></span>). And John Baptist, on seeing the dullness
of his disciples, exclaims, “A man can receive nothing, unless it be
given him from heaven,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p69.3"></span>[John
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.3"></span>). That the gift to which he here refers
must be understood not of ordinary natural gifts, but of special
illumination, appears from this—that he was complaining how little his
disciples had profited by all that he had said to them in commendation
of Christ. “I see,” says he, “that my words are of no effect in imbuing
the minds of men with divine things, unless the Lord enlighten their
understandings by His Spirit.” Nay, Moses also, while upbraiding the
people for their forgetfulness, at the same time observes, that they
could not become wise in the mysteries of God without his assistance.
“Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of
Egypt, unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land;
the great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and these
great miracles: yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this, day,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.4"></span>[Deut.
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p69.4"></span>.md).
Would the expression have been stronger had he called us mere blocks in
regard to the contemplation of divine things? Hence the Lord, by the
mouth of the Prophet, promises to the Israelites as a singular favour,
“I will give them an heart to know me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.5"></span>[Jer.
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.5"></span>); intimating, that in spiritual things the
human mind is wise only in so far as he enlightens it. This was also
clearly confirmed by our Saviour when he said, “No man can come to me,
except the Father which has sent me draw him,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.6"></span>[John
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.6"></span>). Nay, is not he himself the living image
of his Father, in which the full brightness of his glory is manifested
to us? Therefore, how far our faculty of knowing God extends could not
be better shown than when it is declared, that though his image is so
plainly exhibited, we have not eyes to perceive it. What? Did not Christ
descend into the world that he might make the will of his Father
manifest to men, and did he not faithfully perform the office? True! He
did; but nothing is accomplished by his preaching unless the inner
teacher, the Spirit, open the way into our minds. Only those, therefore,
come to him who have heard and learned of the Father. And in what is the
method of this hearing and learning? It is when the Spirit, with a
wondrous and special energy, forms the ear to hear and the mind to
understand. Lest this should seem new, our Saviour refers to the
prophecy of Isaiah, which contains a promise of the renovation of the
Church. “For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies
will I gather thee,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p69.7"></span>[Is.
54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p69.7"></span>). If the Lord here predicts some special
blessing to his elect, it is plain that the teaching to which he refers
is not that which is common to them with the ungodly and profane.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p70"></span>It thus appears that none can enter the
kingdom of God save those whose minds have been renewed by the
enlightening of the Holy Spirit. On this subject the clearest exposition
is given by Paul, who, when expressly handling it, after condemning the
whole wisdom of the world as foolishness and vanity, and thereby
declaring man’s utter destitution, thus concludes, “The natural man
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness
unto him: neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p70.1"></span>[1 Cor.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p70.1"></span>). Whom does he mean by the “natural man”?
The man who trusts to the light of nature. Such a man has no
understanding in the spiritual mysteries of God. Why so? Is it because
through sloth he neglects them? Nay, though he exert himself, it is of
no avail; they are “spiritually discerned.” And what does this mean?
That altogether hidden from human discernment, they are made known only
by the revelation of the Spirit; so that they are accounted foolishness
wherever the Spirit does not give light. The Apostle had previously
declared, that “Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him;” nay, that the wisdom of the world is a kind of veil by which
the mind is prevented from beholding God (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p70.2"></span>[1 Cor.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p70.2"></span>). What would we more? The Apostle declares
that God has “made foolish the wisdom of this world,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p70.3"></span>[1 Cor.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p70.3"></span>); and shall we attribute to it an acuteness
capable of penetrating to God, and the hidden mysteries of his kingdom?
Far from us be such presumption!

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p71"></span>21. What the Apostle here denies to man,
he, in another place, ascribes to God alone, when he prays, “that the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the
spirit of wisdom and revelation,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.1"></span>[Eph.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.1"></span>). You now hear that all wisdom and
revelation is the gift of God. What follows? “The eyes of your
understanding being enlightened.” Surely, if they require a new
enlightening, they must in themselves be blind. The next words are,
“that ye may know what is the hope of his calling,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.2"></span>[Eph.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.2"></span>). In other words, the minds of men have not
capacity enough to know their calling. Let no prating Pelagian here
allege that God obviates this rudeness or stupidity, when, by the
doctrine of his word, he directs us to a path which we could not have
found without a guide. David had the law, comprehending in it all the
wisdom that could be desired, and yet not contented with this, he prays,
“Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p71.3"></span>[Ps.
119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.3"></span>). By this expression, he certainly
intimates, that it is like sunrise to the earth when the word of God
shines forth; but that men do not derive much benefit from it until he
himself, who is for this reason called the Father of lights (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.4"></span>[James
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.4"></span>), either gives eyes or opens them; because,
whatever is not illuminated by his Spirit is wholly darkness. The
Apostles had been duly and amply instructed by the best of teachers.
Still, as they wanted the Spirit of truth to complete their education in
the very doctrine which they had previously heard, they were ordered to
wait for him (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p71.5"></span>[John
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p71.5"></span>). If we confess that what we ask of God is
lacking to us, and He by the very thing promised intimates our want, no
man can hesitate to acknowledge that he is able to understand the
mysteries of God, only in so far as illuminated by his grace. He who
ascribes to himself more understanding than this, is the blinder for not
acknowledging his blindness.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p72"></span>22. It remains to consider the third
branch of the knowledge of spiritual things—viz. the method of properly
regulating the conduct. This is correctly termed the knowledge of the
works of righteousness, a branch in which the human mind seems to have
somewhat more discernment than in the former two, since an Apostle
declares, “When the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto
themselves: which show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the meantime
accusing or else excusing one another” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p72.1"></span>[Rom.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p72.1"></span>). If the Gentiles have the righteousness of
the law naturally engraven on their minds, we certainly cannot say that
they are altogether blind as to the rule of life. Nothing, indeed is
more common, than for man to be sufficiently instructed in a right
course of conduct by natural law, of which the Apostle here speaks. Let
us consider, however for what end this knowledge of the law was given to
men. For from this it will forthwith appear how far it can conduct them
in the way of reason and truth. This is even plain from the words of
Paul, if we attend to their arrangement. He had said a little before,
that those who had sinned in the law will be judged by the law; and
those who have sinned without the law will perish without the law. As it
might seem unaccountable that the Gentiles should perish without any
previous judgment, he immediately subjoins, that conscience served them
instead of the law, and was therefore sufficient for their righteous
condemnation. The end of the natural law, therefore, is to render man
inexcusable, and may be not improperly defined—the judgment of
conscience distinguishing sufficiently between just and unjust, and by
convicting men on their own testimony depriving them of all pretext for
ignorance. So indulgent is man towards himself, that, while doing evil,
he always endeavours as much as he can to suppress the idea of sin. It
was this, apparently, which induced Plato (in his Protagoras) to suppose
that sins were committed only through ignorance. There might be some
ground for this, if hypocrisy were so successful in hiding vice as to
keep the conscience clear in the sight of God. But since the sinner,
when trying to evade the judgment of good and evil implanted in him, is
ever and anon dragged forward, and not permitted to wink so effectually
as not to be compelled at times, whether he will or not, to open his
eyes, it is false to say that he sins only through ignorance.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p73"></span>23. Themistius is more accurate in
teaching (Paraphr. in Lib. 3 de Anima, cap. 46), that the intellect is
very seldom mistaken in the general definition or essence of the matter;
but that deception begins as it advances farther, namely, when it
descends to particulars. That homicide, putting the case in the
abstract, is an evil, no man will deny; and yet one who is conspiring
the death of his enemy deliberates on it as if the thing was good. The
adulterer will condemn adultery in the abstract, and yet flatter himself
while privately committing it. The ignorance lies here: that man, when
he comes to the particular, forgets the rule which he had laid down in
the general case. Augustine treats most admirably on this subject in his
exposition of the first verse of the fifty-seventh Psalm. The doctrine
of Themistius, however, does not always hold true: for the turpitude of
the crime sometimes presses so on the conscience, that the sinner does
not impose upon himself by a false semblance of good, but rushes into
sin knowingly and willingly. Hence the expression,—I see the better
course, and approve it: I follow the worse (Medea of Ovid). For this
reason, Aristotle seems to me to have made a very shrewd distinction
between incontinence and intemperance (Ethic. lib. 7 cap. 3) Where
incontinence (ajkrasiva) reigns, he says, that through the passion
(pavtho") particular knowledge is suppressed: so that the individual
sees not in his own misdeed the evil which he sees generally in similar
cases; but when the passion is over, repentance immediately succeeds.
Intemperance (ajkolasiva), again, is not extinguished or diminished by a
sense of sin, but, on the contrary, persists in the evil choice which it
has once made.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p74"></span>24. Moreover, when you hear of a
universal judgment in man distinguishing between good and evil, you must
not suppose that this judgment is, in every respect, sound and entire.
For if the hearts of men are imbued with a sense of justice and
injustice, in order that they may have no pretext to allege ignorance,
it is by no means necessary for this purpose that they should discern
the truth in particular cases. It is even more than sufficient if they
understand so far as to be unable to practice evasion without being
convicted by their own conscience, and beginning even now to tremble at
the judgment-seat of God. Indeed, if we would test our reason by the
Divine Law, which is a perfect standard of righteousness, we should find
how blind it is in many respects. It certainly attains not to the
principal heads in the First Table, such as, trust in God, the
ascription to him of all praise in virtue and righteousness, the
invocation of his name, and the true observance of his day of rest. Did
ever any soul, under the guidance of natural sense, imagine that these
and the like constitute the legitimate worship of God? When profane men
would worship God, how often soever they may be drawn off from their
vain trifling, they constantly relapse into it. They admit, indeed, that
sacrifices are not pleasing, to God, unless accompanied with sincerity
of mind; and by this they testify that they have some conception of
spiritual worship, though they immediately pervert it by false devices:
for it is impossible to persuade them that every thing which the law
enjoins on the subject is true. Shall I then extol the discernment of a
mind which can neither acquire wisdom by itself, nor listen to advice?16
 <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) As to the precepts of the
Second Table, there is considerably more knowledge of them, inasmuch as
they are more closely connected with the preservation of civil society.
Even here, however, there is something defective. Every man of
understanding deems it most absurd to submit to unjust and tyrannical
domination, provided it can by any means be thrown off, and there is but
one opinion among men, that it is the part of an abject and servile mind
to bear it patiently, the part of an honourable and high-spirited mind
to rise up against it. Indeed, the revenge of injuries is not regarded
by philosophers as a vice. But the Lord condemning this too lofty
spirit, prescribes to his people that patience which mankind deem
infamous. In regard to the general observance of the law, concupiscence
altogether escapes our animadversion. For the natural man cannot bear to
recognise diseases in his lusts. The light of nature is stifled sooner
than take the first step into this profound abyss. For, when
philosophers class immoderate movements of the mind among vices, they
mean those which break forth and manifest themselves in grosser forms.
Depraved desires, in which the mind can quietly indulge, they regard as
nothing (see *infra*, chap. 8 sect. 49).

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p76"></span>25. As we have above animadverted on
Plato’s error, in ascribing all sins to ignorance, so we must repudiate
the opinion of those who hold that all sins proceed from preconceived
gravity and malice. We know too well from experience how often we fall,
even when our intention is good. Our reason is exposed to so many forms
of delusion, is liable to so many errors, stumbles on so many obstacles,
is entangled by so many snares, that it is ever wandering from the right
direction. Of how little value it is in the sight of God, in regard to
all the parts of life, Paul shows, when he says, that we are not
“sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.1"></span>). He is not speaking of the will or
affection; he denies us the power of thinking aright how any thing cam
be duly performed. Is it, indeed, true, that all thought, intelligence,
discernment, and industry, are so defective, that, in the sight of the
Lord, we cannot think or aim at any thing that is right? To us, who can
scarcely bear to part with acuteness of intellect (in our estimation a
most precious endowment), it seems hard to admit this, whereas it is
regarded as most just by the Holy Spirit, who “knoweth the thoughts of
man, that they are vanity,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p76.2"></span>[Ps.
94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.2"></span>), and distinctly declares, that “every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iii-p76.3"></span>[Gen.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p76.3"></span>;
8:21). If every thing which our mind conceives, meditates plans, and
resolves, is always evil, how can it ever think of doing what is
pleasing to God, to whom righteousness and holiness alone are
acceptable? It is thus plain, that our mind, in what direction soever it
turns, is miserably exposed to vanity. David was conscious of its
weakness when he prayed, “Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy
law,” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p76.4"></span>[Ps.
119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.4"></span>). By desiring to obtain a new
understanding, he intimates that his own was by no means sufficient.
This he does not once only, but in one psalm repeats the same prayer
almost ten times, the repetition intimating how strong the necessity
which urged him to pray. What he thus asked for himself alone, Paul
prays for the churches in general. “For this cause,” says he, “we also,
since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire
that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding; that you might walk worthy of the Lord,”
&c. (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p76.5"></span>[Col.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.5"></span>). Whenever he represents this as a blessing
from God, we should remember that he at the same time testifies that it
is not in the power of man. Accordingly, Augustine, in speaking of this
inability of human reason to understand the things of God, says, that he
deems the grace of illumination not less necessary to the mind than the
light of the sun to the eye (*August. de Peccat. Merit. et Remiss*. lib.
2 cap. 5). And, not content with this, he modifies his expression,
adding, that we open our eyes to behold the light, whereas the mental
eye remains shut, until it is opened by the Lord. Nor does Scripture say
that our minds are illuminated in a single day, so as afterwards to see
of themselves. The passage, which I lately quoted from the Apostle Paul,
refers to continual progress and increase. David, too, expresses this
distinctly in these words: “With my whole heart have I sought thee: O
let me not wander from thy commandments,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.6"></span>[Ps.
119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.6"></span>). Though he had been regenerated, and so
had made no ordinary progress in true piety, he confesses that he stood
in need of direction every moment, in order that he might not decline
from the knowledge with which he had been endued. Hence, he elsewhere
prays for a renewal of a right spirit, which he had lost by his sin,16
 <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p77.1"></span>[Ps.
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p77.1"></span>). For that which God gave at first, while
temporarily withdrawn, it is equally his province to restore.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p78"></span>26. We must now examine the will, on
which the question of freedom principally turns, the power of choice
belonging to it rather than the intellect, as we have already seen
(*supra*, sect. 4). And at the outset, to guard against its being
thought that the doctrine taught by philosophers, and generally
received—viz. that all things by natural instinct have a desire of good,
is any proof of the rectitude of the human will,—let us observe, that
the power of free will is not to be considered in any of those desires
which proceed more from instinct than mental deliberation. Even the
schoolmen admit (*Thomas*, Part 1, *Quæst*. 83, art. 3), that there is
no act of free will, unless when reason looks at opposites. By this they
mean, that the things desired must be such as may be made the object of
choice, and that to pave the way for choice, deliberation must precede.
And, undoubtedly, if you attend to what this natural desire of good in
man is, you will find that it is common to him with the brutes. They,
too, desire what is good; and when any semblance of good capable of
moving the sense appears, they follow after it. Here, however, man does
not, in accordance with the excellence of his immortal nature,
rationally choose, and studiously pursue, what is truly for his good. He
does not admit reason to his counsel, nor exert his intellect; but
without reason, without counsel, follows the bent of his nature like the
lower animals. The question of freedom, therefore, has nothing to do
with the fact of man’s being led by natural instinct to desire good. The
question is, Does man, after determining by right reason what is good,
choose what he thus knows, and pursue what he thus chooses? Lest any
doubt should be entertained as to this, we must attend to the double
misnomer. For this *appetite* is not properly a movement of the will,
but natural inclination; and this *good* is not one of virtue or
righteousness, but of condition—viz. that the individual may feel
comfortable. In fine, how much soever man may desire to obtain what is
good, he does not follow it. There is no man who would not be pleased
with eternal blessedness; and yet, without the impulse of the Spirit, no
man aspires to it. Since, then, the natural desire of happiness in man
no more proves the freedom of the will, than the tendency in metals and
stones to attain the perfection of their nature, let us consider, in
other respects, whether the will is so utterly vitiated and corrupted in
every part as to produce nothing but evil, or whether it retains some
portion uninjured, and productive of good desires.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p79"></span> 27. Those who ascribe our willing
effectually, to the primary grace of Gods (*supra*, sect. 6), seem
conversely to insinuate that the soul has in itself a power of aspiring
to good, though a power too feeble to rise to solid affection or active
endeavour. There is no doubt that this opinion, adopted from Origin and
certain of the ancient Fathers, has been generally embraced by the
schoolmen, who are wont to apply to man in his natural state (*in puris
naturalibus*, as they express it) the following description of the
apostle:—“For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I
not; but what I hate, that do I.” “To will is present with me; but how
to perform that which is good I find not,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.1"></span>[Rom.
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.1"></span>). But, in this way, the whole scope of
Paul’s discourse is inverted. He is speaking of the Christian struggle
(touched on more briefly in the Epistle to the Galatians), which
believers constantly experience from the conflict between the flesh and
the Spirit. But the Spirit is not from nature, but from regeneration.
That the apostle is speaking of the regenerate is apparent from this,
that after saying, “in me dwells no good thing,” he immediately adds the
explanation, “in my flesh.” Accordingly, he declares, “It is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.” What is the meaning of the
correction, “in me (that is, in my flesh?)” It is just as if he had
spoken in this way, No good thing dwells in me, of myself, for in my
flesh nothing good can be found. Hence follows the species of excuse, It
is not I myself that do evil, but sin that dwelleth in me. This applies
to none but the regenerate, who, with the leading powers of the soul,
tend towards what is good. The whole is made plain by the conclusion, “I
delight in the law of God after the inward man: but I see another law in
my members, warring against the law of my mind,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.2"></span>[Rom.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.2"></span>). Who has this struggle in himself, save
those who, regenerated by the Spirit of God, bear about with them the
remains of the flesh? Accordingly, Augustine, who had at one time
thought that the discourse related to the natural man (August. ad
Bonifac. lib. 1 c. 10), afterwards retracted his exposition as unsound
and inconsistent. And, indeed if we admit that men, without grace, have
any motions to good, however feeble, what answer shall we give to the
apostles who declares that “we are incapable of thinking a good
thought?” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p79.3"></span>[2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.3"></span>). What answer shall we give to the Lord,
who declares, by Moses, that “every imagination of man’s heart is only
evil continually?” (<span id="iv.ii.iii-p79.4"></span>[Gen.
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.4"></span>). Since the blunder has thus arisen from an
erroneous view of a single passage, it seems unnecessary to dwell upon
it. Let us rather give due weight to our Saviour’s words, “Whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.5"></span>[John
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.5"></span>). We are all sinners by nature, therefore
we are held under the yoke of sin. But if the whole man is subject to
the dominion of sin, surely the will, which is its principal seat, must
be bound with the closest chains. And, indeed, if divine grace were
preceded by any will of ours, Paul could not have said that “it is God
which worketh in us both to will and to do” (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.6"></span>[Phil.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.6"></span>). Away, then, with all the absurd trifling
which many have indulged in with regard to preparation. Although
believers sometimes ask to have their heart trained to the obedience of
the divine law, as David does in several passages (<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.7"></span>[Ps.
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p79.7"></span>), it is to be observed, that even this
longing in prayer is from God. This is apparent from the language used.
When he prays, “Create in me a clean heart,” he certainly does not
attribute the beginning of the creation to himself. Let us therefore
rather adopt the sentiment of Augustine, “God will prevent you in all
things, but do you sometimes prevent his anger. How? Confess that you
have all these things from God, that all the good you have is from him,
all the evil from yourself,” (August. De Verbis Apost. Serm. 10).
Shortly after he says “Of our own we have nothing but sin.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](inst036.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p32"></span>51 151 See Calvin Adv. Theolog.
Parisienses, Art. 2. These two rocks are adverted to by Augustine, <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>Ep. 47<span id="iv.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>, et
in Joannem, cap. 12.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](inst036.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p33"></span>52 152 The French is, “Laquelle
toutefois nous cognoistrons etre très-utile et qui plue est, etre un des
fondemens de la religion;”—which, however, we shall know to be very
useful, and what is more, to be one of the fundamentals of religion.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](inst036.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p38"></span>53 153 The French adds, “pour en dire
franchement ce qu en est;”—to speak of them frankly as they deserve.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](inst036.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p39"></span>54 154 The French adds the explanation,
“Assavoir ceux qui concernoyent la vie celeste;”that is to say, those
which concern the heavenly life.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](inst036.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p41"></span>55 155 Orig. De Principiis, Lib. 3. It
is given by Lombard, Lib. 2 Dist 24 Bernard. de Grat. et Liber Arbit
Anselm, Dialog. de Liber. Arbit. cap. 12, 13 Lombard, Lib. 2 Dist. 24
sec. 5.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](inst036.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p43"></span>56 156 The French adds (“qu’en attribue
ˆ St Ambroise”);—which is attributed St. Ambrose.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](inst036.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p47"></span>57 157 August. Lib. 1 cont. Julian. For
the subsequent quotations, see Homil. 53, in Joannem; Ad Anast. Epist.
144; De Perf. Just; Eucher. ad Laur. c. 30; Idem ad Bonifac. Lib. 3 c.
8; Ibid. c. 7; Idem ad Bonifac. Lib 1 c. 3; Ibid. Lib. 3 cap. 7; Idem.
Lib. de Verbis Apost. Serm. 3; Lib. de Spiritu et Litera. cap. 30.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](inst036.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p48"></span>58 158 See August. de Corrept. et Grat.
cap. 13. Adv. Lib. Arbit. See also August. Epist. 107. Also the first
and last parts of Bernard’s Treatise De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](inst036.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p50"></span>59 159 August. de Prædest. Sanct. Idem
ad Bonifacum, Lib. 4 et alibi. Eucher. Lib in Genesin. Chrysost. Homil.
in Adventu.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](inst036.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p51"></span>60 160 The French adds, “Ancien evesque
de Lion;” ancient bishop of Lyons.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](inst036.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p53"></span>61 161 The French has, “Au commencement
de ce traité;” at the commencment of this treatise.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](inst036.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p54"></span>62 162 The French adds, “Si c’est parole
diabolique celle qui exalte homme en soy’mesme, il ne nous lui faut
donner lieu, sinon que nous veuillins prendre conseli de nostre
ennemi;”—if words which exalt man in himself are devilish, we must not
give place to them unless we would take counsel of our enemy.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](inst036.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p56"></span>63 163 Chrysost. Homil. de Perf. Evang.
August. Epist. 56 ad Discur. As to true humility, see infra, chap. 7
sec. 4, and lib. 3 c 12, sec. 6, 7.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](inst036.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p57"></span>64 164 The French is, “Demosthene
orateur Grec;”—the Greek orator Demosthenes.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](inst036.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p58"></span>65 165 August. Homil. in Joann. 49, lib.
de Natura et Gratia, cap. 52.; and in <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p58.1"></span>[Psalms
45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p58.1"></span>.
set 70

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](inst036.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p63"></span>66 166 The French adds, “de ce que l’ame
savoit avant qu’etre mis dedlans le corps;”—of what the soul knew before
it was placed within the body.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](inst036.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p75"></span>67 167 The French adds, “Or
l’entendement humaiu a eté tel en cest endroit. Nous appercevons donques
qu’il est du tout stupide;” now, the understanding has proved so in this
matter. We see, therefore, that it is quite stupid.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](inst036.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p76.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p77"></span>68 168 Calvin, in his Commentary on the
passage, says, “Lost in part or appearance, or deserved to lose.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 3. - EVERY THING PROCEEDING FROM THE CORRUPT NATURE OF
MAN DAMNABLE.](inst037.md)
