[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst044)  [Next](inst046.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 11.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p1"></span>THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO
TESTAMENTS.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p2"></span>This chapter consists principally of
three parts. I. Five points of difference between the Old and the New
Testament, sec. 1–11. II. The last of these points being, that the Old
Testament belonged to the Jews only, whereas the New Testament belongs
to all; the calling of the Gentiles is shortly considered, sec. 12. III.
A reply to two objections usually taken to what is here taught
concerning the difference between the Old and the New Testaments, sec.
13, 14.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p4"></span>1. Five points of difference between the
Old and the New Testaments. These belong to the mode of administration
rather than the substance. First difference. In the Old Testament the
heavenly inheritance is exhibited under temporal blessings; in the New,
aids of this description are not employed.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p5"></span>2. Proof of this first difference from
the simile of an heir in pupillarity, as in <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>[Gal.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p6"></span>3. This the reason why the Patriarchs,
under the Law, set a higher value on this life and the blessings of it,
and dreaded the punishments, these being even more striking. Why severe
and sudden punishments existed under the Law.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p7"></span>4. A second difference. The Old Testament
typified Christ under ceremonies. The New exhibits the immediate truth
and the whole body. The scope of the Epistle to the Hebrews in
explaining this difference. Definition of the Old Testament.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p8"></span>5. Hence the Law our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p9"></span>6. Notwithstanding, among those under the
Law, some of the strongest examples of faith are exhibited, their equals
being scarcely to be found in the Christian Church. The ordinary method
of the divine dispensation to be here attended to. These excellent
individuals placed under the Law, and aided by ceremonies, that they
might behold and hail Christ afar off.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p10"></span>7. Third difference. The Old Testament
is literal, the New spiritual. This difference considered first
generally.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p11"></span>8. Next treated specially, on a careful
examination of the Apostle’s text. A threefold antithesis. The Old
Testament is literal, deadly, temporary. The New is spiritual,
quickening, eternal. Difference between the letter and the spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p12"></span>9. Fourth difference. The Old Testament
belongs to bondage, the New to liberty. This confirmed by three passages
of Scripture. Two objections answered.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p13"></span>10. Distinction between the three last
differences and the first. Confirmation of the above from Augustine.
Condition of the patriarchs under the Old Testament.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p14"></span>11. Fifth difference. The Old Testament
belonged to one people only, the New to all.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p15"></span>12. The second part of the chapter
depending on the preceding section. Of the calling of the Gentiles. Why
the calling of the Gentiles scented to the Apostles so strange and new.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p16"></span>13. The last part of the chapter. Two
objections considered. 1. God being immutable, cannot consistently
disapprove what he once ordered. Answer confirmed by a passage of
Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p17"></span>14. Objections. 2. God could at first
have transacted with the Jews as he now does with Christians. Answer,
showing the absurdity of this objection. Another answer founded on a
just consideration of the divine will and the dispensation of grace.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p18"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p19"></span>1. What, then? you will say, Is there no
difference between the Old and the New Testaments? What is to become of
the many passages of Scripture in which they are contrasted as things
differing most widely from each other? I readily admit the differences
which are pointed out in Scripture, but still hold that they derogate in
no respect from their established unity, as will be seen after we have
considered them in their order. These differences (so far as I have been
able to observe them and can remember) seem to be chiefly four, or, if
you choose to add a fifth, I have no objections. I hold and think I will
be able to show, that they all belong to the mode of administration
rather than to the substance. In this way, there is nothing in them to
prevent the promises of the Old and New Testament from remaining the
same, Christ being the foundation of both. The first difference then is,
that though, in old time, the Lord was pleased to direct the thoughts of
his people, and raise their minds to the heavenly inheritance, yet, that
their hope of it might be the better maintained, he held it forth, and,
in a manner, gave a foretaste of it under earthly blessings, whereas the
gift of future life, now more clearly and lucidly revealed by the
Gospel, leads our minds directly to meditate upon it, the inferior mode
of exercise formerly employed in regard to the Jews being now laid
aside. Those who attend not to the divine purpose in this respect,
suppose that God’s ancient people ascended no higher than the blessings
which were promised to the body. They hear the land of Canaan so often
named as the special, and as it were the only, reward of the Divine Law
to its worshipers; they hear that the severest punishment which the Lord
denounces against the transgressors of the Law is expulsion from the
possession of that land and dispersion into other countries; they see
that this forms almost the sum of the blessings and curses declared by
Moses; and from these things they confidently conclude that the Jews
were separated from other nations not on their own account, but for
another reason—viz. that the Christian Church might have an emblem in
whose outward shape might be seen an evidence of spiritual things. But
since the Scripture sometimes demonstrates that the earthly blessings
thus bestowed were intended by God himself to guide them to a heavenly
hope, it shows great unskilfulness, not to say dullness, not to attend
to this mode of dispensation. The ground of controversy is this: our
opponents hold that the land of Canaan was considered by the Israelites
as supreme and final happiness, and now, since Christ was manifested,
typifies to us the heavenly inheritance; whereas we maintain that, in
the earthly possession which the Israelites enjoyed, they beheld, as in
a mirror, the future inheritance which they believed to be reserved for
them in heaven.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p20"></span>2. This will better appear from the
similitude which Paul uses in Galatians (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.1"></span>[Gal.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.1"></span>). He compares the Jewish nation to an heir
in pupillarity, who, as yet unfit to govern himself, follows the
direction of a tutor or guide to whose charge he has been committed.
Though this simile refers especially to ceremonies, there is nothing to
prevent us from applying it most appropriately here also. The same
inheritance was destined to them as to us, but from nonage they were
incapable of entering to it, and managing it. They had the same Church,
though it was still in puerility. The Lord, therefore kept them under
this tutelage, giving them spiritual promises, not clear and simple, but
typified by earthly objects. Hence, when he chose Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and their posterity, to the hope of immortality, he promised them
the land of Canaan for an inheritance, not that it might be the limit of
their hopes, but that the view of it might train and confirm them in the
hope of that true inheritance, which, as yet, appeared not. And, to
guard against delusion, they received a better promise, which attested
that this earth was not the highest measure of the divine kindness.
Thus, Abraham is not allowed to keep down his thoughts to the promised
land: by a greater promise his views are carried upward to the Lord. He
is thus addressed, “Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward,” (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p20.2"></span>[Gen.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.2"></span>). Here we see that the Lord is the final
reward promised to Abraham that he might not seek a fleeting and
evanescent reward in the elements of this world, but look to one which
was incorruptible. A promise of the land is afterwards added for no
other reason than that it might be a symbol of the divine benevolence,
and a type of the heavenly inheritance, as the saints declare their
understanding to have been. Thus David rises from temporal blessings to
the last and highest of all, “My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is
the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.” “My heart and my
flesh crieth out for the living God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.3"></span>[Ps.
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.3"></span>; 84:2). Again, “The Lord is the portion of
mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.4"></span>[Ps.
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.4"></span>). Again “I cried unto thee O Lord: I said
Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land of the living,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.5"></span>[Ps.
142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.5"></span>). Those who can venture to speak thus,
assuredly declare that their hope rises beyond the world and worldly
blessings. This future blessedness, however, the prophets often describe
under a type which the Lord had taught them. In this way are to be
understood the many passages in Job (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.6"></span>[Job
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.6"></span>) and Isaiah, to the effect, That the
righteous shall inherit the earth, that the wicked shall be driven out
of it, that Jerusalem will abound in all kinds of riches, and Sion
overflow with every species at abundance. In strict propriety, all these
things obviously apply not to the land of our pilgrimage, nor to the
earthly Jerusalem, but to the true country, the heavenly city of
believers, in which the Lord has commanded blessing and life for
evermore (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p20.7"></span>[Ps.
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p20.7"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p21"></span>3. Hence the reason why the saints under
the Old Testament set a higher value on this mortal life and its
blessings than would now be meet. For, though they well knew, that in
their race they were not to halt at it as the goal, yet, perceiving that
the Lord, in accommodation to their feebleness, had there imprinted the
lineaments of his favour, it gave them greater delight than it could
have done if considered only in itself. For, as the Lord, in testifying
his good will towards believers by means of present blessings, then
exhibited spiritual felicity under types and emblems, so, on the other
hand, by temporal punishments he gave proofs of his judgment against the
reprobate. Hence, by earthly objects, the favour of the Lord was
displayed, as well as his punishment inflicted. The unskilful, not
considering this analogy and correspondence (if I may so speak) between
rewards and punishments, wonder that there is so much variance in God,
that those who, in old time, were suddenly visited for their faults with
severe and dreadful punishments, he now punishes much more rarely and
less severely, as if he had laid aside his former anger, and, for this
reason, they can scarcely help imagining, like the Manichees, that the
God of the Old Testament was different from that of the New. But we
shall easily disencumber ourselves of such doubts if we attend to that
mode of divine administration to which I have adverted—that God was
pleased to indicate and typify both the gift of future and eternal
felicity by terrestrial blessings, as well as the dreadful nature of
spiritual death by bodily punishments, at that time when he delivered
his covenant to the Israelites as under a kind of veil.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p22"></span>4. Another distinction between the Old
and New Testaments is in the types, the former exhibiting only the image
of truth, while the reality was absent, the shadow instead of the
substance, the latter exhibiting both the full truth and the entire
body. Mention is usually made of this, whenever the New Testament is
contrasted with the Old,23  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) but
it is nowhere so fully treated as in the Epistle to the Hebrews (chap.
7–10). The Apostle is there arguing against those who thought that the
observances of the Mosaic Law could not be abolished without producing
the total ruin of religion. In order to refute this error, he adverts to
what the Psalmist had foretold concerning the priesthood of Christ
(<span id="iv.ii.xii-p23.1"></span>[Ps.
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p23.1"></span>). seeing that an eternal priesthood is
assigned to him, it is clear that the priesthood in which there was a
daily succession of priests is abolished. And he proves that the
institution of this new Priest must prevail, because confirmed by an
oath. He afterwards adds, that a change of the priest necessarily led to
a change of the covenant. And the necessity of this he confirms by the
reason, that the weakness of the law was such, that it could make
nothing perfect. He then goes on to show in what this weakness consists,
namely, that it had external carnal observances which could not render
the worshipers perfect in respect of conscience, because its sacrifices
of beasts could neither take away sins nor procure true holiness. He
therefore concludes that it was a shadow of good things to come, and not
the very image of the things, and accordingly had no other office than
to be an introduction to the better hope which is exhibited in the
Gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p24"></span>Here we may see in what respect the
legal is compared with the evangelical covenant, the ministry of Christ
with that of Moses. If the comparison referred to the substance of the
promises, there would be a great repugnance between the two covenants;
but since the nature of the case leads to a different view, we must
follow it in order to discover the truth. Let us, therefore bring
forward the covenant which God once ratified as eternal and unending.
Its completion, whereby it is fixed and ratified, is Christ. Till such
completion takes place, the Lord, by Moses, prescribes ceremonies which
are, as it were formal symbols of confirmation. The point brought under
discussion was, Whether or not the ceremonies ordained in the Law
behaved to give way to Christ. Although these were merely accidents of
the covenant, or at least additions and appendages, and, as they are
commonly called, accessories, yet because they were the means of
administering it, the name of covenant is applied to them, just as is
done in the case of other sacraments.23  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) Hence, in general, the Old Testament
is the name given to the solemn method of confirming the covenant
comprehended under ceremonies and sacrifices. Since there is nothing
substantial in it, until we look beyond it, the Apostle contends that it
behaved to be annulled and become antiquated (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p25.1"></span>[Heb.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p25.1"></span>), to make room for Christ, the surety and
mediator of a better covenant, by whom the eternal sanctification of the
elect was once purchased, and the transgressions which remained under
the Law wiped away. But if you prefer it, take it thus: the covenant of
the Lord was old, because veiled by the shadowy and ineffectual
observance of ceremonies; and it was therefore temporary, being, as it
were in suspense until it received a firm and substantial confirmation.
Then only did it become new and eternal when it was consecrated and
established in the blood of Christ. Hence the Saviour, in giving the cup
to his disciples in the last supper, calls it the cup of the new
testament in his blood; intimating, that the covenant of God was truly
realised, made new, and eternal, when it was sealed with his blood.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p26"></span>5. It is now clear in what sense the
Apostle said (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p26.1"></span>[Gal.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p26.1"></span>; 4:1), that by the tutelage of the Law the
Jews were conducted to Christ, before he was exhibited in the flesh. He
confesses that they were sons and heirs of God, though, on account of
nonage, they were placed under the guardianship of a tutor. It was fit,
the Sun of Righteousness not yet having risen, that there should neither
be so much light of revelation nor such clear understanding. The Lord
dispensed the light of his word, so that they could behold it at a
distance, and obscurely. Accordingly, this slender measure of
intelligence is designated by Paul by the term *childhood*, which the
Lord was pleased to train by the elements of this world, and external
observances, until Christ should appear. Through him the knowledge of
believers was to be matured. This distinction was noted by our Saviour
himself when he said that the Law and the Prophets were until John, that
from that time the gospel of the kingdom was preached (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p26.2"></span>[Mt.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p26.2"></span>). What did the Law and the Prophets deliver
to the men of their time? They gave a foretaste of that wisdom which was
one day to be clearly manifested, and showed it afar off. But where
Christ can be pointed to with the finger, there the kingdom of God is
manifested. In him are contained all the treasures of wisdom and
understanding, and by these we penetrate almost to the very shrine of
heaven.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p27"></span>6. There is nothing contrary to this in
the fact, that in the Christian Church scarcely one is to be found who,
in excellence of faith, can be compared to Abraham, and that the
Prophets were so distinguished by the power of the Spirit, that even in
the present day they give light to the whole world. For the question
here is, not what grace the Lord conferred upon a few, but what was the
ordinary method which he followed in teaching the people, and which even
was employed in the case of those very prophets who were endued with
special knowledge above others. For their preaching was both obscure as
relating to distant objects, and was included in types. Moreover,
however wonderful the knowledge displayed in them, as they were under
the necessity of submitting to the tutelage common to all the people,
they must also be ranked among children. Lastly, none of them ever had
such a degree of discernment as not to savour somewhat of the obscurity
of the age. Whence the words of our Saviour, “Many kings and prophets
have desired to see the things which you see, and have not seen them,
and to hear the things which ye hear, and have not heard them. Blessed
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p27.1"></span>[Mt.
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p27.1"></span>). And it was right that the presence of
Christ should have this distinguishing feature, that by means of it the
revelation of heavenly mysteries should be made more transparent. To the
same effect is the passage which we formerly quoted from the First
Epistle of Peter, that to them it was revealed that their labour should
be useful not so much to themselves as to our age.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p28"></span>7. I proceed to the third distinction,
which is thus expressed by Jeremiah: “Behold, the days come, saith the
Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with their
fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of
the land of Egypt; (which my covenant they brake, although I was an
husband unto them, saith the Lord); but this shall be the covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord,
I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts;
and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach
no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know
the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the
greatest of them,” (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p28.1"></span>[Jer.
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p28.1"></span>). From these words, the Apostle took
occasion to institute a comparison between the Law and the Gospel,
calling the one a doctrine of the letter, the other a doctrine of the
spirit; describing the one as formed on tables of stone, the other on
tables of the heart; the one the preaching of death, the other of life;
the one of condemnation, the other of justification; the one made void,
the other permanent (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p28.2"></span>[2 Cor.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p28.2"></span>.md).
The object of the Apostle being to explain the meaning of the Prophet,
the worlds of the one furnish us with the means of ascertaining what was
understood by both. And yet there is some difference between them. For
the Apostle speaks of the Law more disparagingly than the Prophet. This
he does not simply in respect of the Law itself, but because there were
some false zealots of the Law who, by a perverse zeal for ceremonies,
obscured the clearness of the Gospel, he treats of the nature of the Law
with reference to their error and foolish affection. It will, therefore,
be proper to attend to this peculiarity in Paul. Both, however, as they
are contrasting the Old and New Testament, consider nothing in the Law
but what is peculiar to it. For example, the Law everywhere23  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) contains promises of mercy; but as
these are adventitious to it, they do not enter into the account of the
Law as considered only in its own nature. All which is attributed to it
is, that it commands what is right, prohibits crimes, holds forth
rewards to the cultivators of righteousness, and threatens transgressors
with punishment, while at the same time it neither changes nor amends
that depravity of heart which is naturally inherent in all.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p30"></span>8. Let us now explain the Apostle’s
contrast step by step. The Old Testament is literal, because promulgated
without the efficacy of the Spirit: the New spiritual, because the Lord
has engraven it on the heart. The second antithesis is a kind of
exposition of the first. The Old is deadly, because it can do nothing
but involve the whole human race in a curse; the New is the instrument
of life, because those who are freed from the curse it restores to
favour with God. The former is the ministry of condemnation, because it
charges the whole sons of Adam with transgression; the latter the
ministry of righteousness, because it unfolds the mercy of God, by which
we are justified. The last antithesis must be referred to the Ceremonial
Law. Being a shadow of things to come, it behaved in time to perish and
vanish away; whereas the Gospel, inasmuch as it exhibits the very body,
is firmly established for ever. Jeremiah indeed calls the Moral Law also
a weak and fragile covenant; but for another reason, namely, because it
was immediately broken by the sudden defection of an ungrateful people;
but as the blame of such violation is in the people themselves, it is
not properly alleged against the covenant. The ceremonies, again,
inasmuch as through their very weakness they were dissolved by the
advent of Christ, had the cause of weakness from within. Moreover, the
difference between the spirit and the letter must not be understood as
if the Lord had delivered his Law to the Jews without any good result;
i.e. as if none had been converted to him. It is used comparatively to
commend the riches of the grace with which the same Lawgivers assuming,
as it were a new characters honoured the preaching of the Gospel. When
we consider the multitude of those whom, by the preaching of the Gospel,
he has regenerated by his, Spirit, and gathered out of all nations into
the communion of his Church, we may say that those of ancient Israel
who, with sincere and heartfelt affections embraced the covenant of the
Lord, were few or none, though the number is great when they are
considered in themselves without comparison.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p31"></span>9. Out of the third distinction a fourth
arises. In Scripture, the term bondage is applied to the Old Testaments
because it begets fear, and the term freedom to the New, because
productive of confidence and security. Thus Paul says to the Romans, “Ye
have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have
received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p31.1"></span>[Rom.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p31.1"></span>). To the same effect is the passage in the
Hebrews, “For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and
that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
and the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice they
that heard entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any
more: (for they could not endure that which was commanded, And if so
much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust
through with a dart: and so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake); but ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto
the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,” &c. (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p31.2"></span>[Heb.
12:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p31.2"></span>). What Paul briefly touches on in the
passage which we have quoted from the Romans, he explains more fully in
the Epistles to the Galatians, where he makes an allegory of the two
sons of Abraham in this way: “Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and
answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her
children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of
us all,” (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p31.3"></span>[Gal.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p31.3"></span>). As the offspring of Agar was born in
slavery, and could never attain to the inheritances while that of Sara
was free and entitled to the inheritance, so by the Law we are subjected
to slavery, and by the Gospel alone regenerated into liberty. The sum of
the matter comes to this: The Old Testament filled the conscience with
fear and trembling—The New inspires it with gladness. By the former the
conscience is held in bondage, by the latter it is manumitted and made
free. If it be objected, that the holy fathers among the Israelites, as
they were endued with the same spirit of faith, must also have been
partakers of the same liberty and joy, we answer, that neither was
derived from the Law; but feeling that by the Law they were oppressed
like slaves, and vexed with a disquieted conscience, they fled for
refuge to the (gospel; and, accordingly, the peculiar advantage of the
Gospel was, that, contrary to the common rule of the Old Testament, it
exempted those who were under it from those evils. Then, again, we deny
that they did possess the spirit of liberty and security in such a
degree as not to experience some measure of fear and bondage. For
however they might enjoy the privilege which they had obtained through
the grace of the Gospel, they were under the same bonds and burdens of
observances as the rest of their nation. Therefore, seeing they were
obliged to the anxious observance of ceremonies (which were the symbols
of a tutelage bordering on slavery, and handwritings by which they
acknowledged their guilt, but did not escape from it), they are justly
said to have been, comparatively, under a covenant of fear and bondage,
in respect of that common dispensation under which the Jewish people
were then placed.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p32"></span>10. The three last contrasts to which we
have adverted (sec. 4, 7, 9), are between the Law and the Gospel, and
hence in these the Law is designated by the name of the Old, and the
Gospel by that of the New Testament. The first is of wider extent (sec.
1), comprehending under it the promises which were given even before the
Law. When Augustine maintained that these were not to be included under
the name of the Old Testament (August. ad Bonifac. lib. 3 c. 14), he
took a most correct view, and meant nothing different from what we have
now taught; for he had in view those passages of Jeremiah and Paul in
which the Old Testament is distinguished from the word of grace and
mercy. In the same passage, Augustine, with great shrewdness remarks,
that from the beginning of the world the sons of promise, the divinely
regenerated, who, through faith working by love, obeyed the
commandments, belonged to the New Testament; entertaining the hope not
of carnal, earthly, temporal, but spiritual, heavenly, and eternal
blessings, believing especially in a Mediator, by whom they doubted not
both that the Spirit was administered to them, enabling them to do good,
and pardon imparted as often as they sinned. The thing which he thus
intended to assert was, that all the saints mentioned in Scripture, from
the beginning of the world, as having been specially selected by God,
were equally with us partakers of the blessing of eternal salvation. The
only difference between our division and that of Augustine is, that ours
(in accordance with the words of our Saviour, “All the prophets and the
law prophesied until John,” <span id="iv.ii.xii-p32.1"></span>[Mt.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p32.1"></span>) distinguishes between the gospel light and
that more obscure dispensation of the word which preceded it, while the
other division simply distinguishes between the weakness of the Law and
the strength of the Gospel. And here also, with regard to the holy
fathers, it is to be observed, that though they lived under the Old
Testament, they did not stop there, but always aspired to the New, and
so entered into sure fellowship with it. Those who, contented with
existing shadows, did not carry their thoughts to Christ, the Apostle
charges with blindness and malediction. To say nothing of other matters,
what greater blindness can be imagined, than to hope for the expiation
of sin from the sacrifice of a beast, or to seek mental purification in
external washing with water, or to attempt to appease God with cold
ceremonies, as if he were greatly delighted with them? Such are the
absurdities into which those fall who cling to legal observances,
without respect to Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p33"></span>11. The fifth distinction which we have
to add consists in this, that until the advent of Christ, the Lord set
apart one nation, to which he confined the covenant of his grace. Moses
says, “When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according
to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord’s portion is his
people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p33.1"></span>[Deut.
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p33.1"></span>.md).
In another passage he thus addresses the people: “Behold, the heaven and
the heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, the earth also, with all
that therein is. Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love
them, and he chose their seed, after them, even you, above all people,
as it is this day,” (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p33.2"></span>[Deut.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p33.2"></span>). That people, therefore, as if they had
been the only part of mankind belonging to him he favoured exclusively
with the knowledge of his name, depositing his covenant, as it were, in
their bosom, manifesting to them the presence of his divinity and
honouring them with all privileges. But to say nothing of other favours,
the only one here considered is his binding them to him by the communion
of his word, so that he was called and regarded as their God. Meanwhile,
other nations, as if they had had no kind of intercourse with him, he
allowed to wander in vanity not even supplying them with the only means
of preventing their destructions—viz. the preaching of his word. Israel
was thus the Lord’s favourite child the others were aliens. Israel was
known and admitted to trust and guardianship, the others left in
darkness; Israel was made holy, the others were profane; Israel was
honoured with the presence of God, the others kept far aloof from him.
But on the fulness of the time destined to renew all things, when the
Mediator between God and man was manifested the middle wall of
partition, which had long kept the divine mercy within the confines of
Israel, was broken down, peace was preached to them who were afar off,
as well as to those who were nigh, that being, together reconciled to
God, they might unite as one people. Wherefore, there is now no respect
of Jew or Greek, of circumcision or uncircumcision, but Christ is all
and in all. To him the heathen have been given for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p33.3"></span>[Ps.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p33.3"></span>), that he may rule without distinction
“from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p33.4"></span>[Ps.
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p33.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p34"></span>12. The calling of the Gentiles,
therefore, is a distinguishing feature illustrative of the superiority
of the New over the Old Testament. This, it is true, had been previously
declared by the prophets, in passages both numerous and clear, but still
the fulfilment of it was deferred to the reign of the Messiah. Even
Christ did not acknowledge it at the very outset of his ministry, but
delayed it until having completed the whole work of redemption in all
its parts, and finished the period of his humiliation, he received from
the Father “a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow,” (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p34.1"></span>[Phil.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p34.1"></span>). Hence the period being not yet completed,
he declared to the woman of Canaan, “I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel,” (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p34.2"></span>[Mt.
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p34.2"></span>). Nor in his first commission to the
Apostles does he permit them to pass the same limits, “Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not:
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p34.3"></span>[Matt.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p34.3"></span>.md).
However plainly the thing may have been declared in numerous passages,
when it was announced to the Apostles, it seemed to them so new and
extraordinary, that they were horrified at it as something monstrous. At
length, when they did act upon it, it was timorously, and not without
reluctance. Nor is this strange; for it seemed by no means in accordance
with reason, that the Lord, who for so many ages had selected Israel
from the rest of the nations should suddenly, as it were, change his
purpose, and abandon his choice. Prophecy, indeed, had foretold it, but
they could not be so attentive to prophecies, as not to be somewhat
startled by the novel spectacle thus presented to their eye. It was not
enough that God had in old times given specimens of the future calling
of the Gentiles. Those whom he had so called were very few in number,
and, moreover, he in a manner adopted them into the family of Abraham,
before allowing them to approach his people. But by this public call,
the Gentiles were not only made equal to the Jews, but seemed to be
substituted into their place, as if the Jews had been dead.24  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) We may add, that any strangers whom
God had formerly admitted into the body of the Church, had never been
put on the same footing with the Jews. Wherefore, it is not without
cause that Paul describes it as the mystery which has been hid from ages
and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints (<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p35.1"></span>[Col.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p35.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p36"></span>13. The whole difference between the Old
and New Testaments has, I think, been fully and faithfully explained,
under these four or five heads in so far as requisite for ordinary
instruction. But since this variety in governing the Church, this
diversity in the mode of teaching, this great change in rites and
ceremonies, is regarded by some as an absurdity, we must reply to them
before passing to other matters. And this can be done briefly, because
the objections are not so strong24  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) as to require a very careful
refutation. It is unreasonable they say, to suppose that Gods who is
always consistent With himself permitted such a change as afterwards to
disapprove what he had once ordered and commended. I answer, that God
ought not to be deemed mutable, because he adapts different forms to
different ages, as he knows to be expedient for each. If the husband man
prescribes one set of duties to his household in winter, and another in
summer, we do not therefore charge him with fickleness or think he
deviates from the rules of good husbandry which depends on the regular
course of nature. In like manner, if a father of a family, in educating,
governing, and managing his children, pursues one course in boyhood
another in adolescence and another in manhood we do not therefore say
that he is fickle, or abandons his opinions. Why, then do we charge God
with inconstancy when he makes fit and congruous arrangements for
diversities of times? The latter similitude ought to be completely
satisfactory. Paul likens the Jews to children, and Christians to grown
men (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p37.1"></span>[Gal.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p37.1"></span>). What irregularity is there in the Divine
arrangement, which confined them to the rudiments which were suitable to
their age, and trains us by a firmer and more manly discipline? The
constancy of God is conspicuous in this, that he delivered the same
doctrine to all ages, and persists in requiring that worship of his name
which he commanded at the beginning. His changing the external form and
manner does not show that he is liable to change. In so far he has only
accommodated himself to the mutable and diversified capacities of man.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p38"></span>14. But it is said, Wench this
diversity, save that God chose to make it? Would it not have been as
easy for him from the first, as after the advent of Christ, to reveal
eternal life in clear terms without any figures, to instruct his people
by a few clear sacraments, to bestow his Holy Spirit, and diffuse his
grace over the whole globe? This is very much the same as to bring a
charge against God, because he created the world at so late a period,
when he could have done it at the first, or because he appointed the
alternate changes of summer and winter, of clay and night. With the
feeling common to every pious mind, let us not doubt that every thing
which God has done has been done wisely and justly, although we may be
ignorant of the cause which required that it should be so done. We
should arrogate too much to ourselves were we not to concede to God that
he may have reasons for his counsel, which we are unable to discern. It
is strange, they say, that he now repudiates and abominates the
sacrifices of beasts, and the whole apparatus of that Levitical
priesthood in which he formerly delighted. As if those external and
transient matters could delight God, or affect him in any way!24  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) It has already been observed, that he
appointed none of these things on his own account, but instituted them
all for the salvation of men. If a physician, adopting the best method,
effects a cure upon a youth, and afterwards, when the same individual
has grown old, and is again subject to the same disease, employs a
different method of cure, can it be said that he repudiates the method
which he formerly approved? Nay, continuing to approve of it, he only
adapts himself to the different periods of life. In like manner, it was
necessary in representing Christ in his absence, and predicting his
future advent, to employ a different set of signs from those which are
employed, now that his actual manifestation is exhibited. It is true,
that since the advent of Christ, the calling of God is more widely
addressed to all nations, and the graces of the Spirit more liberally
bestowed than they had previously been. But who, I ask, can deny the
right of God to have the free and uncontrolled disposal of his gifts, to
select the nations which he may be pleased to illuminate, the places
which he may be pleased to illustrate by the preaching of his word, and
the mode and measure of progress and success which he may be pleased to
give to his doctrine,—to punish the world for its ingratitude by
withdrawing the knowledge of his name for certain ages, and again, when
he so pleases, to restore it in mercy? We see, then, that in the
calumnies which the ungodly employ in this matter, to perplex the minds
of the simple, there is nothing that ought to throw doubt either on the
justice of God or the veracity of Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](inst045.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p23"></span>37 237 The French is,“et ˆ icelle se
doivent reduire quasi tous les passages, auxquels le viel Testament est
opposé au Nouveau par comparaison.”—And to this ought in a manner to be
referred all the passages in which the Old Testament is, by way of
camparison, opposed to the New.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](inst045.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p25"></span>38 238 “Qualiter et aliis Sacramentis
dari solet.” French, “comme l’Escriture a coustume d’attribuer aux
sacremens le nom des choses qu’ils representent;”—just as Scripture is
wont to give sacraments the names of the things which they represent.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](inst045.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p29"></span>39 239 “Passim.” French, “cá et
lá;”—here and there.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](inst045.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p35"></span>40 240 “In demortuorum locum.” The
French is simply, “en leur lieu;”—into their place.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](inst045.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p37"></span>41 241 “Firmæ,” French, “Ne si fortes,
ne si urgentes;”—neither so strong, nor so pressing.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](inst045.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p39"></span>42 242 “Aut ullo modo affciant.” French
“ou comme si jamais il s’y fust arreté;”—or as if he could ever have
stopped at them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 12. - CHRIST, TO PERFORM THE OFFICE OF MEDIATOR, BEHOVED
TO BECOME MAN.](inst046.md)
