[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst071)  [Next](inst073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xx"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xx-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 19.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p1"></span>OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p2"></span>The three divisions of this chapter
are,—I. Necessity of the doctrine of Christian Liberty, sec. 1. The
principal parts of this liberty explained, sec. 2-8. II. The nature and
efficacy of this liberty against the Epicureans and others who take no
account whatever of the weak, sec. 9 and 10. III. Of offense given and
received. A lengthened and not unnecessary discussion of this subject,
sec. 11-16.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p4"></span>1. Connection of this chapter with the
previous one on Justification. A true knowledge of Christian liberty
useful and necessary. 1. It purifies the conscience. 2. It checks
licentiousness. 3. It maintains the merits of Christ, the truth of the
Gospel, and the peace of the soul.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p5"></span>2. This liberty consists of three parts.
First, Believers renouncing the righteousness of the law, look only to
Christ. Objection. Answer, distinguishing between Legal and Evangelical
righteousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p6"></span>3. This first part clearly established by
the whole Epistle to the Galatians.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p7"></span>4. The second part of Christian
liberty—viz. that the conscience, freed from the yoke of the law,
voluntarily obeys the will of God. This cannot be done so long as we are
under the law. Reason.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p8"></span>5. When freed from the rigorous exactions
of the law, we can cheerfully and with much alacrity answer the call of
God.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p9"></span>6. Proof of this second part from an
Apostle. The end of this liberty.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p10"></span>7. Third part of liberty—viz. the free
rise of things indifferent. The knowledge of this part necessary to
remove despair and superstition. Superstition described.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p11"></span>8. Proof of this third part from the
Epistle to the Romans. Those who observe it not only use evasion. 1.
Despisers of God. 2. The desperate. 3. The ungrateful. The end and scope
of this third part.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p12"></span>9. Second part of the chapter, showing
the nature and efficacy of Christian liberty, in opposition to the
Epicureans. Their character described. Pretext and allegation. Use of
things indifferent. Abuse detected. Mode of correcting it.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p13"></span>10. This liberty maintained in
opposition to those who pay no regard to the weak. Error of this class
of men refuted. A most pernicious error. Objection. Reply.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p14"></span>11. Application of the doctrine of
Christian liberty to the subject of offenses. These of two kinds.
Offense given. Offense received. Of offense given, a subject
comprehended by few. Of Pharisaical offense, or offense received.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p15"></span>12. Who are to be regarded as weak and
Pharisaical. Proved by examples and the doctrine of Paul. The just
moderation of Christian liberty. necessity of vindicating it. No regard
to be paid to hypocrites. Duty of edifying our weak neighbors.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p16"></span>13. Application of the doctrine to
things indifferent. Things necessary not to be omitted from any fear of
offense.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p17"></span>14. Refutation of errors in regard to
Christian liberty. The consciences of the godly not to be fettered by
human traditions in matters of indifference.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p18"></span>15. Distinction to be made between
Spiritual and Civil government. These must not be confounded. How far
conscience can be bound by human constitutions. Definition of
conscience. Definition explained by passages from the Apostolic
writings.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p19"></span>16. The relation which conscience bears
to external obedience; first, in things good and evil; secondly, in
things indifferent.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p20"></span>1. We are now to treat of Christian
Liberty, the explanation of which certainly ought not to be omitted by
any one proposing to give a compendious summary of Gospel doctrine. For
it is a matter of primary necessity, one without the knowledge of which
the conscience can scarcely attempt any thing without hesitation, in
many must demur and fluctuate, and in all proceed with fickleness and
trepidation. In particular, it forms a proper appendix to Justification,
and is of no little service in understanding its force. Nay, those who
seriously fear God will hence perceive the incomparable advantages of a
doctrine which wicked scoffers are constantly assailing with their
jibes; the intoxication of mind under which they labour leaving their
petulance without restraint. This, therefore, seems the proper place for
considering the subject. Moreover, though it has already been
occasionally adverted to, there was an advantage in deferring the fuller
consideration of it till now, for the moment any mention is made of
Christian liberty lust begins to boil, or insane commotions arise, if a
speedy restraint is not laid on those licentious spirits by whom the
best things are perverted into the worst. For they either, under pretext
of this liberty, shake off all obedience to God, and break out into
unbridled licentiousness, or they feel indignant, thinking that all
choice, order, and restraint, are abolished. What can we do when thus
encompassed with straits? Are we to bid adieu to Christian liberty, in
order that we may cut off all opportunity for such perilous
consequences? But, as we have said, if the subject be not understood,
neither Christ, nor the truth of the Gospel, nor the inward peace of the
soul, is properly known. Our endeavor must rather be, while not
suppressing this very necessary part of doctrine, to obviate the absurd
objections to which it usually gives rise.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p21"></span>2. Christian liberty seems to me to
consist of three parts. First, the consciences of believers, while
seeking the assurance of their justification before God, must rise above
the law, and think no more of obtaining justification by it. For while
the law, as has already been demonstrated (*supra*, chap. 17, sec. 1),
leaves not one man righteous, we are either excluded from all hope of
justification, or we must be loosed from the law, and so loosed as that
no account at all shall be taken of works. For he who imagines that in
order to obtain justification he must bring any degree of works
whatever, cannot fix any mode or limit, but makes himself debtor to the
whole law. Therefore, laying aside all mention of the law, and all idea
of works, we must in the matter of justification have recourse to the
mercy of God only; turning away our regard from ourselves, we must look
only to Christ. For the question is, not how we may be righteous, but
how, though unworthy and unrighteous, we may be regarded as righteous.
If consciences would obtain any assurance of this, they must give no
place to the law. Still it cannot be rightly inferred from this that
believers have no need of the law. It ceases not to teach, exhort, and
urge them to good, although it is not recognized by their consciences
before the judgment-seat of God. The two things are very different, and
should be well and carefully distinguished. The whole lives of
Christians ought to be a kind of aspiration after piety, seeing they are
called unto holiness (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p21.1"></span>[Eph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.xx-p21.2"></span>[1 Thess.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p21.2"></span>). The office of the law is to excite them
to the study of purity and holiness, by reminding them of their duty.
For when the conscience feels anxious as to how it may have the favor of
God, as to the answer it could give, and the confidence it would feel,
if brought to his judgment-seat, in such a case the requirements of the
law are not to be brought forward, but Christ, who surpasses all the
perfection of the law, is alone to be held forth for righteousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p22"></span>3. On this almost the whole subject of
the Epistle to the Galatians hinges; for it can be proved from express
passages that those are absurd interpreters who teach that Paul there
contends only for freedom from ceremonies. Of such passages are the
following: “Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made
a curse for us.” “Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing. For I testify again to every man that is
circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law. Christ is become
of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are
fallen from grace,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p22.1"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p22.1"></span>; 5:1-4). These words certainly refer to
something of a higher order than freedom from ceremonies. I confess,
indeed, that Paul there treats of ceremonies, because he was contending
with false apostles, who were plotting, to bring back into the Christian
Church those ancient shadows of the law which were abolished by the
advent of Christ. But, in discussing this question, it was necessary to
introduce higher matters, on which the whole controversy turns. First,
because the brightness of the Gospel was obscured by those Jewish
shadows, he shows that in Christ we have a full manifestation of all
those things which were typified by Mosaic ceremonies. Secondly, as
those impostors instilled into the people the most pernicious opinion,
that this obedience was sufficient to merit the grace of God, he insists
very strongly that believers shall not imagine that they can obtain
justification before God by any works, far less by those paltry
observances. At the same time, he shows that by the cross of Christ they
are free from the condemnation of the law, to which otherwise all men
are exposed, so that in Christ alone they can rest in full security.
This argument is pertinent to the present subject (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p22.2"></span>[Gal. 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p22.2"></span>,
&c). Lastly, he asserts the right of believers to liberty of conscience,
a liberty which may not be restrained without necessity.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p23"></span>4. Another point which depends on the
former is, that consciences obey the law, not as if compelled by legal
necessity; but being free from the yoke of the law itself, voluntarily
obey the will of God. Being constantly in terror so long as they are
under the dominion of the law, they are never disposed promptly to obey
God, unless they have previously obtained this liberty. Our meaning
shall be explained more briefly and clearly by an example. The command
of the law is, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p23.1"></span>[Deut.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p23.1"></span>). To accomplish this, the soul must
previously be divested of every other thought and feeling, the heart
purified from all its desires, all its powers collected and united on
this one object. Those who, in comparison of others, have made much
progress in the way of the Lord, are still very far from this goal. For
although they love God in their mind, and with a sincere affection of
heart, yet both are still in a great measure occupied with the lusts of
the flesh, by which they are retarded and prevented from proceeding with
quickened pace towards God. They indeed make many efforts, but the flesh
partly enfeebles their strength, and partly binds them to itself. What
can they do while they thus feel that there is nothing of which they are
less capable than to fulfill the law? They wish, aspire, endeavor; but
do nothing with the requisite perfection. If they look to the law, they
see that every work which they attempt or design is accursed. Nor can
any one deceive himself by inferring that the work is not altogether
bad, merely because it is imperfect, and, therefore, that any good which
is in it is still accepted of God. For the law demanding perfect love
condemns all imperfection, unless its rigor is mitigated. Let any man
therefore consider his work which he wishes to be thought partly good,
and he will find that it is a transgression of the law by the very
circumstance of its being imperfect.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p24"></span>5. See how our works lie under the curse
of the law if they are tested by the standard of the law. But how can
unhappy souls set themselves with alacrity to a work from which they
cannot hope to gain any thing in return but cursing? On the other hand,
if freed from this severe exaction, or rather from the whole rigor of
the law, they hear themselves invited by God with paternal levity, they
will cheerfully and alertly obey the call, and follow his guidance. In
one word, those who are bound by the yoke of the law are like servants
who have certain tasks daily assigned them by their masters. Such
servants think that nought has been done; and they dare not come into
the presence of their masters until the exact amount of labour has been
performed. But sons who are treated in a more candid and liberal manner
by their parents, hesitate not to offer them works that are only begun
or half finished, or even with something faulty in them, trusting that
their obedience and readiness of mind will be accepted, although the
performance be less exact than was wished. Such should be our feelings,
as we certainly trust that our most indulgent Parent will approve our
services, however small they may be, and however rude and imperfect.
Thus He declares to us by the prophet, “I will spare them as a man
spareth his own son that serveth him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p24.1"></span>[Mal.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p24.1"></span>); where the word *spare* evidently means
indulgence, or connivance at faults, while at the same time service is
remembered. This confidence is necessary in no slight degree, since
without it every thing should be attempted in vain; for God does not
regard any sock of ours as done to himself, unless truly done from a
desire to serve him. But how can this be amidst these terrors, while we
doubt whether God is offended or served by our work?

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p25"></span>6. This is the reason why the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews ascribes to faith all the good works which
the holy patriarchs are said to have performed, and estimates them
merely by faith (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p25.1"></span>[Heb.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p25.1"></span>). In regard to this liberty there is a
remarkable passage in the Epistle to the Romans, where Paul argues, “Sin
shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but
under grace,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p25.2"></span>[Rom.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p25.2"></span>). For after he had exhorted believers, “Let
not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof: Neither yield ye your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin; but yield yourselves unto God, as those that
are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God;” they might have objected that they still bore
about with them a body full of lust, that sin still dwelt in them. He
therefore comforts them by adding, that they are freed from the law; as
if he had said, Although you feel that sin is not yet extinguished, and
that righteousness does not plainly live in you, you have no cause for
fear and dejection, as if God were always offended because of the
remains of sin, since by grace you are freed from the law, and your
works are not tried by its standard. Let those, however who infer that
they may sin because they are not under the law, understand that they
have no right to this liberty, the end of which is to encourage us in
well-doing.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p26"></span>7. The third part of this liberty is
that we are not bound before God to any observance of external things
which are in themselves indifferent (ἀδιάφορα), but that we are now at
full liberty either to use or omit them. The knowledge of this liberty
is very necessary to us; where it is wanting our consciences will have
no rest, there will be no end of superstition. In the present day many
think us absurd in raising a question as to the free eating of flesh,
the free use of dress and holidays, and similar frivolous trifles, as
they think them; but they are of more importance than is commonly
supposed. For when once the conscience is entangled in the net, it
enters a long and inextricable labyrinth, from which it is afterwards
most difficult to escape. When a man begins to doubt whether it is
lawful for him to use linen for sheets, shirts, napkins, and
handkerchiefs, he will not long be secure as to hemp, and will at last
have doubts as to tow; for he will revolve in his mind whether he cannot
sup without napkins, or dispense with handkerchiefs. Should he deem a
daintier food unlawful, he will afterwards feel uneasy for using
loafbread and common eatables, because he will think that his body might
possibly be supported on a still meaner food. If he hesitates as to a
more genial wine, he will scarcely drink the worst with a good
conscience; at last he will not dare to touch water if more than usually
sweet and pure. In fine, he will come to this, that he will deem it
criminal to trample on a straw lying in his way. For it is no trivial
dispute that is here commenced, the point in debate being, whether the
use of this thing or that is in accordance with the divine will, which
ought to take precedence of all our acts and counsels. Here some must by
despair be hurried into an abyss, while others, despising God and
casting off his fear, will not be able to make a way for themselves
without ruin. When men are involved in such doubts whatever be the
direction in which they turn, every thing they see must offend their
conscience.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p27"></span>8. “I know,” says Paul, “that there is
nothing unclean of itself,” (by unclean meaning unholy); “but to him
that esteemeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p27.1"></span>[Rom.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p27.1"></span>). By these words he makes all external
things subject to our liberty, provided the nature of that liberty
approves itself to our minds as before God. But if any superstitious
idea suggests scruples, those things which in their own nature were pure
are to us contaminated. Wherefore the apostle adds, “Happy is he that
condemneth not himself in that which he alloweth. And he that doubteth
is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p27.2"></span>[Rom.
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p27.2"></span>). When men, amid such difficulties, proceed
with greater confidence, securely doing whatever pleases them, do they
not in so far revolt from God? Those who are thoroughly impressed with
some fear of God, if forced to do many things repugnant to their
consciences are discouraged and filled with dread. All such persons
receive none of the gifts of God with thanksgiving, by which alone Paul
declares that all things are sanctified for our use (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p27.3"></span>[1 Tim.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p27.3"></span>). By thanksgiving I understand that which
proceeds from a mind recognizing the kindness and goodness of God in his
gifts. For many, indeed, understand that the blessings which they enjoy
are the gifts of God, and praise God in their words; but not being
persuaded shalt these have been given to them, how can they give thanks
to God as the giver? In one word, we see whither this liberty tends—viz.
that we are to use the gifts of God without any scruple of conscience,
without any perturbation of mind, for the purpose for which he gave
them: in this way our souls may both have peace with him, and recognize
his liberality towards us. For here are comprehended all ceremonies of
free observance, so that while our consciences are not to be laid under
the necessity of observing them, we are also to remember that, by the
kindness of God, the use of them is made subservient to edification.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p28"></span>9. It is, however, to be carefully
observed, that Christian liberty is in all its parts a spiritual matter,
the whole force of which consists in giving peace to trembling
consciences, whether they are anxious and disquieted as to the
forgiveness of sins, or as to whether their imperfect works, polluted by
the infirmities of the flesh, are pleasing to God, or are perplexed as
to the use of things indifferent. It is, therefore, perversely
interpreted by those who use it as a cloak for their lusts, that they
may licentiously abuse the good gifts of God, or who think there is no
liberty unless it is used in the presence of men, and, accordingly, in
using it pay no regard to their weak brethren. Under this head, the sins
of the present age are more numerous. For there is scarcely any one
whose means allow him to live sumptuously, who does not delight in
feasting, and dress, and the luxurious grandeur of his house, who wishes
not to surpass his neighbor in every kind of delicacy, and does not
plume himself amazingly on his splendor. And all these things are
defended under the pretext of Christian liberty. They say they are
things indifferent: I admit it, provided they are used indifferently.
But when they are too eagerly longed for, when they are proudly boasted
of, when they are indulged in luxurious profusion, things which
otherwise were in themselves lawful are certainly defiled by these
vices. Paul makes an admirable distinction in regard to things
indifferent: “Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and
conscience is defiled” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p28.1"></span>[Tit.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.1"></span>). For why is a woe pronounced upon the rich
who have received their consolation? (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.2"></span>[Luke
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.2"></span>), who are full, who laugh now, who “lie
upon beds of ivory and stretch themselves upon their couches;” “join
house to house,” and “lay field to field;” “and the harp and the viol,
the tablet and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.3"></span>[Amos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p28.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.xx-p28.4"></span>[Isa.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.4"></span>). Certainly ivory and gold, and riches, are
the good creatures of God, permitted, nay destined, by divine providence
for the use of man; nor was it ever forbidden to laugh, or to be full,
or to add new to old and hereditary possessions, or to be delighted with
music, or to drink wine. This is true, but when the means are supplied
to roll and wallow in luxury, to intoxicate the mind and soul with
present and be always hunting after new pleasures, is very far from a
legitimate use of the gifts of God. Let them, therefore, suppress
immoderate desire, immoderate profusion, vanity, and arrogance, that
they may use the gifts of God purely with a pure conscience. When their
mind is brought to this state of soberness, they will be able to
regulate the legitimate use. On the other hand, when this moderation is
wanting, even plebeian and ordinary delicacies are excessive. For it is
a true saying, that a haughty mind often dwells in a coarse and homely
garb, while true humility lurks under fine linen and purple. Let every
one then live in his own station, poorly or moderately, or in splendor;
but let all remember that the nourishment which God gives is for life,
not luxury, and let them regard it as the law of Christian liberty, to
learn with Paul in whatever state they are, “therewith to be content,”
to know “both how to be abased,” and “how to abound,” “to be full and to
be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.5"></span>[Phil.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p28.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p29"></span>10. Very many also err in this: as if
their liberty were not safe and entire, without having men to witness
it, they use it indiscriminately and imprudently, and in this way often
give offense to weak brethren. You may see some in the present day who
cannot think they possess their liberty unless they come into possession
of it by eating flesh on Friday. Their eating I blame not, but this
false notion must be driven from their minds: for they ought to think
that their liberty gains nothing new by the sight of men, but is to be
enjoyed before God, and consists as much in abstaining as in using. If
they understand that it is of no consequence in the sight of God whether
they eat flesh or eggs, whether they are clothed in red or in black,
this is amply sufficient. The conscience to which the benefit of this
liberty was due is loosed. Therefore, though they should afterwards,
during their whole life, abstain from flesh, and constantly wear one
color, they are not less free. Nay, just because they are free, they
abstain with a free conscience. But they err most egregiously in paying
no regard to the infirmity of their brethren, with which it becomes us
to bear, so as not rashly to give them offense. But46  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) it is sometimes also of consequence
that we should assert our liberty before men. This I admit: yet must we
use great caution in the mode, lest we should cast off the care of the
weak whom God has specially committed to us.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p31"></span>11. I will here make some observations
on offenses, what distinctions are to be made between them, what kind
are to be avoided and what disregarded. This will afterwards enable us
to determine what scope there is for our liberty among men. We are
pleased with the common division into *offense given* and *offense
taken*, since it has the plain sanction of Scripture, and not improperly
expresses what is meant. If from unseasonable levity or wantonness, or
rashness, you do any thing out of order or not in its own place, by
which the weak or unskillful are offended, it may be said that offense
has been *given* by you, since the ground of offense is owing to your
fault. And in general, offense is said to be *given* in any matter where
the person from whom it has proceeded is in fault. Offense is said to be
taken when a thing otherwise done, not wickedly or unseasonably, is made
an occasion of offense from malevolence or some sinister feeling. For
here offense was not given, but sinister interpreters ceaselessly take
offense. By the former kind, the weak only, by the latter, the
ill-tempered and Pharisaical are offended. Wherefore, we shall call the
one the offense of the weak, the other the offense of Pharisees, and we
will so temper the use of our liberty as to make it yield to the
ignorance of weak brethren, but not to the austerity of Pharisees. What
is due to infirmity is fully shown by Paul in many passages. “Him that
is weak in the faith receive ye.” Again, “Let us not judge one another
any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling-block, or
an occasion to fall, in his brother’s way;” and many others to the same
effect in the same place, to which, instead of quoting them here, we
refer the reader. The sum is, “We then that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. Let every one of
us please his neighbor for his good to edification.” elsewhere he says,
“Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
stumbling-block to them that are weak.” Again “Whatsoever is sold in the
shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake.”
“Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other.” Finally, “Give
none offense, neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles nor to the Church
of God.” Also in another passage, “Brethren, ye have been called into
liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another.”46  <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) Thus,
indeed, it is: our liberty was not given us against our weak neighbors,
whom charity enjoins us to serve in all things, but rather that, having
peace with God in our minds, we should live peaceably among men. What
value is to be set upon the offense of the Pharisees we learn from the
words of our Lord, in which he says, “Let them alone: they be blind
leaders of the blind,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p32.4"></span>[Mt.
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p32.4"></span>). The disciples had intimated that the
Pharisees were offended at his words. He answers that they are to be let
alone that their offense is not to be regarded.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p33"></span>12. The matter still remains uncertain,
unless we understand who are the weak and who the Pharisees: for if this
distinction is destroyed, I see not how, in regard to offenses, any
liberty at all would remain without being constantly in the greatest
danger. But Paul seems to me to have marked out most clearly, as well by
example as by doctrine, how far our liberty, in the case of offense, is
to be modified or maintained. When he adopts Timothy as his companion,
he circumcises him: nothing can induce him to circumcise Titus (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.1"></span>[Acts
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xx-p33.2"></span>[Gal.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.2"></span>). The acts are different, but there is no
difference in the purpose or intention; in circumcising Timothy, as he
was free from all men, he made himself the servant of all: “Unto the
Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are
under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under
the law; to them that are without law, as without law (being not without
law to God, but under the law to Christ), that I might gain them that
are without law. To the weak became I as weak that I might gain the
weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p33.3"></span>[1 Cor.
9:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.3"></span>). We have here the proper modification of
liberty, when in things indifferent it can be restrained with some
advantage. What he had in view in firmly resisting the circumcision of
Titus, he himself testifies when he thus writes: “But neither Titus, who
was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised: and that
because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to
spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring
us into bondage: to whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an
hour, that the truth of the gospel might continue with you,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.4"></span>[Gal.
2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.4"></span>). We here see the necessity of vindicating
our liberty when, by the unjust exactions of false apostles, it is
brought into danger with weak consciences. In all cases we must study
charity, and look to the edification of our neighbor. “All things are
lawful for me,” says he, “but all things are not expedient; all things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no man seek his own,
but every man another’s wealth,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p33.5"></span>[1
Cor. 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p33.5"></span>). There is nothing plainer than this rule,
that we are to use our liberty if it tends to the edification of our
neighbor, but if inexpedient for our neighbor, we are to abstain from
it. There are some who pretend to imitate this prudence of Paul by
abstinence from liberty, while there is nothing for which they less
employ it than for purposes of charity. Consulting their own ease, they
would have all mention of liberty buried, though it is not less for the
interest of our neighbor to use liberty for their good and edification,
than to modify it occasionally for their advantage. It is the part of a
pious man to think, that the free power conceded to him in external
things is to make him the readier in all offices of charity.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p34"></span>13. Whatever I have said about avoiding
offenses, I wish to be referred to things indifferent.46  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) Things which are necessary to be done
cannot be omitted from any fear of offense. For as our liberty is to be
made subservient to charity, so charity must in its turn be subordinate
to purity of faith. Here, too, regard must be had to charity, but it
must go as far as the altar; that is, we must not offend God for the
sake of our neighbor. We approve not of the intemperance of those who do
every thing tumultuously, and would rather burst through every restraint
at once than proceed step by step. But neither are those to be listened
to who, while they take the lead in a thousand forms of impiety, pretend
that they act thus to avoid giving offense to their neighbor, as if in
the meantime they did not train the consciences of their neighbors to
evil, especially when they always stick in the same mire without any
hope of escape. When a neighbor is to be instructed, whether by doctrine
or by example, then smooth-tongued men say that he is to be fed with
milk, while they are instilling into him the worst and most pernicious
opinions. Paul says to the Corinthians, “I have fed you with milk, and
not with meat,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p35.1"></span>[1 Cor.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p35.1"></span>); but had there then been a Popish mass
among them, would he have sacrificed as one of the modes of giving them
milk? By no means: milk is not poison. It is false then to say they
nourish those whom, under a semblance of soothing they cruelly murder.
But granting that such dissimulation may be used for a time, how long
are they to make their pupils drink that kind of milk? If they never
grow up so as to be able to bear at least some gentle food, it is
certain that they have never been reared on milk.46  <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) Two reasons prevent me from now
entering farther into contest with these people, first, their follies
are scarcely worthy of refutation, seeing all men of sense must nauseate
them; and, secondly, having already amply refuted them in special
treatises, I am unwilling to do it over again.46  <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) Let my readers only bear in mind,
first, that whatever be the offenses by which Satan and the world
attempt to lead us away from the law of God, we must, nevertheless,
strenuously proceed in the course which he prescribes; and, secondly,
that whatever dangers impend, we are not at liberty to deviate one
nail’s breadth from the command of God, that on no pretext is it lawful
to attempt any thing but what he permits.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p38"></span>14. Since by means of this privilege of
liberty which we have described, believers have derived authority from
Christ not to entangle themselves by the observance of things in which
he wished them to be free, we conclude that their consciences are
exempted from all human authority. For it were unbecoming that the
gratitude due to Christ for his liberal gift should perish or that the
consciences of believers should derive no benefit from it. We must not
regard it as a trivial matter when we see how much it cost our Savior,
being purchased not with silver or gold, but with his own blood (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p38.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p38.1"></span>); so that Paul hesitates not to say that
Christ has died in vain, if we place our souls under subjection to men
(<span id="iv.iii.xx-p38.2"></span>[Gal.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p38.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.xx-p38.3"></span>[1 Cor.
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p38.3"></span>). Several chapters of the Epistle to the
Galatians are wholly occupied with showing that Christ is obscured, or
rather extinguished to us, unless our consciences maintain their
liberty; from which they have certainly fallen, if they can be bound
with the chains of laws and constitutions at the pleasure of men. But as
the knowledge of this subject is of the greatest importance, so it
demands a longer and clearer exposition. For the moment the abolition of
human constitutions is mentioned, the greatest disturbances are excited,
partly by the seditious, and partly by calumniators, as if obedience of
every kind were at the same time abolished and overthrown.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p39"></span>15. Therefore, lest this prove a
stumbling-block to any, let us observe that in man government is
twofold: the one spiritual, by which the conscience is trained to piety
and divine worship; the other civil, by which the individual is
instructed in those duties which, as men and citizens, we are bold to
performs (see Book 4, chap. 10, sec. 3-6). To these two forms are
commonly given the not inappropriate names of spiritual and temporal
jurisdiction, intimating that the former species has reference to the
life of the soul, while the latter relates to matters of the present
life, not only to food and clothing, but to the enacting of laws which
require a man to live among his fellows purely honorably, and modestly.
The former has its seat within the soul, the latter only regulates the
external conduct. We may call the one the spiritual, the other the civil
kingdom. Now, these two, as we have divided them, are always to be
viewed apart from each other. When the one is considered, we should call
off our minds, and not allow them to think of the other. For there
exists in man a kind of two worlds, over which different kings and
different laws can preside. By attending to this distinction, we will
not erroneously transfer the doctrine of the gospel concerning spiritual
liberty to civil order, as if in regard to external government
Christians were less subject to human laws, because their consciences
are unbound before God, as if they were exempted from all carnal
service, because in regard to the Spirit they are free. Again because
even in those constitutions which seem to relate to the spiritual
kingdom, there may be some delusion, it is necessary to distinguish
between those which are to be held legitimate as being agreeable to the
Word of God, and those, on the other hand, which ought to have no place
among the pious. We shall elsewhere have an opportunity of speaking of
civil government (see Book 4, chap. 20). For the present, also, I defer
speaking of ecclesiastical laws, because that subject will be more fully
discussed in the Fourth Book when we come to treat of the Power of the
Church. We would thus conclude the present discussion. The question, as
I have said, though not very obscure, or perplexing in itself, occasions
difficulty to many, because they do not distinguish with sufficient
accuracy between what is called the external *forum*, and the *forum* of
conscience. What increases the difficulty is, that Paul commands us to
obey the magistrate, “not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xx-p39.1"></span>[Rom.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p39.1"></span>).
Whence it follows that civil laws also bind the conscience. Were this
so, then what we said a little ago, and are still to say of spiritual
governments would fall. To solve this difficulty, the first thing of
importance is to understand what is meant by *conscience*. The
definition must be sought in the etymology of the word. For as men, when
they apprehend the knowledge of things by the mind and intellects are
said to know, and hence arises the term knowledge or *science*, so when
they have a sense of the divine justice added as a witness which allows
them not to conceal their sins, but drags them forward as culprits to
the bar of God, that sense is called *conscience*. For it stands as it
were between God and man, not suffering man to suppress what he knows in
himself; but following him on even to conviction. It is this that Paul
means when he says, “Their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the meanwhile accusing, or else excusing one another,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p39.2"></span>[Rom.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p39.2"></span>). Simple knowledge may exist in man, as it
were shut up; therefore this sense, which sists man before the bar of
God, is set over him as a kind of sentinel to observe and spy out all
his secrets, that nothing may remain buried in darkness. Hence the
ancient proverb, Conscience is a thousand witnesses. For the same reason
Peter also employs the expression, “the answer of a good conscience,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xx-p39.3"></span>[1 Pet.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p39.3"></span>), for tranquillity of mind; when persuaded
of the grace of Christ, we boldly present ourselves before God. And the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says, that we have “no more
conscience of sins,” (<span id="iv.iii.xx-p39.4"></span>[Heb.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p39.4"></span>), that we are held as freed or acquitted,
so that sin no longer accuses us.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p40"></span>16. Wherefore, as works have respect to
men, so conscience bears reference to God, a good conscience being
nothing else than inward integrity of heart. In this sense Paul says
that “the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of
a good consciences and of faith unfeigned” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.1"></span>[1 Tim.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.1"></span>). He afterwards, in the same chapter, shows
how much it differs from intellect when he speaks of “holding faith, and
a good conscience; which some having put away, have made shipwreck,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xx-p40.2"></span>[1 Tim.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.2"></span>). For by these words he intimates, that it
is a lively inclination to serve God, a sincere desire to live in piety
and holiness. Sometimes, indeed, it is even extended to men, as when
Paul testifies, “Herein do I exercise myself, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.3"></span>[Acts
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.3"></span>). He speaks thus, because the fruits of a
good conscience go forth and reach even to men. But, as I have said,
properly speaking, it refers to God only. Hence a law is said to bind
the conscience, because it simply binds the individual, without looking
at men, or taking any account of them. For example, God not only
commands us to keep our mind chaste and pure from lust, but prohibits
all external lasciviousness or obscenity of language. My conscience is
subjected to the observance of this law, though there were not another
man in the world, and he who violates it sins not only by setting a bad
example to his brethren, but stands convicted in his conscience before
God. The same rule does not hold in things indifferent. We ought to
abstain from every thing that produces offense, but with a free
conscience. Thus Paul, speaking of meat consecrated to idols, says, “If
any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not
for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake:” “Conscience, I
say, not thine own, but of the other,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.4"></span>[1 Cor.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p40.4"></span>). A believer, after being previously
admonished, would sin were he still to eat meat so offered. But though
abstinence, on his part, is necessary, in respect of a brother, as it is
prescribed by God, still he ceases not to retain liberty of conscience.
We see how the law, while binding the external act, leaves the
conscience unbound.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](inst072.htm#fr_453) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p30"></span>60 460 French, “Mais quelcun dira”—But
some one will say.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](inst072.htm#fr_454) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p32"></span>61 461 <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p32.1"></span>[Rom.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p32.1"></span>;
16:1; <span id="iv.iii.xx-p32.2"></span>[1 Cor.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p32.2"></span>;
10:25, 29, 32; <span id="iv.iii.xx-p32.3"></span>[Gal.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](inst072.htm#fr_455) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p35"></span>62 462 The French adds, “Lesquelles ne
sont de soy ne bonnes ne mauvais;”—which in themselves are neither good
nor bad.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](inst072.htm#fr_456) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p36"></span>63 463 French, “de bon laict;”—good
milk.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](inst072.htm#fr_457) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p37"></span>64 464 See Epist. de Fugiendis Impiorum
Illicitis Sacris. Also Epist. de Abjiciendis vel Administrandis
Sacerdotiis Also the short treatise, De Vitandis Superstitionibus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 20. - OF PRAYERA PERPETUAL EXERCISE OF FAITH. THE DAILY
BENEFITS DERIVED FROM IT.](inst073)
