[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst097)  [Next](inst099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xix"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.xix-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 18  <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648)

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p2"></span>OF THE POPISH MASS. HOW IT NOT ONLY
PROFANES, BUT ANNIHILATES THE LORD’S SUPPER.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p3"></span>The principal heads of this chapter
are,—I. The abomination of the Mass, sec. 1. Its manifold impiety
included under five heads, sec. 2-7. Its origin described. sec. 8, 9.
II. Of the name of sacrifice which the ancients gave to the holy Supper,
sec. 10-12. An apposite discussion on sacrifice, refuting the arguments
of the Papists for the sacrifice of the Mass, sec. 13-18. III. A summary
of the doctrine of the Christian Church respecting sacraments, paving
the way for the subsequent discussion of the five sacraments, falsely so
called, sec. 19, 20.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p4"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p5"></span>1. The chief of all the abominations set
up in opposition to the Lord’s Supper is the Papal Mass. A description
of it.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p6"></span>2. Its impiety is five-fold. 1. Its
intolerable blasphemy in substituting priests to him the only Priest.
Objections of the Papists answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p7"></span>3. Impiety of the Mass continued. 2. It
overthrows the cross of Christ by setting up an altar. Objections
answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p8"></span>4. Other objections answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p9"></span>5. Impiety of the Mass continued. 3. It
banishes the remembrance of Christ’s death. It crucifies Christ afresh.
Objections answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p10"></span>6. Impiety of the Mass continued. 4. It
robs us of the benefit of Christ’s death.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p11"></span>7. Impiety of the Mass continued. 5. It
abolishes the Lord’s Supper. In the Supper the Father offers Christ to
us; in the Mass, priestlings offer Christ to the Father. The Supper is a
sacrament common to all Christians; the Mass confined to one priest.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p12"></span>8. The origin of the Mass. Private
masses an impious profanation of the Supper.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p13"></span>9. This abomination unknown to the purer
Church. It has no foundation in the word of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p14"></span>10. Second part of the chapter. Some of
the ancients call the Supper a sacrifice, but not propitiatory, as the
Papists do the Mass. This proved by passages from Augustine.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p15"></span>11. Some of the ancients seem to have
declined too much to the shadows of the law.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p16"></span>12. Great distinction to be made between
the Mosaic sacrifices and the Lord’s Supper, which is called a
eucharistic sacrifice. Same rule in this discussion.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p17"></span>13. The terms *sacrifice* and *priest*.
Different kinds of sacrifices. 1. Propitiatory. 2. Eucharistic. None
propitiatory but the death of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p18"></span>14. The Lord’s Supper not properly
called a propitiatory sacrifice, still less can the Popish Mass be so
called. Those who mutter over the mass cannot be called priests.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p19"></span>15. Their vanity proved even by Plato.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p20"></span>16. To the eucharistic class of
sacrifice belong all offices of piety and charity. This species of
sacrifice has no connection with the appeasing of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p21"></span>17. Prayer, thanksgiving, and other
exercises of piety, called sacrifices. In this sense the Lord’s Supper
called the eucharist. In the same sense all believers are priests.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p22"></span>18. Conclusion. Names given to the Mass.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p23"></span>19. Last part of the chapter,
recapitulating the views which ought to be held concerning baptism and
the Lord’s Supper. Why the Lord’s Supper is, and Baptism is not,
repeated.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p24"></span>20. Christians should be contented with
these two sacraments. They are abolished by the sacraments decreed by
men.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p25"></span>1. By these and similar inventions,
Satan has attempted to adulterate and envelop the sacred Supper of
Christ as with thick darkness, that its purity might not be preserved in
the Church. But the head of this horrid abomination was, when he raised
a sign by which it was not only obscured and perverted, but altogether
obliterated and abolished, vanished away and disappeared from the memory
of man—namely, when, with most pestilential error, he blinded almost the
whole world into the belief that the Mass was a sacrifice and oblation
for obtaining the remission of sins. I say nothing as to the way in
which the sounder Schoolmen at first received this dogma.62  <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649) I leave them with their puzzling
subtleties, which, however they may be defended by cavilling, are to be
repudiated by all good men, because, all they do is to envelop the
brightness of the Supper in great darkness. Bidding adieu to them,
therefore, let my readers understand that I am here combating that
opinion with which the Roman Antichrist and his prophets have imbued the
whole world— viz. that the mass is a work by which the priest who offers
Christ, and the others who in the oblation receive him, gain merit with
God, or that it is an expiatory victim by which they regain the favour
of God. And this is not merely the common opinion of the vulgar, but the
very act has been so arranged as to be a kind of propitiation, by which
satisfaction is made to God for the living and the dead. This is also
expressed by the words employed, and the same thing may be inferred from
daily practice. I am aware how deeply this plague has struck its roots;
under what a semblance of good it conceals its true character, bearing
the name of Christ before it, and making many believe that under the
single name of Mass is comprehended the whole sum of faith. But when it
shall have been most clearly proved by the word of God, that this mass,
however glossed and splendid, offers the greatest insult to Christ,
suppresses and buries his cross, consigns his death to oblivion, takes
away the benefit which it was designed to convey, enervates and
dissipates the sacrament, by which the remembrance of his death was
retained, will its roots be so deep that this most powerful axe, the
word of God, will not cut it down and destroy it? Will any semblance be
so specious that this light will not expose the lurking evil?

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p27"></span>2. Let us show, therefore, as was
proposed in the first place, that in the mass intolerable blasphemy and
insult are offered to Christ. For he was not appointed Priest and
Pontiff by the Father62  <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) for a
time merely, as priests were appointed under the Old Testament. Since
their life was mortal, their priesthood could not be immortal, and hence
there was need of successors, who might ever and anon be substituted in
the room of the dead. But Christ being immortal, had not the least
occasion to have a vicar substituted for him. Wherefore he was appointed
by his Father a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek, that he
might eternally exercise a permanent priesthood. This mystery had been
typified long before in Melchizedek, whom Scripture, after once
introducing as the priest of the living God, never afterwards mentions,
as if he had had no end of life. In this way Christ is said to be a
priest after his order. But those who sacrifice daily must necessarily
give the charge of their oblations to priests, whom they surrogate as
the vicars and successors of Christ. By this surrogation they not only
rob Christ of his honour, and take from him the prerogative of an
eternal priesthood, but attempt to remove him from the right hand of his
Father, where he cannot sit immortal without being an eternal priest.
Nor let them allege that their priestlings are not substituted for
Christ, as if he were dead, but are only substitutes in that eternal
priesthood, which therefore ceases not to exist. The words of the
apostle are too stringent to leave them any means of evasion—viz. “They
truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by
reason of death: but this man, because he continueth ever, hath an
unchangeable priesthood” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p28.4"></span>[Heb.
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.4"></span>). Yet such is their dishonesty, that to
defend their impiety they arm themselves with the example of
Melchizedek. As he is said to have “brought forth (*obtulisse*) bread
and wine” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p28.5"></span>[Gen.
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.5"></span>), they infer that it was a prelude to their
mass, as if there was any resemblance between him and Christ in the
offering of bread and wine. This is too silly and frivolous to need
refutation. Melchizedek gave bread and wine to Abraham and his
companions, that he might refresh them when worn out with the march and
the battle. What has this to do with sacrifice? The humanity of the holy
king is praised by Moses: these men absurdly coin a mystery of which
there is no mention. They, however, put another gloss upon their error,
because it is immediately added, he was “priest of the most high God.” I
answer, that they erroneously wrest to bread and wine what the apostle
refers to blessing. “This Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the most
high God, who met Abraham,” “and blessed him.” Hence the same apostle
(and a better interpreter cannot be desired) infers his excellence.
“Without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better.” But if
the oblation of Melchizedek was a figure of the sacrifice of the mass, I
ask, would the apostle, who goes into the minutest details, have
forgotten a matter so grave and serious? Now, however they quibble, it
is in vain for them to attempt to destroy the argument which is adduced
by the apostle himself—viz. that the right and honour of the priesthood
has ceased among mortal men, because Christ, who is immortal, is the one
perpetual priest.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p29"></span>3. Another iniquity chargeable on the
mass is, that it sinks and buries the cross and passion of Christ. This
much, indeed, is most certain,—the cross of Christ is overthrown the
moment an altar is erected. For if, on the cross, he offered himself in
sacrifice that he might sanctify us for ever, and purchase eternal
redemption for us,62  <span id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651)
undoubtedly the power and efficacy of his sacrifice continues without
end. Otherwise, we should not think more honourably of Christ than of
the oxen and calves which were sacrificed under the law, the offering of
which is proved to have been weak and inefficacious because often
repeated. Wherefore, it must be admitted, either that the sacrifice
which Christ offered on the cross wanted the power of eternal cleansing,
or that he performed this once for ever by his one sacrifice.
Accordingly, the apostle says, “Now once in the end of the world hath he
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.” Again: “By the
which act we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all.” Again: “For by one offering he hath perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.” To this he subjoins the celebrated
passage: “Now, where remission of these is, there is no more offering
for sin.” The same thing Christ intimated by his latest voice, when, on
giving up the ghost, he exclaimed, “It is finished.” We are accustomed
to observe the last words of the dying as oracular. Christ, when dying,
declares, that by his one sacrifice is perfected and fulfilled whatever
was necessary to our salvation. To such a sacrifice, whose perfection he
so clearly declared, shall we, as if it were imperfect, presume daily to
append innumerable sacrifices? Since the sacred word of God not only
affirms, but proclaims and protests, that this sacrifice was once
accomplished, and remains eternally in force, do not those who demand
another, charge it with imperfection and weakness? But to what tends the
mass which has been established, that a hundred thousand sacrifices may
be performed every day, but just to bury and suppress the passion of our
Lord, in which he offered himself to his Father as the only victim? Who
but a blind man does not see that it was Satanic audacity to oppose a
truth so clear and transparent? I am not unaware of the impostures by
which the father of lies is wont to cloak his fraud—viz. that the
sacrifices are not different or various, but that the one sacrifice is
repeated. Such smoke is easily dispersed. The apostle, during his whole
discourse, contends not only that there are no other sacrifices, but
that that one was once offered, and is no more to be repeated. The more
subtle try to make their escape by a still narrower loophole—viz. that
it is not repetition, but application. But there is no more difficulty
in confuting this sophism also. For Christ did not offer himself once,
in the view that his sacrifice should be daily ratified by new
oblations, but that by the preaching of the gospel and the dispensation
of the sacred Supper, the benefit of it should be communicated to us.
Thus Paul says, that “Christ, our passover, is sacrificed for us,” and
bids us “keep the feast” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p30.2"></span>[1 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p30.2"></span>).
The method, I say, in which the cross of Christ is duly applied to us is
when the enjoyment is communicated to us, and we receive it with true
faith.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p31"></span>4. But it is worth while to hear on what
other foundation besides they rear up their sacrifice of the mass. To
this end they drag in the prophecy of Malachi, in which the Lord
promises that “in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and
a pure offering” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p31.1"></span>[Mal.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p31.1"></span>). As if it were new or unusual for the
prophets, when they speak of the calling of the Gentiles, to designate
the spiritual worship of God to which they call them, by the external
rites of the law, more familiarly to intimate to the men of their age
that they were to be called into the true fellowship of religion, just
as in general they are wont to describe the truth which has been
exhibited by the gospel by the types of their own age. Thus they use
going up to Jerusalem for conversion to the Lord, the bringing of all
kinds of gifts for the adoration of God—dreams and visions for the more
ample knowledge with which believers were to be endued in the kingdom of
Christ. The passage they quote from Malachi resembles one in Isaiah, in
which the prophet speaks of three altars to be erected in Assyria,
Egypt, and Judea. First, I ask, whether or not they grant that this
prophecy is fulfilled in the kingdom of Christ? Secondly, Where are
those altars, or when were they ever erected? Thirdly, Do they suppose
that a single temple is destined for a single kingdom, as was that of
Jerusalem? If they ponder these things, they will confess, I think, that
the prophet, under types adapted to his age, prophesied concerning the
propagation of the spiritual worship of God over the whole world. This
is the answer which we give them; but, as obvious examples everywhere
occur in the Scripture, I am not anxious to give a longer enumeration;
although they are miserably deluded in this also, that they acknowledge
no sacrifice but that of the mass, whereas in truth believers now
sacrifice to God and offer him a pure offering, of which we shall speak
by-and-by.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p32"></span>5. I now come to the third part of the
mass, in regard to which, we are to explain how it obliterates the true
and only death of Christ, and drives it from the memory of men. For as
among men, the confirmation of a testament depends upon the death of the
testator, so also the testament by which he has bequeathed to us
remission of sins and eternal righteousness, our Lord has confirmed by
his death. Those who dare to make any change or innovation on this
testament deny his death, and hold it as of no moment. Now, what is the
mass but a new and altogether different testament? What? Does not each
mass promise a new forgiveness of sins, a new purchase of righteousness,
so that now there are as many testaments as there are masses? Therefore,
let Christ come again, and, by another death, make this new testament;
or rather, by innumerable deaths, ratify the innumerable testaments of
the mass. Said I not true, then, at the outset, that the only true death
of Christ is obliterated by the mass? For what is the direct aim of the
mass but just to put Christ again to death, if that were possible? For,
as the apostle says, “Where a testament is, there must also of necessity
be the death of the testator” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p32.1"></span>[Heb.
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p32.1"></span>). The novelty of the mass bears, on the
face of it, to be a testament of Christ, and therefore demands his
death. Besides, it is necessary that the victim which is offered be
slain and immolated. If Christ is sacrificed at each mass, he must be
cruelly slain every moment in a thousand places. This is not my
argument, but the apostle’s: “Nor yet that he should offer himself
often;” “for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of
the world” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p32.2"></span>[Heb.
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p32.2"></span>). I admit that they are ready with an
answer, by which they even charge us with calumny; for they say that we
object to them what they never thought, and could not even think. We
know that the life and death of Christ are not at all in their hand.
Whether they mean to slay him, we regard not: our intention is only to
show the absurdity consequent on their impious and accursed dogma. This
I demonstrate from the mouth of the apostle. Though they insist a
hundred times that this sacrifice is bloodless (ἀναίμακτον), I will
reply, that it depends not on the will of man to change the nature of
sacrifice, for in this way the sacred and inviolable institution of God
would fall. Hence it follows, that the principle of the apostle stands
firm, “without shedding of blood is no remission” (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p32.3"></span>[Heb.
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p32.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p33"></span>6. The fourth property of the mass which
we are to consider is, that it robs us of the benefit which redounded to
us from the death of Christ, while it prevents us from recognising it
and thinking of it. For who can think that he has been redeemed by the
death of Christ when he sees a new redemption in the mass? Who can feel
confident that his sins have been remitted when he sees a new remission?
It will not do to say that the only ground on which we obtain
forgiveness of sins in the mass is, because it has been already
purchased by the death of Christ. For this is just equivalent to saying
that we are redeemed by Christ on the condition that we redeem
ourselves. For the doctrine which is disseminated by the ministers of
Satan, and which, in the present day, they defend by clamour, fire, and
sword, is, that when we offer Christ to the Father in the mass, we, by
this work of oblation, obtain remission of sins, and become partakers of
the sufferings of Christ. What is now left for the sufferings of Christ,
but to be an example of redemption, that we may thereby learn to be our
own redeemers? Christ himself, when he seals our assurance of pardon in
the Supper, does not bid his disciples stop short at that act, but sends
them to the sacrifice of his death; intimating, that the Supper is the
memento, or, as it is commonly expressed, the memorial from which they
may learn that the expiatory victim by which God was to be appeased was
to be offered only once. For it is not sufficient to hold that Christ is
the only victim, without adding that his is the only immolation, in
order that our faith may be fixed to his cross.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p34"></span>7. I come now to the crowning point—viz.
that the sacred Supper, on which the Lord left the memorial of his
passion formed and engraved, was taken away, hidden, and destroyed, when
the mass was erected. While the supper itself is a gift of God, which
was to be received with thanksgiving, the sacrifice of the mass pretends
to give a price to God to be received as satisfaction. As widely as
giving differs from receiving, does sacrifice differ from the sacrament
of the Supper. But herein does the wretched ingratitude of man appear,—
that when the liberality of the divine goodness ought to have been
recognised, and thanks returned, he makes God to be his debtor. The
sacrament promised, that by the death of Christ we were not only
restored to life once, but constantly quickened, because all the parts
of our salvation were then completed. The sacrifice of the mass uses a
very different language—viz. that Christ must be sacrificed daily, in
order that he may lend something to us. The Supper was to be dispensed
at the public meeting of the Church, to remind us of the communion by
which we are all united in Christ Jesus. This communion the sacrifice of
the mass dissolves, and tears asunder. For after the heresy prevailed,
that there behoved to be priests to sacrifice for the people, as if the
Supper had been handed over to them, it ceased to be communicated to the
assembly of the faithful according to the command of the Lord. Entrance
has been given to private masses, which more resemble a kind of
excommunication than that communion ordained by the Lord, when the
priestling, about to devour his victim apart, separates himself from the
whole body of the faithful. That there may be no mistake, I call it a
private mass whenever there is no partaking of the Lord’s Supper among
believers, though, at the same time, a great multitude of persons may be
present.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p35"></span>8. The origin of the name of Mass I have
never been able certainly to ascertain. It seems probable that it was
derived from the offerings which were collected. Hence the ancients
usually speak of it in the plural number. But without raising any
controversy as to the name, I hold that private masses are diametrically
opposed to the institution of Christ, and are, therefore, an impious
profanation of the sacred Supper. For what did the Lord enjoin? Was it
not to take and divide amongst ourselves? What does Paul teach as to the
observance of this command? Is it not that the breaking of bread is the
communion of body and blood? (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p35.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p35.1"></span>). Therefore, when one person takes without
distributing, where is the resemblance? But that one acts in the name of
the whole Church. By what command? Is it not openly to mock God when one
privately seizes for himself what ought to have been distributed among a
number? But as the words, both of our Saviour and of Paul, are
sufficiently clear, we must briefly conclude, that wherever there is no
breaking of bread for the communion of the faithful, there is no Supper
of the Lord, but a false and preposterous imitation of the Supper. But
false imitation is adulteration. Moreover, the adulteration of this high
ordinance is not without impiety. In private masses, therefore, there is
an impious abuse: and as in religion, one fault ever and anon begets
another, after that custom of offering without communion once crept in,
they began gradually to make innumerable masses in all the separate
corners of the churches, and to draw the people hither and thither, when
they ought to have formed one meeting, and thus recognised the mystery
of their unity. Let them now go and deny their idolatry when they
exhibit the bread in their masses, that it may be adored for Christ. In
vain do they talk of those promises of the presence of Christ, which,
however they may be understood, were certainly not given that impure and
profane men might form the body of Christ as often as they please, and
for whatever abuse they please; but that believers, while, with
religious observance, they follow the command of Christ in celebrating
the Supper, might enjoy the true participation of it.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p36"></span>9. We may add, that this perverse course
was unknown to the purer Church. For however the more impudent among our
opponents may attempt to gloss the matter, it is absolutely certain that
all antiquity is opposed to them, as has been above demonstrated in
other instances, and may be more surely known by the diligent reading of
the Fathers.62  <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652) But before I
conclude, I ask our missal doctors, seeing they know that obedience is
better than sacrifice, and God commands us to listen to his voice rather
than to offer sacrifice (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p37.1"></span>[1 Sam.
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p37.1"></span>),—how they can believe this method of
sacrificing to be pleasing to God, since it is certain that he does not
command it, and they cannot support it by one syllable of Scripture?
Besides, when they hear the apostle declaring that “no man taketh this
honour to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron,” so also
Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest, but he that said
unto him, “Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee” (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p37.2"></span>[Heb. 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p37.2"></span>).
They must either prove God to be the author and founder of their
priesthood, or confess that there is no honour from God in an office,
into which, without being called, they have rushed with wicked temerity.
They cannot produce one iota of Scripture in support of their
priesthood. And must not the sacrifices be vain, since they cannot be
offered without a priest?

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p38"></span>10. Should any one here obtrude concise
sentences of the ancients, and contend, or their authority, that the
sacrifice which is performed in the Supper is to be understood
differently from what we have explained it, let this be our brief
reply,—that if the question relates to the approval of the fiction of
sacrifice, as imagined by Papists in the mass, there is nothing in the
Fathers to countenance the sacrilege. They indeed use the term
sacrifice, but they, at the same time, explain that they mean nothing
more than the commemoration of that one true sacrifice which Christ, our
only sacrifice (as they themselves everywhere proclaim), performed on
the cross. “The Hebrews,” says Augustine (Cont. Faust. Lib. 20 c. 18),
“in the victims of beasts which they offered to God, celebrated the
prediction of the future victim which Christ offered: Christians now
celebrate the commemoration of a finished sacrifice by the sacred
oblation and participation of the body of Christ.” Here he certainly
teaches the same doctrine which is delivered at greater length in the
Treatise on Faith, addressed to Peter the deacon, whoever may have been
the author. The words are, “Hold most firmly, and have no doubt at all,
that the Only-Begotten became incarnate for us, that he offered himself
for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour; to
whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, in the time of the Old
Testament, animals were sacrificed, and to whom now, with the Father and
the Holy Spirit (with whom there is one Godhead), the holy Church,
throughout the whole world, ceases not to offer the sacrifice of bread
and wine. For, in those carnal victims, there was a typifying of the
flesh of Christ, which he himself was to offer for our sins, and of the
blood which he was to shed for the forgiveness of sins. But in that
sacrifice there is thanksgiving and commemoration of the flesh of Christ
which he offered for us, and of the blood which he shed for us.” Hence
Augustine himself, in several passages (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p38.1"></span>Ep. 120<span id="iv.iv.xix-p38.1"></span>,
ad Honorat. Cont. Advers. Legis.), explains, that it is nothing else
than a sacrifice of praise. In short, you will find in his writings,
*passim*, that the only reason for which the Lord’s Supper is called a
sacrifice is, because it is a commemoration, an image, a testimonial of
that singular, true, and only sacrifice by which Christ expiated our
guilt. For there is a memorable passage (De Trinitate, Lib. 4 c. 24),
where, after discoursing of the only sacrifice, he thus concludes:
“Since, in a sacrifice, four things are considered—viz. to whom it is
offered, by whom, what and for whom, the same one true Mediator,
reconciling us to God by the sacrifice of peace, remains one with him to
whom he offered, made himself one with those for whom he offered, is
himself the one who offered, and the one thing which he offered.”
Chrysostom speaks to the same effect. They so strongly claim the honour
of the priesthood for Christ alone, that Augustine declares it would be
equivalent to Antichrist for any one to make a bishop to be an
intercessor between God and man (August. Cont. Parmen. Lib. 2 c. 8).62
 <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653)

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p40"></span>11. And yet we deny not that in the
Supper the sacrifice of Christ is so vividly exhibited as almost to set
the spectacle of the cross before our eyes, just as the apostle says to
the Galatians, that Jesus Christ had been evidently set forth before
their eyes, when the preaching of the cross was delivered to them (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p40.1"></span>[Gal.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p40.1"></span>). But because I see that those ancient
writers have wrested this commemoration to a different purpose than was
accordant to the divine institution (the Supper somehow seemed to them
to present the appearance of a repeated, or at least renewed,
immolation), nothing can be safer for the pious than to rest satisfied
with the pure and simple ordinance of God, whose Supper it is said to
be, just because his authority alone ought to appear in it. Seeing that
they retained a pious and orthodox view of the whole ordinance—and I
cannot discover that they wished to derogate in the least from the one
sacrifice of the Lord—I cannot charge them with any impiety, and yet I
think they cannot be excused from having erred somewhat in the mode of
action. They imitated the Jewish mode of sacrificing more closely than
either Christ had ordained, or the nature of the gospel allowed. The
only thing, therefore, for which they may be justly censured is, that
preposterous analogy, that not contented with the simple and genuine
institution of Christ, they declined too much to the shadows of the law.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p41"></span>12. Any who will diligently consider,
will perceive that the word of the Lord makes this distinction between
the Mosaic sacrifices and our eucharist—that while the former
represented to the Jewish people the same efficacy of the death of
Christ which is now exhibited to us in the Supper, yet the form of
representation was different. There the Levitical priests were ordered
to typify the sacrifice which Christ was to accomplish; a victim was
placed to act as a substitute for Christ himself; an altar was erected
on which it was to be sacrificed; the whole, in short, was so conducted
as to bring under the eye an image of the sacrifice which was to be
offered to God in expiation. But now that the sacrifice has been
performed, the Lord has prescribed a different method to us—viz. to
transmit the benefit of the sacrifice offered to him by his Son to his
believing people. The Lord, therefore, has given us a table at which we
may feast, not an altar on which a victim may be offered; he has not
consecrated priests to sacrifice, but ministers to distribute a sacred
feast. The more sublime and holy this mystery is, the more religiously
and reverently ought it to be treated. Nothing, therefore, is safer than
to banish all the boldness of human sense, and adhere solely to what
Scripture delivers. And certainly, if we reflect that it is the Supper
of the Lord and not of men, why do we allow ourselves to be turned aside
one nail’s-breadth from Scripture, by any authority of man or length of
prescription?62  <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) Accordingly,
the apostle, in desiring completely to remove the vices which had crept
into the Church of Corinth, as the most expeditious method, recalls them
to the institution itself, showing that thence a perpetual rule ought to
be derived.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p43"></span>13. Lest any quarrelsome person should
raise a dispute with us as to the terms *sacrifice* and *priest*, I will
briefly explain what in the whole of this discussion we mean by
sacrifice, and what by priest. Some, on what rational ground I see not,
extend the term *sacrifice* to all sacred ceremonies and religious acts.
We know that by the uniform use of Scripture, the name of sacrifice is
given to what the Greeks call at one time θυσια, at another προσφοπὰ, at
another τελετνὴ. This, in its general acceptation, includes everything
whatever that is offered to God. Wherefore, we ought to distinguish, but
so that the distinction may derive its analogy from the sacrifices of
the Mosaic Law, under whose shadows the Lord was pleased to represent to
his people the whole reality of sacrifices. Though these were various in
form, they may all be referred to two classes. For either an oblation
for sin was made by a certain species of satisfaction, by which the
penalty was redeemed before God, or it was a symbol and attestation of
religion and divine worship, at one time in the way of supplication to
demand the favour of God; at another, by way of thanksgiving, to testify
gratitude to God for benefits received; at another, as a simple exercise
of piety, to renew the sanction of the covenant, to which latter branch,
burnt-offerings, and libations, oblations, first-fruits, and peace
offerings, referred. Hence let us also distribute them into two classes.
The other class, with the view of explaining, let us call λατπευτικὸν,
and σεβαστιχὸν, as consisting of the veneration and worship which
believers both owe and render to God; or, if you prefer it, let us call
it ευχαριστικὸν, since it is exhibited to God by none but those who,
enriched with his boundless benefits, offer themselves and all their
actions to him in return. The other class let us call *propitiatory* or
*expiatory*. A sacrifice of expiation is one whose object is to appease
the wrath of God, to satisfy his justice, and thereby wipe and wash away
the sins, by which the sinner being cleansed and restored to purity, may
return to favour with God. Hence the name which was given in the Law to
the victims which were offered in expiation of sin (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p43.1"></span>[Exod.
29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p43.1"></span>); not that they were adequate to regain the
favour of God, and wipe away guilt, but because they typified the true
sacrifice of this nature, which was at length performed in reality by
Christ alone; by him alone, because no other could, and once, because
the efficacy and power of the one sacrifice performed by Christ is
eternal, as he declared by his voice, when he said, “It is finished;”
that is, that everything necessary to regain the favour of the Father,
to procure forgiveness of sins, righteousness, and salvation, that all
this was performed and consummated by his one oblation, and that hence
nothing was wanting. No place was left for another sacrifice.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p44"></span>14. Wherefore, I conclude, that it is an
abominable insult and intolerable blasphemy, as well against Christ as
the sacrifice, which, by his death, he performed for us on the cross,
for any one to think of repeating the oblation, of purchasing the
forgiveness of sins, of propitiating God, and obtaining justification.
But what else is done in the mass than to make us partakers of the
sufferings of Christ by means of a new oblation? And that there might be
no limit to their extravagance, they have deemed it little to say, that
it properly becomes a common sacrifice for the whole Church, without
adding, that it is at their pleasure to apply it specially to this one
or that, as they choose; or rather, to any one who is willing to
purchase their merchandise from them for a price paid. Moreover, as they
could not come up to the estimate of Judas, still, that they might in
some way refer to their author, they make the resemblance to consist in
the number. He sold for thirty pieces of silver: they, according to the
French method of computation, sell for thirty pieces of brass. He did it
once: they as often as a purchaser is met with. We deny that they are
priests in this sense—namely, that by such oblations they intercede with
God for the people, that by propitiating God they make expiation for
sins. Christ is the only Pontiff and Priest of the New Testament: to him
all priestly offices were transferred, and in him they closed and
terminated. Even had Scripture made no mention of the eternal priesthood
of Christ, yet, as God, after abolishing those ancient sacrifices,
appointed no new priest, the argument of the apostle remains invincible,
“No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p44.1"></span>[Heb.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p44.1"></span>). How, then, can those sacrilegious men,
who by their own account are murderers of Christ, dare to call
themselves the priests of the living God?

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p45"></span>15. There is a most elegant passage in
the second book of Plato’s Republic. Speaking of ancient expiations, and
deriding the foolish confidence of wicked and iniquitous men, who
thought that by them, as a kind of veils, they concealed their crimes
from the gods; and, as if they had made a paction with the gods,
indulged themselves more securely, he seems accurately to describe the
use of the expiation of the mass, as it exists in the world in the
present day. All know that it is unlawful to defraud and circumvent
another. To do injustice to widows, to pillage pupils, to molest the
poor, to seize the goods of others by wicked arts, to get possession of
any man’s succession by fraud and perjury, to oppress by violence and
tyrannical terror, all admit to be impious. How then do so many, as if
assured of impunity, dare to do all those things? Undoubtedly, if we
duly consider, we will find that the only thing which gives them so much
courage is, that by the sacrifice of the mass as a price paid, they
trust that they will satisfy God, or at least will easily find a means
of transacting with him. Plato next proceeds to deride the gross
stupidity of those who think by such expiations to redeem the
punishments which they must otherwise suffer after death. And what is
meant by anniversaries and the greater part of masses in the present
day, but just that those who through life have been the most cruel
tyrants, or most rapacious plunderers, or adepts in all kinds of
wickedness, may, as if redeemed at this price, escape the fire of
purgatory?

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p46"></span>16. Under the other kind of sacrifice,
which we have called eucharistic, are included all the offices of
charity, by which, while we embrace our brethren, we honour the Lord
himself in his members; in fine, all our prayers, praises,
thanksgivings, and every act of worship which we perform to God. All
these depend on the greater sacrifice with which we dedicate ourselves,
soul and body, to be a holy temple to the Lord. For it is not enough
that our external acts be framed to obedience, but we must dedicate and
consecrate first ourselves, and, secondly, all that we have, so that all
which is in us may be subservient to his glory, and be stirred up to
magnify it. This kind of sacrifice has nothing to do with appeasing God,
with obtaining remission of sins, with procuring justification, but is
wholly employed in magnifying and extolling God, since it cannot be
grateful and acceptable to God unless at the hand of those who, having
received forgiveness of sins, have already been reconciled and freed
from guilt. This is so necessary to the Church, that it cannot be
dispensed with. Therefore, it will endure for ever, so long as the
people of God shall endure, as we have already seen above from the
prophet. For in this sense we may understand the prophecy, “From the
rising of the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall
be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered
unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the
heathen, said the Lord of hosts” (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p46.1"></span>[Malachi
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p46.1"></span>); so far are we from doing away with this
sacrifice. Thus Paul beseeches us by the mercies of God, to present our
bodies “a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God,” our “reasonable
service” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p46.2"></span>[Rom.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p46.2"></span>). Here he speaks very significantly when he
adds, that this service is reasonable, for he refers to the spiritual
mode of worshipping God, and tacitly opposes it to the carnal sacrifices
of the Mosaic Law. Thus to do good and communicate are called sacrifices
with which God is well pleased (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p46.3"></span>[Heb.
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p46.3"></span>). Thus the kindness of the Philippians in
relieving Paul’s want is called “an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well pleasing to God” (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p46.4"></span>[Phil.
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p46.4"></span>); and thus all the good works of believers
are called spiritual sacrifices.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p47"></span>17. And why do I enumerate? This form of
expression is constantly occurring in Scripture. Nay, even while the
people of God were kept under the external tutelage of the law, the
prophets clearly expressed that under these carnal sacrifices there was
a reality which is common both to the Jewish people and the Christian
Church. For this reason David prayed, “Let my prayer ascend forth before
thee as incense” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p47.1"></span>[Ps.
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.1"></span>). And Hosea gives the name of “calves of
the lips” (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p47.2"></span>[Hos.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.2"></span>) to thanksgivings, which David elsewhere
calls “sacrifices of praise;” the apostle, imitating him, speaks of
offering “the sacrifice of praise,” which he explains to mean, “the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name” (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.3"></span>[Heb.
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.3"></span>). This kind of sacrifice is indispensable
in the Lord’s Supper, in which, while we show forth his death, and give
him thanks, we offer nothing but the sacrifice of praise. From this
office of sacrificing, all Christians are called “a royal priesthood,”
because by Christ we offer that sacrifice of praise of which the apostle
speaks, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name (l Pet. 2:9;
<span id="iv.iv.xix-p47.4"></span>[Heb.
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.4"></span>). We do not appear with our gifts in the
presence of God without an intercessor. Christ is our Mediator, by whose
intervention we offer ourselves and our all to the Father; he is our
High Priest, who, having entered into the upper sanctuary, opens up an
access for us; he is the altar on which we lay our gifts, that whatever
we do attempt, we may attempt in him; he it is, I say, who “hath made us
kings and priests unto God and his Father” (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.5"></span>[Rev.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p47.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p48"></span>18. What remains but for the blind to
see, the deaf to hear, children even to perceive this abomination of the
mass, which, held forth in a golden cup,62  <span
id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) has so intoxicated all the kings and
nations of the earth, from the highest to the lowest; so struck them
with stupor and giddiness, that, duller than the lower animals, they
have placed the vessel of their salvation in this fatal vortex.
Certainly Satan never employed a more powerful engine to assail and
storm the kingdom of Christ. This is the Helen for whom the enemies of
the truth in the present day fight with so much rage, fury, and
atrocity; and truly the Helen with whom they commit spiritual whoredom,
the most execrable of all. I am not here laying my little finger on
those gross abuses by which they might pretend that the purity of their
sacred mass is profaned; on the base traffic which they ply; the sordid
gain which they make; the rapacity with which they satiate their
avarice. I only indicate, and that in few and simple terms, how very
sacred the sanctity of the mass is, how well it has for several ages
deserved to be admired and held in veneration! It were a greater work to
illustrate these great mysteries as they deserve, and I am unwilling to
meddle with their obscene impurities, which are daily before the eyes
and faces of all, that it may be understood that the mass, taken in the
most choice form in which it can be exhibited, without any appendages,
teems from head to foot with all kinds of impiety, blasphemy, idolatry,
and sacrilege.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p50"></span>19. My readers have here a compendious
view of all that I have thought it of importance to know concerning
these two sacraments, which have been delivered to the Christian Church,
to be used from the beginning of the new dispensation to the end of the
world, Baptism being a kind of entrance into the Church, an initiation
into the faith, and the Lord’s Supper the constant aliment by which
Christ spiritually feeds his family of believers. Wherefore, as there is
but one God, one faith, one Christ, one Church, which is his body, so
Baptism is one, and is not repeated. But the Supper is ever and anon
dispensed, to intimate, that those who are once allured into the Church
are constantly fed by Christ. Besides these two, no other has been
instituted by God, and no other ought to be recognised by the assembly
of the faithful. That sacraments are not to be instituted and set up by
the will of men, is easily understood by him who remembers what has been
above with sufficient plainness expounded —viz. that the sacraments have
been appointed by God to instruct us in his promise, and testify his
goodwill towards us; and who, moreover, considers, that the Lord has no
counsellor (<span id="iv.iv.xix-p50.1"></span>[Isa.
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p50.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xix-p50.2"></span>[Rom.
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p50.2"></span>); who can give us any certainty as to his
will, or assure us how he is disposed towards us, what he is disposed to
give, and what to deny? From this it follows, that no one can set forth
a sign which is to be a testimonial of his will, and of some promise. He
alone can give the sign, and bear witness to himself. I will express it
more briefly, perhaps in homelier, but also in clearer terms,—There
never can be a sacrament without a promise of salvation. All men
collected into one cannot, of themselves, give us any promise of
salvation, and, therefore, they cannot, of themselves, give out and set
up a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p51"></span>20. With these two, therefore, let the
Christian Church be contented, and not only not admit or acknowledge any
third at present, but not even desire or expect it even until the end of
the world. For though to the Jews were given, besides his ordinary
sacraments, others differing somewhat according to the nature of the
times (as the manna, the water gushing from the rock, the brazen
serpent, and the like),62  <span id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) by
this variety they were reminded not to stop short at such figures, the
state of which could not be durable, but to expect from God something
better, to endure without decay and without end. Our case is very
different. To us Christ has been revealed. In him are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.5"></span>[Col.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.5"></span>), in such richness and abundance, that to
ask or hope for any new addition to these treasures is truly to offend
God and provoke him against us. It behoves us to hunger after Christ
only, to seek him, look to him, learn of him, and learn again, until the
arrival of the great day on which the Lord will fully manifest the glory
of his kingdom, and exhibit himself as he is to our admiring eye (<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.6"></span>[1 John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.6"></span>). And, for this reason, this age of ours is
designated in Scripture63  <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) by
the last hour, the last days, the last times, that no one may deceive
himself with the vain expectation of some new doctrine or revelation.
Our heavenly Father, who “at sundry times, and in divers manners, spake
in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days
spoken unto us” by his beloved Son, who alone can manifest, and, in
fact, has fully manifested, the Father, in so far as is of importance to
us, while we now see him through a mirror. Now, since men have been
denied the power of making new sacraments in the Church of God, it were
to be wished, that in those which are of God, there should be the least
possible admixture of human invention. For just as when water is
infused, the wine is diluted, and when leaven is put in, the whole mass
is leavened, so the purity of the ordinances of God is impaired,
whenever man makes any addition of his own. And yet we see how far the
sacraments as at present used have degenerated from their genuine
purity. There is everywhere more than enough of pomp, ceremony, and
gesticulation, while no account is taken, or mention made, of the word
of God, without which, even the sacraments themselves are not
sacraments. Nay, in such a crowd, the very ceremonies ordained by God
cannot raise their head, but lie as it were oppressed. In Baptism, as we
have elsewhere justly complained, how little is seen of that which alone
ought to shine and be conspicuous there, I mean Baptism itself? The
Supper was altogether buried when it was turned into the Mass. The
utmost is, that it is seen once a year, but in a garbled, mutilated, and
lacerated form.63  <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_648"></span>[649](inst098.htm#fr_648) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p0.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p1"></span>Vid. Calv. Ep. de Fugiend. Illic. Sacris.
Item, De Sacerdotiis Eccles. Papal. Item, De Necessitate Reform. Eccles.
Item, Epist. ad Sadoletum

<span id="fn_649"></span>[650](inst098.htm#fr_649) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p26"></span>22 622 The French adds, “qui ont parlé
un petit plus passablement que leur successeurs qui sont venus
depuis;”—who have spoken somewhat more tolerably than their successors
who have come since.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[651](inst098.htm#fr_650) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p28"></span>23 623 <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.1"></span>[Heb.
5:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.1"></span>; 7:17; 21; 9:11; 10:21; <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.2"></span>[Ps.
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xix-p28.3"></span>[Gen.
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p28.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[652](inst098.htm#fr_651) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p30"></span>24 624 <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p30.1"></span>[Heb.
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p30.1"></span>;
10:10, 14, 16.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[653](inst098.htm#fr_652) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p37"></span>25 625 The French of this sentence is,
“Car combien que ceux qui sont les plus effrontées entre les Papistes
fassent un bouclier des anciens docteurs, abusant faussement de leurs
tesmoignages, toutesfois c’est une chose claire comme le soleil en plein
midi, que ce qu’ils font est tout contraire a l’usage ancien: et que
c’est un abus qui est venu en avant du temps que tout etoit depravé et
corrompu en l’Eglise.”—For although those who have the most effrontery
among the Papists make a shield of the ancient doctors, falsely abusing
their testimony, it is clear as the sun at noon-day, that what they do
is quite contrary to ancient practice, and that is an abuse which
immediately preceded the time when everything was depraved and corrupted
in the Church.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[654](inst098.htm#fr_653) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p39"></span>26 626 This last sentence forms, in the
French, the first of sec. 11.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[655](inst098.htm#fr_654) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p42"></span>27 627 French, “n’ancun authorite
humaine, ne longeur de temps, ne toutes autres apparences;”—no human
authority, no length of time, nor any other appearances.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[656](inst098.htm#fr_655) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p49"></span>28 628 The French explains, “c’est à
dire, sous le nom de la parole de Dieu;”—that is to say, under the name
of the word of God.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[657](inst098.htm#fr_656) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p52"></span>29 629 <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.1"></span>[Exod.
16:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.1"></span>; 17:6; <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.2"></span>[Num.
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.2"></span>., 21:9; <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.3"></span>[1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xix-p52.4"></span>[John
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[658](inst098.htm#fr_657) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p52.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p53"></span>30 630 <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p53.1"></span>[1 John
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p53.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xix-p53.2"></span>[1 Pet.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p53.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xix-p53.3"></span>[Luke
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p53.3"></span>, <span id="iv.iv.xix-p53.4"></span>[Heb.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.xix-p53.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xix-p53.5"></span>[1 Cor.
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p53.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[659](inst098.htm#fr_658) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p53.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p54"></span>31 631 French, “deschiree, decouppee,
departie, brisee, divisee, et toute difformee.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 19. - OF THE FIVE SACRAMENTS, FALSELY SO CALLED. THEIR
SPURIOUSNESS PROVED, AND THEIR TRUE CHARACTER EXPLAINED.](inst099)
