[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst046)  [Next](inst048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xiv"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 13.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1"></span>CHRIST CLOTHED WITH THE TRUE SUBSTANCE OF
HUMAN NATURE.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p2"></span>The heads of this chapter are, I. The
orthodoxy doctrine as to the true humanity of our Saviour, proved from
many passages of Scripture, sec. 1. II. Refutation of the impious
objections of the Marcionites, Manichees, and similar heretics, sec.
2–4.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p4"></span>1. Proof of the true humanity of Christ,
against the Manichees and Marcionites.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p5"></span>2. Impious objections of heretics further
discussed. Six objections answered.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p6"></span>3. Other eight objections answered.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p7"></span>4. Other three objections answered.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8"></span>1. Of the divinity of Christ, which has
elsewhere been established by clear and solid proofs, I presume it were
superfluous again to treat. It remains, therefore, to see how, when
clothed with our flesh, he fulfilled the office of Mediator. In ancient
times, the reality of his human nature was impugned by the Manichees and
Marcionites, the latter figuring to themselves a phantom instead of the
body of Christ, and the former dreaming of his having been invested with
celestial flesh. The passages of Scripture contradictory to both are
numerous and strong. The blessing is not promised in a heavenly seed, or
the mask of a man, but the seed of Abraham and Jacob; nor is the
everlasting throne promised to an aerial man, but to the Son of David,
and the fruit of his loins. Hence, when manifested in the flesh, he is
called the Son of David and Abraham, not because he was born of a
virgin, and yet created in the air, but because, as Paul explains, he
was “made of the seed of David, according to the flesh,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>[Rom.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>.md),
as the same apostle elsewhere says, that he came of the Jews (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.2"></span>[Rom.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.2"></span>.md).
Wherefore, our Lord himself not contented with the name of man,
frequently calls himself the Son of man, wishing to express more clearly
that he was a man by true human descent. The Holy Spirit having so
often, by so many organs, with so much care and plainness, declared a
matter which in itself is not abstruse, who could have thought that
mortals would have had the effrontery to darken it with their glosses?
Many other passages are at hand, were it wished to produce more: for
instance, that one of Paul, that “God sent forth his Son, made of a
woman,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.3"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.3"></span>.md),
and innumerable others, which show that he was subject to hunger,
thirst, cold, and the other infirmities of our nature. But from the many
we must chiefly select those which may conduce to build up our minds in
true faith, as when it is said, “Verily, he took not on him the nature
of angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham,” “that through death
he might destroy him that had the power of death,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.4"></span>[Heb. 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.4"></span>.md).
Again, “Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of
one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren.”
“Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest.” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.5"></span>[Heb. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.5"></span>.md).
Again “We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.6"></span>[Heb.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.6"></span>), and the like. To the same effect is the
passage to which we lately referred, in which Paul distinctly declares,
that the sins of the world behoved to be expiated in our flesh (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.7"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.7"></span>.md).
And certainly every thing which the Father conferred on Christ pertains
to us for this reason, that “he is the head,” that from him the whole
body is “fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.8"></span>[Eph.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.8"></span>). Nay, in no other way could it hold true as
is said, that the Spirit was given to him without measure (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.9"></span>[John
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.9"></span>), and that out of his fulness have all we
received; since nothing could be more absurd than that God, in his own
essence, should be enriched by an adventitious gift. For this reason
also, Christ himself elsewhere says, “For their sakes I sanctify
myself,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.10"></span>[John
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.10"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p9"></span>2. The passages which they produce in
confirmation of their error are absurdly wrested, nor do they gain any
thing by their frivolous subtleties when they attempt to do away with
what I have now adduced in opposition to them. Marcion imagines that
Christ, instead of a body, assumed a phantom, because it is elsewhere
said, that he was made in the likeness of man, and found in fashion as a
man. Thus he altogether overlooks what Paul is then discussing (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>.md).
His object is not to show what kind of body Christ assumed, but that,
when he might have justly asserted his divinity he was pleased to
exhibit nothing but the attributes of a mean and despised man. For, in
order to exhort us to submission by his example, he shows, that when as
God he might have displayed to the world the brightness of his glory, he
gave up his right, and voluntarily emptied himself; that he assumed the
form of a servant, and, contented with that humble condition, suffered
his divinity to be concealed under a veil of flesh. Here,
unquestionably, he explains not what Christ was, but in what way he
acted. Nay, from the whole context it is easily gathered, that it was in
the true nature of man that Christ humbled himself. For what is meant by
the words, he was “found in fashion as a man,” but that for a time,
instead of being resplendent with divine glory, the human form only
appeared in a mean and abject condition? Nor would the words of Peter,
that he was “put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirits”
(<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.2"></span>[1 Pet.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.2"></span>), hold true, unless the Son of God had
become weak in the nature of man. This is explained more clearly by
Paul, when he declares that “he was crucified through weakness,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.3"></span>[2 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.3"></span>). And hence his exaltation; for it is
distinctly said, that Christ acquired new glory after he humbled
himself. This could fitly apply only to a man endued with a body and a
soul. Manes dreams of an aerial body, because Christ is called the
second Adam, the Lord from heaven. But the apostle does not there speak
of the essence of his body as heavenly, but of the spiritual life which
derived from Christ quickens us (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.4"></span>[I
Cor. 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.4"></span>). This life Paul and Peter, as we have seen,
separate from his flesh. Nay, that passage admirably confirms the
doctrine of the orthodox, as to the human nature of Christ. If his body
were not of the same nature with ours, there would be no soundness in
the argument which Paul pursues with so much earnestness,—If Christ is
risen we shall rise also; if we rise not, neither has Christ risen.
Whatever be the cavils by which the ancient Manichees, or their modern
disciples, endeavour to evade this, they cannot succeed. It is a
frivolous and despicable evasion to say, that Christ is called the Son
of man, because he was promised to men; it being obvious that, in the
Hebrew idiom, the Son of man means a true man: and Christ, doubtless,
retained the idiom of his own tongue.24  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) Moreover, there cannot be a doubt as
to what is to be understood by the sons of Adam. Not to go farther, a
passage in the eighth psalm, which the apostles apply to Christ, will
abundantly suffice: “What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the
son of man, that thou visitest him?” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.1"></span>[Ps
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.1"></span>). Under this figure is expressed the true
humanity of Christ. For although he was not immediately descended of an
earthly father, yet he originally sprang from Adam. Nor could it
otherwise be said in terms of the passage which we have already quoted,
“Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same;” these words plainly
proving that he was an associate and partner in the same nature with
ourselves. In this sense also it is said, that “both he that sanctifieth
and they who are sanctified are all of one.” The context proves that
this refers to a community of nature; for it is immediately added, “For
which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.2"></span>[Heb.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.2"></span>). Had he said at first that believers are
of God, where could there have been any ground for being ashamed of
persons possessing such dignity? But when Christ of his boundless grace
associates himself with the mean and ignoble, we see why it was said
that “he is not ashamed.” It is vain to object, that in this way the
wicked will be the brethren of Christ; for we know that the children of
God are not born of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit through faith.
Therefore, flesh alone does not constitute the union of brotherhood. But
although the apostle assigns to believers only the honour of being one
with Christ, it does not however follow, that unbelievers have not the
same origin according to the flesh; just as when we say that Christ
became man, that he might make us sons of God, the expression does not
extend to all classes of persons; the intervention of faith being
necessary to our being spiritually ingrafted into the body of Christ. A
dispute is also ignorantly raised as to the term *first-born*. It is
alleged that Christ ought to have been the first son of Adam, in order
that he might be the first-born among the brethren (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.3"></span>[Rom.
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.3"></span>). But primogeniture refers not to age, but
to degree of honour and pre-eminence of virtue. There is just as little
colour for the frivolous assertion that Christ assumed the nature of
man, and not that of angels (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.4"></span>[Heb.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.4"></span>), because it was the human race that he
restored to favour. The apostle, to magnify the honour which Christ has
conferred upon us, contrasts us with the angels, to whom we are in this
respect preferred. And if due weight is given to the testimony of Moses
(<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.5"></span>[Gen.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p10.5"></span>), when he says that the seed of the woman
would bruise the head of the serpent, the dispute is at an end. For the
words there used refer not to Christ alone, but to the whole human race.
Since the victory was to be obtained for us by Christ, God declares
generally, that the posterity of the woman would overcome the devil.
From this it follows, that Christ is a descendant of the human race, the
purpose of God in thus addressing Eve being to raise her hopes, and
prevent her from giving way to despair.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p11"></span>3. The passages in which Christ is
called the seed of Abraham, and the fruit of the loins of David, those
persons, with no less folly than wickedness, wrap up in allegory. Had
the term *seed* been used allegorically, Paul surely would not have
omitted to notice it, when he affirms clearly, and without figure, that
the promise was not given “to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to
thy seed, which is Christ,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.1"></span>[Gal.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.1"></span>). With similar absurdity they pretend that
he was called the Son of David for no other reason but because he had
been promised, and was at length in due time manifested. For Paul, after
he had called him the Son of David, by immediately subjoining
“*according to the flesh*”, certainly designates his nature. So also
(<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.2"></span>[Rom.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.2"></span>), while declaring him to be “God blessed
for ever,” he mentions separately, that, “as concerning the flesh, he
was descended from the Jews.” Again if he had not been truly begotten of
the seed of David, what is the meaning of the expression, that he is the
“fruit of his loins;” or what the meaning of the promise, “Of the fruit
of thy body will I set upon thy throne?” (<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.3"></span>[Ps.
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.3"></span>). Moreover their mode of dealing with the
genealogy of Christ, as given by Matthew, is mere sophistry; for though
he reckons up the progenitors not of Mary, but of Joseph, yet as he was
speaking of a matter then generally understood, he deems it enough to
show that Joseph was descended from the seed of David, since it is
certain that Mary was of the same family. Luke goes still farther,
showing that the salvation brought by Christ is common to the whole
human race, inasmuch as Christ, the author of salvation, is descended
from Adam, the common father of us all. I confess, indeed, that the
genealogy proves Christ to be the Son of David only as being descended
of the Virgin; but the new Marcionites, for the purpose of giving a
gloss to their heresy, namely to prove that the body which Christ
assumed was unsubstantial, too confidently maintain that the expression
as to seed is applicable only to males, thus subverting the elementary
principles of nature. But as this discussion belongs not to theology,
and the arguments which they adduce are too futile to require any
laboured refutation, I will not touch on matters pertaining to
philosophy and the medical art. It will be sufficient to dispose of the
objection drawn from the statement of Scripture, that Aaron and
Jehoiadah married wives out of the tribe of Judah, and that thus the
distinction of tribes was confounded, if proper descent could come
through the female. It is well known, that in regard to civil order,
descent is reckoned through the male; and yet the superiority on his
part does not prevent the female from having her proper share in the
descent. This solution applies to all the genealogies. When Scripture
gives a list of individuals, it often mentions males only. Must we
therefore say that females go for nothing? Nay, the very children know
that they are classified with men. For this reasons wives are said to
give children to their husbands, the name of the family always remaining
with the males. Then, as the male sex has this privilege, that sons are
deemed of noble or ignoble birth, according to the condition of their
fathers, so, on the other hand, in slavery, the condition of the child
is determined by that of the mother, as lawyers say, *partus sequitur
ventrem*. Whence we may infer, that offspring is partly procreated by
the seed of the mother. According to the common custom of nations,
mothers are deemed progenitors, and with this the divine law agrees,
which could have had no ground to forbid the marriage of the uncle with
the niece, if there was no consanguinity between them. It would also be
lawful for a brother and sister uterine to intermarry, when their
fathers are different. But while I admit that the power assigned to the
woman is passive, I hold that the same thing is affirmed
indiscriminately of her and of the male. Christ is not said to have been
made by a woman, but of a woman (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.4"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.4"></span>). But some of this herd, laying aside all
shame, publicly ask whether we mean to maintain that Christ was
procreated of the proper seed of a Virgin.24  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) I, in my turn, asks whether they are
not forced to admit that he was nourished to maturity in the Virgin’s
womb. Justly, therefore, we infer from the words of Matthew, that
Christ, inasmuch as he was begotten of Mary, was procreated of her seed;
as a similar generation is denoted when Boaz is said to have been
begotten of Rachab (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p12.1"></span>[Matt.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p12.1"></span>). Matthew does not here describe the Virgin
as the channel through which Christ flowed, but distinguishes his
miraculous from an ordinary birth, in that Christ was begotten by her of
the seed of David. For the same reason for which Isaac is said to be
begotten of Abraham, Joseph of Jacob, Solomon of David, is Christ said
to have been begotten of his mother. The Evangelist has arranged his
discourse in this way. Wishing to prove that Christ derives his descent
from David, he deems it enough to state, that he was begotten of Mary.
Hence it follows, that he assumed it as an acknowledged fact, that Mary
was of the same lineage as Joseph.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p13"></span>4. The absurdities which they wish to
fasten upon us are mere puerile calumnies. They reckon it base and
dishonouring to Christ to have derived his descent from men; because, in
that case, he could not be exempted from the common law which includes
the whole offspring of Adam, without exception, under sin. But this
difficulty is easily solved by Paul’s antithesis, “As by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin”—“even so by the righteousness
of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p13.1"></span>[Rom.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p13.1"></span>). Corresponding to this is another passage,
“The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from
heaven,” (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p13.2"></span>[1 Cor.
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p13.2"></span>). Accordingly, the same apostle, in another
passage, teaching that Christ was sent “in the likeness of sinful flesh,
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us,” distinctly
separates him from the common lot, as being true man, and yet without
fault and corruption (<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p13.3"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p13.3"></span>). It is childish trifling to maintain, that
if Christ is free from all taint, and was begotten of the seed of Mary,
by the secret operation of the Spirit, it is not therefore the seed of
the woman that is impure, but only that of the man. We do not hold
Christ to be free from all taint, merely because he was born of a woman
unconnected with a man, but because he was sanctified by the Spirit, so
that the generation was pure and spotless, such as it would have been
before Adam’s fall. Let us always bear in mind, that wherever Scripture
adverts to the purity of Christ, it refers to his true human nature,
since it were superfluous to say that God is pure. Moreover, the
sanctification of which John speaks in his seventeenth chapter is
inapplicable to the divine nature. This does not suggest the idea of a
twofold seed in Adam, although no contamination extended to Christ, the
generation of man not being in itself vicious or impure, but an
accidental circumstance of the fall. Hence, it is not strange that
Christ, by whom our integrity was to be restored, was exempted from the
common corruption. Another absurdity which they obtrude upon us—viz.
that if the Word of God became incarnate, it must have been enclosed in
the narrow tenement of an earthly body, is sheer petulance. For although
the boundless essence of the Word was united with human nature into one
person, we have no idea of any enclosing. The Son of God descended
miraculously from heaven, yet without abandoning heaven; was pleased to
be conceived miraculously in the Virgin’s womb, to live on the earth,
and hang upon the cross, and yet always filled the world as from the
beginning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](inst047.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p10"></span>45 245 The last clause of the sentence
is omited in the French.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](inst047.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p11.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p12"></span>46 246 Latin, “An dicere velimus ex
semine menstruali virginis procreatur esse Christum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 14. - HOW TWO NATURES CONSTITUTE THE PERSON OF THE
MEDIATOR.](inst048.md)
