[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst086)  [Next](inst088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.viii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 7.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1"></span>OF THE BEGINNING AND RISE OF THE ROMISH
PAPACY, TILL IT ATTAINED A HEIGHT BY WHICH THE LIBERTY OF THE CHURCH WAS
DESTROYED, AND ALL TRUE RULE OVERTHROWN.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p2"></span>There are five heads in this chapter. I.
The Patriarchate given and confirmed to the Bishop of Rome, first by the
Council of Nice, and afterwards by that of Chalcedon though by no means
approved of by other bishops, was the commencement of the Papacy, sec.
1-4. II. The Church at Rome, by taking pious exiles under its
protection, and also thereby protecting wicked men who fled to her,
helped forward the mystery of iniquity, although at that time neither
the ordination of bishops, nor admonitions and censures, nor the right
of convening Councils, nor the right of receiving appeals, belonged to
the Roman Bishop, whose profane meddling with these things was condemned
by Gregory, sec. 5-13. III. After the Council of Turin, disputes arose
as to the authority of Metropolitans. Disgraceful strife between the
Patriarchs of Rome and Constantinople. The vile assassin Phocas put an
end to these brawls at the instigation of Boniface, sec. 14-18. IV. To
the dishonest arts of Boniface succeeded fouler frauds devised in more
modern times, and expressly condemned by Gregory and Bernard. sec.
19-21. V. The Papacy at length appeared complete in all its parts, the
seat of Antichrist. Its impiety, execrable tyranny, and wickedness,
portrayed, sec. 23-30.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p4"></span>1. First part of the chapter, in which
the commencement of the Papacy is assigned to the Council of Nice. In
subsequent Councils other bishops presided. No attempt then made to
claim the first place.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p5"></span>2. Though the Roman Bishop presided in
the Council of Chalcedon, this was owing to special circumstances. The
same right not given to his successors in other Councils.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p6"></span>3. The ancient Fathers did not give the
title of Primate to the Roman Bishop.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7"></span>4. Gregory was vehement in opposition to
the title when claimed by the Bishop of Constantinople, and did not
claim it for himself.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p8"></span>5. Second part of the chapter,
explaining the ambitious attempts of the Roman See to obtain the
primacy. Their reception of pious exiles. Hearing the appeals and
complaints of heretics. Their ambition in this respect offensive to the
African Church.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p9"></span>6. The power of the Roman Bishops in
ordaining bishops, appointing councils, deciding controversies, &c.,
confined to their own Patriarchate.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p10"></span>7. If they censured other bishops, they
themselves were censured in their turn.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p11"></span>8. They had no right of calling
provincial councils except within their own boundaries. The calling of a
universal council belonged solely to the Emperor.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p12"></span>9. Appeal to the Roman See not
acknowledged by other bishops. Stoutly resisted by the Bishops of France
and Africa. The impudence and falsehood of the Roman Pontiff detected.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p13"></span>10. Proof from history that the Roman
had no jurisdiction over other churches.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p14"></span>11. The decretal epistles of no avail
in support of this usurped jurisdiction.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p15"></span>12. The authority of the Roman Bishop
extended in the time of Gregory. Still it only consisted in aiding other
bishops with their own consent, or at the command of the Emperor.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p16"></span>13. Even the extent of jurisdiction,
thus voluntarily conferred, objected to by Gregory as interfering with
better duties.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p17"></span>14. Third part of the chapter, showing
the increase of the power of the Papacy in defining the limits of
Metropolitans. This gave rise to the decree of the Council of Turin.
This decree haughtily annulled by Innocent.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p18"></span>15. Hence the great struggle for
precedency between the Sees of Rome and Constantinople. The pride and
ambition of the Roman Bishops unfolded.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p19"></span>16. Many attempts of the Bishop of
Constantinople to deprive the Bishop of Rome of the primacy.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p20"></span>17. Phocas murders the Emperor, and
gives Rome the primacy.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p21"></span>18. The Papal tyranny shortly after
established. Bitter complaints by Bernard.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p22"></span>19. Fourth part of the chapter. Altered
appearance of the Roman See since the days of Gregory.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p23"></span>20. The present demands of the
Romanists not formerly conceded. Fictions of Gregory IX. and Martin.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p24"></span>21. Without mentioning the opposition
of Cyprian, of councils, and historical facts, the claims now made were
condemned by Gregory himself.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p25"></span>22. The abuses of which Gregory and
Bernard complained now increased and sanctioned.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p26"></span>23. The fifth and last part of the
chapter, containing the chief answer to the claims of the Papacy—viz.
that the Pope is not a bishop in the house of God. This answer confirmed
by an enumeration of the essential parts of the episcopal office.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p27"></span>24. A second confirmation by appeal to
the institution of Christ. A third confirmation *e contrario*—viz. That
in doctrine and morals the Roman Pontiff is altogether different from a
true bishop. Conclusion, that Rome is not the Apostolic See, but the
Papacy.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p28"></span>25. Proof from Daniel and Paul that the
Pope is Antichrist.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p29"></span>26. Rome could not now claim the
primacy, even though she had formerly been the first See, especially
considering the base trafficking in which she has engaged.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p30"></span>27. Personal character of Popes.
Irreligious opinions held by some of them.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p31"></span>28. John XXII. heretical in regard to
the immortality of the soul. His name, therefore, ought to be expunged
from the catalogue of Popes, or rather, there is no foundation for the
claim of perpetuity of faith in the Roman See.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p32"></span>29. Some Roman Pontiffs atheists, or
sworn enemies of religion. Their immoral lives. Practice of the
Cardinals and Romish clergy.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p33"></span>30. Cardinals were formerly merely
presbyters of the Roman Church, and far inferior to bishops. As they now
are, they have no true and legitimate office in the Church. Conclusion.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p34"></span>1. In regard to the antiquity of the
primacy of the Roman See, there is nothing in favour of its
establishment more ancient than the decree of the Council of Nice, by
which the first place among the Patriarchs is assigned to the Bishop of
Rome, and he is enjoined to take care of the suburban churches. While
the council, in dividing between him and the other Patriarchs, assigns
the proper limits of each, it certainly does not appoint him head of
all, but only one ofthe chief. Vitus and Vincentius attended on the part
of Julius, who then governed the Roman Church, and to them the fourth
place was given. I ask, if Julius was acknowledged the head of the
Church, would his legates have been consigned to the fourth place? Would
Athanasius have presided in the council where a representative of the
hierarchal order should have been most conspicuous? In the Council of
Ephesus, it appears that Celestinus (who was then Roman Pontiff) used a
cunning device to secure the dignity of his See. For when he sent his
deputies, he made Cyril of Alexandria, who otherwise would have
presided, his substitute. Why that commission, but just that his name
might stand connected with the first See? His legates sit in an inferior
place, are asked their opinion along with others, and subscribe in their
order, while, at the same time, his name is coupled with that of the
Patriarch of Alexandria. What shall I say of the second Council of
Ephesus, where, while the deputies of Leo were present, the Alexandrian
Patriarch Dioscorus presided as in his own right? They wil1 object that
this was not an orthodox council, since by it the venerable Flavianus
was condemned, Eutyches acquitted, and his heresy approved. Yet when the
council was met, and the bishops distributed the places among
themselves, the deputies of the Roman Church sat among the others just
as in a sacred and lawful Council. Still they contend not for the first
place, but yield it to another: this they never would have done if they
had thought it their own by right. For the Roman bishops were never
ashamed to stir up the greatest strife in contending for honours, and
for this cause alone, to trouble and harass the Church with many
pernicious contests; but because Leo saw that it would be too
extravagant to ask the first place for his legates, he omitted to do it.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p35"></span>2. Next came the Council of Chalcedon,
in which, by concession of the Emperor, the legates of the Roman Church
occupied the first place. But Leo himself confesses that this was an
extraordinary privilege; for when he asks it of the Emperor Marcian and
Pulcheria Augusta, he does not maintain that it is due to him, but only
pretends that the Eastern bishops who presided in the Council of Ephesus
had thrown all into confusion, and made a bad use of their power.
Therefore, seeing there was need of a grave moderator, and it was not
probable that those who had once been so fickle and tumultuous would be
fit for this purpose, he requests that, because of the fault and
unfitness of others, the office of governing should be transferred to
him. That which is asked as a special privilege, and out of the usual
order, certainly is not due by a common law. When it is only pretended
that there is need of a new president, because the former ones had
behaved themselves improperly, it is plain that the thing asked was not
previously done, and ought not to be made perpetual, being done only in
respect of a present danger. The Roman Pontiff, therefore, holds the
first place in the Council of Chalcedon, not because it is due to his
See, but because the council is in want of a grave and fit moderator,
while those who ought to have presided exclude themselves by their
intemperance and passion. This statement the successor of Leo approved
by his procedure. For when he sent his legates to the fifth Council,
that of Constantinople, which was held long after, he did not quarrel
for the first seat, but readily allowed Mennas, the patriarch of
Constantinople, to preside. In like manner, in the Council of Carthage,
at which Augustine was present, we perceive that not the legates of the
Roman See, but Aurelius, the archbishop of the place, presided, although
there was then a question as to the authority of the Roman Pontiff. Nay,
even in Italy itself, a universal council was held (that of Aquileia),
at which the Roman Bishop was not present. Ambrose, who was then in high
favour with the Emperor, presided, and no mention is made of the Roman
Pontiff. Therefore, owing to the dignity of Ambrose, the See of Milan
was then more illustrious than that of Rome.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p36"></span>3. In regard to the mere title of
primate and other titles of pride, of which that pontiff now makes a
wondrous boast, it is not difficult to understand how and in what way
they crept in. Cyprian often makes mention of Cornelius (Cyprian. Lib. 2
Ep. 2; Lib. 4 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p36.1"></span>[Ep.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p36.1"></span>),
nor does he distinguish him by any other name than that of brother, or
fellow bishop, or colleague. When he writes to Stephen, the successor of
Cornelius, he not only makes him the equal of himself and others, but
addresses him in harsh terms, charging him at one time with presumption,
at another with ignorance. After Cyprian, we have the judgment of the
whole African Church on the subject. For the Council of Carthage
enjoined that none should be called chief of the priests, or first
bishop, but only bishop of the first See. But any one who will examine
the more ancient records will find that the Roman Pontiff was then
contented with the common appellation of brother. Certainly, as long as
the true and pure form of the Church continued, all these names of pride
on which the Roman See afterwards began to plume itself, were altogether
unheard of; none knew what was meant by the supreme Pontiff, and the
only head of the Church on earth. Had the Roman Bishop presumed to
assume any such title, there were right-hearted men who would
immediately have repressed his folly. Jerome, seeing he was a Roman
presbyter, was not slow to proclaim the dignity of his church, in as far
as fact and the circumstances of the times permitted, and yet we see how
he brings it under due subordination. “If authority is asked, the world
is greater than a city. Why produce to me the custom of one city? Why
vindicate a small number with whom superciliousness has originated
against the laws of the Church? Wherever the bishop be, whether at Rome,
or Eugubium, or Constantinople, or Rhegium, the merit is the same, and
the priesthood the same. The power of riches, or the humbleness of
poverty, do not make a bishop superior or inferior” (Hieron. Ep. ad
Evagr.).

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37"></span>4. The controversy concerning the title
of universal bishop arose at length in the time of Gregory, and was
occasioned by the ambition of John of Constantinople. For he wished to
make himself universal, a thing which no other had ever attempted. In
that controversy, Gregory does not allege that he is deprived of a right
which belonged to him, but he strongly insists that the appellation is
profane, nay, blasphemous, nay the forerunner of Antichrist. “The whole
Church falls from its state, if he who is called universal falls” (Greg.
Lib. 4 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>Ep. 76<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>). Again, “It is very difficult to bear
patiently that one who is our brother and fellow bishop should alone be
called bishop, while all others are despised. But in this pride of his,
what else is intimated but that the days of Antichrist are already near?
For he is imitating him, who, despising the company of angels, attempted
to ascend the pinnacle of greatness” (Lib. 4 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.2"></span>Ep. 76<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.2"></span>).
He elsewhere says to Eulogius of Alexandria and Anastasius of Antioch:
“None of my predecessors ever desired to use this profane term: for if
one patriarch is called universal, it is derogatory to the name of
patriarch in others. But far be it from any Christian mind to wish to
arrogate to itself that which would in any degree, however slight,
impair the honour of his brethren” (Lib. 4 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.3"></span>Ep. 80<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.3"></span>).
“To consent to that impious term is nothing else than to lose the faith”
(Lib. 4 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.4"></span>Ep. 83<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.4"></span>). “What we owe to the preservation of the
unity of the faith is one thing, what we owe to the suppression of pride
is another. I speak with confidence, for every one that calls himself,
or desires to be called, universal priest, is by his pride a forerunner
of Antichrist, because he acts proudly in preferring himself to others”
(Lib. 7 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.5"></span>Ep. 154<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.5"></span>). Thus, again, in a letter to Anastasius
of Antioch, “I said, that he could not have peace with us unless he
corrected the presumption of a superstitious and haughty term which the
first apostate invented; and (to say nothing of the injury to your
honour) if one bishop is called universal, the whole Church goes to ruin
when that universal bishop falls” (Lib. 4 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.6"></span>Ep. 188<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.6"></span>). But when he writes, that this honour was
offered to Leo in the Council of Chalcedon (Lib. 4 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.7"></span>Eph. 76:0, Eph. 80:0<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.7"></span>; Lib. 7 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.8"></span>Ep. 76<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.8"></span>),
he says what has no semblance of truth; nothing of the kind is found
among the acts of that council. And Leo himself, who, in many letters,
impugns the decree which was then made in honour of the See of
Constantinople, undoubtedly would not have omitted this argument, which
was the most plausible of all, if it was true that he himself repudiated
what was given to him. One who, in other respects, was rather too
desirous of honour, would not have omitted what would have been to his
praise. Gregory, therefore, is incorrect in saying, that that title was
conferred on the Roman See by the Council of Chalcedon; not to mention
how ridiculous it is for him to say, that it proceeded from that sacred
council, and yet to term it wicked, profane, nefarious, proud, and
blasphemous, nay, devised by the devil, and promulgated by the herald of
Antichrist. And yet he adds, that his predecessor refused it, lest by
that which was given to one individually, all priests should be deprived
of their due honour. In another place, he says, “None ever wished to be
called by such a name; none arrogated this rash name to himself, lest,
by seizing on the honour of supremacy in the office of the Pontificate,
he might seem to deny it to all his brethren” (Gregor. Lib. 4 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p37.9"></span>Ep. 82<span id="iv.iv.viii-p37.9"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p38"></span>5. I come now to jurisdiction, which
the Roman Pontiff asserts as an incontrovertible proposition that he
possesses over all churches. I am aware of the great disputes which
anciently existed on this subject: for there never was a time when the
Roman See did not aim at authority over other churches. And here it will
not be out of place to investigate the means by which she gradually
attained to some influence. I am not now referring to that unlimited
power which she seized at a comparatively recent period. The
consideration of that we shall defer to its own place. But it is worth
while here briefly to show in what way, and by what means, she formerly
raised herself, so as to arrogate some authority over other churches.
When the churches of the East were troubled and rent by the factions of
the Arians, under the Emperors Constantius and Constans, sons of
Constantine the Great; and Athanasius, the principal defender of the
orthodox faith, had been driven from his see, the calamity obliged him
to come to Rome, in order that by the authority of this see he might
both repress the rage of his enemies, and confirm the orthodox under
their distress. He was honourably received by Julius, who was then
bishop, and engaged those of the West to undertake the defence of his
cause. Therefore, when the orthodox stood greatly in need of external
aid, and perceived that their chief protection lay in the Roman See,
they willingly bestowed upon it all the authority they could. But the
utmost extent of this was, that its communion was held in high
estimation, and it was deemed ignominious to be excommunicated by it.
Dishonest bad men afterwards added much to its authority, for when they
wished to escape lawful tribunals, they betook themselves to Rome as an
asylum. Accordingly, if any presbyter was condemned by his bishop, or if
any bishop was condemned by the synod of his province, he appealed to
Rome. These appeals the Roman bishops received more eagerly than they
ought, because it seemed a species of extraordinary power to interpose
in matters with which their connection was so very remote. Thus, when
Eutyches was condemned by Flavianus, Bishop of Constantinople, he
complained to Leo that the sentence was unjust. He, nothing loth, no
less presumptuously than abruptly, undertook the patronage of a bad
cause, and inveighed bitterly against Flavianus, as having condemned an
innocent man without due investigation: and thus the effect of Leo’s
ambition was, that for some time the impiety of Eutyches was confirmed.
It is certain that in Africa the same thing repeatedly occurred, for
whenever any miscreant had been condemned by his ordinary judge, he fled
to Rome, and brought many calumnious charges against his own people. The
Roman See was always ready to interpose. This dishonesty obliged the
African bishops to decree that no one should carry an appeal beyond sea
under pain of excommunication.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p39"></span>6. Be this as it may, let us consider
what right or authority the Roman See then possessed. Ecclesiastical
power may be reduced to four heads—viz. ordination of bishops, calling
of councils, hearing of appeals (or jurisdiction), inflicting monitory
chastisements or censures. All ancient councils enjoin that bishops
shall be ordained by their own Metropolitans; they nowhere enjoin an
application to the Roman Bishop, except in his own patriarchate.
Gradually, however, it became customary for all Italian bishops to go to
Rome for consecration, with the exception of the Metropolitans, who did
not allow themselves to be thus brought into subjection; but when any
Metropolitan was to be ordained, the Roman Bishop sent one of his
presbyters merely to be present, but not to preside. An example of this
kind is extant in Gregory (Lib. 2 Ep. 68, 70), in the consecration of
Constantius of Milan, after the death of Laurence. I do not, however,
think that this was a very ancient custom. At first, as a mark of
respect and good-will, they sent deputies to one another to witness the
ordination, and attest their communion. What was thus voluntary
afterwards began to be regarded as necessary. However this be, it is
certain that anciently the Roman Bishop had no power of ordaining except
within the bounds of his own patriarchate, that is, as a canon of the
Council of Nice expresses it, in suburban churches. To ordination was
added the sending of a *synodical epistle*, but this implied no
authority. The patriarchs were accustomed, immediately after
consecration, to attest their faith by a formal writing, in which they
declared that they assented to sacred and orthodox councils. Thus, by
rendering an account of their faith, they mutually approved of each
other. If the Roman Bishop had received this confession from others, and
not given it, he would therein have been acknowledged superior; but when
it behoved to give as well as to receive, and to be subject to the
common law, this was a sign of equality, not of lordship. Of this we
have an example in a letter of Gregory to Anastasius and Cyriac of
Constantinople, and in another letter to all the patriarchs together
(Gregor. Lib. 1 Ep. 24, 25; Lib. 6 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>Ep. 169<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p40"></span>7. Next come *admonitions* or
*censures*. These the Roman Bishops anciently employed towards others,
and in their turn received. Irenæus sharply rebuked Victor for rashly
troubling the Church with a pernicious schism, for a matter of no
moment. He submitted without objecting. Holy bishops were then wont to
use the freedom as brethren, of admonishing and rebuking the Roman
Prelate when he happened to err. He in his turn, when the case required,
reminded others of their duty, and reprimanded them for their faults.
For Cyprian, when he exhorts Stephen to admonish the bishops of France,
does not found on his larger power, but on the common right which
priests have in regard to each other (Cyprian. Lib. 3 Ep. 13). I ask if
Stephen had then presided over France, would not Cyprian have said,
“Check them, for they are yours”? but his language is very different.
“The brotherly fellowship which binds us together requires that we
should mutually admonish each other” (Cyprian. ad Pomp. Cont. Epist.
Steph.) And we see also with what severity of expression, a man
otherwise of a mild temper, inveighs against Stephen himself, when he
thinks him chargeable with insolence. Therefore, it does not yet appear
in this respect that the Roman Bishop possessed any jurisdiction over
those who did not belong to his province.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p41"></span>8. In regard to calling of councils, it
was the duty of every Metropolitan to assemble a provincial synod at
stated times. Here the Roman Bishop had no jurisdiction, while the
Emperor alone could summon a general council. Had any of the bishops
attempted this, not only would those out of the province not have obeyed
the call, but a tumult would instantly have arisen. Therefore the
Emperor gave intimation to all alike to attend. Socrates, indeed,
relates that Julius expostulated with the Eastern bishops for not having
called him to the Council of Antioch, seeing it was forbidden by the
canons that anything should be decided without the knowledge of the
Roman Bishop (Tripart. Hist. Lib. 4). But who does not perceive that
this is to be understood of those decrees which bind the whole Church?
At the same time, it is not strange if, in deference both to the
antiquity and largeness of the city, and the dignity of the see, no
universal decree concerning religion should be made in the absence of
the Bishop of Rome, provided he did not refuse to be present. But what
has this to do with the dominion of the whole Church? For we deny not
that he was one of the principal bishops, though we are unwilling to
admit what the Romanists now contend for—viz. that he had power over
all.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p42"></span>9. The fourth remaining species of
power is that of hearing *appeals*. It is evident that the supreme power
belongs to him to whose tribunal appeals are made. Many had repeatedly
appealed to the Roman Pontiff. He also had endeavoured to bring causes
under his cognisance, but he had always been derided whenever he went
beyond his own boundaries. I say nothing of the East and of Greece, but
it is certain, that the bishops of France stoutly resisted when he
seemed to assume authority over them. In Africa, the subject was long
disputed, for in the Council of Milevita, at which Augustine was
present, when those who carried appeals beyond seas were excommunicated,
the Roman Pontiff attempted to obtain an alteration of the decree, and
sent legates to show that the privilege of hearing appeals was given him
by the Council of Nice. The legates produced acts of the council drawn
from the armoury of their church. The African bishops resisted, and
maintained, that credit was not to be given to the Bishop of Rome in his
own cause; accordingly, they said that they would send to
Constantinople, and other cities of Greece, where less suspicious copies
might be had. It was found that nothing like what the Romanists had
pretended was contained in the acts, and thus the decree which abrogated
the supreme jurisdiction of the Roman Pontiff was confirmed. In this
matter was manifested the egregious effrontery of the Roman Pontiff. For
when he had fraudulently substituted the Council of Sardis for that of
Nice, he was disgracefully detected in a palpable falsehood; but still
greater and more impudent was the iniquity of those who added a
fictitious letter to the Council, in which some Bishop of Carthage
condemns the arrogance of Aurelius his predecessor, in promising to
withdraw himself from obedience to the Apostolic See, and making a
surrender of himself and his church, suppliantly prays for pardon. These
are the noble records of antiquity on which the majesty of the Roman See
is founded, while, under the pretext of antiquity, they deal in
falsehoods so puerile, that even a blind man might feel them. “Aurelius
(says he), elated by diabolical audacity and contumacy, was rebellious
against Christ and St Peter, and, accordingly, deserved to be
anathematised.” What does Augustine say? and what the many Fathers who
were present at the Council of Milevita? But what need is there to give
a lengthened refutation of that absurd writing, which not even
Romanists, if they have any modesty left them, can look at without a
deep feeling of shame? Thus Gratian, whether through malice or
ignorance, I know not, after quoting the decree, That those are to be
deprived of communion who carry appeals beyond seas, subjoins the
exception, Unless, perhaps, they have appealed to the Roman See (Grat.
2, Quæst. 4, cap. Placuit.). What can you make of creatures like these,
who are so devoid of common sense that they set down as an exception
from the law the very thing on account of which, as everybody sees, the
law was made? For the Council, in condemning transmarine appeals, simply
prohibits an appeal to Rome. Yet this worthy expounder excepts Rome from
the common law.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p43"></span>10. But (to end the question at once)
the kind of jurisdiction which belonged to the Roman Bishop one
narrative will make manifest. Donatus of Casa Nigra had accused
Cecilianus the Bishop of Carthage. Cecilianus was condemned without a
hearing: for, having ascertained that the bishops had entered into a
conspiracy against him, he refused to appear. The case was brought
before the Emperor Constantine. who, wishing the matter to be ended by
an ecclesiastical decision; gave the cognisance of it to Melciades, the
Roman Bishop, appointing as his colleagues some bishops from Italy,
France, and Spain. If it formed part of the ordinary jurisdiction of the
Roman See to hear appeals in ecclesiastical causes, why did he allow
others to be conjoined with him at the Emperor’s discretion? nay, why
does he undertake to decide more from the command of the Emperor than
his own office? But let us hear what afterwards happened (see August.
<span id="iv.iv.viii-p43.1"></span>Ep. 162<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p43.1"></span>, *et alibi*). Cecilianus prevails. Donatus
of Casa Nigra is thrown in his calumnious action and appeals.
Constantine devolves the decision of the appeal on the Bishop of Arles,
who sits as judge, to give sentence after the Roman Pontiff.55  <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) If the Roman See has supreme power not
subject to appeal, why does Melciades allow himself to be so greatly
insulted as to have the Bishop of Arles preferred to him? And who is the
Emperor that does this? Constantine, who they boast not only made it his
constant study, but employed all the resources of the empire to enlarge
the dignity of that see. We see, therefore, how far in every way the
Roman Pontiff was from that supreme dominion, which he asserts to have
been given him by Christ over all churches, and which he falsely alleges
that he possessed in all ages, with the consent of the whole world.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p45"></span>11. I know how many epistles there are,
how many rescripts and edicts in which there is nothing which the
pontiffs do not ascribe and confidently arrogate to themselves. But all
men of the least intellect and learning know, that the greater part of
them are in themselves so absurd, that it is easy at the first sight to
detect the forge from which they have come. Does any man of sense and
soberness think that Anacletus is the author of that famous
interpretation which is given in Gratian, under the name of
Anacletus—viz. that Cephas is head? (Dist. 22, cap. Sacrosancta.)
Numerous follies of the same kind which Gratian has heaped together
without judgment, the Romanists of the present day employ against us in
defence of their see. The smoke, by which, in the former days of
ignorance, they imposed upon the ignorant, they would still vend in the
present light. I am unwilling to take much trouble in refuting things
which, by their extreme absurdity, plainly refute themselves. I admit
the existence of genuine epistles by ancient Pontiffs, in which they
pronounce magnificent eulogiums on the extent of their see. Such are
some of the epistles of Leo. For as he possessed learning and eloquence,
so he was excessively desirous of glory and dominion; but the true
question is, whether or not, when he thus extolled himself, the churches
gave credit to his testimony? It appears that many were offended with
his ambition, and also resisted his cupidity. He in one place appoints
the Bishop of Thessalonica his vicar throughout Greece and other
neighbouring regions (Leo, <span id="iv.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>Ep.
85<span id="iv.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>), and elsewhere gives the same
office to the Bishop of Arles or some other throughout France (<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p45.2"></span>Ep. 83<span id="iv.iv.viii-p45.2"></span>).
In like manner, he appointed Hormisdas, Bishop of Hispala, his vicar
throughout Spain, but he uniformly makes this reservation, that in
giving such commissions, the ancient privileges of the Metropolitans
were to remain safe and entire. These appointments, therefore, were made
on the condition, that no bishop should be impeded in his ordinary
jurisdiction, no Metropolitan in taking cognisance of appeals, no
provincial council in constituting churches. But what else was this than
to decline all jurisdiction, and to interpose for the purpose of
settling discord only, in so far as the law and nature of ecclesiastical
communion admit?

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p46"></span>12. In the time of Gregory, that
ancient rule was greatly changed. For when the empire was convulsed and
torn, when France and Spain were suffering from the many disasters which
they ever and anon received, when Illyricum was laid waste, Italy
harassed, and Africa almost destroyed by uninterrupted calamities, in
order that, during these civil convulsions, the integrity of the faith
might remain, or at least not entirely perish, the bishops in all
quarters attached themselves more to the Roman Pontiff. In this way, not
only the dignity, but also the power of the see, exceedingly increased,
although I attach no great importance to the means by which this was
accomplished. It is certain, that it was then greater than in former
ages. And yet it was very different from the unbridled dominion of one
ruling others as he pleased. Still the reverence paid to the Roman See
was such, that by its authority it could guide and repress those whom
their own colleagues were unable to keep to their duty; for Gregory is
careful ever and anon to testify that he was not less faithful in
preserving the rights of others, that in insisting that his own should
be preserved. “I do not,” says he, “under the stimulus of ambition,
derogate from any man’s right, but desire to honour my brethren in all
things” (Gregor. Lib. 2 Ep. 68). There is no sentence in his writings in
which he boasts more proudly of the extent of his primacy than the
following: “I know not what bishop is not subject to the Roman See, when
he is discovered in a fault” (Leo. Lib. 2, Epist. 68). However, he
immediately adds, “Where faults do not call for interference, all are
equal according to the rule of humility.” He claims for himself the
right of correcting those who have sinned; if all do their duty, he puts
himself on a footing of equality. He, indeed, claimed this right, and
those who chose assented to it, while those who were not pleased with it
were at liberty to object with impunity; and it is known that the
greater part did so. We may add, that he is then speaking of the primate
of Byzantium, who, when condemned by a provincial synod, repudiated the
whole judgment. His colleagues had informed the Emperor of his
contumacy, and the Emperor had given the cognisance of the matter to
Gregory. We see, therefore, that he does not interfere in any way with
the ordinary jurisdiction, and that, in acting as a subsidiary to
others, he acts entirely by the Emperor’s command.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p47"></span>13. At this time, therefore, the whole
power of the Roman Bishop consisted in opposing stubborn and
ungovernable spirits, where some extraordinary remedy was required, and
this in order to assist other bishops, not to interfere with them.
Therefore, he assumes no more power over others than he elsewhere gives
others over himself, when he confesses that he is ready to be corrected
by all, amended by all (Lib. 2 Ep. 37). So, in another p\]ace, though he
orders the Bishop of Aquileia to come to Rome to plead his cause in a
controversy as to doctrine which had arisen between himself and others,
he thus orders not of his own authority, but in obedience to the
Emperor’s command. Nor does he declare that he himself will be sole
judge, but promises to call a synod, by which the whole business may be
determined. But although the moderation was still such, that the power
of the Roman See had certain limits which it was not permitted to
overstep, and the Roman Bishop himself was not more above than under
others, it appears how much Gregory was dissatisfied with this state of
matters. For he ever and anon complains, that he, under the colour of
the episcopate, was brought back to the world, and was more involved in
earthly cares than when living as a laic; that he, in that honourable
office, was oppressed by the tumult of secular affairs. Elsewhere he
says, “So many burdensome occupations depress me, that my mind cannot at
all rise to things above. I am shaken by the many billows of causes, and
after they are quieted, am afflicted by the tempests of a tumultuous
life, so that I may truly say I am come into the depths of the sea, and
the flood has overwhelmed me.” From this I infer what he would have said
if he had fallen on the present times. If he did not fulfil, he at least
did the duty of a pastor. He declined the administration of civil power,
and acknowledged himself subject, like others, to the Emperor. He did
not interfere with the management of other churches, unless forced by
necessity. And yet he thinks himself in a labyrinth, because he cannot
devote himself entirely to the duty of a bishop.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p48"></span>14. At that time, as has already been
said, the Bishop of Constantinople was disputing with the Bishop of Rome
for the primacy. For after the seat of empire was fixed at
Constantinople, the majesty of the empire seemed to demand that that
church should have the next place of honour to that of Rome. And
certainly, at the outset, nothing had tended more to give the primacy to
Rome, than that it was then the capital of the empire. In Gratian,
(Dist. 80), there is a rescript under the name of Pope Lucinus, to the
effect that the only way in which the cities where Metropolitans and
Primates ought to preside were distinguished, was by means of the civil
government which had previously existed. There is a similar rescript
under the name of Pope Clement, in which he says, that patriarchs were
appointed in those cities which had previously had the first flamens.
Although this is absurd, it was borrowed from what was true. For it is
certain, that in order to make as little change as possible, provinces
were distributed according to the state of matters then existing, and
Primates and Metropolitans were placed in those cities which surpassed
others in honours and power. Accordingly, it was decreed in the Council
of Turin, that the cities of every province which were first in the
civil government should be the first sees of bishops. But if it should
happen that the honour of civil government was transferred from one city
to another, then the right of the metropolis should be at the same time
transferred thither. But Innocent, the Roman Pontiff, seeing that the
ancient dignity of the city had been decaying ever since the seat of
empire had been transferred to Constantinople, and fearing for his see,
enacted a contrary law, in which he denies the necessity of changing
metropolitan churches as imperial metropolitan cities were changed. But
the authority of a synod is justly to be preferred to the opinion of one
individual, and Innocent himself should be suspected in his own cause.
However this be, he by his caveat shows the original rule to have been,
that Metropolitans should be distributed according to the order of the
empire.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p49"></span>15. Agreeably to this ancient custom,
the first Council of Constantinople decreed that the bishop of that city
should take precedence after the Roman Pontiff, because it was a new
Rome. But long after, when a similar decree was made at Chalcedon, Leo
keenly protested (Socrat. Hist. Trop. Lib. 9 cap. 13). And not only did
he permit himself to set at nought what six hundred bishops or more had
decreed, but he even assailed them with bitter reproaches, because they
had derogated from other sees in the honour which they had presumed to
confer on the Church of Constantinople (in Decr. 22, Distinct. cap.
Constantinop.). What, pray, could have incited the man to trouble the
world for so small an affair but mere ambition? He says, that what the
Council of Nice had once sanctioned ought to have been inviolable; as if
the Christian faith was in any danger if one church was preferred to
another; or as if separate Patriarchates had been established on any
other grounds than that of policy. But we know that policy varies with
times, nay, demands various changes. It is therefore futile in Leo to
pretend that the See of Constantinople ought not to receive the honour
which was given to that of Alexandria, by the authority of the Council
of Nice. For it is the dictate of common sense, that the decree was one
of those which might be abrogated, in respect of a change of times. What
shall we say to the fact, that none of the Eastern churches, though
chiefly interested, objected? Proterius, who had been appointed at
Alexandria instead of Dioscorus, was certainly present; other patriarchs
whose honour was impaired were present. It belonged to them to
interfere, not to Leo, whose station remained entire. While all of them
are silent, many assent, and the Roman Bishop alone resists, it is easy
to judge what it is that moves him; just because he foresaw what
happened not long after, that when the glory of ancient Rome declined,
Constantinople, not contented with the second place, would dispute the
primacy with her. And yet his clamour was not so successful as to
prevent the decree of the council from being ratified. Accordingly, his
successors seeing themselves defeated, quietly desisted from that
petulance, and allowed the Bishop of Constantinople to be regarded as
the second Patriarch.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p50"></span>16. But shortly after, John, who, in
the time of Gregory, presided over the church of Constantinople, went so
far as to say that he was universal Patriarch. Here Gregory, that he
might not be wanting to his See in a most excellent cause, constantly
opposed. And certainly it was impossible to tolerate the pride and
madness of John, who wished to make the limits of his bishopric equal to
the limits of the empire. This, which Gregory denies to another, he
claims not for himself, but abominates the title by whomsoever used, as
wicked, impious, and nefarious. Nay, he is offended with Eulogius,
Bishop of Alexandria, who had honoured him with this title, “See (says
he, Lib. 8 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p50.1"></span>Ep. 30<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p50.1"></span>) in the address of the letter which you
have directed to me, though I prohibited you, you have taken care to
write a word of proud signification by calling me Universa1 Pope. What I
ask is, that your holiness do not go farther, because, whatever is given
to another more than reason demands is withdrawn from you. I do not
regard that as honour by which I see that the honour of my brethren is
diminished. For my honour is the universal honour of the Church, and
entire prerogative of my brethren. If your holiness calls me universal
Pope, it denies itself to be this whole which it acknowledges me to be.”
The cause of Gregory was indeed good and honourable; but John, aided by
the favour of the Emperor Maurice, could not be dissuaded from his
purpose. Cyriac also, his successor, never allowed himself to be spoken
to on the subject.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p51"></span>17. At length Phocas, who had slain
Maurice, and usurped his place (more friendly to the Romans, for what
reason I know not, or rather because he had been crowned king there
without opposition), conceded to Boniface III. what Gregory by no means
demanded—viz. that Rome should be the head of all the churches. In this
way the controversy was ended. And yet this kindness of the Emperor to
the Romans would not have been of very much avail had not other
circumstances occurred. For shortly after Greece and all Asia were cut
off from his communion, while all the reverence which he received from
France was obedience only in so far as she pleased. She was brought into
subjection for the first time when Pepin got possession of the throne.
For Zachary, the Roman Pontiff, having aided him in his perfidy and
robbery when he expelled the lawful sovereign, and seized upon the
kingdom, which lay exposed as a kind of prey, was rewarded by having the
jurisdiction of the Roman See established over the churches of France.
In the same way as robbers are wont to divide and share the common
spoil, those two worthies arranged that Pepin should have the worldly
and civil power by spoiling the true prince, while Zachary should become
the head of all the bishops, and have the spiritual power. This, though
weak at the first (as usually happens with new power), was afterwards
confirmed by the authority of Charlemagne for a very similar cause. For
he too was under obligation to the Roman Pontiff, to whose zeal he was
indebted for the honour of empire. Though there is reason to believe
that the churches had previously been greatly altered, it is certain
that the ancient form of the Church was then only completely effaced in
Gaul and Germany. There are still extant among the archives of the
Parliament of Paris short commentaries on those times, which, in
treating of ecclesiastical affairs, make mention of the compacts both of
Pepin and Charlemagne with the Roman Pontiff. Hence we may infer that
the ancient state of matters was then changed.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p52"></span>18. From that time, while everywhere
matters were becoming daily worse, the tyranny of the Roman Bishop was
established, and ever and anon increased, and this partly by the
ignorance, partly by the sluggishness, of the bishops. For while he was
arrogating everything to himself, and proceeding more and more to exalt
himself without measure, contrary to law and right, the bishops did not
exert themselves so zealously as they ought in curbing his pretensions.
And though they had not been deficient in spirit, they were devoid of
true doctrine and experience, so that they were by no means fit for so
important an effort. Accordingly, we see how great and monstrous was the
profanation of all sacred things, and the dissipation of the whole
ecclesiastical order at Rome, in the age of Bernard. He complains (Lib.
1 de Consider. ad Eugen.) that the ambitious, avaricious, demoniacal,
sacrilegious, fornicators, incestuous, and similar miscreants, flocked
from all quarters of the world to Rome, that by apostolic authority they
might acquire or retain ecclesiastical honours: that fraud,
circumvention, and violence, prevailed. The mode of judging causes then
in use he describes as execrable, as disgraceful, not only to the
Church, but the bar. He exclaims that the Church is filled with the
ambitious: that not one is more afraid to perpetrate crimes than robbers
in their den when they share the spoils of the traveller. “Few (say he)
look to the mouth of the legislator, but all to his hands. Not without
cause, however: for their hands do the whole business of the Pope. What
kind of thing is it when those are bought by the spoils of the Church,
who say to you, Well done, well done? The life of the poor is sown in
the highways of the rich: silver glitters in the mire: they run together
from all sides: it is not the poorer that takes it up, but the stronger,
or, perhaps, he who runs fastest. That custom, however, or rather that
death, comes not of you: I wish it would end in you. While these things
are going on, you, a pastor, come forth robed in much costly clothing.
If I might presume to say it, this is more the pasture of demons than of
sheep. Peter, forsooth, acted thus; Paul sported thus. Your court has
been more accustomed to receive good men than to make them. The bad do
not gain much there, but the good degenerate.” Then when he describes
the abuses of appeals, no pious man can read them without being
horrified. At length, speaking of the unbridled cupidity of the Roman
See in usurping jurisdiction, he thus concludes (Lib. 3 de Concil.), “I
express the murmur and common complaint of the churches. Their cry is,
that they are maimed and dismembered. There are none, or very few, who
do not lament or fear that plague. Do you ask what plague? Abbots are
encroached upon by bishops, bishops by archbishops, &c. It is strange if
this can be excused. By thus acting, you prove that you have the fulness
of power, but not the fulness of righteousness. You do this because you
are able; but whether you also ought to do it is the question. You are
appointed to preserve, not to envy, the honour and rank of each.” I have
thought it proper to quote these few passages out of many, partly that
my readers may see how grievously the Church had then fallen, partly,
too, that they may see with what grief and lamentation all pious men
beheld this calamity.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p53"></span>19. But though we were to concede to
the Roman Pontiff of the present day the eminence and extent of
jurisdiction which his see had in the middle ages, as in the time of Leo
and Gregory, what would this be to the existing Papacy? I am not now
speaking of worldly dominion, or of civil power, which will afterwards
be explained in their own place (chap. 11 sec. 8-14); but what
resemblance is there between the spiritual government of which they
boast and the state of those times? The only definition which they give
of the Pope is, that he is the supreme head of the Church on earth, and
the universal bishop of the whole globe. The Pontiffs themselves, when
they speak of their authority, declare with great superciliousness, that
the power of commanding belongs to them,—that the necessity of obedience
remains with others,—that all their decrees are to be regarded as
confirmed by the divine voice of Peter,—that provincial synods, from not
having the presence of the Pope, are deficient in authority,—that they
can ordain the clergy of any church,—and can summon to their See any who
have been ordained elsewhere. Innumerable things of this kind are
contained in the farrago of Gratian, which I do not mention, that I may
not be tedious to my readers. The whole comes to this, that to the Roman
Pontiff belongs the supreme cognisance of all ecclesiastical causes,
whether in determining and defining doctrines, or in enacting laws, or
in appointing discipline, or in giving sentences. It were also tedious
and superfluous to review the privileges which they assume to themselves
in what they call reservations. But the most intolerable of all things
is their leaving no judicial authority in the world to restrain and curb
them when they licentiously abuse their immense power. “No man (say
they55  <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) ) is entitled to alter
the judgment of this See, on account of the primacy of the Roman
Church.” Again, “The judge shall not be judged either by the emperor, or
by kings, or by the clergy, or by the people.” It is surely imperious
enough for one man to appoint himself the judge of all, while he will
not submit to the judgment of any. But what if he tyrannises over the
people of God? if he dissipates and lays waste the kingdom of Christ? if
he troubles the whole Church? if he convert the pastoral office into
robbery? Nay, though he should be the most abandoned of all, he insists
that none can call him to account. The language of Pontiffs is, “God has
been pleased to terminate the causes of other men by men, but the
Prelate of this See he has reserved unquestioned for his own judgment.”
Again, “The deeds of subjects are judged by us; ours by God only.”

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p55"></span>20. And in order that edicts of this
kind might have more weight, they falsely substituted the names of
ancient Pontiffs, as if matters had been so constituted from the
beginning, while it is absolutely certain that whatever attributes more
to the Pontiff than we have stated to have been given to him by ancient
councils, is new and of recent fabrication. Nay, they have carried their
effrontery so far as to publish a rescript under the name of Anastasius,
the Patriarch of Constantinople, in which he testifies that it was
appointed by ancient regulations, that nothing should be done in the
remotest provinces without being previously referred to the Roman See.
Besides its extreme folly, who can believe it credible that such an
eulogium on the Roman See proceeded from an opponent and rival of its
honour and dignity? But doubtless it was necessary that those
Antichrists should proceed to such a degree of madness and blindness,
that their iniquity might be manifest to all men of sound mind who will
only open their eyes. The decretal epistles collected by Gregory IX.,
also the Clementines and Extravagants of Martin, breathe still more
plainly, and in more bombastic terms bespeak this boundless ferocity and
tyranny, as it were, of barbarian kings. But these are the oracles out
of which the Romanists would have their Papacy to be judged. Hence have
sprung those famous axioms which have the force of oracles throughout
the Papacy in the present day—viz. that the Pope cannot err; that the
Pope is superior to councils; that the Pope is the universal bishop of
all churches, and the chief Head of the Church on earth. I say nothing
of the still greater absurdities which are babbled by the foolish
canonists in their schools, absurdities, however, which Roman
theologians not only assent to, but even applaud in flattery of their
idol.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p56"></span>21. I will not treat with them on the
strictest terms. In opposition to their great insolence, some would
quote the language which Cyprian used to the bishops in the council over
which he presided: “None of us styles himself bishop of bishops, or
forces his colleagues to the necessity of obeying by the tyranny of
terror.” Some might object what was long after decreed at Carthage, “Let
no one be called the prince of priests or first bishop;” and might
gather many proofs from history, and canons from councils, and many
passages from ancient writers, which bring the Roman Pontiff into due
order. But these I omit, that I may not seem to press too hard upon
them. However, let these worthy defenders of the Roman See tell me with
what face they can defend the title of universal bishop, while they see
it so often anathematised by Gregory. If effect is to be given to his
testimony, then they, by making their Pontiff universal, declare him to
be Antichrist. The name of *head* was not more approved. For Gregory
thus speaks: “Peter was the chief member in the body, John, Andrew, and
James, the heads of particular communities. All, however, are under one
head members of the Church: nay, the saints before the law, the saints
under the law, the saints under grace, all perfecting the body of the
Lord, are constituted members: none of them ever wished to be styled
universal” (Gregor. Lib. 4 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p56.1"></span>Ep.
83<span id="iv.iv.viii-p56.1"></span>). When the Pontiff arrogates to
himself the power of ordering, he little accords with what Gregory
elsewhere says. For Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria, having said that he
had received an order from him, he replies in this manner: “This word
*order* I beg you to take out of my hearing, for I know who I am, and
who you are: in station you are my brethren, in character my fathers. I
therefore did not order, but took care to suggest what seemed useful”
(Gregor. Lib. 7 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p56.2"></span>Ep. 80<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p56.2"></span>). When the Pope extends his jurisdiction
without limit, he does great and atrocious injustice not only to other
bishops, but to each single church, tearing and dismembering them, that
he may build his see upon their ruins. When he exempts himself from all
tribunals, and wishes to reign in the manner of a tyrant, holding his
own caprice to be his only law, the thing is too insulting, and too
foreign to ecclesiastical rule, to be on any account submitted to. It is
altogether abhorrent, not only from pious feeling, but also from common
sense.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p57"></span>22. But that I may not be forced to
discuss and follow out each point singly, I again appeal to those who,
in the present day, would be thought the best and most faithful
defenders of the Roman See, whether they are not ashamed to defend the
existing state of the Papacy, which is clearly a hundred times more
corrupt than in the days of Gregory and Bernard, though even then these
holy men were so much displeased with it. Gregory everywhere complains
(Lib. 1 Ep. 5; *item*, <span id="iv.iv.viii-p57.1"></span>Eph. 7:0, Eph.
25:0<span id="iv.iv.viii-p57.1"></span>, &c.) that he was distracted
above measure by foreign occupations: that under colour of the
episcopate he was taken back to the world, being subject to more worldly
cares than he remembered to have ever had when a laic; that he was so
oppressed by the trouble of secular affairs, as to be unable to raise
his mind to things above; that he was so tossed by the many billows of
causes, and afflicted by the tempests of a tumultuous life, that he
might well say, “I am come into the depths of the sea.” It is certain,
that amid these worldly occupations, he could teach the people in
sermons, admonish in private, and correct those who required it; order
the Church, give counsel to his colleagues, and exhort them to their
duty. Moreover, some time was left for writing, and yet he deplores it
as his calamity, that he was plunged into the very deepest sea. If the
administration at that time was a sea, what shall we say of the present
Papacy? For what resemblance is there between the periods? Now there are
no sermons, no care for discipline, no zeal for churches, no spiritual
function; nothing, in short, but the world. And yet this labyrinth is
lauded as if nothing could be found better ordered and arranged. What
complaints also does Bernard pour forth, what groans does he utter, when
he beholds the vices of his own age? What then would he have done on
beholding this iron, or, if possible, worse than iron, age of ours? How
dishonest, therefore, not only obstinately to defend as sacred and
divine what all the saints have always with one mouth disapproved, but
to abuse their testimony in favour of the Papacy, which, it is evident,
was altogether unknown to them? Although I admit, in respect to the time
of Bernard, that all things were so corrupt as to make it not unlike our
own. But it betrays a want of all sense of shame to seek any excuse from
that middle period—namely, from that of Leo, Gregory, and the like—for
it is just as if one were to vindicate the monarchy of the Cæsars by
lauding the ancient state of the Roman empire; in other words, were to
borrow the praises of liberty in order to eulogise tyranny.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p58"></span>23. Lastly, Although all these things
were granted, an entirely new question arises, when we deny that there
is at Rome a Church in which privileges of this nature can reside; when
we deny that there is a bishop to sustain the dignity of these
privileges. Assume, therefore, that all these things are true (though we
have already extorted the contrary from them), that Peter was by the
words of Christ constituted head of the universal Church, and that the
honour thus conferred upon him he deposited in the Roman See, that this
was sanctioned by the authority of the ancient Church, and confirmed by
long use; that supreme power was always with one consent devolved by all
on the Roman Pontiff, that while he was the judge of all causes and all
men, he was subject to the judgment of none. Let even more be conceded
to them if they will, I answer, in one word, that none of these things
avail if there be not a Church and a Bishop at Rome. They must of
necessity concede to me that she is not a mother of churches who is not
herself a church, that he cannot be the chief of bishops who is not
himself a bishop. Would they then have the Apostolic See at Rome? Let
them give me a true and lawful apostleship. Would they have a supreme
pontiff, let them give me a bishop. But how? Where will they show me any
semblance of a church? They, no doubt, talk of one, and have it ever in
their mouths. But surely the Church is recognised by certain marks, and
bishopric is the name of an office. I am not now speaking of the people
but of the government, which ought perpetually to be conspicuous in the
Church. Where, then, is a ministry such as the institution of Christ
requires? Let us remember what was formerly said of the duty of
presbyters and bishops. If we bring the office of cardinals to that
test, we will acknowledge that they are nothing less than presbyters.
But I should like to know what one quality of a bishop the Pope himself
has? The first point in the office of a bishop is to instruct the people
in the word of God; the second and next to it is to administer the
sacraments; the third is to admonish and exhort, to correct those who
are in fault, and restrain the people by holy discipline. Which of these
things does he do? Nay, which of these things does he pretend to do? Let
them say, then, on what ground they will have him to be regarded as a
bishop, who does not even in semblance touch any part of the duty with
his little finger.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p59"></span>24. It is not with a bishop as with a
king; the latter, though he does not execute the proper duty of a king,
nevertheless retains the title and the honour; but in deciding on a
bishop respect is had to the command of Christ, to which effect ought
always to be given in the Church. Let the Romanists then untie this
knot. I deny that their pontiff is the prince of bishops, seeing he is
no bishop. This allegation of mine they must prove to be false if they
would succeed in theirs. What then do I maintain? That he has nothing
proper to a bishop, but is in all things the opposite of a bishop. But
with what shall I here begin? With doctrine or with morals? What shall I
say, or what shall I pass in silence, or where shall I end? This I
maintain: while in the present day the world is so inundated with
perverse and impious doctrines, so full of all kinds of superstition, so
blinded by error and sunk in idolatry, there is not one of them which
has not emanated from the Papacy, or at least been confirmed by it. Nor
is there any other reason why the pontiffs are so enraged against the
reviving doctrine of the Gospel, why they stretch every nerve to oppress
it, and urge all kings and princes to cruelty, than just that they see
their whole dominion tottering and falling to pieces the moment the
Gospel of Christ prevails. Leo was cruel and Clement sanguinary, Paul is
truculent. But in assailing the truth, it is not so much natural temper
that impels them as the conviction that they have no other method of
maintaining their power. Therefore, seeing they cannot be safe unless
they put Christ to flight, they labour in this cause as if they were
fighting for their altars and hearths, for their own lives and those of
their adherents. What then? Shall we recognise the Apostolic See where
we see nothing but horrible apostacy? Shall he be the vicar of Christ
who, by his furious efforts in persecuting the Gospel, plainly declares
himself to be Antichrist? Shall he be the successor of Peter who goes
about with fire and sword demolishing everything that Peter built? Shall
he be the Head of the Church who, after dissevering the Church from
Christ, her only true Head, tears and lacerates her members? Rome,
indeed, was once the mother of all the churches, but since she began to
be the seat of Antichrist she ceased to be what she was.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p60"></span>25. To some we seem slanderous and
petulant, when we call the Roman Pontiff Antichrist. But those who think
so perceive not that they are bringing a charge of intemperance against
Paul, after whom we speak, nay, in whose very words we speak. But lest
any one object that Paul’s words have a different meaning, and are
wrested by us against the Roman Pontiff, I wil1 briefly show that they
can only be understood of the Papacy. Paul says that Antichrist would
sit in the temple of God (<span id="iv.iv.viii-p60.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p60.1"></span>). In another passage, the Spirit,
portraying him in the person of Antiochus, says that his reign would be
with great swelling words of vanity (<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p60.2"></span>[Dan.
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p60.2"></span>). Hence we infer that his tyranny is more
over souls than bodies, a tyranny set up in opposition to the spiritual
kingdom of Christ. Then his nature is such, that he abolishes not the
name either of Christ or the Church, but rather uses the name of Christ
as a pretext, and lurks under the name of Church as under a mask. But
though all the heresies and schisms which have existed from the
beginning belong to the kingdom of Antichrist, yet when Paul foretells
that defection will come, he by the description intimates that that seat
of abomination will be erected, when a kind of universal defection comes
upon the Church, though many members of the Church scattered up and down
should continue in the true unity of the faith. But when he adds, that
in his own time, the mystery of iniquity, which was afterwards to be
openly manifested, had begun to work in secret, we thereby understand
that this calamity was neither to be introduced by one man, nor to
terminate in one man (see Calv. in <span id="iv.iv.viii-p60.3"></span>[2
Thess. 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p60.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.viii-p60.4"></span>[Dan.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p60.4"></span>). Moreover, when the mark by which he
distinguishes Antichrist is, that he would rob God of his honour and
take it to himself, he gives the leading feature which we ought to
follow in searching out Antichrist; especially when pride of this
description proceeds to the open devastation of the Church. Seeing then
it is certain that the Roman Pontiff has impudently transferred to
himself the most peculiar properties of God and Christ, there cannot be
a doubt that he is the leader and standard-bearer of an impious and
abominable kingdom.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p61"></span>26. Let the Romanists now go and oppose
us with antiquity; as if, amid such a complete change in every respect,
the honour of the See can continue where there is no See. Eusebius says
that God, to make way for his vengeance, transferred the Church which
was at Jerusalem to Pella (Euseb. Lib. 3 cap. 5). What we are told was
once done may have been done repeatedly. Hence it is too absurd and
ridiculous so to fix the honour of the primacy to a particular spot, so
that he who is in fact the most inveterate enemy of Christ, the chief
adversary of the Gospel, the greatest devastator and waster of the
Church, the most cruel slayer and murderer of the saints, should be,
nevertheless, regarded as the vicegerent of Christ, the successor of
Peter, the first priest of the Church, merely because he occupies what
was formerly the first of all sees. I do not say how great the
difference is between the chancery of the Pope and well-regulated order
in the Church; although this one fact might well set the question at
rest. For no man of sound mind will include the episcopate in lead and
bulls, much less in that administration of captions and
circumscriptions, in which the spiritual government of the Pope is
supposed to consist. It has therefore been elegantly said, that that
vaunted Roman Church was long ago converted into a temporal court, the
only thing which is now seen at Rome. I am not here speaking of the
vices of individuals, but demonstrating that the Papacy itself is
diametrically opposed to the ecclesiastical system.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p62"></span>27. But if we come to individuals, it
is well known what kind of vicars of Christ we shall find. No doubt,
Julius and Leo, and Clement and Paul, will be pillars of the Christian
faith, the first interpreters of religion, though they knew nothing more
of Christ than they had learned in the school of Lucian. But why give
the names of three or four pontiffs? as if there were any doubt as to
the kind of religion professed by pontiffs, with their College of
Cardinals, and professors, in the present day. The first head of the
secret theology which is in vogue among them is, that there is no God.
Another, that whatever things have been written and are taught
concerning Christ are lies and imposture.55  <span
id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) A third, that the doctrine of a future
life and final resurrection is a mere fable. All do not think, few speak
thus; I confess it. Yet it is long since this began to be the ordinary
religion of pontiffs; and though the thing is notorious to all who know
Rome, Roman theologians cease not to boast that by special privilege our
Saviour has provided that the Pope cannot err, because it was said to
Peter, “I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not”(Luke 22:32).
What, pray, do they gain by their effrontery, but to let the whole world
understand that they have reached the extreme of wickedness, so as
neither to fear God nor regard man?

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p64"></span>28. But let us suppose that the
iniquity of these pontiffs whom I have mentioned is not known, as they
have not published it either in sermons or writings, but betrayed it
only at table or in their chamber, or at least within the walls of their
court. But if they would have the privilege which they claim to be
confirmed, they must expunge from their list of pontiffs John XXII.,55
 <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) who publicly maintained that
the soul is mortal, and perishes with the body till the day of
resurrection. And to show you that the whole See with its chief props
then utterly fell, none of the Cardinals opposed his madness, only the
Faculty of Paris urged the king to insist on a recantation. The king
interdicted his subjects from communion with him, unless he would
immediately recant, and published his interdict in the usual way by a
herald. Thus necessitated, he abjured his error. This example relieves
me from the necessity of disputing further with my opponents, when they
say that the Roman See and its pontiffs cannot err in the faith, from
its being said to Peter, “I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
not.” Certainly by this shameful lapse he fell from the faith, and
became a noted proof to posterity, that all are not Peters who succeed
Peter in the episcopate; although the thing is too childish in itself to
need an answer: for if they insist on applying everything that was said
to Peter to the successors of Peter, it will follow, that they are all
Satans, because our Lord once said to Peter, “Get thee behind me, Satan,
thou art an offence unto me.” It is as easy for us to retort the latter
saying as for them to adduce the former.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p66"></span>29. But I have no pleasure in this
absurd mode of disputation, and therefore return to the point from which
I digressed. To fix down Christ and the Holy Spirit and the Church to a
particular spot, so that every one who presides in it, should he be a
devil, must still be deemed vicegerent of Christ, and the head of the
Church, because that spot was formerly the See of Peter, is not only
impious and insulting to Christ, but absurd and contrary to common
sense. For a long period, the Roman Pontiffs have either been altogether
devoid of religion, or been its greatest enemies. The see which they
occupy, therefore, no more makes them the vicars of Christ, than it
makes an idol to become God, when it is placed in the temple of God
(<span id="iv.iv.viii-p66.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p66.1"></span>). Then, if manners be inquired into, let
the Popes answer for themselves, what there is in them that can make
them be recognised for bishops. First, the mode of life at Rome, while
they not only connive and are silent, but also tacitly approve, is
altogether unworthy of bishops, whose duty it is to curb the licence of
the people by the strictness of discipline. But I will not be so rigid
with them as to charge them with the faults of others. But when they
with their household, with almost the whole College of Cardinals, and
the whole body of their clergy, are so devoted to wickedness, obscenity,
uncleanness, iniquity, and crime of every description, that they
resemble monsters more than men, they herein betray that they are
nothing less than bishops. They need not fear that I will make a farther
disclosure of their turpitude. For it is painful to wade through such
filthy mire, and I must spare modest ears. But I think I have amply
demonstrated what I proposed—viz. that though Rome was formerly the
first of churches, she deserves not in the present day to be regarded as
one of her minutest members.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p67"></span>30. In regard to those whom they call
Cardinals, I know not how it happened that they rose so suddenly to such
a height. In the age of Gregory, the name was applied to bishops only
(Gregor. Lib. 2 Ep. 15, 77, 79; <span id="iv.iv.viii-p67.1"></span>[Eph.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#000), Eph. 25:0<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p67.1"></span>). For whenever he makes mention of
cardinals, he assigns them not only to the Roman Church, but to every
other church, so that, in short, *a Cardinal priest* is nothing else
than a bishop. I do not find the name among the writers of a former age.
I see, however, that they were inferior to bishops, whom they now far
surpass. There is a well-known passage in Augustine: “Although, in
regard to terms of honour which custom has fixed in the Church, the
office of bishop is greater than that of presbyter, yet in many things,
Augustine is inferior to Jerome” (August. ad Hieron. <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p67.2"></span>Ep. 19<span id="iv.iv.viii-p67.2"></span>).
Here, certainly, he is not distinguishing a presbyter of the Roman
Church from other presbyters, but placing all of them alike after
bishops. And so strictly was this observed, that at the Council of
Carthage, when two legates of the Roman See were present, one a bishop,
and the other a presbyter, the latter was put in the lowest place. But
not to dwell too much on ancient times, we have account of a Council
held at Rome, under Gregory, at which the presbyters sit in the lowest
place, and subscribe by themselves, while deacons do not subscribe at
all. And, indeed, they had no office at that time, unless to be present
under the bishop, and assist him in the administration of word and
sacraments. So much is their lot now changed, that they have become
associates of kings and Cæsars. And there can be no doubt that they have
grown gradually with their head, until they reached their present
pinnacle of dignity. This much it seemed proper to say in passing, that
my readers may understand how very widely the Roman See, as it now
exists, differs from the ancient See, under which it endeavours to cloak
and defend itself. But whatever they were formerly, as they have no true
and legitimate office in the Church, they only retain a colour and empty
mask; nay, as they are in all respects the opposite of true ministers,
the thing which Gregory so often writes must, of necessity, have
befallen them. His words are, “Weeping, I say, groaning, I declare it;
when the sacerdotal order has fallen within, it cannot long stand
without” (Gregor. Lib. 4 <span id="iv.iv.viii-p67.3"></span>Eph. 55:0,
Eph. 56:0<span id="iv.iv.viii-p67.3"></span>; Lib. 5 <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p67.4"></span>Ep. 7<span id="iv.iv.viii-p67.4"></span>).
Nay, rather what Malachi says of such persons must be fulfilled in them:
“Ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the
law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts.
Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the
people” (<span id="iv.iv.viii-p67.5"></span>[Mal.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p67.5"></span>). I now leave all the pious to judge what
the supreme pinnacle of the Roman hierarchy must be, to which the
Papists, with nefarious effrontery, hesitate not to subject the word of
God itself, that word which should be venerable and holy in earth and
heaven, to men and angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](inst087.htm#fr_564) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p44"></span>55 555 French, “Voila l’Archeveque
d’Arles assis pour retracter; si bon lui semble la sentence de l’Eveque
Romain. au moins pour juger par dessus lui.”—Here is the Archbishop of
Arles seated to recall, if he thinks fit, the sentence of the Bishop of
Rome, or at least to judge as his superior.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](inst087.htm#fr_565) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p54"></span>56 556 Nicolas, whose view is given in
Decretis 17, Quæst. 3, cap. Nemini; Innocent IX. Quæst. 3, cap. Nemo.
Symmachi 9. Quæst. 3, cap. Aliorum. Antherius, ibidem, cap. Facta.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](inst087.htm#fr_566) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p63"></span>57 557 Erasmus, in a letter to
Steuchus, says, “It may be that in Germany there are persons who do not
refrain from blasphemy against God, but the severest punishment is
inflicted on them. But at Rome, I have with my own ears heard men
belching out horrid blasphemies against Christ and his apostles, in the
presence of many besides myself, and doing it with impunity!”

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](inst087.htm#fr_567) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p65"></span>58 558 John Gerson, who lived at the
time, attests that John XXII. openly denied the immortality of the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 8. - OF THE POWER OF THE CHURCH IN ARTICLES OF FAITH. THE
UNBRIDLED LICENCE OF THE PAPAL CHURCH IN DESTROYING PURITY OF
DOCTRINE.](inst088)
