[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst096)  [Next](inst098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xviii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.xviii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 17.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p1"></span>OF THE LORD’S SUPPER, AND THE BENEFITS
CONFERRED BY IT.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p2"></span>This chapter is divided into two
principal heads.—I. The first part shows what it is that God exhibits in
the Holy Supper, sec. 1-4; and then in what way and how far it becomes
ours, sec. 5-11. II. The second part is chiefly occupied with a
refutation of the errors which superstition has introduced in regard to
the Lord’s Supper. And, first, Transubstantiation is refuted, sec.
12-15. Next, Consubstantiation and Ubiquity, sec. 16-19. Thirdly, It is
shown that the institution itself is opposed to those hyperbolical
doctors, sec. 20-25. Fourth, The orthodox view is confirmed by other
arguments derived from Scripture, sec. 26-27. Fifth, The authority of
the Fathers is shown to support the same view. Sixth, The presence for
which opponents contend is overthrown, and another presence established,
sec. 29-32. Seventh, What the nature of our communion ought to be, sec.
33, 34. Eighth, The adoration introduced by opponents refuted. For what
end the Lord’s Supper was instituted, sec. 35-39. Lastly, The
examination of communicants is considered, sec. 40-42. Of the external
rites to be observed. Of frequent communion in both kinds. Objections
refuted, sec. 43-50.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p4"></span>1. Why the Holy Supper was instituted
by Christ. The knowledge of the sacrament, how necessary. The signs
used. Why there are no others appointed.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p5"></span>2. The manifold uses and advantages of
this sacrament to the pious.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p6"></span>3. The Lord’s Supper exhibits the great
blessings of redemption, and even Christ himself. This even evident from
the words of the institution. The thing specially to be considered in
them. Congruity of the signs and the things signified.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p7"></span>4. The chief parts of this sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p8"></span>5. How Christ, the Bread of Life, is to
be received by us. Two faults to be avoided. The receiving of it must
bear reference both to faith and the effect of faith. What meant by
eating Christ. In what sense Christ the bread of life.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p9"></span>6. This mode of eating confirmed by the
authority of Augustine and Chrysostom.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p10"></span>7. It is not sufficient, while
omitting all mention of flesh and blood, to recognise this communion
merely as spiritual. It is impossible fully to comprehend it in the
present life.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p11"></span>8. In explanation of it, it may be
observed,—I. There is no life at all save in Christ. II. Christ has life
in a twofold sense; first, in himself, as he is God; and, secondly, by
transfusing it into the flesh which he assumed, that he might thereby
communicate life to us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p12"></span>9. This confirmed from Cyril, and by a
familiar example. How the flesh of Christ gives life, and what the
nature of our communion with Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p13"></span>10. No distance of place can impede
it. In the Supper it is not presented as an empty symbol, but, as the
apostle testifies, we receive the reality. Objection, that the
expression is figurative. Answer. A sure rule with regard to the
sacraments.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p14"></span>11. Conclusion of the first part of
the chapter. The sacrament of the Supper consists of two parts—viz.
corporeal signs, and spiritual truth. These comprehend the meaning,
matter, and effect. Christ truly exhibited to us by symbols.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p15"></span>12. Second part of the chapter,
reduced to nine heads. The transubstantiation of the Papists considered
and refuted. Its origin and absurdity. Why it should be exploded.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p16"></span>13. Transubstantiation as feigned by
the Schoolmen. Refutation. The many superstitions introduced by their
error.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p17"></span>14. The fiction of transubstantiation
why invented contrary to Scripture, and the consent of antiquity. The
term of transubstantiation never used in the early Church. Objection.
Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p18"></span>15. The error of transubstantiation
favoured by the consecration, which was a kind of magical incantation.
The bread is not a sacrament to itself, but to those who receive it. The
changing of the rod of Moses into a serpent gives no countenance to
Popish transubstantiation. No resemblance between it and the words of
institution in the Supper. Objection. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p19"></span>16. Refutation of consubstantiation;
whence the idea of ubiquity.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p20"></span>17. This ubiquity confounds the
natures of Christ. Subtleties answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p21"></span>18. Absurdities connected with
consubstantiation. Candid exposition of the orthodox view.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p22"></span>19. The nature of the true presence of
Christ in the Supper. The true and substantial communion of the body and
blood of the Lord. This orthodox view assailed by turbulent spirits.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p23"></span>20. This view vindicated from their
calumnies. The words of the institution explained in opposition to the
glosses of transubstantiators and consubstantiators. Their subterfuges
and absurd blasphemies.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p24"></span>21. Why the name of the thing
signified is given to the sacramental symbols. This illustrated by
passages of Scripture; also by a passage of Augustine.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p25"></span>22. Refutation of an objection founded
on the words, *This is*. Objection answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p26"></span>23. Other objections answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p27"></span>24. Other objections answered. No
question here as to the omnipotence of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p28"></span>25. Other objections answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p29"></span>26. The orthodox view further
confirmed. I. By a consideration of the reality of Christ’s body. II.
From our Saviour’s declaration that he would always be in the world.
This confirmed by the exposition of Augustine.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p30"></span>27. Refutation of the sophisms of the
Ubiquitists. The evasion of visible and invisible presence refuted.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p31"></span>28. The authority of Fathers not in
favour of these errors as to Christ’s presence. Augustine opposed to
them.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p32"></span>29. Refutation of the invisible
presence maintained by opponents. Refutation from Tertullian, from a
saying of Christ after his resurrection, from the definition of a true
body, and from different passages of Scripture.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p33"></span>30. Ubiquity refuted by various
arguments.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p34"></span>31. The imaginary presence of
Transubstantiators, Consubstantiators, and Ubiquitists, contrasted with
the orthodox doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p35"></span>32. The nature of our Saviour’s true
presence explained. The mode of it incomprehensible.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p36"></span>33. Our communion in the blood and
flesh of Christ. Spiritual not oral, and yet real. Erroneous view of the
Schoolmen.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p37"></span>34. This view not favoured by
Augustine. How the wicked eat the body of Christ. Cyril’s sentiments as
to the eating of the body of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p38"></span>35. Absurdity of the adoration of
sacramental symbols.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p39"></span>36. This adoration condemned. I. By
Christ himself. II. By the Council of Nice. III. By ancient custom. IV.
By Scripture. This adoration is mere idolatry.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p40"></span>37. This adoration inconsistent with
the nature and institution of the sacrament. Ends for which the
sacrament was instituted.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p41"></span>38. Ends for which the sacrament was
instituted.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p42"></span>39. True nature of the sacrament,
contrasted with the Popish observance of it.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p43"></span>40. Nature of an unworthy approach to
the Lord’s table. The great danger of it. The proper remedy in serious
self-examination.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p44"></span>41. The spurious examination
introduced by the Papists. Refutation.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p45"></span>42. The nature of Christian
examination.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p46"></span>43. External rites in the
administration of the Supper. Many of them indifferent.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p47"></span>44. Duty of frequent communion. This
proved by the practice of the Church in its purer state, and by the
canons of the early bishops.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p48"></span>45. Frequent communion in the time of
Augustine. The neglect of it censured by Chrysostom.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p49"></span>46. The Popish injunction to
communicate once a-year an execrable invention.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p50"></span>47. Communion in one kind proved to be
an invention of Satan.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p51"></span>48. Subterfuges of the Papists
refuted.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p52"></span>49. The practice of the early Church
further considered.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p53"></span>50. Conclusion.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p54"></span>1. After God has once received us into
his family, it is not that he may regard us in the light of servants,
but of sons, performing the part of a kind and anxious parent, and
providing for our maintenance during the whole course of our lives. And,
not contented with this, he has been pleased by a pledge to assure us of
his continued liberality. To this end, he has given another sacrament to
his Church by the hand of his only-begotten Son—viz. a spiritual feast,
at which Christ testifies that he himself is living bread (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p54.1"></span>[John
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p54.1"></span>), on which our souls feed, for a true and
blessed immortality. Now, as the knowledge of this great mystery is most
necessary, and, in proportion to its importance, demands an accurate
exposition, and Satan, in order to deprive the Church of this
inestimable treasure, long ago introduced, first, mists, and then
darkness, to obscure its light, and stirred up strife and contention to
alienate the minds of the simple from a relish for this sacred food, and
in our age, also, has tried the same artifice, I will proceed, after
giving a simple summary adapted to the capacity of the ignorant, to
explain those difficulties by which Satan has tried to ensnare the
world. First, then, the signs are bread and wine, which represent the
invisible food which we receive from the body and blood of Christ. For
as God, regenerating us in baptism, ingrafts us into the fellowship of
his Church, and makes us his by adoption, so we have said that he
performs the office of a provident parent, in continually supplying the
food by which he may sustain and preserve us in the life to which he has
begotten us by his word. Moreover, Christ is the only food of our soul,
and, therefore, our heavenly Father invites us to him, that, refreshed
by communion with him, we may ever and anon gather new vigour until we
reach the heavenly immortality. But as this mystery of the secret union
of Christ with believers is incomprehensible by nature, he exhibits its
figure and image in visible signs adapted to our capacity, nay, by
giving, as it were, earnests and badges, he makes it as certain to us as
if it were seen by the eye; the familiarity of the similitude giving it
access to minds however dull, and showing that souls are fed by Christ
just as the corporeal life is sustained by bread and wine. We now,
therefore, understand the end which this mystical benediction has in
view—viz. to assure us that the body of Christ was once sacrificed for
us, so that we may now eat it, and, eating, feel within ourselves the
efficacy of that one sacrifice,—that his blood was once shed for us so
as to be our perpetual drink. This is the force of the promise which is
added, “Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for you” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p54.2"></span>[Mt.
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p54.2"></span>, &c.). The body which was once offered
for our salvation we are enjoined to take and eat, that, while we see
ourselves made partakers of it, we may safely conclude that the virtue
of that death will be efficacious in us. Hence he terms the cup the
covenant in his blood. For the covenant which he once sanctioned by his
blood he in a manner renews, or rather continues, in so far as regards
the confirmation of our faith, as often as he stretches forth his sacred
blood as drink to us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p55"></span>2. Pious souls can derive great
confidence and delight from this sacrament, as being a testimony that
they form one body with Christ, so that everything which is his they may
call their own. Hence it follows, that we can confidently assure
ourselves, that eternal life, of which he himself is the heir, is ours,
and that the kingdom of heaven, into which he has entered, can no more
be taken from us than from him; on the other hand, that we cannot be
condemned for our sins, from the guilt of which he absolves us, seeing
he has been pleased that these should be imputed to himself as if they
were his own. This is the wondrous exchange made by his boundless
goodness. Having become with us the Son of Man, he has made us with
himself sons of God. By his own descent to the earth he has prepared our
ascent to heaven. Having received our mortality, he has bestowed on us
his immortality. Having undertaken our weakness, he has made us strong
in his strength. Having submitted to our poverty, he has transferred to
us his riches. Having taken upon himself the burden of unrighteousness
with which we were oppressed, he has clothed us with his righteousness.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p56"></span>3. To all these things we have a
complete attestation in this sacrament, enabling us certainly to
conclude that they are as truly exhibited to us as if Christ were placed
in bodily presence before our view, or handled by our hands. For these
are words which can never lie nor deceive—Take, eat, drink. This is my
body, which is broken for you: this is my blood, which is shed for the
remission of sins. In bidding us take, he intimates that it is ours: in
bidding us eat, he intimates that it becomes one substance with us: in
affirming of his body that it was broken, and of his blood that it was
shed for us, he shows that both were not so much his own as ours,
because he took and laid down both, not for his own advantage, but for
our salvation. And we ought carefully to observe, that the chief, and
almost the whole energy of the sacrament, consists in these words, It is
broken for you: it is shed for you. It would not be of much importance
to us that the body and blood of the Lord are now distributed, had they
not once been set forth for our redemption and salvation. Wherefore they
are represented under bread and wine, that we may learn that they are
not only ours, but intended to nourish our spiritual life; that is, as
we formerly observed, by the corporeal things which are produced in the
sacrament, we are by a kind of analogy conducted to spiritual things.
Thus when bread is given as a symbol of the body of Christ, we must
immediately think of this similitude. As bread nourishes, sustains, and
protects our bodily life, so the body of Christ is the only food to
invigorate and keep alive the soul. When we behold wine set forth as a
symbol of blood, we must think that such use as wine serves to the body,
the same is spiritually bestowed by the blood of Christ; and the use is
to foster, refresh, strengthen, and exhilarate. For if we duly consider
what profit we have gained by the breaking of his sacred body, and the
shedding of his blood, we shall clearly perceive that these properties
of bread and wine, agreeably to this analogy, most appropriately
represent it when they are communicated to us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p57"></span>4. Therefore, it is not the principal
part of a sacrament simply to hold forth the body of Christ to us
without any higher consideration, but rather to seal and confirm that
promise by which he testifies that his flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood drink indeed, nourishing us unto life eternal, and by which he
affirms that he is the bread of life, of which, whosoever shall eat,
shall live for ever—I say, to seal and confirm that promise, and in
order to do so, it sends us to the cross of Christ, where that promise
was performed and fulfilled in all its parts. For we do not eat Christ
duly and savingly unless as crucified, while with lively apprehension we
perceive the efficacy of his death. When he called himself the bread of
life, he did not take that appellation from the sacrament, as some
perversely interpret; but such as he was given to us by the Father, such
he exhibited himself when becoming partaker of our human mortality, he
made us partakers of his divine immortality; when offering himself in
sacrifice, he took our curse upon himself, that he might cover us with
his blessing, when by his death he devoured and swallowed up death, when
in his resurrection he raised our corruptible flesh, which he had put
on, to glory and incorruption.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p58"></span>5. It only remains that the whole
become ours by application. This is done by means of the gospel, and
more clearly by the sacred Supper, where Christ offers himself to us
with all his blessings, and we receive him in faith. The sacrament,
therefore, does not make Christ become for the first time the bread of
life; but, while it calls to remembrance that Christ was made the bread
of life that we may constantly eat him, it gives us a taste and relish
for that bread, and makes us feel its efficacy. For it assures us,
first, that whatever Christ did or suffered was done to give us life;
and, secondly, that this quickening is eternal; by it we are ceaselessly
nourished, sustained, and preserved in life. For as Christ would not
have not been the bread of life to us if he had not been born, if he had
not died and risen again; so he could not now be the bread of life, were
not the efficacy and fruit of his nativity, death, and resurrection,
eternal. All this Christ has elegantly expressed in these words, “The
bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p58.1"></span>[John
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p58.1"></span>); doubtless intimating, that his body
will be as bread in regard to the spiritual life of the soul, because it
was to be delivered to death for our salvation, and that he extends it
to us for food when he makes us partakers of it by faith. Wherefore he
once gave himself that he might become bread, when he gave himself to be
crucified for the redemption of the world; and he gives himself daily,
when in the word of the gospel he offers himself to be partaken by us,
inasmuch as he was crucified, when he seals that offer by the sacred
mystery of the Supper, and when he accomplishes inwardly what he
externally designates. Moreover, two faults are here to be avoided. We
must neither, by setting too little value on the signs, dissever them
from their meanings to which they are in some degree annexed, nor by
immoderately extolling them, seem somewhat to obscure the mysteries
themselves. That Christ is the bread of life by which believers are
nourished unto eternal life, no man is so utterly devoid of religion as
not to acknowledge. But all are not agreed as to the mode of partaking
of him. For there are some who define the eating of the flesh of Christ,
and the drinking of his blood, to be, in one word, nothing more than
believing in Christ himself. But Christ seems to me to have intended to
teach something more express and more sublime in that noble discourse,
in which he recommends the eating of his flesh—viz. that we are
quickened by the true partaking of him, which he designated by the terms
eating and drinking, lest any one should suppose that the life which we
obtain from him is obtained by simple knowledge. For as it is not the
sight but the eating of bread that gives nourishment to the body, so the
soul must partake of Christ truly and thoroughly, that by his energy it
may grow up into spiritual life. Meanwhile, we admit that this is
nothing else than the eating of faith, and that no other eating can be
imagined. But there is this difference between their mode of speaking
and mine. According to them, to eat is merely to believe; while I
maintain that the flesh of Christ is eaten by believing, because it is
made ours by faith, and that that eating is the effect and fruit of
faith; or, if you will have it more clearly, according to them, eating
is faith, whereas it rather seems to me to be a consequence of faith.
The difference is little in words, but not little in reality. For,
although the apostle teaches that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p58.2"></span>[Eph.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p58.2"></span>), no one will interpret that dwelling to
be faith All see that it explains the admirable effect of faith, because
to it it is owing that believers have Christ dwelling in them. In this
way, the Lord was pleased, by calling himself the bread of life, not
only to teach that our salvation is treasured up in the faith of his
death and resurrection, but also, by virtue of true communication with
him, his life passes into us and becomes ours, just as bread when taken
for food gives vigour to the body.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p59"></span>6. When Augustine, whom they claim as
their patron, wrote, that we eat by believing, all he meant was to
indicate that that eating is of faith, and not of the mouth. This I deny
not; but I at the same time add, that by faith we embrace Christ, not as
appearing at a distance, but as uniting himself to us, he being our
head, and we his members. I do not absolutely disapprove of that mode of
speaking; I only deny that it is a full interpretation, if they mean to
define what it is to eat the flesh of Christ. I see that Augustine
repeatedly used this form of expression, as when he said (De Doct.
Christ. Lib. 3), “ Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man” is a
figurative expression enjoining us to have communion with our Lord’s
passion, and sweetly and usefully to treasure in our memory that his
flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Also when he says, “These three
thousand men who were converted at the preaching of Peter (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p59.1"></span>[Acts
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p59.1"></span>), by believing, drank the blood which
they had cruelly shed.”60  <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630.md) But
in very many other passages he admirably commends faith for this, that
by means of it our souls are not less refreshed by the communion of the
blood of Christ, than our bodies with the bread which they eat. The very
same thing is said by Chrysostom, “Christ makes us his body, not by
faith only, but in reality.” He does not mean that we obtain this
blessing from any other quarter than from faith: he only intends to
prevent any one from thinking of mere imagination when he hears the name
of faith. I say nothing of those who hold that the Supper is merely a
mark of external profession, because I think I sufficiently refuted
their error when I treated of the sacraments in general (Chap. 14 sec.
13). Only let my readers observe, that when the cup is called the
covenant in blood (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p60.1"></span>[Luke
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p60.1"></span>), the promise which tends to confirm
faith is expressed. Hence it follows, that unless we have respect to
God, and embrace what he offers, we do not make a right use of the
sacred Supper.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p61"></span>7. I am not satisfied with the view of
those who, while acknowledging that we have some kind of communion with
Christ, only make us partakers of the Spirit, omitting all mention of
flesh and blood. As if it were said to no purpose at all, that his flesh
is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed; that we have no life
unless we eat that flesh and drink that blood; and so forth. Therefore,
if it is evident that full communion with Christ goes beyond their
description, which is too confined, I will attempt briefly to show how
far it extends, before proceeding to speak of the contrary vice of
excess. For I shall have a longer discussion with these hyperbolical
doctors, who, according to their gross ideas, fabricate an absurd mode
of eating and drinking, and transfigure Christ, after divesting him of
his flesh, into a phantom: if, indeed, it be lawful to put this great
mystery into words, a mystery which I feel, and therefore freely confess
that I am unable to comprehend with my mind, so far am I from wishing
any one to measure its sublimity by my feeble capacity. Nay, I rather
exhort my readers not to confine their apprehension within those too
narrow limits, but to attempt to rise much higher than I can guide them.
For whenever this subject is considered, after I have done my utmost, I
feel that I have spoken far beneath its dignity. And though the mind is
more powerful in thought than the tongue in expression, it too is
overcome and overwhelmed by the magnitude of the subject. All then that
remains is to break forth in admiration of the mystery, which it is
plain that the mind is inadequate to comprehend, or the tongue to
express. I will, however, give a summary of my view as I best can, not
doubting its truth, and therefore trusting that it will not be
disapproved by pious breasts.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p62"></span>8. First of all, we are taught by the
Scriptures that Christ was from the beginning the living Word of the
Father, the fountain and origin of life, from which all things should
always receive life. Hence John at one time calls him the Word of life,
and at another says, that in him was life; intimating, that he, even
then pervading all creatures, instilled into them the power of breathing
and living. He afterwards adds, that the life was at length manifested,
when the Son of God, assuming our nature, exhibited himself in bodily
form to be seen and handled. For although he previously diffused his
virtue into the creatures, yet as man, because alienated from God by
sin, had lost the communication of life, and saw death on every side
impending over him, he behoved, in order to regain the hope of
immortality, to be restored to the communion of that Word. How little
confidence can it give you, to know that the Word of God, from which you
are at the greatest distance, contains within himself the fulness of
life, whereas in yourself, in whatever direction you turn, you see
nothing but death? But ever since that fountain of life began to dwell
in our nature, he no longer lies hid at a distance from us, but exhibits
himself openly for our participation. Nay, the very flesh in which he
resides he makes vivifying to us, that by partaking of it we may feed
for immortality. “I,” says he, “am that bread of life;” “I am the living
bread which came down from heaven;” “And the bread that I will give is
my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p62.1"></span>[John
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048.md),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p62.1"></span>). By these words he declares, not only
that he is life, inasmuch as he is the eternal Word of God who came down
to us from heaven, but, by coming down, gave vigour to the flesh which
he assumed, that a communication of life to us might thence emanate.
Hence, too, he adds, that his flesh is meat indeed, and that his blood
is drink indeed: by this food believers are reared to eternal life. The
pious, therefore, have admirable comfort in this, that they now find
life in their own flesh. For they not only reach it by easy access, but
have it spontaneously set forth before them. Let them only throw open
the door of their hearts that they may take it into their embrace, and
they will obtain it.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p63"></span>9. The flesh of Christ, however, has
not such power in itself as to make us live, seeing that by its own
first condition it was subject to mortality, and even now, when endued
with immortality, lives not by itself. Still it is properly said to be
life-giving, as it is pervaded with the fulness of life for the purpose
of transmitting it to us. In this sense I understand our Saviour’s words
as Cyril interprets them, “As the Father hath life in himself, so hath
he given to the Son to have life in himself” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.1"></span>[John
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.1"></span>). For there properly he is speaking not
of the properties which he possessed with the Father from the beginning,
but of those with which he was invested in the flesh in which he
appeared. Accordingly, he shows that in his humanity also fulness of
life resides, so that every one who communicates in his flesh and blood,
at the same time enjoys the participation of life. The nature of this
may be explained by a familiar example. As water is at one time drunk
out of the fountain, at another drawn, at another led away by conduits
to irrigate the fields, and yet does not flow forth of itself for all
these uses, but is taken from its source, which, with perennial flow,
ever and anon sends forth a new and sufficient supply; so the flesh of
Christ is like a rich and inexhaustible fountain, which transfuses into
us the life flowing forth from the Godhead into itself. Now, who sees
not that the communion of the flesh and blood of Christ is necessary to
all who aspire to the heavenly life? Hence those passages of the
apostle: The Church is the “body” of Christ; his “fulness.” He is “the
head,” “from whence the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth,” “maketh increase of the body”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.2"></span>[Eph.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.2"></span>; 4:15,16). Our bodies are the “members of
Christ” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.3"></span>[1 Cor.
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.3"></span>). We perceive that all these things
cannot possibly take place unless he adheres to us wholly in body and
spirit. But the very close connection which unites us to his flesh, he
illustrated with still more splendid epithets, when he said that we “are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.4"></span>[Eph.
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.4"></span>). At length, to testify that the matter
is too high for utterance, he concludes with exclaiming, “This is a
great mystery” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.5"></span>[Eph.
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p63.5"></span>). It were, therefore, extreme infatuation
not to acknowledge the communion of believers with the body and blood of
the Lord, a communion which the apostle declares to be so great, that he
chooses rather to marvel at it than to explain it.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p64"></span>10. The sum is, that the flesh and
blood of Christ feed our souls just as bread and wine maintain and
support our corporeal life. For there would be no aptitude in the sign,
did not our souls find their nourishment in Christ. This could not be,
did not Christ truly form one with us, and refresh us by the eating of
his flesh, and the drinking of his blood. But though it seems an
incredible thing that the flesh of Christ, while at such a distance from
us in respect of place, should be food to us, let us remember how far
the secret virtue of the Holy Spirit surpasses all our conceptions, and
how foolish it is to wish to measure its immensity by our feeble
capacity. Therefore, what our mind does not comprehend let faith
conceive—viz. that the Spirit truly unites things separated by space.
That sacred communion of flesh and blood by which Christ transfuses his
life into us, just as if it penetrated our bones and marrow, he
testifies and seals in the Supper, and that not by presenting a vain or
empty sign, but by there exerting an efficacy of the Spirit by which he
fulfils what he promises. And truly the thing there signified he
exhibits and offers to all who sit down at that spiritual feast,
although it is beneficially received by believers only who receive this
great benefit with true faith and heartfelt gratitude. For this reason
the apostle said, “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ”? (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p64.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p64.1"></span>.) There is no ground to object that the
expression is figurative, and gives the sign the name of the thing
signified. I admit, indeed, that the breaking of bread is a symbol, not
the reality. But this being admitted, we duly infer from the exhibition
of the symbol that the thing itself is exhibited. For unless we would
charge God with deceit, we will never presume to say that he holds forth
an empty symbol. Therefore, if by the breaking of bread the Lord truly
represents the partaking of his body, there ought to be no doubt
whatever that he truly exhibits and performs it. The rule which the
pious ought always to observe is, whenever they see the symbols
instituted by the Lord, to think and feel surely persuaded that the
truth of the thing signified is also present. For why does the Lord put
the symbol of his body into your hands, but just to assure you that you
truly partake of him? If this is true let us feel as much assured that
the visible sign is given us in seal of an invisible gift as that his
body itself is given to us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p65"></span>11. I hold then (as has always been
received in the Church, and is still taught by those who feel aright),
that the sacred mystery of the Supper consists of two things—the
corporeal signs, which, presented to the eye, represent invisible things
in a manner adapted to our weak capacity, and the spiritual truth, which
is at once figured and exhibited by the signs. When attempting
familiarly to explain its nature, I am accustomed to set down three
things—the thing meant, the matter which depends on it, and the virtue
or efficacy consequent upon both. The thing meant consists in the
promises which are in a manner included in the sign. By the matter, or
substance, I mean Christ, with his death and resurrection. By the
effect, I understand redemption, justification, sanctification, eternal
life, and all other benefits which Christ bestows upon us. Moreover,
though all these things have respect to faith, I leave no room for the
cavil, that when I say Christ is conceived by faith, I mean that he is
only conceived by the intellect and imagination. He is offered by the
promises, not that we may stop short at the sight or mere knowledge of
him, but that we may enjoy true communion with him. And, indeed, I see
not how any one can expect to have redemption and righteousness in the
cross of Christ, and life in his death, without trusting first of all to
true communion with Christ himself. Those blessings could not reach us,
did not Christ previously make himself ours. I say then, that in the
mystery of the Supper, by the symbols of bread and wine, Christ, his
body and his blood, are truly exhibited to us, that in them he fulfilled
all obedience, in order to procure righteousness for us— first that we
might become one body with him; and, secondly, that being made partakers
of his substance, we might feel the result of this fact in the
participation of all his blessings.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p66"></span>12. I now come to the hyperbolical
mixtures which superstition has introduced. Here Satan has employed all
his wiles, withdrawing the minds of men from heaven, and imbuing them
with the perverse error that Christ is annexed to the element of bread.
And, first, we are not to dream of such a presence of Christ in the
sacrament as the artificers of the Romish court have imagined, as if the
body of Christ, locally present, were to be taken into the hand, and
chewed by the teeth, and swallowed by the throat. This was the form of
Palinode, which Pope Nicholas dictated to Berengarius, in token of his
repentance, a form expressed in terms so monstrous, that the author of
the Gloss exclaims, that there is danger, if the reader is not
particularly cautious, that he will be led by it into a worse heresy
than was that of Berengarius (Distinct. 2 c. Ego Berengarius). Peter
Lombard, though he labours much to excuse the absurdity, rathers
inclines to a different opinion. As we cannot at all doubt that it is
bounded according to the invariable rule in the human body, and is
contained in heaven, where it was once received, and will remain till it
return to judgment, so we deem it altogether unlawful to bring it back
under these corruptible elements, or to imagine it everywhere present.
And, indeed, there is no need of this, in order to our partaking of it,
since the Lord by his Spirit bestows upon us the blessing of being one
with him in soul, body, and spirit. The bond of that connection,
therefore, is the Spirit of Christ, who unites us to him, and is a kind
of channel by which everything that Christ has and is, is derived to us.
For if we see that the sun, in sending forth its rays upon the earth, to
generate, cherish, and invigorate its offspring, in a manner transfuses
its substance into it, why should the radiance of the Spirit be less in
conveying to us the communion of his flesh and blood? Wherefore the
Scripture, when it speaks of our participation with Christ, refers its
whole efficacy to the Spirit. Instead of many, one passage will suffice.
Paul, in the Epistle to the Romans (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p66.1"></span>[Rom.
8:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p66.1"></span>), shows that the only way in which Christ
dwells in us is by his Spirit. By this, however, he does not take away
that communion of flesh and blood of which we now speak, but shows that
it is owing to the Spirit alone that we possess Christ wholly, and have
him abiding in us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p67"></span>13. The Schoolmen, horrified at this
barbarous impiety, speak more modestly, though they do nothing more than
amuse themselves with more subtle delusions. They admit that Christ is
not contained in the sacrament circumscriptively, or in a bodily manner,
but they afterwards devise a method which they themselves do not
understand, and cannot explain to others. It, however, comes to this,
that Christ may be sought in what they call the species of bread. What?
When they say that the substance of bread is converted into Christ, do
they not attach him to the white colour, which is all they leave of it?
But they say, that though contained in the sacrament, he still remains
in heaven, and has no other presence there than that of abode. But,
whatever be the terms in which they attempt to make a gloss, the sum of
all is, that that which was formerly bread, by consecration becomes
Christ: so that Christ thereafter lies hid under the colour of bread.
This they are not ashamed distinctly to express. For Lombard’s words
are, “The body of Christ, which is visible in itself, lurks and lies
covered after the act of consecration under the species of bread”
(Lombard. Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 12). Thus the figure of the bread is
nothing but a mask which conceals the view of the flesh from our eye.
But there is no need of many conjectures to detect the snare which they
intended to lay by these words, since the thing itself speaks clearly.
It is easy to see how great is the superstition under which not only the
vulgar but the leaders also, have laboured for many ages, and still
labour, in Popish Churches. Little solicitous as to true faith (by which
alone we attain to the fellowship of Christ, and become one with him),
provided they have his carnal presence, which they have fabricated
without authority from the word, they think he is sufficiently present.
Hence we see, that all which they have gained by their ingenious
subtlety is to make bread to be regarded as God.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p68"></span>14. Hence proceeded that fictitious
transubstantiation  <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631.md) for which
they fight more fiercely in the present day than for all the other
articles of their faith. For the first architects of local presence
could not explain, how the body of Christ could be mixed with the
substance of bread, without forthwith meeting with many absurdities.
Hence it was necessary to have recourse to the fiction, that there is a
conversion of the bread into body, not that properly instead of bread it
becomes body, but that Christ, in order to conceal himself under the
figure, reduces the substance to nothing. It is strange that they have
fallen into such a degree of ignorance, nay, of stupor, as to produce
this monstrous fiction not only against Scripture, but also against the
consent of the ancient Church. I admit, indeed, that some of the
ancients occasionally used the term *conversion*, not that they meant to
do away with the substance in the external signs, but to teach that the
bread devoted to the sacrament was widely different from ordinary bread,
and was now something else. All clearly and uniformly teach that the
sacred Supper consists of two parts, an earthly and a heavenly. The
earthly they without dispute interpret to be bread and wine. Certainly,
whatever they may pretend, it is plain that antiquity, which they often
dare to oppose to the clear word of God, gives no countenance to that
dogma. It is not so long since it was devised; indeed, it was unknown
not only to the better ages, in which a purer doctrine still flourished,
but after that purity was considerably impaired. There is no early
Christian writer who does not admit in distinct terms that the sacred
symbols of the Supper are bread and wine, although, as has been said,
they sometimes distinguish them by various epithets, in order to
recommend the dignity of the mystery. For when they say that a secret
conversion takes place at consecration, so that it is now something else
than bread and wine, their meaning, as I already observed, is, not that
these are annihilated, but that they are to be considered in a different
light from common food, which is only intended to feed the body, whereas
in the former the spiritual food and drink of the mind are exhibited.
This we deny not. But, say our opponents, if there is conversion, one
thing must become another. If they mean that something becomes different
from what it was before, I assent. If they will wrest it in support of
their fiction, let them tell me of what kind of change they are sensible
in baptism. For here, also, the Fathers make out a wonderful conversion,
when they say that out of the corruptible element is made the spiritual
laver of the soul, and yet no one denies that it still remains water.
But say they, there is no such expression in Baptism as that in the
Supper, *This is my body;* as if we were treating of these words, which
have a meaning sufficiently clear, and not rather of that term
*conversion*, which ought not to mean more in the Supper than in
Baptism. Have done, then, with those quibbles upon words, which betray
nothing but their silliness. The meaning would have no congruity, unless
the truth which is there figured had a living image in the external
sign. Christ wished to testify by an external symbol that his flesh was
food. If he exhibited merely an empty show of bread, and not true bread,
where is the analogy or similitude to conduct us from the visible thing
to the invisible? For, in order to make all things consistent, the
meaning cannot extend to more than this, that we are fed by the species
of Christ’s flesh; just as, in the case of baptism, if the figure of
water deceived the eye, it would not be to us a sure pledge of our
ablution; nay, the fallacious spectacle would rather throw us into
doubt. The nature of the sacrament is therefore overthrown, if in the
mode of signifying the earthly sign corresponds not to the heavenly
reality; and, accordingly, the truth of the mystery is lost if true
bread does not represent the true body of Christ. I again repeat, since
the Supper is nothing but a conspicuous attestation to the promise which
is contained in the sixth chapter of John—viz. that Christ is the bread
of life, who came down from heaven, that visible bread must intervene,
in order that that spiritual bread may be figured, unless we would
destroy all the benefits with which God here favours us for the purpose
of sustaining our infirmity. Then on what ground could Paul infer that
we are all one bread, and one body in partaking together of that one
bread, if only the semblance of bread, and not the natural reality,
remained?

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p70"></span>15. They could not have been so
shamefully deluded by the impostures of Satan had they not been
fascinated by the erroneous idea, that the body of Christ included under
the bread is transmitted by the bodily mouth into the belly. The cause
of this brutish imagination was, that consecration had the same effect
with them as magical incantation. They overlooked the principle, that
bread is a sacrament to none but those to whom the word is addressed,
just as the water of baptism is not changed in itself, but begins to be
to us what it formerly was not, as soon as the promise is annexed. This
will better appear from the example of a similar sacrament. The water
gushing from the rock in the desert was to the Israelites a badge and
sign of the same thing that is figured to us in the Supper by wine. For
Paul declares that they drank the same spiritual drink (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p70.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p70.1"></span>). But the water was common to the herds
and flocks of the people. Hence it is easy to infer, that in the earthly
elements, when employed for a spiritual use, no other conversion takes
place than in respect of men, inasmuch as they are to them seals of
promises. Moreover, since it is the purpose of God, as I have repeatedly
inculcated, to raise us up to himself by fit vehicles, those who indeed
call us to Christ, but to Christ lurking invisibly under bread,
impiously, by their perverseness, defeat this object. For it is
impossible for the mind of man to disentangle itself from the immensity
of space, and ascend to Christ even above the heavens. What nature
denied them, they attempted to gain by a noxious remedy. Remaining on
the earth, they felt no need of a celestial proximity to Christ. Such
was the necessity which impelled them to transfigure the body of Christ.
In the age of Bernard, though a harsher mode of speech had prevailed,
transubstantiation was not yet recognised. And in all previous ages, the
similitude in the mouths of all was, that a spiritual reality was
conjoined with bread and wine in this sacrament. As to the terms, they
think they answer acutely, though they adduce nothing relevant to the
case in hand. The rod of Moses (they say), when turned into a serpent,
though it acquires the name of a serpent, still retains its former name,
and is called a rod; and thus, according to them, it is equally probable
that though the bread passes into a new substance, it is still called by
catachresis, and not inaptly, what it still appears to the eye to be.
But what resemblance, real or apparent, do they find between an
illustrious miracle and their fictitious illusion, of which no eye on
the earth is witness? The magi by their impostures had persuaded the
Egyptians, that they had a divine power above the ordinary course of
nature to change created beings. Moses comes forth, and after exposing
their fallacies, shows that the invincible power of God is on his side,
since his rod swallows up all the other rods. But as that conversion was
visible to the eye, we have already observed, that it has no reference
to the case in hand. Shortly after the rod visibly resumed its form. It
may be added, that we know not whether this was an extemporary
conversion of substance.60  <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md) For
we must attend to the illusion to the rods of the magicians, which the
prophet did not choose to term serpents, lest he might seem to insinuate
a conversion which had no existence, because those impostors had done
nothing more than blind the eyes of the spectators. But what resemblance
is there between that expression and the following? “The bread which we
break;”—“As often as ye eat this bread;”—“They communicated in the
breaking of bread;” and so forth. It is certain that the eye only was
deceived by the incantation of the magicians. The matter is more
doubtful with regard to Moses, by whose hand it was not more difficult
for God to make a serpent out of a rod, and again to make a rod out of a
serpent, than to clothe angels with corporeal bodies, and a little after
unclothe them. If the case of the sacrament were at all akin to this,
there might be some colour for their explanation. Let it, therefore,
remain fixed that there is no true and fit promise in the Supper, that
the flesh of Christ is truly meat, unless there is a correspondence in
the true substance of the external symbol. But as one error gives rise
to another, a passage in Jeremiah has been so absurdly wrested, to prove
transubstantiation, that it is painful to refer to it. The prophet
complains that wood was placed in his bread, intimating that by the
cruelty of his enemies his bread was infected with bitterness, as David
by a similar figure complains, “They gave me also gall for my meat: and
in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p71.1"></span>[Psalm
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p71.1"></span>). These men would allegorise the
expression to mean, that the body of Christ was nailed to the wood of
the cross. But some of the Fathers thought so! As if we ought not rather
to pardon their ignorance and bury the disgrace, than to add impudence,
and bring them into hostile conflict with the genuine meaning of the
prophet.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p72"></span>16. Some, who see that the analogy
between the sign and the thing signified cannot be destroyed without
destroying the truth of the sacrament, admit that the bread of the
Supper is truly the substance of an earthly and corruptible element, and
cannot suffer any change in itself, but must have the body of Christ
included under it. If they would explain this to mean, that when the
bread is held forth in the sacrament, an exhibition of the body is
annexed, because the truth is inseparable from its sign, I would not
greatly object. But because fixing the body itself in the bread, they
attach to it an ubiquity contrary to its nature, and by adding *under*
the bread, will have it that it lies hid under it,  <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md) I must employ a short time in exposing
their craft, and dragging them forth from their concealments. Here,
however, it is not my intention professedly to discuss the whole case; I
mean only to lay the foundations of a discussion which will afterwards
follow in its own place. They insist, then, that the body of Christ is
invisible and immense, so that it may be hid under bread, because they
think that there is no other way by which they can communicate with him
than by his descending into the bread, though they do not comprehend the
mode of descent by which he raises us up to himself. They employ all the
colours they possibly can, but after they have said all, it is
sufficiently apparent that they insist on the local presence of Christ.
How so? Because they cannot conceive any other participation of flesh
and blood than that which consists either in local conjunction and
contact, or in some gross method of enclosing.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p74"></span>17. Some, in order obstinately to
maintain the error which they have once rashly adopted, hesitate not to
assert that the dimensions of Christ’s flesh are not more circumscribed
than those of heaven and earth. His birth as an infant, his growth, his
extension on the cross, his confinement in the sepulchre, were effected,
they say, by a kind of dispensation, that he might perform the offices
of being born, of dying, and of other human acts: his being seen with
his wonted bodily appearance after the resurrection, his ascension into
heaven, his appearance, after his ascension, to Stephen and Paul, were
the effect of the same dispensation, that it might be made apparent to
the eye of man that he was constituted King in heaven. What is this but
to call forth Marcion from his grave? For there cannot be a doubt that
the body of Christ, if so constituted, was a phantasm, or was
phantastical. Some employ a rather more subtle evasion, That the body
which is given in the sacrament is glorious and immortal, and that,
therefore, there is no absurdity in its being contained under the
sacrament in various places, or in no place, and in no form. But, I ask,
what did Christ give to his disciples the day before he suffered? Do not
the words say that he gave the mortal body, which was to be delivered
shortly after? But, say they, he had previously manifested his glory to
the three disciples on the mount (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p74.1"></span>[Mt.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p74.1"></span>). This is true; but his purpose was to
give them for the time a taste of immortality. Still they cannot find
there a twofold body, but only the one which he had assumed, arrayed in
new glory. When he distributed his body in the first Supper, the hour
was at hand in which he was “stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p74.2"></span>[Isa.
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p74.2"></span>). So far was he from intending at that
time to exhibit the glory of his resurrection. And here what a door is
opened to Marcion, if the body of Christ was seen humble and mortal in
one place, glorious and immortal in another! And yet, if their opinion
is well-founded, the same thing happens every day, because they are
forced to admit that the body of Christ, which is in itself visible,
lurks invisibly under the symbol of bread. And yet those who send forth
such monstrous dogmas, so far from being ashamed at the disgrace, assail
us with virulent invectives for not subscribing to them.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p75"></span>18. But assuming that the body and
blood of Christ are attached to the bread and wine, then the one must
necessarily be dissevered from the other. For as the bread is given
separately from the cup, so the body, united to the bread, must be
separated from the blood, included in the cup. For since they affirm
that the body is in the bread, and the blood is in the cup, while the
bread and wine are, in regard to space, at some distance from each
other, they cannot, by any quibble, evade the conclusion that the body
must be separated from the blood. Their usual pretence—viz. that the
blood is in the body, and the body again in the blood, by what they call
concomitance, is more than frivolous, since the symbols in which they
are included are thus distinguished. But if we are carried to heaven
with our eyes and minds, that we may there behold Christ in the glory of
his kingdom, as the symbols invite us to him in his integrity, so, under
the symbol of bread, we must feed on his body, and, under the symbol of
wine, drink separately of his blood, and thereby have the full enjoyment
of him. For though he withdrew his flesh from us, and with his body
ascended to heaven, he, however, sits at the right hand of the Father;
that is, he reigns in power and majesty, and the glory of the Father.
This kingdom is not limited by any intervals of space, nor circumscribed
by any dimensions. Christ can exert his energy wherever he pleases, in
earth and heaven, can manifest his presence by the exercise of his
power, can always be present with his people, breathing into them his
own life, can live in them, sustain, confirm, and invigorate them, and
preserve them safe, just as if he were with them in the body; in fine,
can feed them with his own body, communion with which he transfuses into
them. After this manner, the body and blood of Christ are exhibited to
us in the sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p76"></span>19. The presence of Christ in the
Supper we must hold to be such as neither affixes him to the element of
bread, nor encloses him in bread, nor circumscribes him in any way (this
would obviously detract from his celestial glory); and it must,
moreover, be such as neither divests him of his just dimensions, nor
dissevers him by differences of place, nor assigns to him a body of
boundless dimensions, diffused through heaven and earth. All these
things are clearly repugnant to his true human nature. Let us never
allow ourselves to lose sight of the two restrictions. First, Let there
be nothing derogatory to the heavenly glory of Christ. This happens
whenever he is brought under the corruptible elements of this world, or
is affixed to any earthly creatures. Secondly, Let no property be
assigned to his body inconsistent with his human nature. This is done
when it is either said to be infinite, or made to occupy a variety of
places at the same time. But when these absurdities are discarded, I
willingly admit anything which helps to express the true and substantial
communication of the body and blood of the Lord, as exhibited to
believers under the sacred symbols of the Supper, understanding that
they are received not by the imagination or intellect merely, but are
enjoyed in reality as the food of eternal life. For the odium with which
this view is regarded by the world, and the unjust prejudice incurred by
its defence, there is no cause, unless it be in the fearful fascinations
of Satan. What we teach on the subject is in perfect accordance with
Scripture, contains nothing absurd, obscure, or ambiguous, is not
unfavourable to true piety and solid edification; in short, has nothing
in it to offend, save that, for some ages, while the ignorance and
barbarism of sophists reigned in the Church, the clear light and open
truth were unbecomingly suppressed. And yet as Satan, by means of
turbulent spirits, is still, in the present day, exerting himself to the
utmost to bring dishonour on this doctrine by all kinds of calumny and
reproach, it is right to assert and defend it with the greatest care.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p77"></span>20. Before we proceed farther, we must
consider the ordinance itself, as instituted by Christ, because the most
plausible objection of our opponents is, that we abandon his words. To
free ourselves from the obloquy with which they thus load us, the
fittest course wil1 be to begin with an interpretation of the words.
Three Evangelists and Paul relate that our Saviour took bread, and after
giving thanks, brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saving, Take,
eat: this is my body which is given or broken for you. Of the cup,
Matthew and Mark say, “This is my blood of the new testament, which is
shed for many for the remission of sins” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.1"></span>[Mt.
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.2"></span>[Mark
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.2"></span>). Luke and Paul say, “This cup is the new
testament in my blood” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.3"></span>[Luke
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.4"></span>[1
Cor. 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p77.4"></span>). The advocates of transubstantiation
insist, that by the pronoun, *this*, is denoted the appearance of bread,
because the whole complexion of our Saviour’s address is an act of
consecration, and there is no substance which can be demonstrated. But
if they adhere so religiously to the words, inasmuch as that which our
Saviour gave to his disciples he declared to be his body, there is
nothing more alien from the strict meaning of the words than the
fiction, that what was bread is now body. What Christ takes into his
hands, and gives to the apostles, he declares to be his body; but he had
taken bread, and, therefore, who sees not that what is given is still
bread? Hence, nothing can be more absurd than to transfer what is
affirmed of bread to the species of bread. Others, in interpreting the
particle *is*, as equivalent to being transubstantiated, have recourse
to a gloss which is forced and violently wrested. They have no ground,
therefore, for pretending that they are moved by a reverence for the
words. The use of the term *is*, for being converted into something
else, is unknown to every tongue and nation. With regard to those who
leave the bread in the Supper, and affirm that it is the body of Christ,
there is great diversity among them. Those who speak more modestly,
though they insist upon the letter, This is my body, afterwards abandon
this strictness, and observe that it is equivalent to saying that the
body of Christ is with the bread, in the bread, and under the bread. To
the reality which they affirm, we have already adverted, and will
by-and-by, at greater length. I am not only considering the words by
which they say they are prevented from admitting that the bread is
called body, because it is a sign of the body. But if they shun
everything like metaphor, why do they leap from the simple demonstration
of Christ to modes of expression which are widely different? For there
is a great difference between saying that the bread is the body, and
that the body is with the bread. But seeing it impossible to maintain
the simple proposition that the bread is the body, they endeavoured to
evade the difficulty by concealing themselves under those forms of
expression. Others, who are bolder, hesitate not to assert that,
strictly speaking, the bread is body, and in this way prove that they
are truly of the letter. If it is objected that the bread, therefore, is
Christ, and, being Christ, is God,—they will deny it, because the words
of Christ do not expressly say so. But they gain nothing by their
denial, since all agree that the whole Christ is offered to us in the
Supper. It is intolerable blasphemy to affirm, without figure, of a
fading and corruptible element, that it is Christ. I now ask them, if
they hold the two propositions to be identical, Christ is the Son of
God, and Bread is the body of Christ? If they concede that they are
different (and this, whether they will or not, they will be forced to
do), let them tell wherein is the difference. All which they can adduce
is, I presume, that the bread is called body in a sacramental manner.
Hence it follows, that the words of Christ are not subject to the common
rule, and ought not to be tested grammatically. I ask all these rigid
and obstinate exactors of the letter, whether, when Luke and Paul call
the cup *the testament in blood*, they do not express the same thing as
in the previous clause, when they call bread the body? There certainly
was the same solemnity in the one part of the mystery as in the other,
and, as brevity is obscure, the longer sentence better elucidates the
meaning. As often, therefore, as they contend, from the one expression,
that the bread is body, I will adduce an apt interpretation from the
longer expression, That it is a testament in the body. What? Can we seek
for surer or more faithful expounders than Luke and Paul? I have no
intention, however, to detract, in any respect, from the communication
of the body of Christ, which I have acknowledged. I only meant to expose
the foolish perverseness with which they carry on a war of words. The
bread I understand, on the authority of Luke and Paul, to be the body of
Christ, because it is a covenant in the body. If they impugn this, their
quarrel is not with me, but with the Spirit of God. However often they
may repeat, that reverence for the words of Christ will not allow them
to give a figurative interpretation to what is spoken plainly, the
pretext cannot justify them in thus rejecting all the contrary arguments
which we adduce. Meanwhile, as I have already observed, it is proper to
attend to the force of what is meant by a testament in the body and
blood of Christ. The covenant, ratified by the sacrifice of death, would
not avail us without the addition of that secret communication, by which
we are made one with Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p78"></span>21. It remains, therefore, to hold,
that on account of the affinity which the things signified have with
their signs, the name of the thing itself is given to the sign
figuratively, indeed, but very appropriately. I say nothing of
allegories and parables, lest it should be alleged that I am seeking
subterfuges, and slipping out of the present question. I say that the
expression which is uniformly used in Scripture, when the sacred
mysteries are treated of, is metonymical. For you cannot otherwise
understand the expressions, that circumcision is a “covenant”—that the
lamb is the Lord’s “passover”—that the sacrifices of the law are
expiations—that the rock from which the water flowed in the desert was
Christ,—unless you interpret them metonymically.”60  <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md) Nor is the name merely transferred
from the superior to the inferior, but, on the contrary, the name of the
visible sign is given to the thing signified, as when God is said to
have appeared to Moses in the bush; the ark of the covenant is called
God, and the face of God, and the dove is called the Holy Spirit.60
 <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635.md) For although the sign differs
essentially from the thing signified, the latter being spiritual and
heavenly, the former corporeal and visible,—yet, as it not only figures
the thing which it is employed to represent as a naked and empty badge,
but also truly exhibits it, why should not its name be justly applied to
the thing? But if symbols humanly devised, which are rather the images
of absent than the marks of present things, and of which they are very
often most fallacious types, are sometimes honoured with their
names,—with much greater reason do the institutions of God borrow the
names of things, of which they always bear a sure, and by no means
fallacious signification, and have the reality annexed to them. So
great, then, is the similarity, and so close the connection between the
two, that it is easy to pass from the one to the other. Let our
opponents, therefore, cease to indulge their mirth in calling us
Tropists, when we explain the sacramental mode of expression according
to the common use of Scripture. For, while the sacraments agree in many
things, there is also, in this metonymy, a certain community in all
respects between them. As, therefore, the apostle says that the rock
from which spiritual water flowed forth to the Israelites was Christ
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.4"></span>[1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.4"></span>), and was thus a visible symbol under
which, that spiritual drink was truly perceived, though not by the eye,
so the body of Christ is now called bread, inasmuch as it is a symbol
under which our Lord offers us the true eating of his body. Lest any one
should despise this as a novel invention, the view which Augustine took
and expressed was the same: “Had not the sacraments a certain
resemblance to the things of which they are sacraments, they would not
be sacraments at all. And from this resemblance, they generally have the
names of the things themselves. This, as the sacrament of the body of
Christ, is, after a certain manner, the body of Christ, and the
sacrament of Christ is the blood of Christ; so the sacrament of faith is
faith” (August. <span id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.5"></span>Ep. 23<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.5"></span>, ad Bonifac.). He has many similar
passages, which it would be superfluous to collect, as that one may
suffice. I need only remind my readers, that the same doctrine is taught
by that holy man in his Epistle to Evodius. Where Augustine teaches that
nothing is more common than metonymy in mysteries, it is a frivolous
quibble to object that there is no mention of the Supper. Were this
objection sustained, it would follow, that we are not entitled to argue
from the genus to the species; *e. g.*, Every animal is endued with
motion; and, therefore, the horse and the ox are endued with motion.61
 <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636.md) Indeed, longer discussion is
rendered unnecessary by the words of the Saint himself, where he says,
that when Christ gave the symbol of his body, he did not hesitate to
call it his body (August. Cont. Adimantum, cap. 12). He elsewhere says,
“Wonderful was the patience of Christ in admitting Judas to the feast,
in which he committed and delivered to the disciples the symbol of his
body and blood” (August. in. <span id="iv.iv.xviii-p81.1"></span>[Ps.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p81.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p82"></span>22. Should any morose person, shutting
his eyes to everything else, insist upon the expression, *This is*, as
distinguishing this mystery from all others, the answer is easy. They
say that the substantive verb is so emphatic, as to leave no room for
interpretation. Though I should admit this, I answer, that the
substantive verb occurs in the words of Paul (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.1"></span>), where he calls the bread the
*communion* of the body of Christ. But communion is something different
from the body itself. Nay, when the sacraments are treated of, the same
word occurs: “My covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting
covenant” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.2"></span>[Gen.
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.2"></span>). “This is the ordinance of the passover”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.3"></span>[Exod.
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.3"></span>). To say no more, when Paul declares that
the rock was Christ (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.4"></span>[1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.4"></span>), why should the substantive verb, in
that passage, be deemed less emphatic than in the discourse of Christ?
When John says, “The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus
was not yet glorified” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.5"></span>[John
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.5"></span>), I should like to know what is the force
of the substantive verb? If the rule of our opponents is rigidly
observed, the eternal essence of the Spirit will be destroyed, as if he
had only begun to be after the ascension of Christ. Let them tell me, in
fine, what is meant by the declaration of Paul, that baptism is “the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.6"></span>[Tit.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.6"></span>); though it is certain that to many it
was of no use. But they cannot be more effectually refuted than by the
expression of Paul, that the Church is Christ. For, after introducing
the similitude of the human body, he adds, “So also is Christ” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.7"></span>[1 Cor.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p82.7"></span>), when he means not the only-begotten Son
of God in himself, but in his members. I think I have now gained this
much, that all men of sense and integrity will be disgusted with the
calumnies of our enemies, when they give out that we discredit the words
of Christ; though we embrace them not less obediently than they do, and
ponder them with greater reverence. Nay, their supine security proves
that they do not greatly care what Christ meant, provided it furnishes
them with a shield to defend their obstinacy, while our careful
investigation should be an evidence of the authority which we yield to
Christ. They invidiously pretend that human reason will not allow us to
believe what Christ uttered with his sacred mouth; but how naughtily
they endeavour to fix this odium upon us, I have already, in a great
measure, shown, and will still show more clearly. Nothing, therefore,
prevents us from believing Christ speaking, and from acquiescing in
everything to which he intimates his assent. The only question here is,
whether it be unlawful to inquire into the genuine meaning?

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p83"></span>23. Those worthy masters, to show that
they are of the letter, forbid us to deviate, in the least, from the
letter. On the contrary, when Scripture calls God a man of war, as I see
that the expression would be too harsh if not interpreted, I have no
doubt that the similitude is taken from man. And, indeed, the only
pretext which enabled the Anthropomorphites to annoy the orthodox
Fathers was by fastening on the expressions, “The eyes of God see;” “It
ascended to his ears;” “His hand is stretched out;” “The earth is his
footstool;” and exclaimed, that God was deprived of the body which
Scripture assigns to him. Were this rule admitted, complete barbarism
would bury the whole light of faith. What monstrous absurdities shall
fanatical men not be able to extract, if they are allowed to urge every
knotty point in support of their dogmas? Their objection, that it is not
probable that when Christ was providing special comfort for the apostles
in adversity, he spoke enigmatically or obscurely,—supports our view.
For, had it not occurred to the apostles that the bread was called the
body figuratively, as being a symbol of the body, the extraordinary
nature of the thing would doubtless have filled them with perplexity.
For, at this very period, John relates, that the slightest difficulties
perplexed them (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p83.1"></span>[John
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#005.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p83.1"></span>; 16:17). They debate, among themselves,
how Christ is to go to the Father, and not understanding that the things
which were said referred to the heavenly Father, raise a question as to
how he is to go out of the world until they shall see him? How, then,
could they have been so ready to believe what is repugnant to all
reason—viz. that Christ was seated at table under their eye, and yet was
contained invisible under the bread? As they attest their consent by
eating this bread without hesitation, it is plain that they understood
the words of Christ in the same sense as we do, considering what ought
not to seem unusual when mysteries are spoken of, that the name of the
thing signified was transferred to the sign. There was therefore to the
disciples, as there is to us, clear and sure consolation, not involved
in any enigma; and the only reason why certain persons reject our
interpretation is, because they are blinded by a delusion of the devil
to introduce the darkness of enigma, instead of the obvious
interpretation of an appropriate figure. Besides, if we insist strictly
on the words, our Saviour will be made to affirm erroneously something
of the bread different from the cup. He calls the bread body, and the
wine blood. There must either be a confusion in terms, or there must be
a division separating the body from the blood. Nay, “This is my body,”
may be as truly affirmed of the cup as of the bread; and it may in turn
be affirmed that the bread is the blood.61  <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637.md) If they answer, that we must look to
the end or use for which symbols were instituted, I admit it: but still
they will not disencumber themselves of the absurdity which their error
drags along with it—viz. that the bread is blood, and the wine is body.
Then I know not what they mean when they concede that bread and body are
different things, and yet maintain that the one is predicated of the
other, properly and without figure, as if one were to say that a garment
is different from a man, and yet is properly called a man. Still, as if
the victory depended on obstinacy and invective, they say that Christ is
charged with falsehood, when it is attempted to interpret his words. It
will now be easy for the reader to understand the injustice which is
done to us by those carpers at syllables, when they possess the simple
with the idea that we bring discredit on the words of Christ; words
which, as we have shown, are madly perverted and confounded by them, but
are faithfully and accurately expounded by us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p85"></span>24. This infamous falsehood cannot be
completely wiped away without disposing of another charge. They give out
that we are so wedded to human reason, that we attribute nothing more to
the power of God than the order of nature admits, and common sense
dictates.61  <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638.md) From these wicked
calumnies, I appeal to the doctrine which I have delivered,—a doctrine
which makes it sufficiently clear that I by no means measure this
mystery by the capacity of human reason, or subject it to the laws of
nature. I ask, whether it is from physics we have learned that Christ
feeds our souls from heaven with his flesh, just as our bodies are
nourished by bread and wine? How has flesh this virtue of giving life to
our souls? All will say, that it is not done naturally. Not more
agreeable is it to human reason to hold that the flesh of Christ
penetrates to us, so as to be our food. In short, every one who may have
tasted our doctrine, will be carried away with admiration of the secret
power of God. But these worthy zealots fabricate for themselves a
miracle, and think that without it God himself and his power vanish
away. I would again admonish the reader carefully to consider the nature
of our doctrine, whether it depends on common apprehension, or whether,
after having surmounted the world on the wings of faith, it rises to
heaven. We say that Christ descends to us, as well by the external
symbol as by his Spirit, that he may truly quicken our souls by the
substance of his flesh and blood. He who feels not that in these few
words are many miracles, is more than stupid; since nothing is more
contrary to nature than to derive the spiritual and heavenly life of the
soul from flesh, which received its origin from the earth, and was
subjected to death, nothing more incredible than that things separated
by the whole space between heaven and earth should, notwithstanding of
the long distance, not only be connected, but united, so that souls
receive aliment from the flesh of Christ. Let preposterous men, then,
cease to assail us with the vile calumny, that we malignantly restrict
the boundless power of God. They either foolishly err, or wickedly lie.
The question here is not, What could God do? but, What has he been
pleased to do? We affirm that he has done what pleased him, and it
pleased him that Christ should be in all respects like his brethren,
“yet without sin” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p86.1"></span>[Heb.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p86.1"></span>). What is our flesh? Is it not that which
consists of certain dimensions? is confined within a certain place? is
touched and seen? And why, say they, may not God make the same flesh
occupy several different places, so as not to be confined to any
particular place, and so as to have neither measure nor species? Fool!
why do you require the power of God to make a thing to be at the same
time flesh and not flesh? It is just as if you were to insist on his
making light to be at the same time light and darkness. He wills light
to be light, darkness to be darkness, flesh to be flesh. True, when he
so chooses, he will convert darkness into light, and light into
darkness: but when you insist that there shall be no difference between
light and darkness, what do you but pervert the order of the divine
wisdom? Flesh must therefore be flesh, and spirit spirit; each under the
law and condition on which God has created them. Now, the condition of
flesh is, that it should have one certain place, its own dimensions, its
own form. On that condition, Christ assumed the flesh, to which, as
Augustine declares (Ep. ad Dardan.), he gave incorruption and glory, but
without destroying its nature and reality.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p87"></span>25. They object that they have the
word by which the will of God has been openly manifested; that is if we
permit them to banish from the Church the gift of interpretation, which
should throw light upon the word. I admit that they have the word, but
just as the Anthropomorphites of old had it, when they made God
corporeal; just as Marcion and the Manichees had it when they made the
body of Christ celestial or phantastical. They quoted the passages, “The
first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from
heaven” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.1"></span>): Christ “made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of
men” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.2"></span>[Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.2"></span>). But these vain boasters think that
there is no power of God unless they fabricate a monster in their own
brains, by which the whole order of nature is subverted. This rather is
to circumscribe the power of God, to attempt to try, by our fictions,
what he can do. From this word, they have assumed that the body of
Christ is visible in heaven, and yet lurks invisible on the earth under
innumerable bits of bread. They will say that this is rendered
necessary, in order that the body of Christ may be given in the Supper.
In other words, because they have been pleased to extract a carnal
eating from the words of Christ, carried away by their own prejudice,
they have found it necessary to coin this subtlety, which is wholly
repugnant to Scripture. That we detract, in any respect, from the power
of God, is so far from being true, that our doctrine is the loudest in
extolling it. But as they continue to charge us with robbing God of his
honour, in rejecting what, according to common apprehension, it is
difficult to believe, though it had been promised by the mouth of
Christ; I answer, as I lately did, that in the mysteries of faith we do
not consult common apprehension, but, with the placid docility and
spirit of meekness which James recommends (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.3"></span>[James
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.3"></span>), receive the doctrine which has come
from heaven. Wherein they perniciously err, I am confident that we
follow a proper moderation. On hearing the words of Christ, this is my
body, they imagine a miracle most remote from his intention; and when,
from this fiction, the grossest absurdities arise, having already, by
their precipitate haste, entangled themselves with snares, they plunge
themselves into the abyss of the divine omnipotence, that, in this way,
they may extinguish the light of truth.61  <span
id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639.md) Hence the supercilious moroseness. We
have no wish to know how Christ is hid under the bread: we are satisfied
with his own words, “This is my body.” We again study, with no less
obedience than care, to obtain a sound understanding of this passage, as
of the whole of Scripture. We do not, with preposterous fervour, rashly,
and without choice, lay hold on whatever first presents itself to our
minds; but, after careful meditation, embrace the meaning which the
Spirit of God suggests. Trusting to him, we look down, as from a height,
on whatever opposition may be offered by earthly wisdom. Nay, we hold
our minds captive, not allowing one word of murmur, and humble them,
that they may not presume to gainsay. In this way, we have arrived at
that exposition of the words of Christ, which all who are moderately
versant in Scripture know to be perpetually used with regard to the
sacraments. Still, in a matter of difficulty, we deem it not unlawful to
inquire, after the example of the blessed Virgin, “How shall this be?”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p88.2"></span>[Luke
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p88.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p89"></span>26. But as nothing will be more
effectual to confirm the faith of the pious than to show them that the
doctrine which we have laid down is taken from the pure word of God, and
rests on its authority, I will make this plain with as much brevity as I
can. The body with which Christ rose is declared, not by Aristotle, but
by the Holy Spirit, to be finite, and to be contained in heaven until
the last day. I am not unaware how confidently our opponents evade the
passages which are quoted to this effect. Whenever Christ says that he
will leave the world and go away (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p89.1"></span>[John
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p89.1"></span>), they reply, that that departure was
nothing more than a change of mortal state. Were this so, Christ would
not substitute the Holy Spirit, to supply, as they express it, the
defect of his absence, since he does not succeed in place of him, nor,
on the other hand, does Christ himself descend from the heavenly glory
to assume the condition of a mortal life. Certainly the advent of’ the
Spirit and the ascension of Christ are set against each other, and hence
it necessarily follows that Christ dwells with us according to the
flesh, in the same way as that in which he sends his Spirit. Moreover,
he distinctly says that he would not always be in the world with his
disciples (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p89.2"></span>[Mt.
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p89.2"></span>). This saving, also, they think they
admirably dispose of, as if it were a denial by Christ that he would
always be poor and mean, or liable to the necessities of a fading life.
But this is plainly repugnant to the context, since reference is made
not to poverty and want, or the wretched condition of an earthly life,
but to worship and honour. The disciples were displeased with the
anointing by Mary, because they thought it a superfluous and useless
expenditure, akin to luxury, and would therefore have preferred that the
price which they thought wasted should have been expended on the poor.
Christ answers, that he will not be always with them to receive such
honour. No different exposition is given by Augustine, whose words are
by no means ambiguous. When Christ says, “Me ye have not always,” he
spoke of his bodily presence. In regard to his majesty, in regard to his
providence, in regard to his ineffable and invisible grace, is fulfilled
what he said: “Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p89.3"></span>[Mt.
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p89.3"></span>); but in regard to the flesh which the
Word assumed—in regard to that which was born of the Virgin—in regard to
that which was apprehended by the Jews, nailed to the tree, suspended on
the cross, wrapt in linen clothes, laid in the tomb, and manifested in
the resurrection,—“Me ye have not always.” Why? Since he conversed with
his disciples in bodily presence for forty days, and, going out with
them, ascended, while they saw but followed not. He is not here, for he
sits there, at the right hand of the Father. And yet he is here: for the
presence of his majesty is not withdrawn. Otherwise, as regards the
presence of his majesty, we have Christ always; while, in regard to his
bodily presence, it was rightly said, “Me ye have not always.” In
respect of bodily presence, the Church had him for a few days: now she
holds him by faith, but sees him not with the eye (August. Tract. in
Joann. 50). Here (that I may briefly note this) he makes him present
with us in three ways—in majesty, providence, and ineffable grace; under
which I comprehend that wondrous communion of his body and blood,
provided we understand that it is effected by the power of the Holy
Spirit, and not by that fictitious enclosing of his body under the
element, since our Lord declared that he had flesh and bones which could
be handled and seen. *Going away*, and *ascending*, intimate, not that
he had the appearance of one going away and ascending, but that he truly
did what the words express. Some one will ask, Are we then to assign a
certain region of heaven to Christ? I answer with Augustine, that this
is a curious and superfluous question, provided we believe that he is in
heaven.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p90"></span>27. What? Does not the very name of
ascension, so often repeated, intimate removal from one place to
another? This they deny, because by height, according to them, the
majesty of empire only is denoted. But what was the very mode of
ascending? Was he not carried up while the disciples looked on? Do not
the Evangelists clearly relate that he was carried into heaven? These
acute Sophists reply, that a cloud intervened, and took him out of their
sight, to teach the disciples that he would not afterwards be visible in
the world. As if he ought not rather to have vanished in a moment, to
make them believe in his invisible presence, or the cloud to have
gathered around him before he moved a step. When he is carried aloft
into the air, and the interposing cloud shows that he is no more to be
sought on earth, we safely infer that his dwelling now is in the
heavens, as Paul also asserts, bidding us look for him from thence
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p90.1"></span>[Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p90.1"></span>). For this reason, the angels remind the
disciples that it is vain to keep gazing up into heaven, because Jesus,
who was taken up, would come in like manner as they had seen him ascend.
Here the adversaries of sound doctrine escape, as they think, by the
ingenious quibble, that he will come in visible form, though he never
departed from the earth, but remained invisible among his people. As if
the angels had insinuated a two-fold presence, and not simply made the
disciples eye-witnesses of the ascent, that no doubt might remain. It
was just as if they had said, By ascending to heaven, while you looked
on, he has asserted his heavenly power: it remains for you to wait
patiently until he again arrive to judge the world. He has not entered
into heaven to occupy it alone, but to gather you and all the pious
along with him.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p91"></span>28. Since the advocates of this
spurious dogma are not ashamed to honour it with the suffrages of the
ancients, and especially of Augustine, how perverse they are in the
attempt I will briefly explain. Pious and learned men have collected the
passages, and therefore I am unwilling to plead a concluded cause: any
one who wishes may consult their writings. I will not even collect from
Augustine what might be pertinent to the matter,61  <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640.md) but will be contented to show briefly,
that without all controversy he is wholly ours. The pretence of our
opponents, when they would wrest him from us, that throughout his works
the flesh and blood of Christ are said to be dispensed in the
Supper—namely, the victim once offered on the cross, is frivolous,
seeing he, at the same time, calls it either the eucharist or sacrament
of the body. But it is unnecessary to go far to find the sense in which
he uses the terms *flesh* and *blood*, since he himself explains, saying
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p92.2"></span>Ep. 23<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p92.2"></span>, ad Bonif.) that the sacraments receive
names from their similarity to the things which they designate; and
that, therefore, the sacrament of the body is after a certain manner the
body. With this agrees another well-know passage, “The Lord hesitated
not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign” (Cont. Adimant.
Manich. cap. 12). They again object that Augustine says distinctly that
the body of Christ falls upon the earth, and enters the mouth. But this
is in the same sense in which he affirms that it is consumed, for he
conjoins both at the same time. There is nothing repugnant to this in
his saying that the bread is consumed after the mystery is performed:
for he had said a little before, “As these things are known to men, when
they are done by men they may receive honour as being religious, but not
as being wonderful” (De Trinit. Lib. 3 c. 10). His meaning is not
different in the passage which our opponents too rashly appropriate to
themselves—viz. that Christ in a manner carried himself in his own
hands, when he held out the mystical bread to his disciples. For by
interposing the expression, *in a manner*, he declares that he was not
really or truly included under the bread. Nor is it strange, since he
elsewhere plainly contends, that bodies could not be without particular
localities, and being nowhere, would have no existence. It is a paltry
cavil that he is not there treating of the Supper, in which God exerts a
special power. The question had been raised as to the flesh of Christ,
and the holy man professedly replying, says, “Christ gave immortality to
his flesh, but did not destroy its nature. In regard to this form, we
are not to suppose that it is everywhere diffused: for we must beware
not to rear up the divinity of the man, so as to take away the reality
of the body. It does not follow that that which is in God is everywhere
as God” (Ep. ad Dardan.). He immediately subjoins the reason, “One
person is God and man, and both one Christ, everywhere, inasmuch as he
is God, and in heaven, inasmuch as he is man.” How careless would it
have been not to except the mystery of the Supper, a matter so grave and
serious, if it was in any respect adverse to the doctrine which he was
handling? And yet, if any one will attentively read what follows shortly
after, he will find that under that general doctrine the Supper also is
comprehended, that Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, and also Son of
man, is everywhere wholly present as God, in the temple of God, that is,
in the Church, as an inhabiting God, and in some place in heaven,
because of the dimensions of his real body. We see how, in order to
unite Christ with the Church, he does not bring his body out of heaven.
This he certainly would have done had the body of Christ not been truly
our food, unless when included under the bread. Elsewhere, explaining
how believers now possess Christ, he says, “You have him by the sign of
the cross, by the sacrament of baptism, by the meat and drink of the
altar” (Tract. in Joann. 50). How rightly he enumerates a superstitious
rite, among the symbols of Christ’s presence, I dispute not; but in
comparing the presence of the flesh to the sign of the cross, he
sufficiently shows that he has no idea of a twofold body of Christ, one
lurking concealed under the bread, and another sitting visible in
heaven. If there is any need of explanation, it is immediately added,
“In respect of the presence of his majesty, we have Christ always: in
respect of the presence of his flesh, it is rightly said, ‘Me ye have
not always.’” They object that he also adds, “In respect of ineffable
and invisible grace is fulfilled what was said by him, ‘I am with you
always, even to the end of the world.’” But this is nothing in their
favour. For it is at length restricted to his majesty, which is always
opposed to body, while the flesh is expressly distinguished from grace
and virtue. The same antithesis elsewhere occurs, when he says that
“Christ left the disciples in bodily presence, that he might be with
them in spiritual presence.” Here it is clear that the essence of the
flesh is distinguished from the virtue of the Spirit, which conjoins us
with Christ, when, in respect of space, we are at a great distance from
him. He repeatedly uses the same mode of expression, as when he says,
“He is to come to the quick and the dead in bodily presence, according
to the rule of faith and sound doctrine: for in spiritual presence he
was to come to them, and to be with the whole Church in the world until
its consummation. Therefore, this discourse is directed to believers,
whom he had begun already to save by corporeal presence, and whom he was
to leave in coporeal absence, that by spiritual presence he might
preserve them with the Father.” By corporeal to understand visible is
mere trifling, since he both opposes his body to his divine power, and
by adding, that he might “preserve them with the Father,” clearly
expresses that he sends his grace to us from heaven by means of the
Spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p93"></span>29. Since they put so much confidence
in his hiding-place of invisible presence, let us see how well they
conceal themselves in it. First, they cannot produce a syllable from
Scripture to prove that Christ is invisible; but they take for granted
what no sound man will admit, that the body of Christ cannot be given in
the Supper, unless covered with the mask of bread. This is the very
point in dispute; so far is it from occupying the place of the first
principle. And while they thus prate, they are forced to give Christ a
twofold body, because, according to them, it is visible in itself in
heaven, but in the Supper is invisible, by a special mode of
dispensation. The beautiful consistency of this may easily be judged,
both from other passages of Scripture, and from the testimony of Peter.
Peter says that the heavens must receive, or contain Christ, till he
come again (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p93.1"></span>[Acts
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p93.1"></span>). These men teach that he is in every
place, but without form. They say that it is unfair to subject a
glorious body to the ordinary laws of nature. But this answer draws
along with it the delirious dream of Servetus, which all pious minds
justly abhor, that his body was absorbed by his divinity. I do not say
that this is their opinion; but if it is considered one of the
properties of a glorified body to fill all things in an invisible
manner, it is plain that the corporeal substance is abolished, and no
distinction is left between his Godhead and his human nature. Again, if
the body of Christ is so multiform and diversified, that it appears in
one place, and in another is invisible, where is there anything of the
nature of body with its proper dimensions, and where is its unity? Far
more correct is Tertullian, who contends that the body of Christ was
natural and real, because its figure is set before us in the mystery of
the Supper, as a pledge and assurance of spiritual life (Tertull. Cont.
Marc. Lib. 4).61  <span id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641.md) And certainly
Christ said of his glorified body, “Handle me, and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.1"></span>[Luke
24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.1"></span>). Here, by the lips of Christ himself,
the reality of his flesh is proved, by its admitting of being seen and
handled. Take these away, and it will cease to be flesh. They always
betake themselves to their lurking-place of dispensation, which they
have fabricated. But it is our duty so to embrace what Christ absolutely
declares, as to give it an unreserved assent. He proves that he is not a
phantom, because he is visible in his flesh. Take away what he claims as
proper to the nature of his body, and must not a new definition of body
be devised? Then, however they may turn themselves about, they will not
find any place for their fictitious dispensation in that passage, in
which Paul says, that “our conversation is in heaven; from whence we
look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.2"></span>[Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.2"></span>). We are not to hope for conformity to
Christ in these qualities which they ascribe to him as a body, without
bounds, and invisible. They will not find any one so stupid as to be
persuaded of this great absurdity. Let them not, therefore, set it down
as one of the properties of Christ’s glorious body, that it is, at the
same time, in many places, and in no place. In short, let them either
openly deny the resurrection of his flesh, or admit that Christ, when
invested with celestial glory, did not lay aside his flesh, but is to
make us, in our flesh, his associates, and partakers of the same glory,
since we are to have a common resurrection with him. For what does
Scripture throughout deliver more clearly than that, as Christ assumed
our flesh when he was born of the Virgin, and suffered in our true flesh
when he made satisfaction for us, so on rising again he resumed the same
true flesh, and carried it with him to heaven? The hope of our
resurrection, and ascension to heaven, is, that Christ rose again and
ascended, and, as Tertullian says (De Resurrect. Carnis), “Carried an
earnest of our resurrection along with him into heaven.” Morever, how
weak and fragile would this hope be, had not this very flesh of ours in
Christ been truly raised up, and entered into the kingdom of heaven. But
the essential properties of a body are to be confined by space, to have
dimension and form. Have done, then, with that foolish fiction, which
affixes the minds of men, as well as Christ, to bread. For to what end
this occult presence under the bread, save that those who wish to have
Christ conjoined with them may stop short at the symbol? But our Lord
himself wished us to withdraw not only our eyes, but all our senses,
from the earth, forbidding the woman to touch him until he had ascended
to the Father (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.3"></span>[John
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.3"></span>). When he sees Mary, with pious
reverential zeal, hastening to kiss his feet, there could be no reason
for his disapproving and forbidding her to touch him before he had
ascended to heaven, unless he wished to he sought nowhere else. The
objection, that he afterwards appeared to Stephen, is easily answered.
It was not necessary for our Saviour to change his place, as he could
give the eyes of his servant a power of vision which could penetrate to
heaven. The same account is to be given of the case of Paul. The
objection, that Christ came forth from the closed sepulchre, and came in
to his disciples while the doors were shut (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.4"></span>[Mt.
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.4"></span>; <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.5"></span>[John
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.5"></span>), gives no better support to their error.
For as the water, just as if it had been a solid pavement, furnished a
path to our Saviour when he walked on it (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.6"></span>[Mt.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.6"></span>.), so it is not strange that the hard
stone yielded to his step; although it is more probable that the stone
was removed at his command, and forthwith, after giving him a passage,
returned to its place. To enter while the doors were shut, was not so
much to penetrate through solid matter, as to make a passage for himself
by divine power, and stand in the midst of his disciples in a most
miraculous manner. They gain nothing by quoting the passage from Luke,
in which it is said, that Christ suddenly vanished from the eyes of the
disciples, with whom he had journed to Emmaus (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.7"></span>[Luke
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p94.7"></span>). In withdrawing from their sight, he did
not become invisible: he only disappeared. Thus Luke declares that, on
the journeying with them, he did not assume a new form, but that “ their
eyes were holden.” But these men not only transform Christ that he may
live on the earth, but pretend that there is another elsewhere of a
different description. In short, by thus trifling, they, not in direct
terms indeed, but by a circumlocution, make a spirit of the flesh of
Christ; and, not contented with this, give him properties altogether
opposite. Hence it necessarily follows that he must be twofold.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p95"></span>30. Granting what they absurdly talk
of the invisible presence, it will still be necessary to prove the
immensity, without which it is vain to attempt to include Christ under
the bread. Unless the body of Christ can be everywhere without any
boundaries of space, it is impossible to believe that he is hid in the
Supper under the bread. Hence, they have been under the necessity of
introducing the monstrous dogma of ubiquity. But it has been
demonstrated by strong and clear passages of Scripture, first, that it
is bounded by the dimensions of the human body; and, secondly, that its
ascension into heaven made it plain that it is not in all places, but on
passing to a new one, leaves the one formerly occupied. The promise to
which they appeal, “I am with you always, even to the end of the world,”
is not to be applied to the body. First, then, a perpetual connection
with Christ could not exist, unless he dwells in us corporeally,
independently of the use of the Supper; and, therefore, they have no
good ground for disputing so bitterly concerning the words of Christ, in
order to include him under the bread in the Supper.61  <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642.md) Secondly, the context proves that
Christ is not speaking at all of his flesh, but promising the disciples
his invincible aid to guard and sustain them against all the assaults of
Satan and the world. For, in appointing them to a difficult office, he
confirms them by the assurance of his presence, that they might neither
hesitate to undertake it, nor be timorous in the discharge of it; as if
he had said, that his invincible protection would not fail them. Unless
we would throw everything into confusion, must it not be necessary to
distinguish the mode of presence? And, indeed, some, to their great
disgrace, choose rather to betray their ignorance than give up one iota
of their error. I speak not of Papists, whose doctrine is more
tolerable, or at least more modest; but some are so hurried away by
contention as to say, that on account of the union of natures in Christ,
wherever his divinity is, there his flesh, which cannot be separated
from it, is also; as if that union formed a kind of medium of the two
natures, making him to be neither God nor man. So held Eutyches, and
after him Servetus. But it is clearly gathered from Scripture that the
one person of Christ is composed of two natures, but so that each has
its peculiar properties unimpaired. That Eutyches was justly condemned,
they will not have the hardihood to deny. It is strange that they attend
not to the cause of condemnation—viz. that destroying the distinction
between the natures, and insisting only on the unity of person, he
converted God into man and man into God.61  <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643.md) What madness, then, is it to confound
heaven with earth, sooner than not withdraw the body of Christ from its
heavenly sanctuary? In regard to the passages which they adduce, “No man
has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the
Son of man which is in heaven” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p97.1"></span>[John
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p97.1"></span>); “The only-begotten Son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p97.2"></span>[John
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p97.2"></span>), they betray the same stupidity,
scouting the communion of properties (*idiomatum*, κοινωνίαν), which not
without reason was formerly invented by holy Fathers. Certainly when
Paul says of the princes of this world that they “crucified the Lord of
glory” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p97.3"></span>[1 Cor.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p97.3"></span>), he means not that he suffered anything
in his divinity, but that Christ, who was rejected and despised, and
suffered in the flesh, was likewise God and the Lord of glory. In this
way, both the Son of man was in heaven because he was also Christ; and
he who, according to the flesh, dwelt as the Son of man on earth, was
also God in heaven. For this reason, he is said to have descended from
heaven in respect of his divinity, not that his divinity quitted heaven
to conceal itself in the prison of the body, but because, although he
filled all things, it yet resided in the humanity of Christ coporeally,
that is, naturally, and in an ineffable manner. There is a trite
distinction in the schools which I hesitate not to quote. Although the
whole Christ is everywhere, yet everything which is in him is not
everywhere. I wish the Schoolmen had duly weighed the force of this
sentence, as it would have obviated their absurd fiction of the
corporeal presence of Christ. Therefore, while our whole Mediator is
everywhere, he is always present with his people, and in the Supper
exhibits his presence in a special manner; yet so, that while he is
wholly present, not everything which is in him is present, because, as
has been said, in his flesh he will remain in heaven till he come to
judgment.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p98"></span>31. They are greatly mistaken in
imagining that there is no presence of the flesh of Christ in the
Supper, unless it be placed in the bread. They thus leave nothing for
the secret operation of the Spirit, which unites Christ himself to us.
Christ does not seem to them to be present unless he descends to us, as
if we did not equally gain his presence when he raises us to himself.
The only question, therefore, is as to the mode, they placing Christ in
the bread, while we deem it unlawful to draw him down from heaven. Which
of the two is more correct, let the reader judge. Only have done with
the calumny that Christ is withdrawn from his Supper if he lurk not
under the covering of bread. For seeing this mystery is heavenly, there
is no necessity to bring Christ on the earth that he may be connected
with us.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p99"></span>32. Now, should any one ask me as to
the mode, I will not be ashamed to confess that it is too high a mystery
either for my mind to comprehend or my words to express; and to speak
more plainly, I rather feel than understand it. The truth of God,
therefore, in which I can safely rest, I here embrace without
controversy. He declares that his flesh is the meat, his blood the
drink, of my soul; I give my soul to him to be fed with such food. In
his sacred Supper he bids me take, eat, and drink his body and blood
under the symbols of bread and wine. I have no doubt that he will truly
give and I receive. Only, I reject the absurdities which appear to be
unworthy of the heavenly majesty of Christ, and are inconsistent with
the reality of his human nature. Since they must also be repugnant to
the word of God, which teaches both that Christ was received into the
glory of the heavenly kingdom, so as to be exalted above all the
circumstances of the world (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p99.1"></span>[Luke
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p99.1"></span>), and no less carefully ascribes to him
the properties belonging to a true human nature. This ought not to seem
incredible or contradictory to reason (Iren. Lib. 4 cap. 34); because,
as the whole kingdom of Christ is spiritual, so whatever he does in his
Church is not to be tested by the wisdom of this world; or, to use the
words of Augustine, “this mystery is performed by man like the others,
but in a divine manner, and on earth, but in a heavenly manner.” Such, I
say, is the corporeal presence which the nature of the sacrament
requires, and which we say is here displayed in such power and efficacy,
that it not only gives our minds undoubted assurance of eternal life,
but also secures the immortality of our flesh, since it is now quickened
by his immortal flesh, and in a manner shines in his immortality. Those
who are carried beyond this with their hyperboles, do nothing more by
their extravagancies than obscure the plain and simple truth. If any one
is not yet satisfied, I would have him here to consider with himself
that we are speaking of the sacrament, every part of which ought to have
reference to faith. Now by participation of the body, as we have
explained, we nourish faith not less richly and abundantly than do those
who drag Christ himself from heaven. Still I am free to confess that
that mixture or transfusion of the flesh of Christ with our soul, which
they teach, I repudiate, because it is enough for us that Christ, out of
the substance of his flesh, breathes life into our souls, nay, diffuses
his own life into us, though the real flesh of Christ does not enter
us.61  <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644.md) I may add, that there can
be no doubt that the analogy of faith by which Paul enjoins us to test
every interpretation of Scripture, is clearly with us in this matter.
Let those who oppose a truth so clear, consider to what standard of
faith they conform themselves: “Ever spirit that confesseth not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God” ((<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p100.1"></span>[1 John
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p100.1"></span>); 2 John ver. 7). These men, though they
disguise the fact, or perceive it not, rob him of his flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p101"></span>33. The same view must be taken of
communion, which, according to them, has no existence unless they
swallow the flesh of Christ under the bread. But no slight insult is
offered to the Spirit if we refuse to believe that it is by his
incomprehensible agency that we communicate in the body and blood of
Christ. Nay, if the nature of the mystery, as delivered to us, and known
to the ancient Church for four hundred years, had been considered as it
deserves, there was more than enough to satisfy us; the door would have
been shut against many disgraceful errors. These have kindled up fearful
dissensions, by which the Church, both anciently and in our own times,
has been miserably vexed; curious men insisting on an extravagant mode
of presence to which Scripture gives no countenance. And for a matter
thus foolishly and rashly devised they keep up a turmoil, as if the
including of Christ under the bread were, so to speak, the beginning and
end of piety. It was of primary importance to know how the body of
Christ once delivered to us becomes ours, and how we become partakers of
his shed blood, because this is to possess the whole of Christ
crucified, so as to enjoy all his blessings. But overlooking these
points, in which there was so much importance, nay, neglecting and
almost suppressing them, they occupy themselves only with this one
perplexing question, How is the body of Christ hidden under the bread,
or under the appearance of bread? They falsely pretend that all which we
teach concerning spiritual eating is opposed to true and what they call
real eating, since we have respect only to the mode of eating. This,
according to them, is carnal, since they include Christ under the bread,
but according to us is spiritual, inasmuch as the sacred agency of the
Spirit is the bond of our union with Christ. Not better founded is the
other objection, that we attend only to the fruit or effect which
believers receive from eating the flesh of Christ. We formerly said,
that Christ himself is the matter of the Supper, and that the effect
follows from this, that by the sacrifice of his death our sins are
expiated, by his blood we are washed, and by his resurrection we are
raised to the hope of life in heaven. But a foolish imagination, of
which Lombard was the author, perverts their minds, while they think
that the sacrament is the eating of the flesh of Christ. His words are,
“The sacrament and not the thing are the forms of bread and wine; the
sacrament and the thing are the flesh and blood of Christ; the thing and
not the sacrament is his mystical flesh” (Lombard, Lib. 4 Dist. 8).
Again a little after, “The thing signified and contained is the proper
flesh of Christ; the thing signified and not contained is his mystical
body.” To his distinction between the flesh of Christ and the power of
nourishing which it possesses, I assent; but his maintaining it to be a
sacrament, and a sacrament contained under the bread, is an error not to
be tolerated. Hence has arisen that false interpretation of sacramental
eating, because it was imagined that even the wicked and profane,
however much alienated from Christ, eat his body. But the very flesh of
Christ in the mystery of the Supper is no less a spiritual matter than
eternal salvation. Whence we infer, that all who are devoid of the
Spirit of Christ can no more eat the flesh of Christ than drink wine
that has no savour. Certainly Christ is shamefully lacerated, when his
body, as lifeless and without any vigour, is prostituted to unbelievers.
This is clearly repugnant to his words, “He that eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p101.1"></span>[John
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p101.1"></span>). They object that he is not there
speaking of sacramental eating; this I admit, provided they will not
ever and anon stumble on this stone, that his flesh itself is eaten
without any benefit. I should like to know how they confine it after
they have eaten. Here, in my opinion, they will find no outlet. But they
object, that the ingratitude of man cannot in any respect detract from,
or interfere with, faith in the promises of God. I admit and hold that
the power of the sacrament remains entire, however the wicked may labour
with all their might to annihilate it. Still, it is one thing to be
offered, another to be received. Christ gives this spiritual food and
holds forth this spiritual drink to all. Some eat eagerly, others
superciliously reject it. Will their rejection cause the meat and drink
to lose their nature? They will say that this similitude supports their
opinion—viz. that the flesh of Christ, though it be without taste, is
still flesh. But I deny that it can be eaten without the taste of faith,
or (if it is more agreeable to speak with Augustine), I deny that men
carry away more from the sacrament than they collect in the vessel of
faith. Thus nothing is detracted from the sacrament, nay, its reality
and efficacy remain unimpaired, although the wicked, after externally
partaking of it, go away empty. If, again, they object, that it
derogates from the expression, “This is my body,” if the wicked receive
corruptible bread and nothing besides, it is easy to answer, that God
wills not that his truth should be recognised in the mere reception, but
in the constancy of his goodness, while he is prepared to perform, nay,
liberally offers to the unworthy what they reject. The integrity of the
sacrament, an integrity which the whole world cannot violate, lies here,
that the flesh and blood of Christ are not less truly given to the
unworthy than to the elect believers of God; and yet it is true, that
just as the rain falling on the hard rock runs away because it cannot
penetrate, so the wicked by their hardness repel the grace of God, and
prevent it from reaching them. We may add, that it is no more possible
to receive Christ without faith, than it is for seed to germinate in the
fire. They ask how Christ can have come for the condemnation of some,
unless they unworthily receive him; but this is absurd, since we nowhere
read that they bring death upon themselves by receiving Christ
unworthily, but by rejecting him. They are not aided by the parable in
which Christ says, that the seed which fell among thorns sprung up, but
was afterwards choked (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p101.2"></span>[Mt.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p101.2"></span>), because he is there speaking of the
effect of a temporary faith, a faith which those who place Judas in this
respect on a footing with Peter, do not think necessary to the eating of
the flesh and the drinking of the blood of Christ. Nay, their error is
refuted by the same parable, when Christ says that some seed fell upon
the wayside, and some on stony ground, and yet neither took root. Hence
it follows that the hardness of believers is an obstacle which prevents
Christ from reaching them. All who would have our salvation to be
promoted by this sacrament, will find nothing more appropriate than to
conduct believers to the fountain, that they may draw life from the Son
of God. The dignity is amply enough commended when we hold, that it is a
help by which we may be ingrafted into the body of Christ, or, already
ingrafted, may be more and more united to him, until the union is
completed in heaven. They object, that Paul could not have made them
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord if they had not partaken of
them (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p101.3"></span>[1 Cor.
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p101.3"></span>); I answer, that they were not condemned
for having eaten. but only for having profaned the ordinance by
trampling under foot the pledge, which they ought to have reverently
received, the pledge of sacred union with God.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p102"></span>34. Moreover, as among ancient
writers, Augustine especially maintaine  <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645.md) this head of doctrine, that the grace
figured by the sacraments is not impaired or made void by the infidelity
or malice of men, it will be useful to prove clearly from his words, how
ignorantly and erroneously those who cast forth the body of Christ to be
eaten by dogs, wrest them to their present purpose. Sacramental eating,
according to them, is that by which the wicked receive the body and
blood of Christ without the agency of the Spirit, or any gracious
effect. Augustine, on the contrary, prudently pondering the expression.
“Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life ”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p103.1"></span>[John
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p103.1"></span>), says: “That is the virtue of the
sacrament, and not merely the visible sacrament: the sacrament of him
who eats inwardly, not of him who eats outwardly, or merely with the
teeth” (Hom. in Joann. 26). Hence he at length concludes, that the
sacrament of this thing, that is, of the unity of the body and blood of
Christ in the Lord’s Supper, is set before some for life, before others
for destruction: while the matter itself, of which it is the sacrament,
is to all for life, to none for destruction, whoever may have been the
partaker. Lest any one should here cavil that by *thing* is not meant
body, but the grace of the Spirit, which may be separated from it, he
dissipates these mists by the antithetical epithets, Visible and
Invisible. For the body of Christ cannot be included under the former.
Hence it follows, that unbelievers communicate only in the visible
symbol; and the better to remove all doubt, after saying that this bread
requires an appetite in the inner man, he adds (Hom. in Joann. 59),
“Moses, and Aaron, and Phinehas, and many others who ate manna, pleased
God. Why? Because the visible food they understood spiritually, hungered
for spiritually, tasted spiritually, and feasted on spiritually. We,
too, in the present day, have received visible food: but the sacrament
is one thing, the virtue of the sacrament is another.” A little after,
he says: “And hence, he who remains not in Christ, and in whom Christ
remains not, without doubt neither spiritually eats his flesh, nor
drinks his blood, though with his teeth he may carnally and visibly
press the symbol of his body and blood.” Again, we are told that the
visible sign is opposed to spiritual eating. This refutes the error that
the invisible body of Christ is sacramentally eaten in reality, although
not spiritually. We are told, also, that nothing is given to the impure
and profane beyond the visible taking of the sign. Hence his celebrated
saying, that the other disciples ate *bread which was the Lord,* whereas
Judas ate *the bread of the Lord* (Hom. in Joann. 62). By this, he
clearly excludes unbelievers from participation in his body and blood.
He has no other meaning when he says, “Why do you wonder that the bread
of Christ was given to Judas, though he consigned him to the devil, when
you see, on the contrary, that a messenger of the devil was given to
Paul to perfect him in Christ?” (August. de Bapt. Cont. Donat. Lib. 5).
He indeed says elsewhere, that the bread of the Supper was the body of
Christ to those to whom Paul said, “He that eateth and drinketh
unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself; and that it does
not follow that they received nothing because they received unworthily.”
But in what sense he says this, he explains more fully in another
passage (De Civit. Dei, Lib. 21 c. 25). For undertaking professedly to
explain how the wicked and profane, who, with the mouth, profess the
faith of Christ, but in act deny him, eat the body of Christ; and,
indeed, refuting the opinion of some who thought that they ate not only
sacramentally, but really, he says: “Neither can they be said to eat the
body of Christ, because they are not to be accounted among the members
of Christ. For, not to mention other reasons, they cannot be at the same
time the members of Christ and the members of a harlot. In fine, when
Christ himself says, ‘He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood,
dwelleth in me, and I in him’ (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p103.2"></span>[John
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p103.2"></span>), he shows what it is to eat the body of
Christ, not sacramentally, but in reality. It is to abide in Christ,
that Christ may abide in him. For it is just as if he had said, Let not
him who abides not in me, and in whom I abide not, say or think that he
eats my body or drinks my blood.” Let the reader attend to the
antithesis between eating sacramentally and eating really, and there
will be no doubt. The same thing he confirms not less clearly in these
words: “Prepare not the jaws, but the heart; for which alone the Supper
is appointed. We believe in Christ when we receive him in faith: in
receiving, we know what we think: we receive a small portion, but our
heart is filled: it is not therefore that which is seen, but that which
is believed, that feeds (August. Cont. Faust. Lib. 8 c. 16). Here, also,
he restricts what the wicked take to be the visible sign, and shows that
the only way of receiving Christ is by faith. So, also, in another
passage, declaring distinctly that the good and the bad communicate by
signs, he excludes the latter from the true eating of the flesh of
Christ. For had they received the reality, he would not have been
altogether silent as to a matter which was pertinent to the case. In
another passage, speaking of eating, and the fruit of it, he thus
concludes: “Then will the body and blood of Christ be life to each, if
that which is visibly taken in the sacrament is in reality spiritually
eaten, spiritually drunk” (De Verb. Apost. Serm. 2) Let those,
therefore, who make unbelievers partakers of the flesh and blood of
Christ, if they would agree with Augustine, set before us the visible
body of Christ, since, according to him, the whole truth is spiritual.
And certainly his words imply that sacramental eating, when unbelief
excludes the entrance of the reality, is only equivalent to visible or
external eating. But if the body of Christ may be truly and yet not
spiritually eaten, what could he mean when he elsewhere says: “Ye are
not to eat this body which you see, nor to drink the blood which will be
shed by those who are to crucify me? I have committed a certain
sacrament to you: it is the spiritual meaning which will give you life”
(August. in <span id="iv.iv.xviii-p103.3"></span>[Ps.
98](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p103.3"></span>). He certainly meant not to deny that
the body offered in the Supper is the same as that which Christ offered
in sacrifice; but he adverted to the mode of eating—viz. that the body,
though received into the celestial glory, breathes life into us by the
secret energy of the Spirit. I admit, indeed, that he often uses the
expression, “that the body of Christ is eaten by unbelievers;” but he
explains himself by adding, “in the sacrament.” And he elsewhere speaks
of a spiritual eating, in which our teeth do not chew grace (Hom. in
Joann. 27). And, lest my opponents should say that I am trying to
overwhelm them with the mass of my quotations, I would ask how they get
over this one sentence: “In the elect alone, the sacraments effect what
they figure.” Certainly they will not venture to deny, that by the bread
in the Supper, the body of Christ is figured. Hence it follows, that the
reprobate are not allowed to partake of it. That Cyril did not think
differently is clear from these words: “As one in pouring melted wax on
melted wax mixes the whole together, so it is necessary, when one
receives the body and blood of the Lord, to be conjoined with him, that
Christ may be found in him, and he in Christ.” From these words, I think
it plain that there is no true and real eating by those who only eat the
body of Christ sacramentally, seeing the body cannot be separated from
its virtue, and that the promises of God do not fail, though, while he
ceases not to rain from heaven, rocks and stones are not penetrated by
the moisture.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p104"></span>35. This consideration will easily
dissuade us from that carnal adoration which some men have, with
perverse temerity, introduced into the sacrament, reasoning thus with
themselves: If it is body, then it is also soul and divinity which go
along with the body, and cannot be separated from it; and, therefore,
Christ must there be adored. First, if we deny their pretended
concomitance, what will they do? For, as they chiefly insist on the
absurdity of separating the body of Christ from his soul and divinity,
what sane and sober man can persuade himself that the body of Christ is
Christ? They think that they completely establish this by their
syllogisms. But since Christ speaks separately of his body and blood,
without describing the mode of his presence, how can they in a doubtful
matter arrive at the certainty which they wish? What then? Should their
consciences be at any time exercised with some more grievous
apprehension, will they forthwith set them free, and dissolve the
apprehensions by their syllogisms? In other words, when they see that no
certainty is to be obtained from the word of God, in which alone our
minds can rest, and without which they go astray the very first moment
when they begin to reason, when they see themselves opposed by the
doctrine and practice of the apostles, and that they are supported by no
authority but their own, how will they feel? To such feelings other
sharp stings will be added. What? Was it a matter of little moment to
worship God under this form without any express injunction? In a matter
relating to the true worship of God, were we thus lightly to act without
one word of Scripture? Had all their thoughts been kept in due
subjection to the word of God, they certainly would have listened to
what he himself has said, “Take, eat, and drink,” and obeyed the command
by which he enjoins us to receive the sacrament, not worship it. Those
who receive, without adoration, as commanded by God, are secure that
they deviate not from the command. In commencing any work, nothing is
better than this security. They have the example of the apostles, of
whom we read not that they prostrated themselves and worshipped, but
that they sat down, took and ate. They have the practice of the
apostolic Church, where, as Luke relates, believers communicated not in
adoration, but in the breaking of bread (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p104.1"></span>[Acts
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p104.1"></span>). They have the doctrine of the apostles
as taught to the Corinthian Church by Paul, who declares that what he
delivered he had received of the Lord (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p104.2"></span>[1 Cor.
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p104.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p105"></span>36. The object of these remarks is to
lead pious readers to reflect how dangerous it is in matters of such
difficulty to wander from the simple word of God to the dreams of our
own brain. What has been said above should free us from all scruple in
this matter. That the pious soul may duly apprehend Christ in the
sacrament, it must rise to heaven. But if the office of the sacrament is
to aid the infirmity of the human mind, assisting it in rising upwards,
so as to perceive the height of spiritual mysteries, those who stop
short at the external sign stray from the right path of seeking Christ.
What then? Can we deny that the worship is superstitious when men
prostrate themselves before bread that they may therein worship Christ?
The Council of Nice undoubtedly intended to meet this evil when it
forbade us to give humble heed to the visible signs. And for no other
reason was it formerly the custom, previous to consecration, to call
aloud upon the people to raise their hearts, *sursum corda*. Scripture
itself, also, besides carefully narrating the ascension of Christ, by
which he withdrew his bodily presence from our eye and company, that it
might make us abandon all carnal thoughts of him, whenever it makes
mention of him, enjoins us to raise our minds upwards and seek him in
heaven, seated at the right hand of the Father (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p105.1"></span>[Col.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p105.1"></span>). According to this rule, we should
rather have adored him spiritually in the heavenly glory, than devised
that perilous species of adoration replete with gross and carnal ideas
of God. Those, therefore, who devised the adoration of the sacrament,
not only dreamed it of themselves, without any authority from Scripture,
where no mention of it can be shown (it would not have been omitted, had
it been agreeable to God); but, disregarding Scripture, forsook the
living God, and fabricated a god for themselves, after the lust of their
own hearts. For what is idolatry if it is not to worship the gifts
instead of the giver? Here the sin is twofold. The honour robbed from
God is transferred to the creature, and God, moreover, is dishonoured by
the pollution and profanation of his own goodness, while his holy
sacrament is converted into an execrable idol. Let us, on the contrary,
that we may not fall into the same pit, wholly confine our eyes, ears,
hearts, minds, and tongues, to the sacred doctrine of God. For this is
the school of the Holy Spirit, that best of masters, in which such
progress is made, that while nothing is to be acquired anywhere else, we
must willingly be ignorant of whatever is not there taught.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p106"></span>37. Then, as superstition, when once
it has passed the proper bounds, has no end to its errors, men went much
farther; for they devised rites altogether alien from the institution of
the Supper, and to such a degree that they paid divine honours to the
sign. They say that their veneration is paid to Christ. First, if this
were done in the Supper, I would say that that adoration only is
legitimate which stops not at the sign, but rises to Christ sitting in
heaven. Now, under what pretext do they say that they honour Christ in
that bread, when they have no promise of this nature? They consecrate
the host, as they call it, and carry it about in solemn show, and
formally exhibit it to be admired, reverenced, and invoked. I ask by
what virtue they think it duly consecrated? They will quote the words,
“This is my body.” I, on the contrary, will object, that it was at the
same time said, “Take, eat.” Nor will I count the other passage as
nothing; for I hold that since the promise is annexed to the command,
the former is so included under the latter, that it cannot possibly be
separated from it. This will be made clearer by an example. God gave a
command when he said, “Call upon me,” and added a promise, “I will
deliver thee” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p106.1"></span>[Psal.
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p106.1"></span>). Should any one invoke Peter or Paul,
and found on this promise, will not all exclaim that he does it in
error? And what else, pray, do those do who, disregarding the command to
eat, fasten on the mutilated promise, “This is my body,” that they may
pervert it to rites alien from the institution of Christ? Let us
remember, therefore, that this promise has been given to those who
observe the command connected with it, and that those who transfer the
sacrament to another end have no countenance from the word of God. We
formerly showed how the mystery of the sacred Supper contributes to our
faith in God. But since the Lord not only reminds us of this great gift
of his goodness, as we formerly explained, but passes it, as it were,
from hand to hand, and urges us to recognise it, he, at the same time,
admonishes us not to be ungrateful for the kindness thus bestowed, but
rather to proclaim it with such praise as is meet, and celebrate it with
thanksgiving. Accordingly, when he delivered the institution of the
sacrament to the apostles, he taught them to do it in remembrance of
him, which Paul interprets, “to show forth his death” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p106.2"></span>[1 Cor.
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p106.2"></span>). And this is, that all should publicly
and with one mouth confess that all our confidence of life and salvation
is placed in our Lord’s death, that we ourselves may glorify him by our
confession, and by our example excite others also to give him glory.
Here, again, we see what the aim of the sacrament is—namely, to keep us
in remembrance of Christ’s death. When we are ordered to show forth the
Lord’s death till he come again, all that is meant is, that we should,
with confession of the mouth, proclaim what our faith has recognised in
the sacrament—viz. that the death of Christ is our life. This is the
second use of the sacrament, and relates to outward confession.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p107"></span>38. Thirdly, The Lord intended it to
be a kind of exhortation, than which no other could urge or animate us
more strongly, both to purity and holiness of life, and also to charity,
peace, and concord. For the Lord there communicates his body so that he
may become altogether one with us, and we with him. Moreover, since he
has only one body of which he makes us all to be partakers, we must
necessarily, by this participation, all become one body. This unity is
represented by the bread which is exhibited in the sacrament. As it is
composed of many grains, so mingled together, that one cannot be
distinguished from another; so ought our minds to be so cordially
united, as not to allow of any dissension or division. This I prefer
giving in the words of Paul: “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many, are one
bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p107.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p107.1"></span>). We shall have profited admirably in
the sacrament, if the thought shall have been impressed and engraven on
our minds, that none of our brethren is hurt, despised, rejected,
injured, or in any way offended, without our, at the same time, hurting,
despising, and injuring Christ; that we cannot have dissension with our
brethren, without at the same time dissenting from Christ; that we
cannot love Christ without loving our brethren; that the same care we
take of our own body we ought to take of that of our brethren, who are
members of our body; that as no part of our body suffers pain without
extending to the other parts, so every evil which our brother suffers
ought to excite our compassion. Wherefore Augustine not inappropriately
often terms this sacrament *the bond of charity*. What stronger stimulus
could be employed to excite mutual charity, than when Christ, presenting
himself to us, not only invites us by his example to give and devote
ourselves mutually to each other, but inasmuch as he makes himself
common to all, also makes us all to be one in him.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p108"></span>39. This most admirably confirms what
I elsewhere said—viz. that there cannot be a right administration of the
Supper without the word. Any utility which we derive from the Supper
requires the word. Whether we are to be confirmed in faith, or exercised
in confession, or aroused to duty, there is need of preaching. Nothing,
therefore, can be more preposterous than to convert the Supper into a
dumb action. This is done under the tyranny of the Pope, the whole
effect of consecration being made to depend on the intention of the
priest, as if it in no way concerned the people, to whom especially the
mystery ought to have been explained. This error has originated from not
observing that those promises by which consecration is effected are
intended, not for the elements themselves, but for those who receive
them. Christ does not address the bread and tell it to become his body,
but bids his disciples eat, and promises them the communion of his body
and blood. And, according to the arrangement which Paul makes, the
promises are to be offered to believers along with the bread and the
cup. Thus, indeed, it is. We are not to imagine some magical
incantation, and think it sufficient to mutter the words, as if they
were heard by the elements; but we are to regard those words as a living
sermon, which is to edify the hearers, penetrate their minds, being
impressed and seated in their hearts, and exert its efficacy in the
fulfilment of that which it promises. For these reasons, it is clear
that the setting apart of the sacrament, as some insist, that an
extraordinary distribution of it may be made to the sick, is useless.
They will either receive it without hearing the words of the institution
read, or the minister will conjoin the true explanation of the mystery
with the sign. In the silent dispensation, there is abuse and defect. If
the promises are narrated, and the mystery is expounded, that those who
are to receive may receive with advantage, it cannot be doubted that
this is the true consecration. What then becomes of that other
consecration, the effect of which reaches even to the sick? But those
who do so have the example of the early Church. I confess it; but in so
important a matter, where error is so dangerous, nothing is safer than
to follow the truth.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p109"></span>40. Moreover, as we see that this
sacred bread of the Lord’s Supper is spiritual food, is sweet and
savoury, not less than salutary, to the pious worshippers of God, on
tasting which they feel that Christ is their life, are disposed to give
thanks, and exhorted to mutual love; so, on the other hand, it is
converted into the most noxious poison to all whom it does not nourish
and confirm in the faith, nor urge to thanksgiving and charity. For,
just as corporeal food, when received into a stomach subject to morbid
humours, becomes itself vitiated and corrupted, and rather hurts than
nourishes, so this spiritual food also, if given to a soul polluted with
malice and wickedness, plunges it into greater ruin, not indeed by any
defect in the food, but because to the “defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p109.1"></span>[Titus
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p109.1"></span>), however much it may be sanctified by
the blessing of the Lord. For, as Paul says, “Whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord;” “eateth and drinketh damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lord’s body” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p109.2"></span>[1 Cor.
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p109.2"></span>). For men of this description, who
without any spark of faith, without any zeal for charity, rush forward
like swine to seize the Lord’s Supper, do not at all discern the Lord’s
body. For, inasmuch as they do not believe that body to be their life,
they put every possible affront upon it, stripping it of all its
dignity, and profane and contaminate it by so receiving; inasmuch as
while alienated and estranged from their brethren, they dare to mingle
the sacred symbol of Christ’s body with their dissensions. No thanks to
them if the body of Christ is not rent and torn to pieces. Wherefore
they are justly held guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, which,
with sacrilegious impiety, they so vilely pollute. By this unworthy
eating, they bring judgment on themselves. For while they have no faith
in Christ, yet, by receiving the sacrament, they profess to place their
salvation only in him, and abjure all other confidence. Wherefore they
themselves are their own accusers; they bear witness against themselves;
they seal their own condemnation. Next being divided and separated by
hatred and ill-will from their brethren, that is, from the members of
Christ, they have no part in Christ, and yet they declare that the only
safety is to communicate with Christ, and be united to him. For this
reason Paul commands a man to examine himself before he eats of that
bread, and drinks of that cup (l Cor. 11:28). By this, as I understand,
he means that each individual should descend into himself, and consider,
first, whether, with inward confidence of heart, he leans on the
salvation obtained by Christ, and with confession of the mouth,
acknowledges it; and, secondly, whether with zeal for purity and
holiness he aspires to imitate Christ; whether, after his example, he is
prepared to give himself to his brethren, and to hold himself in common
with those with whom he has Christ in common; whether, as he himself is
regarded by Christ, he in his turn regards all his brethren as members
of his body, or, like his members, desires to cherish, defend, and
assist them, not that the duties of faith and charity can now be
perfected in us, but because it behoves us to contend and seek, with all
our heart, daily to increase our faith.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p110"></span>41. In seeking to prepare for eating
worthily, men have often dreadfully harassed and tortured miserable
consciences, and yet have in no degree attained the end. They have said
that those *eat worthily* who are in a state of grace. *Being in a state
of grace,* they have interpreted to be pure and free from all sin. By
this definition, all the men that ever have been, and are upon the
earth, were debarred from the use of this sacrament. For if we are to
seek our worthiness from ourselves, it is all over with us; only despair
and fatal ruin await us. Though we struggle to the utmost, we will not
only make no progress, but then be most unworthy after we have laboured
most to make ourselves worthy. To cure this ulcer, they have devised a
mode of procuring worthiness—viz. after having, as far as we can, made
an examination, and taken an account of all our actions, to expiate our
unworthiness by contrition, confession, and satisfaction. Of the nature
of this expiation we have spoken at the proper place (Book 3 chap. 4
sec. 2, 17, 27). As far as regards our present object, I say that such
things give poor and evanescent comfort to alarmed and downcast
consciences, struck with terror at their sins. For if the Lord, by his
prohibition, admits none to partake of his Supper but the righteous and
innocent, every man would require to be cautious before feeling secure
of that righteousness of his own which he is told that God requires. But
how are we to be assured that those who have done what in them lay have
discharged their duty to God? Even were we assured of this, who would
venture to assure himself that he had done what in him lay? Thus there
being no certain security for our worthiness, access to the Supper would
always be excluded by the fearful interdict, “He that eateth and
drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself.”

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p111"></span>42. It is now easy to judge what is
the nature, and who is the author, of that doctrine which prevails in
the Papacy, and which, by its inhuman austerity, deprives and robs
wretched sinners, oppressed with sorrow and trembling, of the
consolation of this sacrament, a sacrament in which all that is
delightful in the gospel was set before them. Certainly the devil could
have no shorter method of destroying men than by thus infatuating them,
and so excluding them from the taste and savour of this food with which
their most merciful Father in heaven had been pleased to feed them.
Therefore, lest we should rush over such a precipice, let us remember
that this sacred feast is medicine to the sick, comfort to the sinner,
and bounty to the poor; while to the healthy, the righteous, and the
rich, if any such could be found, it would be of no value. For while
Christ is therein given us for food, we perceive that without him we
fail, pine, and waste away, just as hunger destroys the vigour of the
body. Next, as he is given for life, we perceive that without him we are
certainly dead. Wherefore, the best and only worthiness which we can
bring to God, is to offer him our own vileness, and, if I may so speak,
unworthiness, that his mercy may make us worthy; to despond in
ourselves, that we may be consoled in him; to humble ourselves, that we
may be elevated by him; to accuse ourselves, that we may be justified by
him; to aspire, moreover, to the unity which he recommends in the
Supper; and, as he makes us all one in himself, to desire to have all
one soul, one heart, one tongue. If we ponder and meditate on these
things, we may be shaken, but will never be overwhelmed by such
considerations as these, how shall we, who are devoid of all good,
polluted by the defilements of sin, and half dead, worthily eat the body
of the Lord? We shall rather consider that we, who are poor, are coming
to a benevolent giver, sick to a physician, sinful to the author of
righteousness, in fine, dead to him who gives life; that worthiness
which is commanded by God, consists especially in faith, which places
all things in Christ, nothing in ourselves, and in charity, charity
which, though imperfect, it may be sufficient to offer to God, that he
may increase it, since it cannot be fully rendered. Some, concurring
with us in holding that worthiness consists in faith and charity, have
widely erred in regard to the measure of worthiness, demanding a
perfection of faith to which nothing can be added, and a charity
equivalent to that which Christ manifested towards us. And in this way,
just as the other class, they debar all men from access to this sacred
feast. For, were their view well founded, every one who receives must
receive unworthily, since all, without exception, are guilty, and
chargeable with imperfection. And certainly it were too stupid, not to
say idiotical, to require to the receiving of the sacrament a perfection
which would render the sacrament vain and superfluous, because it was
not instituted for the perfect, but for the infirm and weak, to stir up,
excite, stimulate, exercise the feeling of faith and charity, and at the
same time correct the deficiency of both.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p112"></span>43. In regard to the external form of
the ordinance, whether or not believers are to take into their hands and
divide among themselves, or each is to eat what is given to him: whether
they are to return the cup to the deacon or hand it to their neighbour;
whether the bread is to be leavened or unleavened, and the wine to be
red or white, is of no consequence. These things are indifferent, and
left free to the Church, though it is certain that it was the custom of
the ancient Church for all to receive into their hand. And Christ said,
“Take this, and divide it among yourselves” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p112.1"></span>[Luke
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p112.1"></span>). History relates that leavened and
ordinary bread was used before the time of Alexander the Bishop of Rome,
who was the first that was delighted with unleavened bread: for what
reason I see not, unless it was to draw the wondering eyes of the
populace by the novelty of the spectacle, more than to train them in
sound religion. I appeal to all who have the least zeal for piety,
whether they do not evidently perceive both how much more brightly the
glory of God is here displayed, and how much more abundant spiritual
consolation is felt by believers than in these rigid and histrionic
follies, which have no other use than to impose on the gazing populace.
They call it restraining the people by religion, when, stupid and
infatuated, they are drawn hither and thither by superstition. Should
any one choose to defend such inventions by antiquity, I am not unaware
how ancient is the use of chrism and exorcism in baptism, and how, not
long after the age of the apostles, the Supper was tainted with
adulteration; such, indeed, is the forwardness of human confidence,
which cannot restrain itself, but is always sporting and wantoning in
the mysteries of God. But let us remember that God sets so much value on
obedience to his word, that, by it, he would have us to judge his angels
and the whole world. All this mass of ceremonies being abandoned, the
sacrament might be celebrated in the most becoming manner, if it were
dispensed to the Church very frequently, at least once a-week. The
commencement should be with public prayer; next, a sermon should be
delivered: then the minister, having placed bread and wine on the table,
should read the institution of the Supper. He should next explain the
promises which are therein given; and, at the same time, keep back from
communion all those who are debarred by the prohibition of the Lord. He
should afterwards pray that the Lord, with the kindness with which he
has bestowed this sacred food upon us, would also form and instruct us
to receive it with faith and gratitude; and, as we are of ourselves
unworthy, would make us worthy of the feast by his mercy. Here, either a
psalm should be sung, or something read, while the faithful, in order,
communicate at the sacred feast, the minister breaking the bread, and
giving it to the people. The Supper being ended, an exhortation should
be given to sincere faith, and confession of faith, to charity, and
lives becoming Christians. Lastly, thanks should be offered, and the
praises of God should be sung. This being done, the Church should be
dismissed in peace.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p113"></span>44. What we have hitherto said of the
sacrament, abundantly shows that it was not instituted to be received
once a-year and that perfunctorily (as is now commonly the custom); but
that all Christians might have it in frequent use, and frequently call
to mind the sufferings of Christ, thereby sustaining and confirming
their faith: stirring themselves up to sing the praises of God, and
proclaim his goodness; cherishing and testifying towards each other that
mutual charity, the bond of which they see in the unity of the body of
Christ. As often as we communicate in the symbol of our Saviour’s body,
as if a pledge were given and received, we mutually bind ourselves to
all the offices of love, that none of us may do anything to offend his
brother, or omit anything by which he can assist him when necessity
demands, and opportunity occurs. That such was the practice of the
Apostolic Church, we are informed by Luke in the Acts, when he says,
that “they continued stedfastly in the apostles’ doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers” (<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p113.1"></span>[Acts
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p113.1"></span>). Thus we ought always to provide that
no meeting of the Church is held without the word, prayer, the
dispensation of the Supper, and alms. We may gather from Paul that this
was the order observed by the Corinthians, and it is certain that this
was the practice many ages after. Hence, by the ancient canons, which
are attributed to Anacletus and Calixtus, after the consecration was
made, all were to communicate who did not wish to be without the pale of
the Church. And in those ancient canons, which bear the name of
Apostolical, it is said that those who continue not to the end, and
partake not of the sacred communion, are to be corrected, as causing
disquiet to the Church. In the Council of Antioch it was decreed, that
those who enter the Church, hear the Scriptures, and abstain from
communion, are to be removed from the Church until they amend their
fault. And although, in the first Council of Tholouse, this was
mitigated, or at least stated in milder terms, yet there also it was
decreed, that those who after hearing the sermon, never communicated,
were to be admonished, and if they still abstained after admonition,
were to be excluded.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p114"></span>45. By these enactments, holy men
wished to retain and ensure the use of frequent communion, as handed
down by the apostles themselves; and which, while it was most salutary
to believers, they saw gradually falling into desuetude by the
negligence of the people. Of his own age, Augustine testifies: “The
sacrament of the unity of our Lord’s body is, in some places, provided
daily, and in others at certain intervals, at the Lord’s table; and at
that table some partake to life, and others to destruction” (August.
Tract. 26, in Joann. 6). And in the first Epistle to Januarius he says:
“Some communicate daily in the body and blood of the Lord; others
receive it on certain days: in some places, not a day intervenes on
which it is not offered: in others, it is offered only on the Sabbath
and the Lord’s day: in others, on the Lord’s day only.” But since, as we
have said, the people were sometimes remiss, holy men urged them with
severe rebukes, that they might not seem to connive at their
sluggishness. Of this we have an example in Chrysostom, on the Epistle
to the Ephesians (Hom. 26). “It was not said to him who dishonoured the
feast, Why have you not taken your seat? ‘But how camest thou in?’
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p114.1"></span>[Mt.
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p114.1"></span>). Whoever partakes not of the sacred
rites is wicked and impudent in being present: should any one who was
invited to a feast come in, wash his hands, take his seat, and seem to
prepare to eat, and thereafter taste nothing, would he not, I ask,
insult both the feast and the entertainer? So you, standing among those
who prepare themselves by prayer to take the sacred food, profess to be
one of the number by the mere fact of your not going away, and yet you
do not partake,—would it not have been better not to have made your
appearance? I am unworthy, you say. Then neither were you worthy of the
communion of prayer, which is the preparation for taking the sacred
mystery.”

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p115"></span>46. Most assuredly, the custom which
prescribes communion once a-year is an invention of the devil, by what
instrumentality soever it may have been introduced. They say that
Zephyrinus was the author of the decree, though it is not possible to
believe that it was the same as we now have it. It may be, that as times
then were, he did not, by his ordinance, consult ill for the Church. For
there cannot be a doubt that at that time the sacred Supper was
dispensed to the faithful at every meeting; nor can it be doubted that a
great part of them communicated. But as it scarcely ever happened that
all could communicate at the same time, and it was necessary that those
who were mingled with the profane and idolaters, should testify their
faith by some external symbol, this holy man, with a view to order and
government, had appointed that day, that on it the whole of Christendom
might give a confession of their faith by partaking of the Lord’s
Supper. The ordinance of Zephyrinus, which was otherwise good, posterity
perverted, when they made a fixed law of one communion in the year. The
consequence is, that almost all, when they have once communicated, as if
they were discharged as to all the rest of the year, sleep on secure. It
ought to have been far otherwise. Each week, at least, the table of the
Lord ought to have been spread for the company of Christians, and the
promises declared on which we might then spiritually feed. No one,
indeed, ought to be forced, but all ought to be exhorted and stimulated;
the torpor of the sluggish, also, ought to be rebuked, that all, like
persons famishing, should come to the feast. It was not without cause,
therefore, I complained, at the outset, that this practice had been
introduced by the wile of the devil; a practice which, in prescribing
one day in the year, makes the whole year one of sloth. We see, indeed,
that this perverse abuse had already crept in in the time of Chrysostom;
but we, also, at the same time, see how much it displeased him. For he
complains in bitter terms, in the passage which I lately quoted, that
there is so great an inequality in this matter, that they did not
approach often, at other times of the year, even when prepared, but only
at Easter, though unprepared. Then he exclaims: “O custom! O
presumption! In vain, then, is the daily oblation made: in vain do we
stand at the altar. There is none who partakes along with us.” So far is
he from having approved the practice by interposing his authority to it.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p116"></span>47. From the same forge proceeded
another constitution, which snatched or robbed a half of the Supper from
the greater part of the people of God—namely, the symbol of blood,
which, interdicted to laics and profane (such are the titles which they
give to God’s heritage), became the peculiar possession of a few shaven
and anointed individuals. The edict of the eternal God is, that all are
to drink. This an upstart dares to antiquate and abrogate by a new and
contrary law, proclaiming that all are not to drink. And that such
legislators may not seem to fight against their God without any ground,
they make a pretext of the dangers which might happen if the sacred cup
were given indiscriminately to all: as if these had not been observed
and provided for by the eternal wisdom of God. Then they reason acutely,
forsooth, that the one is sufficient for the two. For if the body is, as
they say, the whole Christ, who cannot be separated from his body, then
the blood includes the body by concomitance. Here we see how far our
sense accords with God, when to any extent whatever it begins to rage
and wanton with loosened reins. The Lord, pointing to the bread, says,
“This is my body.” Then pointing to the cup, he calls it his blood. The
audacity of human reason objects and says, The bread is the blood, the
wine is the body, as if the Lord had without reason distinguished his
body from his blood, both by words and signs; and it had ever been heard
that the body of Christ or the blood is called God and man. Certainly,
if he had meant to designate himself wholly, he might have said, It is
I, according to the Scriptural mode of expression, and not, “This is my
body,” “This is my blood.” But wishing to succour the weakness of our
faith, he placed the cup apart from the bread, to show that he suffices
not less for drink than for food. Now, if one part be taken away, we can
only find the half of the elements in what remains. Therefore, though it
were true, as they pretend, that the blood is in the bread, and, on the
other hand, the body in the cup, by concomitance, yet they deprive the
pious of that confirmation of faith which Christ delivered as necessary.
Bidding adieu, therefore, to their subtleties, let us retain the
advantage which, by the ordinance of Christ, is obtained by a double
pledge.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p117"></span>48. I am aware, indeed, how the
ministers of Satan, whose usual practice is to hold the Scriptures in
derision, here cavil.62  <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646.md) First,
they allege that from a simple fact we are not to draw a rule which is
to be perpetually obligatory on the Church. But they state an untruth
when they call it a simple fact. For Christ not only gave the cup, but
appointed that the apostles should do so in future. For his words
contain the command, “Drink ye all of it.” And Paul relates, that it was
so done, and recommends it as a fixed institution. Another subterfuge
is, that the apostles alone were admitted by Christ to partake of this
sacred Supper, because he had already selected and chosen them to the
priesthood. I wish they would answer the five following questions, which
they cannot evade, and which easily refute them and their lies. First,
By what oracle was this solution so much at variance with the word of
God revealed to them? Scripture mentions twelve who sat down with Jesus,
but it does not so derogate from the dignity of Christ as to call them
priests. Of this appellation we shall afterwards speak in its own place.
Although he then gave to twelve, he commanded them to “do this;” in
other words, to distribute thus among themselves. Secondly, Why during
that purer age, from the days of the apostles downward for a thousand
years, did all, without exception, partake of both symbols? Did the
primitive Church not know who the guests were whom Christ would have
admitted to his Supper? It were the most shameless impudence to carp and
quibble here. We have extant ecclesiastical histories, we have the
writings of the Fathers, which furnish clear proofs of this fact. “The
flesh,” says Tertullian, “feeds on the body and blood of Christ, that
the soul may be satiated by God” (Tertull. de Resurr. Carnis.). “How,”
says Ambrose to Theodosius, “will you receive the sacred body of the
Lord with such hands? how will you have the boldness to put the cup of
precious blood to your lips?” Jerome speaks of “the priests who perform
the Eucharist and distribute the Lord’s blood to the people” (Hieron. in
Malach. cap. 2). Chrysostom says, “Not as under the ancient law the
priest ate a part and the people a part, but one body and one cup is set
before all. All the things which belong to the Eucharist are common to
the priest and the people” (Chrysost. in Cor. cap. 8, Hom. 18). The same
thing is attested by Augustine in numerous passages.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p119"></span>49. But why dispute about a fact
which is perfectly notorious? Look at all Greek and Latin writers.
Passages of the same kind everywhere occur. Nor did this practice fall
into desuetude so long as there was one particle of integrity in the
Church. Gregory, whom you may with justice call the last Bishop of Rome,
says that it was observed in his age.  <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647.md) “What the blood of the Lamb is you
have learned, not by hearing, but by drinking it. His blood is poured
into the mouths of the faithful.” Nay, four hundred years after his
death, when all things had degenerated, the practice still remained. Nor
was it regarded as the custom merely, but as an inviolable law.
Reverence for the divine institution was then maintained, and they had
no doubt of its being sacrilege to separate what the Lord had joined.
For Gelasius thus speaks: “We find that some taking only the portion of
the sacred body, abstain from the cup. Undoubtedly let those persons, as
they seem entangled by some strange superstition, either receive the
whole sacrament, or be debarred from the whole. For the division of this
mystery is not made without great sacrilege” (De Consec. Dist. 2).
Reasons were given by Cyprian, which surely ought to weigh with
Christian minds. “How,” says he, “do we teach or incite them to shed
their blood in confessing Christ, if we deny his blood to those who are
to serve; or how do we make them fit for the cup of martyrdom, if we do
not previously admit them by right of communion in the Church, to drink
the cup of the Lord?” (Cyprian, Serm. 5, de Lapsis). The attempt of the
Canonists to restrict the decree of Gelasius to priests is a cavil too
puerile to deserve refutation.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p121"></span>50. Thirdly, Why did our Saviour say
of the bread simply, “Take, eat,” and of the cup, “drink ye all of it;”
as if he had purposely intended to provide against the wile of Satan?
Fourthly, If, as they will have it, the Lord honoured priests only with
his Supper, what man would ever have dared to call strangers, whom the
Lord had excluded, to partake of it, and to partake of a gift which he
had not in his power, without any command from him who alone could give
it? Nay, what presumption do they show in the present day in
distributing the symbol of Christ’s body to the common people, if they
have no command or example from the Lord? Fifthly, Did Paul lie when he
said to the Corinthians, “I have received of the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you?” (<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p121.1"></span>[1 Cor.
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p121.1"></span>). The thing delivered, he afterwards
declares to be, that all should communicate promiscuously in both
symbols. But if Paul received of the Lord that all were to be admitted
without distinction, let those who drive away almost the whole people of
God see from whom they have received, since they cannot now pretend to
have their authority from God, with whom there is not “yea and nay”
(<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p121.2"></span>[2 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p121.2"></span>). And yet these abominations they dare
to cloak with the name of the Church, and defend under this pretence, as
if those Antichrists were the Church who so licentiously trample under
foot, waste, and abrogate the doctrine and institutions of Christ, or as
if the Apostolic Church, in which religion flourished in full vigour,
were not the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_630"></span>[631](inst097.htm#fr_630.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p60"></span>06 606 See August. Hom. in Joann. 31
et 40, &c., Chrysost. Hom. ad Popul. Antioch., 60, 61; et Hom. in Marc.
89.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[632](inst097.htm#fr_631.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p69"></span>131 D131 The degree to which Calvin’s
words concerning the Roman Catholic dogma of transubstantiation have
become obsolete, during the 390 years following this definitive edition
of the Institutes (Geneva, 1559), may be ascertained by comparing his
discussion with the answers to questions 347-50 of the official
Baltimore Catechism, No. 3, issued in 1449 under the auspices of the
Confraternity of Christian Doctrine. We here quote both questions and
answers verbatim: 347. What happened when our Lord said: “This is My
body...This is My blood”? When Our Lord said, “This is My body,” the
entire substance of the bread was changed into His body; and when He
said, “This is My blood,” the entire substance of the wine changed into
His blood. 348. Did anything of the bread and wine remain after their
substance had been changed into Our Lord’s body and blood? After the
substance of the bread and wine had been changed into Our Lord’s body
and blood, there remained only the appearances of bread and wine. 349.
What do we mean by the appearances of bread and wine? By the appearances
of bread and wine we mean their color, taste, weight, shape, and
whatever else appears to the senses. 350. What is the change of the
entire substance of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ
called? The change of the entire substance of the bread and wine into
the body and blood of Christ is called Transubstantiation.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[633](inst097.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p71"></span>07 607 Compare together Ambrose on
those who are initiated in the sacraments (cap. 9) and Augustine, De
Trinitate, Lib. 3 cap. 10, and it will be seen that both are opposed to
transubstantiation.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[634](inst097.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p73"></span>132 D132 Calvin, though tactfully
refraining from any mention of Luther (whom he held in high regard),
obviously has reference to that view of the presence of Christ in the
Lord’s Supper historically associated with the Lutheran tradition—a view
which has often been called (in contradistinction to transubstantiation)
“consubstantiation.” Whereas “transubstantiation” means a change of the
substance of the bread and wine into the substance of Christ’s body and
blood, “consubstantiation” means that the substance of the bread and
wine is accompanied by the substance of Christ’s body and blood. Perhaps
three references from Lutheran tradition will suffice to support the
contention that this view has been held by that tradition. In his Large
Catechism, Martin Luther asserted: The Sacrament of the Alter is the
true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, in and under bread and
wine, instituted and commanded by the Word of Christ to be eaten and
drank by us Christians. In the negative division of Article 7 of the
Formula of Concord (1584), two sections are particularly relevant:
Section 5. (We reject and condemn the erroneous article) That the body
of Christ in the Holy Supper is not received by the mouth together with
the bread, but that only bread and wine are received by the mouth, while
the body of Christ is taken only spiritually, to wit, by faith. Section
11. (We reject and condemn the erroneous article) That Christ’s body is
so confined in heaven that it can in no mode whatever be likewise at one
and the same time in many places, or in all the places where the Lord’s
Supper is celebrated. Those theologians who followed in the Lutheran
tradition (e.g., David Hollaz and Heinrich Schmid) frequently expressed
this view in the following manner: In with, and under the bread and
wine, Christ presents His true body and blood to be truly and
substantially eaten and drank by us.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[635](inst097.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p79"></span>08 608 <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.1"></span>[Gen.
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.2"></span>[Exod.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.2"></span>; 17:6; <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.3"></span>[1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[636](inst097.htm#fr_635.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p79.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p80"></span>09 609 <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.1"></span>[Exod.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.2"></span>[Psalm
84:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.2"></span>; 42:3; <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.3"></span>[Mt
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[637](inst097.htm#fr_636.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p80.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p81"></span>10 610 French, “Certes si on ne veut
abolir toute raison, on ne peut dire que ce qui est commun à tous
sacremens n’appartienne aussi à la Cene.”—Certainly if we would not
abolish reason altogether, we cannot say that that which is common to
all the sacraments belongs not also to the Supper.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[638](inst097.htm#fr_637.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p84"></span>11 611 The French adds, “Je di si
Jesus Christ est enclos sous chacun des deux signes.”—I mean, if Jesus
Christ is included under each of the two signs.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[639](inst097.htm#fr_638.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p86"></span>12 612 The French adds, “En lisant nos
ecrits, on verra incontinent combien ces calomnies sont vilaines et
puantes.”—In reading our writings, it will at once be seen how vile and
foul these calumnies are.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[640](inst097.htm#fr_639.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p87.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p88"></span>13 613 Thus Augustine, speaking of
certain persons, says: “It is strange, when they are confined in their
straits, over what precipices they plunge themselves, fearing the nets
of truth” (Aug. <span id="iv.iv.xviii-p88.1"></span>Ep. 105<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p88.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_640"></span>[641](inst097.htm#fr_640.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p92"></span>14 614 That the dogma of those who
place the body of Christ in the bread is not aided by passages from
Augustine, or the authority of Scripture, is proved here and sec. 29-31.
There is no ambiguity in what he says, De Civit. Dei, 16, cap. 27. In
<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p92.1"></span>[Psal.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p92.1"></span>
et 46. In Joann. Tract. 13, 102, 106, 107, &c.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[642](inst097.htm#fr_641.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p94"></span>15 615 The French adds, “Car la figure
seroit fausse, si ce qu’elle represente n’estoit vray.”—For the figure
would be false, if the thing which it represents were not real.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[643](inst097.htm#fr_642.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p96"></span>16 616 The French adds, “veu qu’ils
confessent que nous l’avons aussi bien sans la Cene;”—seeing they
acknowledge that we have him as well without the Supper.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[644](inst097.htm#fr_643.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p97"></span>17 617 French, “Il faisoit Jesus
Christ homme en tant qu’il est Dieu, et Dieu en tant qu’il est
homme.”—He made Jesus Christ man, in so far as he is God, and God in so
far as he is man.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[645](inst097.htm#fr_644.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p100"></span>18 618 See Bernard in Cant. Serm. 74,
75; et Trad. de Gratia et Liber. Arbit.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[646](inst097.htm#fr_645.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p103"></span>19 619 See August. Cont. Liter.
Petiliani, Lib. 2 c. 47, et Tract. in Joann.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[647](inst097.htm#fr_646.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p118"></span>20 620 See Calvin de Cœna Domini.
Item, Adv. Theol. Paris. Item, Vera Eceles. Reform. Ratio.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[648](inst097.htm#fr_647.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p120"></span>133 D133 The reference is to Gregory
I (frequently referred to as Gregory the Great), bishop of Rome from 590
to 604.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 18 - OF THE POPISH MASS. HOW IT NOT ONLY PROFANES, BUT
ANNIHILATES THE LORDS SUPPER.](inst098.md)
