[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst082)  [Next](inst084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.iv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 3.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span>OF THE TEACHERS AND MINISTERS OF THE
CHURCH. THEIR ELECTION AND OFFICE.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>The three heads of this chapter are,—I. A
few preliminary remarks on Church order, on the end, utility, necessity,
and dignity of the Christian ministry, sec. 1-3. II. A separate
consideration of the persons performing Ecclesiastical functions, sec.
4-10. III. Of the Ordination or calling of the ministers of the Church,
sec. 10-16.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p4"></span>1. Summary of the chapter. Reasons why
God, in governing the Church, uses the ministry of men. 1. To declare
his condescension. 2. To train us to humility and obedience. 3. To bind
us to each other in mutual charity. These reasons confirmed by
Scripture.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p5"></span>2. This ministry of men most useful to the
whole Church. Its advantages enumerated.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p6"></span>3. The honourable terms in which the
ministry is spoken of. Its necessity established by numerous examples.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p7"></span>4. Second part of the chapter, treating of
Ecclesiastical office-bearers in particular. Some of them, as Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, temporary. Others, as Pastors and Teachers,
perpetual and indispensable.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p8"></span>5. Considering the office of Evangelist
and Apostle as one, we have Pastors corresponding with Apostles, and
Teachers with Prophets. Why the name of Apostles specially conferred on
the twelve.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p9"></span>6. As to the Apostles so also to Pastors
the preaching of the Word and the administration of the sacraments has
been committed. How the Word should be preached.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p10"></span>7. Regularly every Pastor should have a
separate church assigned to him. This, however, admits of modification,
when duly and regularly made by public authority.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p11"></span>8. Bishops, Presbyters, Pastors, and
Ministers, are used by the Apostles as one and the same. Some functions,
as being temporary, are omitted. Two—namely, those of Elders and
Deacons—as pertaining to the ministry of the Word, are retained.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p12"></span>9. Distinction between Deacons. Some
employed in distributing alms, others in taking care of the poor.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p13"></span>10. Third part of the chapter, treating
of the Ordination or calling of the ministers of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p14"></span>11. A twofold calling—viz. an external
and an internal. Mode in which both are to be viewed.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p15"></span>12. 1. Who are to be appointed ministers?
2. Mode of appointment.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p16"></span>13. 3. By whom the appointment is to be
made. Why the Apostles were elected by Christ alone. Of the calling and
election of St Paul.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p17"></span>14. Ordinary Pastors are designated by
other Pastors. Why certain of the Apostles also were designated by men.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p18"></span>15. The election of Pastors does not
belong to one individual. Other Pastors should preside, and the people
consent and approve.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p19"></span>16. Form in which the ministers of the
Church are to be ordained. No express precept but one. Laying on of
hands.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p20"></span>1. We are now to speak of the order in
which the Lord has been pleased that his Church should be governed. For
though it is right that he alone should rule and reign in the Church,
that he should preside and be conspicuous in it, and that its government
should be exercised and administered solely by his word; yet as he does
not dwell among us in visible presence, so as to declare his will to us
by his own lips, he in this (as we have said) uses the ministry of men,
by making them, as it were, his substitutes,53  <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) not by transferring his right and
honour to them, but only doing his own work by their lips, just as an
artificer uses a tool for any purpose. What I have previously expounded
(chap. 1 sec. 5) I am again forced to repeat. God might have acted, in
this respect, by himself, without any aid or instrument, or might even
have done it by angels; but there are several reasons why he rather
chooses to employ men.53  <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) First,
in this way he declares his condescension towards us, employing men to
perform the function of his ambassadors in the world, to be the
interpreters of his secret will; in short, to represent his own person.
Thus he shows by experience that it is not to no purpose he calls us his
temples, since by man’s mouth he gives responses to men as from a
sanctuary. Secondly, it forms a most excellent and useful training to
humility, when he accustoms us to obey his word though preached by men
like ourselves, or, it may be, our inferiors in worth. Did he himself
speak from heaven, it were no wonder if his sacred oracles were received
by all ears and minds reverently and without delay. For who would not
dread his present power? who would not fall prostrate at the first view
of his great majesty? who would not be overpowered by that immeasurable
splendour? But when a feeble man, sprung from the dust, speaks in the
name of God, we give the best proof of our piety and obedience, by
listening with docility to his servant, though not in any respect our
superior. Accordingly, he hides the treasure of his heavenly wisdom in
frail earthen vessels (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>[2 Cor.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>),
that he may have a more certain proof of the estimation in which it is
held by us. Moreover, nothing was fitter to cherish mutual charity than
to bind men together by this tie, appointing one of them as a pastor to
teach the others who are enjoined to be disciples, and receive the
common doctrine from a single mouth. For did every man suffice for
himself, and stand in no need of another’s aid (such is the pride of the
human intellect), each would despise all others, and be in his turn
despised. The Lord, therefore, has astricted his Church to what he
foresaw would be the strongest bond of unity when he deposited the
doctrine of eternal life and salvation with men, that by their hands he
might communicate it to others. To this Paul had respect when he wrote
to the Ephesians, “There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are
called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all. But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of
the gift of Christ. Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. (Now that he ascended,
what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the
earth? He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that he might fill all things.) And he gave some, apostles; and
some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;
for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: that we henceforth
be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in love, may grow up
into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the
whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love”
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p22.2"></span>[Eph
4:4-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p22.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p23"></span>2. By these words he shows that the
ministry of men, which God employs in governing the Church, is a
principal bond by which believers are kept together in one body. He also
intimates, that the Church cannot be kept safe, unless supported by
those guards to which the Lord has been pleased to commit its safety.
Christ “ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>[Eph.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>). The mode of filling is this: By the
ministers to whom he has committed this office, and given grace to
discharge it, he dispenses and distributes his gifts to the Church, and
thus exhibits himself as in a manner actually present by exerting the
energy of his Spirit in this his institution, so as to prevent it from
being vain or fruitless. In this way, the renewal of the saints is
accomplished, and the body of Christ is edified; in this way we grow up
in all things unto Him who is the Head, and unite with one another; in
this way we are all brought into the unity of Christ, provided prophecy
flourishes among us, provided we receive his apostles, and despise not
the doctrine which is administered to us. Whoever, therefore, studies to
abolish this order and kind of government of which we speak, or
disparages it as of minor importance, plots the devastation, or rather
the ruin and destruction, of the Church. For neither are the light and
heat of the sun, nor meat and drink, so necessary to sustain and cherish
the present life, as is the apostolical and pastoral office to preserve
a Church in the earth.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p24"></span>3. Accordingly, I have observed above,
that God has repeatedly commended its dignity by the titles which he has
bestowed upon it, in order that we might hold it in the highest
estimation, as among the most excellent of our blessings. He declares,
that in raising up teachers, he confers a special benefit on men, when
he bids his prophet exclaim, “How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace” (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>[Isa.
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>); when he calls the apostles the light of
the world and the salt of the earth (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.2"></span>[Matt.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p24.2"></span>).
Nor could the office be more highly eulogised than when he said, “He
that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me”
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p24.3"></span>[Luke
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.3"></span>). But the most striking passage of all is
that in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, where Paul treats as it
were professedly of this question. He contends, that there is nothing in
the Church more noble and glorious than the ministry of the Gospel,
seeing it is the administration of the Spirit of righteousness and
eternal life. These and similar passages should have the effect of
preventing that method of governing and maintaining the Church by
ministers, a method which the Lord has ratified for ever, from seeming
worthless in our eyes, and at length becoming obsolete by contempt. How
very necessary it is, he has declared not only by words but also by
examples. When he was pleased to shed the light of his truth in greater
effulgence on Cornelius, he sent an angel from heaven to despatch Peter
to him (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p24.4"></span>[Acts
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.4"></span>). When he was pleased to call Paul to the
knowledge of himself, and ingraft him into the Church, he does not
address him with his own voice, but sends him to a man from whom he may
both obtain the doctrine of salvation and the sanctification of baptism
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p24.5"></span>[Acts
9:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.5"></span>). If it was not by mere accident that the
angel, who is the interpreter of God, abstains from declaring the will
of God, and orders a man to be called to declare it; that Christ, the
only Master of believers, commits Paul to the teaching of a man, that
Paul whom he had determined to carry into the third heaven, and honour
with a wondrous revelation of things that could not be spoken (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.6"></span>[2 Cor.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p24.6"></span>), who will presume to despise or disregard
as superfluous that ministry, whose utility God has been pleased to
attest by such evidence?

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p25"></span>4. Those who preside over the government
of the Church, according to the institution of Christ, are named by
Paul, first, *Apostles*; secondly, *Prophets*; thirdly, *Evangelists*;
fourthly, *Pastors*; and, lastly, *Teachers* (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>[Eph.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>). Of these, only the two last have an
ordinary office in the Church. The Lord raised up the other three at the
beginning of his kingdom, and still occasionally raises them up when the
necessity of the times requires. The nature of the apostolic function is
clear from the command, “Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p25.2"></span>[Mark
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p25.2"></span>). No fixed limits are given them, but the
whole world is assigned to be reduced under the obedience of Christ,
that by spreading the Gospel as widely as they could, they might
everywhere erect his kingdom. Accordingly, Paul, when he would approve
his apostleship, does not say that he had acquired some one city for
Christ, but had propagated the Gospel far and wide—had not built on
another man’s foundation, but planted churches where the name of his
Lord was unheard. The apostles, therefore, were sent forth to bring back
the world from its revolt to the true obedience of God, and everywhere
establish his kingdom by the preaching of the Gospel; or, if you choose,
they were like the first architects of the Church, to lay its
foundations throughout the world. By *Prophets*, he means not all
interpreters of the divine will, but those who excelled by special
revelation; none such now exist, or they are less manifest. By
*Evangelists*, I mean those who, while inferior in rank to the apostles,
were next them in office, and even acted as their substitutes. Such were
Luke, Timothy, Titus, and the like; perhaps, also, the seventy disciples
whom our Saviour appointed in the second place to the apostles (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p25.3"></span>[Luke
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p25.3"></span>). According to this interpretation, which
appears to me consonant both to the words and the meaning of Paul, those
three functions were not instituted in the Church to be perpetual, but
only to endure so long as churches were to be formed where none
previously existed, or at least where churches were to be transferred
from Moses to Christ; although I deny not, that afterward God
occasionally raised up Apostles, or at least Evangelists, in their
stead, as has been done in our time. For such were needed to bring back
the Church from the revolt of Antichrist. The office I nevertheless call
extraordinary, because it has no place in churches duly constituted.
Next come *Pastors* and *Teachers*, with whom the Church never can
dispense, and between whom, I think, there is this difference, that
teachers preside not over discipline, or the administration of the
sacraments, or admonitions, or exhortations, but the interpretation of
Scripture only, in order that pure and sound doctrine may be maintained
among believers. But all these are embraced in the pastoral office.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p26"></span>5. We now understand what offices in the
government of the Church were temporary, and what offices were
instituted to be of perpetual duration. But if we class evangelists with
apostles, we shall have two like offices in a manner corresponding to
each other. For the same resemblance which our teachers have to the
ancient prophets pastors have to the apostles. The prophetical office
was more excellent in respect of the special gift of revelation which
accompanied it, but the office of teachers was almost of the same
nature, and had altogether the same end. In like manner, the twelve,
whom the Lord chose to publish the new preaching of the Gospel to the
world (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>[Luke
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>), excelled others in rank and dignity. For
although, from the nature of the case, and etymology of the word, all
ecclesiastical officers may be properly called apostles, because they
are all sent by the Lord and are his messengers, yet as it was of great
importance that a sure attestation should be given to the mission of
those who delivered a new and extraordinary message, it was right that
the twelve (to the number of whom Paul was afterwards added) should be
distinguished from others by a peculiar title. The same name, indeed, is
given by Paul to Andronicus and Junia, who, he says, were “of note among
the apostles” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p26.2"></span>[Rom.
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p26.2"></span>); but when he would speak properly, he
confines the term to that primary order. And this is the common use of
Scripture. Still pastors (except that each has the government of a
particular church assigned to him) have the same function as apostles.
The nature of this function let us now see still more clearly.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27"></span>6. When our Lord sent forth the apostles,
he gave them a commission (as has been lately said) to preach the
Gospel, and baptise those who believed for the remission of sins. He had
previously commanded that they should distribute the sacred symbols of
his body and blood after his example (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>[Mt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.2"></span>[Luke
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.2"></span>). Such is the sacred, inviolable, and
perpetual law, enjoined on those who succeed to the place of the
apostles,—they receive a commission to preach the Gospel and administer
the sacraments. Whence we infer that those who neglect both of these
falsely pretend to the office of apostles. But what shall we say of
pastors? Paul speaks not of himself only but of all pastors, when he
says, “Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.3"></span>[I
Cor. 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.3"></span>). Again, in another passage, he describes a
bishop as one “holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught,
that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and convince the
gainsayers” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.4"></span>[Tit.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.4"></span>).
From these and similar passages which everywhere occur, we may infer
that the two principal parts of the office of pastors are to preach the
Gospel and administer the sacraments. But the method of teaching
consists not merely in public addresses, it extends also to private
admonitions. Thus Paul takes the Ephesians to witness, “I kept back
nothing that was profitable to you, but have showed you, and have taught
you publicly, and from house to house, testifying both to the Jews, and
also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ.” A little after he says, “Remember, that, for the space of
three years, I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears”
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.5"></span>[Acts
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.5"></span>).
Our present purpose, however, is not to enumerate the separate qualities
of a good pastor, but only to indicate what those profess who call
themselves pastors—viz. that in presiding over the Church they have not
an indolent dignity, but must train the people to true piety by the
doctrine of Christ, administer the sacred mysteries, preserve and
exercise right discipline. To those who are set as watchmen in the
Church the Lord declares, “When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely
die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked
from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in
his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand” (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.6"></span>[Ezek.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.6"></span>). What Paul says of himself is applicable to
all pastors: “For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory
of: for necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me if I preach not
the Gospel” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p27.7"></span>[1 Cor.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p27.7"></span>). In short, what the apostles did to the
whole world, every pastor should do to the flock over which he is
appointed.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28"></span>7. While we assign a church to each
pastor, we deny not that he who is fixed to one church may assist other
churches, whether any disturbance has occurred which requires his
presence, or his advice is asked on some doubtful matter. But because
that policy is necessary to maintain the peace of the Church, each has
his proper duty assigned, lest all should become disorderly, run up and
down without any certain vocation, flock together promiscuously to one
spot, and capriciously leave the churches vacant, being more solicitous
for their own convenience than for the edification of the Church. This
arrangement ought, as far as possible, to be commonly observed, that
every one, content with his own limits, may not encroach on another’s
province. Nor is this a human invention. It is an ordinance of God. For
we read that Paul and Barnabas appointed presbyters over each of the
churches of Lystra, Antioch, and Iconium (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>[Acts
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>); and Paul himself enjoins Titus to ordain
presbyters in every town (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28.2"></span>[Tit.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28.2"></span>).
In like manner, he mentions the bishops of the Philippians, and
Archippus, the bishop of the Colossians (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.3"></span>[Phil.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p28.4"></span>[Col.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.4"></span>). And in the Acts we have his celebrated
address to the presbyters of the Church of Ephesus (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.5"></span>[Acts
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p28.5"></span>). Let every one, then, who undertakes the
government and care of one church, know that he is bound by this law of
divine vocation, not that he is astricted to the soil (as lawyers
speak), that is, enslaved, and, as it were, fixed, as to be unable to
move a foot if public utility so require, and the thing is done duly and
in order; but he who has been called to one place ought not to think of
removing, nor seek to be set free when he deems it for his own
advantage. Again, if it is expedient for any one to be transferred to
another place, he ought not to attempt it of his own private motive, but
to wait for public authority.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29"></span>8. In giving the name of bishops,
presbyters, and pastors, indiscriminately to those who govern churches,
I have done it on the authority of Scripture, which uses the words as
synonymous. To all who discharge the ministry of the word it gives the
name of bishops. Thus Paul, after enjoining Titus to ordain elders in
every city, immediately adds, “A bishop must be blameless,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>[Titus 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>).
So in another place he salutes several bishops in one church (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.2"></span>[Phil.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29.2"></span>).
And in the Acts, the elders of Ephesus, whom he is said to have called
together, he, in the course of his address, designates as bishops (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.3"></span>[Acts
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.3"></span>). Here it is to be observed, that we have
hitherto enumerated those offices only which consist in the ministry of
the word; nor does Paul make mention of any others in the passage which
we have quoted from the fourth chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians.
But in the Epistle to the Romans, and the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, he enumerates other offices, as powers, gifts of healing,
interpretation, government, care of the poor (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.4"></span>[Rom.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29.5"></span>[1 Cor.
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.5"></span>). As to those which were temporary, I say
nothing, for it is not worth while to dwell upon them. But there are two
of perpetual duration—viz. government and care of the poor. By these
governors I understand seniors selected from the people to unite with
the bishops in pronouncing censures and exercising discipline. For this
is the only meaning which can be given to the passage, “He that ruleth
with diligence” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p29.6"></span>[Rom.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.6"></span>). From the beginning, therefore, each church
had its senate,53  <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) composed of
pious, grave, and venerable men, in whom was lodged the power of
correcting faults. Of this power we shall afterwards speak. Moreover,
experience shows that this arrangement was not confined to one age, and
therefore we are to regard the office of government as necessary for all
ages.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p31"></span>9. The care of the poor was committed to
deacons, of whom two classes are mentioned by Paul in the Epistle to the
Romans, “He that giveth, let him do it with simplicity;” “he that
showeth mercy, with cheerfulness” (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p31.1"></span>[Rom.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p31.1"></span>). As it is certain that he is here speaking
of public offices of the Church, there must have been two distinct
classes. If I mistake not, he in the former clause designates deacons,
who administered alms; in the latter, those who had devoted themselves
to the care of the poor and the sick. Such were the widows of whom he
makes mention in the Epistle to Timothy (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p31.2"></span>[1 Tim.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p31.2"></span>). For there was no public office which women
could discharge save that of devoting themselves to the service of the
poor. If we admit this (and it certainly ought to be admitted), there
will be two classes of deacons, the one serving the Church by
administering the affairs of the poor; the other, by taking care of the
poor themselves. For although the term διακονία has a more extensive
meaning, Scripture specially gives the name of deacons to those whom the
Church appoints to dispense alms, and take care of the poor,
constituting them as it were stewards of the public treasury of the
poor. Their origin, institution, and office, is described by Luke (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p31.3"></span>[Acts
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p31.3"></span>).
When a murmuring arose among the Greeks, because in the administration
of the poor their widows were neglected, the apostles, excusing
themselves that they were unable to discharge both offices, to preach
the word and serve tables, requested the multitude to elect seven men of
good report, to whom the office might be committed. Such deacons as the
Apostolic Church had, it becomes us to have after her example.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p32"></span>10. Now seeing that in the sacred
assembly all things ought to be done decently and in order (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p32.1"></span>[1 Cor.
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p32.1"></span>), there is nothing in which this ought to be
more carefully observed than in settling government, irregularity in any
respect being nowhere more perilous. Wherefore, lest restless and
turbulent men should presumptuously push themselves forward to teach or
rule (an event which actually was to happen), it was expressly provided
that no one should assume a public office in the Church without a call
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p32.2"></span>[Heb.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p32.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p32.3"></span>[Jer.
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p32.3"></span>). Therefore, if any one would be deemed a
true minister of the Church, he must *first* be duly called; and,
*secondly*, he must answer to his calling; that is, undertake and
execute the office assigned to him. This may often be observed in Paul,
who, when he would approve his apostleship, almost always alleges a
call, together with his fidelity in discharging the office. If so great
a minister of Christ dares not arrogate to himself authority to be heard
in the Church, unless as having been appointed to it by the command of
his Lord, and faithfully performing what has been intrusted to him, how
great the effrontery for any man, devoid of one or both of them, to
demand for himself such honour. But as we have already touched on the
necessity of executing the office, let us now treat only of the call.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p33"></span>11. The subject is comprehended under
four heads—viz. *who* are to be appointed ministers, *in what way, by
whom*, and *with what rite or initiatory ceremony*. I am speaking of the
external and formal call which relates to the public order of the
Church, while I say nothing of that secret call of which every minister
is conscious before God, but has not the Church as a witness of it; I
mean, the good testimony of our heart, that we undertake the offered
office neither from ambition nor avarice, nor any other selfish feeling,
but a sincere fear of God and desire to edify the Church. This, as I
have said, is indeed necessary for every one of us, if we would approve
our ministry to God. Still, however, a man may have been duly called by
the Church, though he may have accepted with a bad conscience, provided
his wickedness is not manifest. It is usual also to say, that private
men are called to the ministry when they seem fit and apt to discharge
it; that is, because learning, conjoined with piety and the other
endowments of a good pastor, is a kind of preparation for the office.
For those whom the Lord has destined for this great office he previously
provides with the armour which is requisite for the discharge of it,
that they may not come empty and unprepared. Hence Paul, in the First
Epistle to the Corinthians, when treating of the offices, first
enumerates the gifts in which those who performed the offices ought to
excel. But as this is the first of the four heads which I mentioned, let
us now proceed to it.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34"></span>12. What persons should be elected
bishops is treated at length by Paul in two passages (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>[Tit.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34.2"></span>[1 Tim.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p34.2"></span>).
The substance is, that none are to be chosen save those who are of sound
doctrine and holy lives, and not notorious for any defect which might
destroy their authority and bring disgrace on the ministry. The
description of deacons and elders is entirely similar (see chapter 4
sec. 10-13). We must always take care that they are not unfit for or
unequal to the burden imposed upon them; in other words, that they are
provided with the means which will be necessary to fulfil their office.
Thus our Saviour, when about to send his apostles, provided them with
the arms and instruments which were indispensably requisite.53  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) And Paul, after portraying the
character of a good and genuine bishop, admonishes Timothy not to
contaminate himself by choosing an improper person for the office. The
expression, *in what way*, I use not in reference to the rite of
choosing, but only to the religious fear which is to be observed in
election. Hence the fastings and prayers which Luke narrates that the
faithful employed when they elected presbyters (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p35.5"></span>[Acts
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p35.5"></span>). For, understanding that the business was
the most serious in which they could engage, they did not venture to act
without the greatest reverence and solicitude. But above all, they were
earnest in prayer, imploring from God the spirit of wisdom and
discernment.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p36"></span>13. The third division which we have
adopted is, *by whom* ministers are to be chosen. A certain rule on this
head cannot be obtained from the appointment of the apostles, which was
somewhat different from the common call of others. As theirs was an
extraordinary ministry, in order to render it conspicuous by some more
distinguished mark, those who were to discharge it behoved to be called
and appointed by the mouth of the Lord himself. It was not, therefore,
by any human election, but at the sole command of God and Christ, that
they prepared themselves for the work. Hence, when the apostles were
desirous to substitute another in the place of Judas, they did not
venture to nominate any one certainly, but brought forward two, that the
Lord might declare by lot which of them he wished to succeed (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>[Acts
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>). In this way we ought to understand Paul’s
declaration, that he was made an apostle, “not of men, neither by man,
but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father” (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p36.2"></span>[Gal.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p36.2"></span>).
The former—viz. *not of men*—he had in common with all the pious
ministers of the word, for no one could duly perform the office unless
called by God. The other was proper and peculiar to him. And while he
glories in it, he boasts that he had not only what pertains to a true
and lawful pastor, but he also brings forward the insignia of his
apostleship. For when there were some among the Galatians who, seeking
to disparage his authority, represented him as some ordinary disciple,
substituted in place of the primary apostles, he, in order to maintain
unimpaired the dignity of his ministry, against which he knew that these
attempts were made, felt it necessary to show that he was in no respect
inferior to the other apostles. Accordingly, he affirms that he was not
chosen by the judgment of men, like some ordinary bishop, but by the
mouth and manifest oracle of the Lord himself.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p37"></span>14. But no sober person will deny that
the regular mode of lawful calling is, that bishops should be designated
by men, since there are numerous passages of Scripture to this effect.
Nor, as has been said, is there anything contrary to this in Paul’s
protestation, that he was not sent either of man, or by man, seeing he
is not there speaking of the ordinary election of ministers, but
claiming for himself what was peculiar to the apostles: although the
Lord in thus selecting Paul by special privilege, subjected him in the
meantime to the discipline of an ecclesiastical call: for Luke relates,
“As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them”
(<span id="iv.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>[Acts
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>). Why this separation and laying on of hands
after the Holy Spirit had attested their election, unless that
ecclesiastical discipline might be preserved in appointing ministers by
men? God could not give a more illustrious proof of his approbation of
this order, than by causing Paul to be set apart by the Church after he
had previously declared that he had appointed him to be the Apostle of
the Gentiles. The same thing we may see in the election of Matthias. As
the apostolic office was of such importance that they did not venture to
appoint any one to it of their own judgment, they bring forward two, on
one of whom the lot might fall, that thus the election might have a sure
testimony from heaven, and, at the same time, the policy of the Church
might not be disregarded.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p38"></span>15. The next question is, Whether a
minister should be chosen *by the whole Church*, or only by *colleagues*
and *elders*, who have the charge of discipline; or whether they may be
appointed by the authority of one individual?53  <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541) Those who attribute this right to one
individual quote the words of Paul to Titus “For this cause left I thee
in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting,
and ordain elders in every city” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.2"></span>[Tit.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.2"></span>);
and also to Timothy, “Lay hands suddenly on no man” (l Tim. 5:22). But
they are mistaken if they suppose that Timothy so reigned at Ephesus,
and Titus in Crete, as to dispose of all things at their own pleasure.
They only presided by previously giving good and salutary counsels to
the people, not by doing alone whatever pleased them, while all others
were excluded. Lest this should seem to be a fiction of mine, I will
make it plain by a similar example. Luke relates that Barnabas and Paul
ordained elders throughout the churches, but he at the same time marks
the plan or mode when he says that it was done by suffrage. The words
are, Χειροτονήσαντες πρεσβυτέρους κατ᾽ ἐκκλησίαν (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p39.3"></span>[Acts
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p39.3"></span>). They therefore selected (*creabant*) two;
but the whole body, as was the custom of the Greeks in elections,
declared by a show of hands which of the two they wished to have. Thus
it is not uncommon for Roman historians to say, that the consul who held
the comitia elected the new magistrates, for no other reason but because
he received the suffrages, and presided over the people at the election.
Certainly it is not credible that Paul conceded more to Timothy and
Titus than he assumed to himself. Now we see that his custom was to
appoint bishops by the suffrages of the people. We must therefore
interpret the above passages, so as not to infringe on the common right
and liberty of the Church. Rightly, therefore, does Cyprian contend for
it as of divine authority, that the priest be chosen in presence of the
people, before the eyes of all, and be approved as worthy and fit by
public judgment and testimony, (Cyprian, Lib. 1 Ep. 3). Indeed, we see
that by the command of the Lord, the practice in electing the Levitical
priests was to bring them forward in view of the people before
consecration. Nor is Matthias enrolled among the number of the apostles,
nor are the seven deacons elected in any other way, than at the sight
and approval of the people (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.4"></span>[Acts
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.4"></span>).
“Those examples,” says Cyprian, “show that the ordination of a priest
behoved not to take place, unless under the consciousness of the people
assisting, so that that ordination was just and legitimate which was
vouched by the testimony of all.” We see, then, that ministers are
legitimately called according to the word of God, when those who may
have seemed fit are elected on the consent and approbation of the
people. Other pastors, however, ought to preside over the election, lest
any error should be committed by the general body either through levity,
or bad passion, or tumult.

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40"></span>16. It remains to consider the form of
ordination, to which we have assigned the last place in the call (see
chap. 4, sec. 14, 15). It is certain, that when the apostles appointed
any one to the ministry, they used no other ceremony than the laying on
of hands. This form was derived, I think, from the custom of the Jews,
who, by the laying on of hands, in a manner presented to God whatever
they wished to be blessed and consecrated. Thus Jacob, when about to
bless Ephraim and Manasseh, placed his hands upon their heads (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p40.1"></span>[Gen.
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p40.1"></span>). The same thing was done by our Lord, when
he prayed over the little children (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p40.2"></span>[Mt.
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p40.2"></span>). With the same intent (as I imagine), the
Jews, according to the injunction of the law, laid hands upon their
sacrifices. Wherefore, the apostles, by the laying on of hands,
intimated that they made an offering to God of him whom they admitted to
the ministry; though they also did the same thing over those on whom
they conferred the visible gifts of the Spirit (<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p40.3"></span>[Acts
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40.3"></span>;
19:6). However this be, it was the regular form, whenever they called
any one to the sacred ministry. In this way they consecrated pastors and
teachers; in this way they consecrated deacons. But though there is no
fixed precept concerning the laying on of hands, yet as we see that it
was uniformly observed by the apostles, this careful observance ought to
be regarded by us in the light of a precept (see chap. 14, sec. 20;
chap. 19, sec. 31). And it is certainly useful, that by such a symbol
the dignity of the ministry should be commended to the people, and he
who is ordained, reminded that he is no longer his own, but is bound in
service to God and the Church. Besides, it will not prove an empty sign,
if it be restored to its genuine origin. For if the Spirit of God has
not instituted anything in the Church in vain, this ceremony of his
appointment we shall feel not to be useless, provided it be not
superstitiously abused. Lastly, it is to observed, that it was not the
whole people, but only pastors, who laid hands on ministers, though it
is uncertain whether or not several always laid their hands: it is
certain, that in the case of the deacons, it was done by Paul and
Barnabas, and some few others (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40.4"></span>[Acts
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40.4"></span>;
13:3). But in another place, Paul mentions that he himself, without any
others, laid hands on Timothy. “Wherefore, I put thee in remembrance,
that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of
my hands” (<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40.5"></span>[2 Tim.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p40.5"></span>).
For what is said in the First Epistle, of the *laying on of the hands of
the presbytery*, I do not understand as if Paul were speaking of the
college of Elders. By the expression, I understand the ordination
itself; as if he had said, Act so, that the gift which you received by
the laying on of hands, when I made you a presbyter, may not be in vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_537"></span>[538](inst083.htm#fr_537) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p21"></span>34 534 Latin, “quasi vicariam
operam.”—French, “les faisans comme ses lieutenans;”—making them as it
were his substitutes.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[539](inst083.htm#fr_538) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p22"></span>35 535 See on this subject August. de
Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 1

<span id="fn_539"></span>[540](inst083.htm#fr_539) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p29.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p30"></span>36 536 Latin, “senatum.”—French, “conseil
ou consistoire;”—council or consistory.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[541](inst083.htm#fr_540) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35"></span>37 537 <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p35.1"></span>[Luke
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.iv-p35.1"></span>; 24:49; <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p35.2"></span>[Mark
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35.3"></span>[Acts
1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35.3"></span> 8;
<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35.4"></span>[1 Tim.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p35.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[542](inst083.htm#fr_541) <span
id="iv.iv.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39"></span>38 538 See chap. 4 sec. 10, 11; chap. 5
sec. 2, 3. Also Calv. in <span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.1"></span>[Acts
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iv-p39.1"></span>,
and Luther, tom. 2 p 374.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 4. - OF THE STATE OF THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH, AND THE MODE
OF GOVERNMENT IN USE BEFORE THE PAPACY.](inst084)
