[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst098)  [Next](inst100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xx"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.xx-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 19.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p1"></span>OF THE FIVE SACRAMENTS, FALSELY SO CALLED.
THEIR SPURIOUSNESS PROVED, AND THEIR TRUE CHARACTER EXPLAINED.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p2"></span>There are two divisions of this
chapter,—I. A general discussion of these five sacraments, sec. 1-3. II.
A special consideration of each. 1. Of Confirmation, sec. 4-13. 2. Of
Penance, sec. 14-17. 3. Of Extreme Unction, sec. 18-21. 4. Of Order, in
which the seven so-called sacraments have originated, sec. 22-23. 5. Of
Marriage, sec. 34-37.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p4"></span>1. Connection of the present discussion
with that concerning Baptism and the Lord’s Supper. Impiety of the
popish teachers in attributing more to human rites than to the
ordinances of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p5"></span>2. Men cannot institute sacraments.
Necessary to keep up a distinction between sacraments and other
ceremonies.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p6"></span>3. Seven sacraments not to be found in
ecclesiastical writers. Augustine, who may represent all the others,
acknowledged two sacraments only.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p7"></span>4. Nature of confirmation in ancient
times. The laying on of hands.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p8"></span>5. This kind of confirmation afterwards
introduced. It is falsely called a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p9"></span>6. Popish argument for confirmation
answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p10"></span>7. Argument confirmed by the example of
Christ. Absurdity and impiety of Papists in calling their oil the oil of
salvation.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p11"></span>8. Papistical argument, that Baptism
cannot be complete without Confirmation. Answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p12"></span>9. Argument, that without confirmation we
cannot be fully Christians. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p13"></span>10. Argument, that the Unction in
confirmation is more excellent than Baptism. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p14"></span>11. Answer continued. Argument, that
confirmation has greater virtue.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p15"></span>12. Argument from the practice of
antiquity. Augustine’s view of confirmation.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p16"></span>13. The ancient confirmation very
praiseworthy. Should be restored in churches in the present day.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p17"></span>14. Of Penitence. Confused and absurd
language of the Popish doctors. Imposition of hands in ancient times.
This made by the Papists a kind of foundation of the sacrament of
Penance.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p18"></span>15. Disagreement among Papists
themselves, as to the grounds on which penance is regarded as a
sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p19"></span>16. More plausibility in calling the
absolution of the priest, than in calling penance a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p20"></span>17. Penance not truly a sacrament.
Baptism the sacrament of penitence.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p21"></span>18. Extreme Unction described. No
foundation for it in the words of James.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p22"></span>19. No better ground for making this
unction a sacrament, than any of the other symbols mentioned in
Scripture.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p23"></span>20. Insult offered by this unction to the
Holy Spirit. It cannot be a sacrament, as it was not instituted by
Christ, and has no promise annexed to it.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p24"></span>21. No correspondence between the unction
enjoined by James and the anointing of the Papists.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p25"></span>22. Of ecclesiastical orders. Two points
for discussion. Absurdities here introduced. Whether ecclesiastical
order is a sacrament. Papists not agreed as to holy orders.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p26"></span>23. Insult to Christ in attempting to
make him their colleague.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p27"></span>24. The greater part of these orders
empty names implying no certain office. Popish exorcists.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p28"></span>25. Absurdity of the tonsure.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p29"></span>26. The Judaizing nature of the tonsure.
Why Paul shaved his head in consequence of a vow.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p30"></span>27. Origin of this clerical tonsure as
given by Augustine. Absurd ceremonies in consecrating Doorkeepers,
Readers, Exorcists, and Acolytes.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p31"></span>28. Of the higher class of orders called
Holy Orders. Insult offered to Christ when ministers are regarded as
priests. Holy orders have nothing of the nature of a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p32"></span>29. Absurd imitation of our Saviour in
breathing on his apostles.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p33"></span>30. Absurdity of the anointing employed.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p34"></span>31. Imposition of hands. Absurdity of, in
Papistical ordination.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p35"></span>32. Ordination of deacons. Absurd forms
of Papists.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p36"></span>33. Of sub-deacons.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p37"></span>34. Marriage not a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p38"></span>35. Nothing in Scripture to countenance
the idea that marriage is a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p39"></span>36. Origin of the notion that marriage is
a sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p40"></span>37. Practical abuses from this erroneous
idea of marriage. Conclusion.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p41"></span>1. The above discourse concerning the
sacraments might have the effect, among the docile and sober-minded, of
preventing them from indulging their curiosity, or from embracing,
without authority from the word, any other sacraments than those two,
which they know to have been instituted by the Lord. But since the idea
of seven sacraments, almost common in the mouths of all, and circulated
in all schools and sermons, by mere antiquity, has struck its roots. and
is even now seated in the minds of men, I thought it might be worth
while to give a separate and closer consideration of the other five,
which are vulgarly classed with the true and genuine sacraments of the
Lord, and, after wiping away every gloss, to hold them up to the view of
the simple, that they may see what their true nature is, and how falsely
they have hitherto been regarded as sacraments. Here, at the outset, I
would declare to all the pious, that I engage not in this dispute about
a word for love of wrangling, but am induced, by weighty causes, to
impugn the abuse of it. I am not unaware that Christians are the masters
of words, as they are of all things, and that, therefore, they may at
pleasure adapt words to things, provided a pious meaning is retained,
though there should be some impropriety in the mode of expression. All
this I concede, though it were better to make words subordinate to
things than things to words. But in the name of sacrament, the case is
different. For those who set down seven sacraments, at the same time
give this definition to all—viz. that they are visible forms of
invisible grace; and at the same time, make them all vehicles of the
Holy Spirit, instruments for conferring righteousness, causes of
procuring grace. Accordingly, the Master of Sentences himself denies
that the sacraments of the Mosaic Law are properly called by this name,
because they exhibited not what they figured. Is it tolerable, I ask,
that the symbols which the Lord has consecrated with his own lips, which
he has distinguished by excellent promises, should be regarded as no
sacraments, and that, meanwhile, this honour should be transferred to
those rites which men have either devised of themselves, or at least
observe without any express command from God? Therefore, let them either
change the definition, or refrain from this use of the word, which may
afterwards give rise to false and absurd opinions. Extreme unction, they
say, is a figure and cause of invisible grace, because it is a
sacrament. If we cannot possibly admit the inference, we must certainly
meet them on the subject of the name, that we may not receive it on
terms which may furnish occasion for such an error. On the other hand,
when they prove it to be a sacrament, they add the reason, because it
consists of the external sign and the word. If we find neither command
nor promise, what else can we do than protest against it?

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p42"></span>2. It now appears that we are not
quarreling about a word, but raising a not unnecessary discussion as to
the reality. Accordingly, we most strenuously maintain what we formerly
confirmed by invincible argument, that the power of instituting a
sacrament belongs to God alone, since a sacrament ought, by the sure
promise of God, to raise up and comfort the consciences of believers,
which could never receive this assurance from men. A sacrament ought to
be a testimony of the good-will of God toward us. Of this no man or
angel can be witness, since God has no counsellor (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p42.1"></span>[Isa.
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p42.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p42.2"></span>[Rom.
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p42.2"></span>). He himself alone, with legitimate
authority, testifies of himself to us by his word. A sacrament is a seal
of attestation or promise of God. Now, it could not be sealed by
corporeal things, or the elements of this world, unless they were
confirmed and set apart for this purpose by the will of God. Man,
therefore, cannot institute a sacrament, because it is not in the power
of man to make such divine mysteries lurk under things so abject. The
word of God must precede to make a sacrament to be a sacrament, as
Augustine most admirably shows (Hom. in Joann. 80). Moreover, it is
useful to keep up some distinction between sacraments and other
ceremonies, if we would not fall into many absurdities. The apostles
prayed on their bended knees; therefore our knees may not be bent
without a sacrament (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p42.3"></span>[Acts
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p42.3"></span>;
20:36). The disciples are said to have prayed toward the east; thus
looking at the east is a sacrament. Paul would have men in every place
to lift up pure hands (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p42.4"></span>[1 Tim.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p42.4"></span>.md);
and it is repeatedly stated that the saints prayed with uplifted hands,
let the outstretching, therefore, of hands also become a sacrament; in
short, let all the gestures of saints pass into sacraments, though I
should not greatly object to this, provided it was not connected with
those greater inconveniences.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p43"></span>3. If they would press us with the
authority of the ancient Church, I say that they are using a gloss. This
number seven is nowhere found in the ecclesiastical writers, nor is it
well ascertained at what time it crept in. I confess, indeed, that they
sometimes use freedom with the term *sacrament*, but what do they mean
by it? all ceremonies, external writs, and exercises of piety. But when
they speak of those signs which ought to be testimonies of the divine
favour toward us, they are contented with those two, Baptism and the
Eucharist. Lest any one suppose that this is falsely alleged by me, I
will here give a few passages from Augustine. “First, I wish you to hold
that the principle point in this discussion is, that our Lord Jesus
Christ (as he himself says in the gospel) has placed us under a yoke
which is easy, and a burden which is light. Hence he has knit together
the society of his new people by sacraments, very few in number, most
easy of observance, and most excellent in meaning; such is baptism
consecrated by the name of the Trinity: such is the communion of the
body and blood of the Lord, and any other, if recommended in the
canonical Scriptures” (August. ad. Januar. <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p43.1"></span>Ep. 118<span id="iv.iv.xx-p43.1"></span>).
Again, “After the resurrection of our Lord, our Lord himself, and
apostolic discipline, appointed, instead of many, a few signs, and these
most easy of performance, most august in meaning, most chaste in
practice; such is baptism and the celebration of the body and blood of
the Lord” (August. De. Doct. Christ. Lib. 3 cap. 9). Why does he here
make no mention of the sacred number, I mean seven? Is it probable that
he would have omitted it if it had then been established in the Church,
especially seeing he is otherwise more curious in observing numbers than
might be necessary? Nay, when he makes mention of Baptism and the
Supper, and is silent as to others,63  <span
id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659.md) does he not sufficiently intimate that
these two ordinances excel in special dignity, and that other ceremonies
sink down to an inferior place? Wherefore, I say, that those
sacramentary doctors are not only unsupported by the word of God, but
also by the consent of the early Church, however much they may plume
themselves on the pretence that they have this consent. But let us now
come to particulars.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p45"></span>OF CONFIRMATION.63  <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660.md)

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p47"></span>4. It was anciently customary for the
children of Christians, after they had grown up, to appear before the
bishop to fulfil that duty which was required of such adults as
presented themselves for baptism. These sat among the catechumens until
they were duly instructed in the mysteries of the faith, and could make
a confession of it before bishop and people. The infants, therefore, who
had been initiated by baptism, not having then given a confession of
faith to the Church, were again, toward the end of their boyhood, or on
adolescence, brought forward by their parents, and were examined by the
bishop in terms of the Catechism which was then in common use. In order
that this act, which otherwise justly required to be grave and holy,
might have more reverence and dignity, the ceremony of laying on of
hands was also used. Thus the boy, on his faith being approved, was
dismissed with a solemn blessing. Ancient writers often make mention of
this custom. Pope Leo says (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p47.1"></span>Ep. 39<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p47.1"></span>), “If any one returns from heretics, let him
not be baptised again, but let that which was there wanting to him—viz.
the virtue of the Spirit, be conferred by the laying on of the hands of
the bishop.” Our opponents will here exclaim, that the name of sacrament
is justly given to that by which the Holy Spirit is conferred. But Leo
elsewhere explains what he means by these words (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p47.2"></span>Ep. 77<span id="iv.iv.xx-p47.2"></span>);
“Let not him who was baptised by heretics be rebaptised, but be
confirmed by the laying on of hands with the invocation of the Holy
Spirit, because he received only the form of baptism without
sanctification.” Jerome also mentions it (Contra Luciferian). Now though
I deny not that Jerome is somewhat under delusion when he says that the
observance is apostolical, he is, however, very far from the follies of
these men. And he softens the expression when he adds, that this
benediction is given to bishops only, more in honour of the priesthood
than from any necessity of law. This laying on of hands, which is done
simply by way of benediction, I commend, and would like to see restored
to its pure use in the present day.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p48"></span>5. A later age having almost obliterated
the reality, introduced a kind of fictitious confirmation as a divine
sacrament. They feigned that the virtue of confirmation consisted in
conferring the Holy Spirit, for increase of grace, on him who had been
prepared in baptism for righteousness, and in confirming for contest
those who in baptism were regenerated to life. This confirmation is
performed by unction, and the following form of words: “I sign thee with
the sign of the holy cross, and confirm thee with the chrism of
salvation, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit.” All fair and venerable. But where is the word of God which
promises the presence of the Holy Spirit here? Not one iota can they
allege. How will they assure us that their chrism is a vehicle of the
Holy Spirit? We see oil, that is, a thick and greasy liquid, but nothing
more. “Let the word be added to the element,” says Augustine, “and it
will become a sacrament.” Let them, I say, produce this word if they
would have us to see anything more in the oil than oil. But if they
would show themselves to be ministers of the sacraments as they ought,
there would be no room for further dispute. The first duty of a minister
is not to do anything without a command. Come, then, and let them
produce some command for this ministry, and I will not add a word. If
they have no command they cannot excuse their sacrilegious audacity. For
this reason our Saviour interogated the Pharisees as to the baptism of
John, “Was it from heaven, or of men?” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p48.1"></span>[Mt.
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p48.1"></span>). If they had answered, Of men, he held them
confessed that it was frivolous and vain; if Of heaven, they were forced
to acknowledge the doctrine of John. Accordingly, not to be too
contumelious to John, they did not venture to say that it was of men.
Therefore, if confirmation is of men, it is proved to be frivolous and
vain; if they would persuade us that it is of heaven, let them prove it.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p49"></span>6. They indeed defend themselves by the
example of the apostles, who, they presume, did nothing rashly. In this
they are right, nor would they be blamed by us if they showed themselves
to be imitators of the apostles. But what did the apostles do? Luke
narrates (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p49.1"></span>[Acts
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#015.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p49.1"></span>.md),
that the apostles who were at Jerusalem, when they heard that Samaria
had received the word of God, sent thither Peter and John, that Peter
and John prayed for the Samaritans, that they might receive the Holy
Spirit, who had not yet come upon any of them, they having only been
baptised in the name of Jesus; that after prayer they laid their hands
upon them, and that by this laying on of hands the Samaritans received
the Holy Spirit. Luke repeatedly mentions this laying on of hands. I
hear what the apostles did, that is, they faithfully executed their
ministry. It pleased the Lord that those visible and admirable gifts of
the Holy Spirit, which he then poured out upon his people, should be
administered and distributed by his apostles by the laying on of hands.
I think that there was no deeper mystery under this laying on of hands,
but I interpret that this kind of ceremony was used by them to intimate,
by the outward act, that they commended to God, and, as it were, offered
him on whom they laid hands. Did this ministry, which the apostles then
performed, still remain in the Church, it would also behove us to
observe the laying on of hands: but since that gift has ceased to be
conferred, to what end is the laying on of hands? Assuredly the Holy
Spirit is still present with the people of God; without his guidance and
direction the Church of God cannot subsist. For we have a promise of
perpetual duration, by which Christ invites the thirsty to come to him,
that they may drink living water (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p49.2"></span>[John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p49.2"></span>). But those miraculous powers and manifest
operations, which were distributed by the laying on of hands, have
ceased. They were only for a time. For it was right that the new
preaching of the gospel, the new kingdom of Christ, should be signalised
and magnified by unwonted and unheard-of miracles. When the Lord ceased
from these, he did not forthwith abandon his Church, but intimated that
the magnificence of his kingdom, and the dignity of his word, had been
sufficiently manifested. In what respect then can these stage-players
say that they imitate the apostles? The object of the laying on of hands
was, that the evident power of the Holy Spirit might be immediately
exerted. This they effect not. Why then do they claim to themselves the
laying on of hands, which is indeed said to have been used by the
apostles, but altogether to a different end?

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p50"></span>7. The same account is to be given were
any one to insist that the breathing of our Lord upon his disciples
(<span id="iv.iv.xx-p50.1"></span>[John
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p50.1"></span>) is a sacrament by which the Holy Spirit is
conferred. But the Lord did this once for all, and did not also wish us
to do it. In the same way, also, the apostles laid their hands,
agreeably to that time at which it pleased the Lord that the visible
gifts of the Spirit should be dispensed in answer to their prayers; not
that posterity might, as those apes do, mimic the empty and useless sign
without the reality. But if they prove that they imitate the apostles in
the laying on of hands (though in this they have no resemblance to the
apostles, except it be in manifesting some absurd false zeal),63  <span
id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661.md) where did they get their oil which
they call the oil of salvation? Who taught them to seek salvation in
oil? Who taught them to attribute to it the power of strengthening? Was
it Paul, who draws us far away from the elements of this world, and
condemns nothing more than clinging to such observances? This I boldly
declare, not of myself, but from the Lord: Those who call oil the oil of
salvation abjure the salvation which is in Christ, deny Christ, and have
no part in the kingdom of God. Oil for the belly, and the belly for oil,
but the Lord will destroy both. For all these weak elements, which
perish even in the using, have nothing to do with the kingdom of God,
which is spiritual, and will never perish. What, then, some one will
say, do you apply the same rule to the water by which we are baptised,
and the bread and wine under which the Lord’s Supper is exhibited? I
answer, that in the sacraments of divine appointment, two things are to
be considered: the substance of the corporeal thing which is set before
us, and the form which has been impressed upon it by the word of God,
and in which its whole force lies. In as far, then, as the bread, wine,
and water, which are presented to our view in the sacraments, retain
their substance, Paul’s declaration applies, “meats for the belly, and
the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them” (l Cor.
6:13). For they pass and vanish away with the fashion of this world. But
in as far as they are sanctified by the word of God to be sacraments,
they do not confine us to the flesh, but teach truly and spiritually.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p52"></span>8. But let us make a still closer
inspection, and see how many monsters this greasy oil fosters and
nourishes. Those anointers say that the Holy Spirit is given in baptism
for righteousness, and in confirmation, for increase of grace, that in
baptism we are regenerated for life, and in confirmation, equipped for
contest. And, accordingly, they are not ashamed to deny that baptism can
be duly completed without confirmation. How nefarious! Are we not, then,
buried with Christ by baptism, and made partakers of his death, that we
may also be partners of his resurrection? This fellowship with the life
and death of Christ, Paul interprets to mean the mortification of our
flesh, and the quickening of the Spirit, our old man being crucified in
order that we may walk in newness of life (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p52.1"></span>[Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p52.1"></span>.md).
What is it to be equipped for contest, if this is not? But if they
deemed it as nothing to trample on the word of God, why did they not at
least reverence the Church, to which they would be thought to be in
everything so obedient? What heavier charge can be brought against their
doctrine than the decree of the Council of Melita?63  <span
id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662.md) “Let him who says that baptism is
given for the remission of sins only, and not in aid of future grace, be
anathema.” When Luke, in the passage which we have quoted, says, that
the Samaritans were only “baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p53.1"></span>[Acts
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p53.1"></span>), but had not received the Holy Spirit, he
does not say absolutely that those who believed in Christ with the
heart, and confessed him with the mouth, were not endued with any gift
of the Spirit. He means that receiving of the Spirit by which miraculous
power and visible graces were received. Thus the apostles are said to
have received the Spirit on the day of Pentecost (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p53.2"></span>[Acts
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p53.2"></span>.md),
whereas Christ had long before said to them, “It is not ye that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p53.3"></span>[Mt.
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p53.3"></span>). Ye who are of God see the malignant and
pestiferous wile of Satan. What was truly given in baptism, is falsely
said to be given in the confirmation of it, that he may stealthily lead
away the unwary from baptism. Who can now doubt that this doctrine,
which dissevers the proper promises of baptism from baptism, and
transfers them elsewhere, is a doctrine of Satan? We have discovered on
what foundation this famous unction rests. The word of God says, that as
many as have been baptised into Christ, have put on Christ with his
gifts (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p53.4"></span>[Gal.
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p53.4"></span>). The word of the anointers says that they
received no promise in baptism to equip them for contest (De Consecr.
Dist. 5, cap. Spir. Sanct). The former is the word of truth, the latter
must be the word of falsehood. I can define this baptism more truly than
they themselves have hitherto defined it— viz. that it is a noted insult
to baptism, the use of which it obscures—nay, abolishes: that it is a
false suggestion of the devil, which draws us away from the truth of
God; or, if you prefer it, that it is oil polluted with a lie of the
devil, deceiving the minds of the simple by shrouding them, as it were,
in darkness.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p54"></span>9. They add, moreover, that all believers
ought, after baptism, to receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of
hands, that they may become complete Christians, inasmuch as there never
can be a Christian who has not been *chrismed* by episcopal
confirmation. These are their exact words.63  <span
id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663.md) I thought that everything pertaining
to Christianity was prescribed and contained in Scripture. Now I see
that the true form of religion must be sought and learned elsewhere than
in Scripture. Divine wisdom, heavenly truth, the whole doctrine of
Christ, only begins the Christian; it is the oil that perfects him. By
this sentence are condemned all the apostles and the many martyrs who,
it is absolutely certain, were never chrismed, the oil not yet being
made, besmeared with which, they might fulfil all the parts of
Christianity, or rather become Christians, which, as yet, they were not.
Though I were silent, they abundantly refute themselves. How small the
proportion of the people whom they anoint after baptism! Why, then, do
they allow among their flock so many half Christians, whose imperfection
they might easily remedy? Why, with such supine negligence, do they
allow them to omit what cannot be omitted without grave offence? Why do
they not more rigidly insist on a matter so necessary, that, without it,
salvation cannot be obtained unless, perhaps, when the act has been
anticipated by sudden death? When they allow it to be thus licentiously
despised, they tacitly confess that it is not of the importance which
they pretend.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p56"></span>10. Lastly, they conclude that this
sacred unction is to be held in greater veneration than baptism, because
the former is specially administered by the higher order of priests,
whereas the latter is dispensed in common by all priests whatever
(Distinct. 5, De his vero). What can you here say, but that they are
plainly mad in thus pluming themselves on their own inventions, while,
in comparison with these, they carelessly contemn the sacred ordinances
of God? Sacrilegious mouth! dare you oppose oil merely polluted with
your fetid breath, and charmed by your muttered words, to the sacrament
of Christ, and compare it with water sanctified by the word of God? But
even this was not enough for your improbity: you must also prefer it.
Such are the responses of the holy see, such the oracles of the
apostolic tripod. But some of them have begun to moderate this madness,
which, even in their own opinion, was carried too far (Lombard. Sent.
Lib. 4 Dist. 7, c. 2). It is to be held in greater veneration, they say,
not perhaps because of the greater virtue and utility which it confers,
but because it is given by more dignified persons, and in a more
dignified part of the body, the forehead; or because it gives a greater
increase of virtue, though baptism is more effectual for forgiveness.
But do they not, by their first reason, prove themselves to be
Donatists, who estimate the value of the sacrament by the dignity of the
minister? Grant, however, that confirmation may be called more dignified
from the dignity of the bishop’s hand, still should any one ask how this
great perrogative was conferred on the bishops, what reason can they
give but their own caprice? The right was used only by the apostles, who
alone dispensed the Holy Spirit. Are bishops alone apostles? Are they
apostles at all? However, let us grant this also; why do they not, on
the same grounds, maintain that the sacrament of blood in the Lord’s
Supper is to be touched only by bishops? Their reason for refusing it to
laics is, that it was given by our Lord to the apostles only. If to the
apostles only, why not infer then to bishops only? But in that place,
they make the apostles simple Presbyters, whereas here another vertigo
seizes them, and they suddenly elect them bishops. Lastly, Ananias was
not an apostle, and yet Paul was sent to him to receive his sight, to be
baptised and filled with the Holy Spirit (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p56.1"></span>[Acts
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p56.1"></span>). I will add, though cumulatively, if, by
divine right, this office was peculiar to bishops, why have they dared
to transfer it to plebeian Presbyters, as we read in one of the Epistles
of Gregory? (Dist. 95, cap. Pervenis)

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p57"></span>11. How frivolous, inept, and stolid the
other reason, that their confirmation is worthier than the baptism of
God, because in confirmation it is the forehead that is besmeared with
oil, and in baptism the cranium. As if baptism were performed with oil,
and not with water! I take all the pious to witness, whether it be not
the one aim of these miscreants to adulterate the purity of the
sacraments by their leaven. I have said elsewhere, that what is of God
in the sacraments, can scarcely be got a glimpse of among the crowd of
human inventions. If any did not then give me credit for the fact, let
them now give it to their own teachers. Here, passing over water, and
making it of no estimation, they set a great value on oil alone in
baptism. We maintain, against them, that in baptism also the forehead is
sprinkled with water, in comparison with which, we do not value your oil
one straw, whether in baptism or in confirmation. But if any one alleges
that oil is sold for more, I answer, that by this accession of value any
good which might otherwise be in it is vitiated, so far is it from being
lawful fraudulently to vend this most vile imposture. They betray their
impiety by the third reason, when they pretend that a greater increase
of virtue is conferred in confirmation than in baptism. By the laying on
of hands the apostles dispensed the visible gifts of the Spirit. In what
respect does the oil of these men prove its fecundity? But have done
with these guides, who cover one sacrilege with many acts of sacrilege.
It is a Gordian knot, which it is better to cut than to lose so much
labour in untying.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p58"></span>12. When they see that the word of God,
and everything like plausible argument, fail them, they pretend, as
usual, that the observance is of the highest antiquity, and is confirmed
by the consent of many ages. Even were this true, they gain nothing by
it. A sacrament is not of earth, but of heaven; not of men, but of God
only. They must prove God to be the author of their confirmation, if
they would have it to be regarded as a sacrament. But why obtrude
antiquity, seeing that ancient writers, whenever they would speak
precisely, nowhere mention more than two sacraments? Were the bulwark of
our faith to be sought from men, we have an impregnable citadel in this,
that the fictitious sacraments of these men were never recognised as
sacraments by ancient writers. They speak of the laying on of hands, but
do they call it a sacrament? Augustine distinctly affirms that it is
nothing but prayer (De Bapt. cont. Donat. Lib. 3 cap. 16). Let them not
here yelp out one of their vile distinctions, that the laying on of
hands to which Augustine referred was not the confirmatory, but the
curative or reconciliatory. His book is extant and in men’s hands; if I
wrest it to any meaning different from that which Augustine himself
wrote it, they are welcome not only to load me with reproaches after
their wonted manner, but to spit upon me. He is speaking of those who
returned from schism to the unity of the Church. He says that they have
no need of a repetition of baptism, for the laying on of hands is
sufficient, that the Lord may bestow the Holy Spirit upon them by the
bond of peace. But as it might seem absurd to repeat laying on of hands
more than baptism, he shows the difference: “What,” he asks, “is the
laying on of hands but prayer over the man?” That this is his meaning is
apparent from another passage, where he says, “Because of the bond of
charity, which is the greatest gift of the Holy Spirit, without which
all the other holy qualities which a man may possess are ineffectual for
salvation, the hand is laid on reformed heretics” (Lib. 5 cap. 23).

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p59"></span>13. I wish we could retain the custom,
which, as I have observed, existed in the early Church, before this
abortive mask of a sacrament appeared. It would not be such a
confirmation as they pretend, one which cannot even be named without
injury to baptism, but catechising by which those in boyhood, or
immediately beyond it, would give an account of their faith in the face
of the Church. And the best method of catechising would be, if a form
were drawn up for this purpose, containing, and briefly explaining, the
substance of almost all the heads of our religion, in which the whole
body of the faithful ought to concur without controversy. A boy of ten
years of age would present himself to the Church, to make a profession
of faith, would be questioned on each head, and give answers to each. If
he was ignorant of any point, or did not well understand it, he would be
taught. Thus, while the whole Church looked on and witnessed, he would
profess the one true sincere faith with which the body of the faithful,
with one accord, worship one God. Were this discipline in force in the
present day, it would undoubtedly whet the sluggishness of certain
parents, who carelessly neglect the instruction of their children, as if
it did not at all belong to them, but who could not then omit it without
public disgrace; there would be greater agreement in faith among the
Christian people, and not so much ignorance and rudeness; some persons
would not be so readily carried away by new and strange dogmas; in fine,
it would furnish all with a methodical arrangement of Christian
doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p60"></span>OF PENITENCE.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p61"></span>14. The next place they give to
Penitence, of which they discourse so confusedly and unmethodically,
that consciences cannot derive anything certain or solid from their
doctrine. In another place (Book 3 chap. 3 and 4), we have explained at
length, first, what the Scriptures teach concerning repentance, and,
secondly, what these men teach concerning it. All we have now to advert
to is the grounds of that opinion of it as a sacrament which has long
prevailed in schools and churches. First, however, I will speak briefly
of the rite of the early Church, which those men have used as a pretext
for establishing their fiction. By the order observed in public
repentance, those who had performed the satisfactions imposed upon them
were reconciled by the formal laying on of hands. This was the symbol of
absolution by which the sinner himself regained his confidence of pardon
before God, and the Church was admonished to lay aside the remembrance
of the offence, and kindly receive him into favour. This Cyprian often
terms *to give peace*. In order that the act might have more weight and
estimation with the people, it was appointed that the authority of the
bishop should always be interposed. Hence the decree of the second
Council of Carthage, “No presbyter may publicly at mass reconcile a
penitent;” and another, of the Council of Arausica, “Let those who are
departing this life, at the time of penitence, be admitted to communion
without the reconciliatory laying on of hands; if they recover from the
disease, let them stand in the order of penitents, and after they have
fulfilled their time, receive the reconciliatory laying on of hands from
the bishop.” Again, in the third Council of Carthage, “A presbyter may
not reconcile a penitent without the authority of the bishop.” The
object of all these enactments was to prevent the strictness, which they
wished to be observed in that matter, from being lost by excessive
laxity. Accordingly, they wished cognisance to be taken by the bishop,
who, it was probable, would be more circumspect in examining. Although
Cyprian somewhere says that not the bishop only laid hands, but also the
whole clergy. For he thus speaks, “They do penitence for a proper time;
next they come to communion, and receive the right of communion by the
laying on of the hands of the bishop and clergy” (Lib. 3 Ep 14).
Afterwards, in process of time, the matter came to this, that they used
the ceremony in private absolutions also without public penitence. Hence
the distinction in Gratian (Decret. 26, Quæst. 6) between public and
private reconciliation. I consider that ancient observance of which
Cyprian speaks to have been holy and salutary to the Church, and I could
wish it restored in the present day. The more modern form, though I dare
not disapprove, or at least strongly condemn, I deem to be less
necessary. Be this as it may, we see that the laying on of hands in
penitence was a ceremony ordained by men, not by God, and is to be
ranked among indifferent things, and external exercises, which indeed
are not to be despised, but occupy an inferior place to those which have
been recommended to us by the word of the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p62"></span>15. The Romanists and Schoolmen, whose
wont it is to corrupt all things by erroneous interpretation, anxiously
labour to find a sacrament here, and it cannot seem wonderful, for they
seek a thing where it is not. At best, they leave the matter involved,
undecided, uncertain, confused, and confounded by the variety of
opinions. Accordingly, they say (Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 22, cap. 3), either
that external penitence is a sacrament, and, if so, ought to be regarded
as a sign of internal penitence; *i. e.*, contrition of heart, which
will be the matter of the sacrament, or that both together make a
sacrament, not two, but one complete; but that the external is the
sacrament merely, the internal, the matter, and the sacrament, whereas
the forgiveness of sins is the matter only, and not the sacrament. Let
those who remember the definition of a sacrament, which we have given
above, test by it that which they say is a sacrament, and it will be
found that it is not an external ceremony appointed by God for the
confirmation of our faith. But if they allege that my definition is not
a law which they are necessarily bound to obey, let them hear Augustine,
whom they pretend to regard as a saint.63  <span
id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664.md) “Visible sacraments were instituted
for the sake of carnal men, that by the ladder of sacraments they may be
conveyed from those things which are seen by the eye, to those which are
perceived by the understanding” (August. Quæst. Vet. Test. Lib. 3). Do
they themselves see, or can they show to others, anything like this in
that which they call the sacrament of penance? In another passage, he
says, “It is called a sacrament, because in it one thing is seen,
another thing is understood. What is seen has bodily appearance, what is
understood has spiritual fruit” (Serm. de Bapt. Infant). These things in
no way apply to the sacrament of penance, as they feign it; there, there
is no bodily form to represent spiritual fruit.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p64"></span>16. And (to despatch these beasts in
their own arena) if any sacrament is sought here, would it not have been
much more plausible to maintain that the absolution of the priest is a
sacrament, than penitence either external or internal? For it might
obviously have been said that it is a ceremony to confirm our faith in
the forgiveness of sins, and that it has the promise of the keys, as
they describe them: “Whatsoever ye shall bind or loose on earth, shall
be bound or loosed in heaven.” But some one will object that to most of
those who are absolved by priests nothing of the kind is given by the
absolution, whereas, according to their dogma, the sacraments of the new
dispensation ought to effect what they figure. This is ridiculous. As in
the eucharist, they make out a twofold eating—a sacramental, which is
common to the good and bad alike, and a spiritual, which is proper only
to the good; why should they not also pretend that absolution is given
in two ways? And yet I have never been able to understand what they
meant by their dogma. How much it is at variance with the truth of God,
we showed when we formally discussed that subject. Here I only wish to
show that no scruple should prevent them from giving the name of a
sacrament to the absolution of the priest. For they might have answered
by the mouth of Augustine,63  <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665.md)
that there is a sanctification without a visible sacrament, and a
visible sacrament without internal sanctification. Again, that in the
elect alone sacraments effect what they figure. Again, that some put on
Christ so far as the receiving of the sacrament, and others so far as
sanctification; that the former is done equally by the good and the bad,
the latter by the good only. Surely they were more deluded than
children, and blind in the full light of the sun when they toiled with
so much difficulty, and perceived not a matter so plain and obvious to
every man.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p66"></span>17. Lest they become elated, however,
whatever be the part in which they place the sacrament, I deny that it
can justly be regarded as a sacrament; first, because there exists not
to this effect any special promise of God, which is the only ground of a
sacrament;63  <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666.md) and, secondly,
because whatever ceremony is here used is a mere invention of man;
whereas, as has already been shown, the ceremonies of sacraments can
only be appointed by God. Their fiction of the sacrament of penance,
therefore, was falsehood and imposture. This fictitious sacrament they
adorned with the befitting eulogium, that it was the second plank in the
case of shipwreck, because if any one had, by sin, injured the garment
of innocence received in baptism, he might repair it by penitence.64
 <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667.md) This was a saying of Jerome.
Let it be whose it may, as it is plainly impious, it cannot be excused
if understood in this sense; as if baptism were effaced by sin, and were
not rather to be recalled to the mind of the sinner whenever he thinks
of the forgiveness of sins, that he may thereby recollect himself,
regain courage, and be confirmed in the belief that he shall obtain the
forgiveness of sins which was promised him in baptism. What Jerome said
harshly and improperly—viz. that baptism, which is fallen from by those
who deserve to be excommunicated from the Church, is repaired by
penitence, these worthy expositors wrest to their own impiety. You will
speak most correctly, therefore, if you call baptism the sacrament of
penitence, seeing it is given to those who aim at repentance to confirm
their faith and seal their confidence. But lest you should think this
our invention, it appears, that besides being conformable to the words
of Scripture, it was generally regarded in the early Church as an
indubitable axiom. For in the short Treatise on Faith addressed to
Peter, and bearing the name of Augustine, it is called, *The sacrament
of faith and repentance*. But why have recourse to doubtful writings, as
if anything can be required more distinct than the statement of the
Evangelist, that John preached “the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins”? (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p68.1"></span>[Mark
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p68.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p68.2"></span>[Luke
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p68.2"></span>.md).

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p69"></span>OF EXTREME UNCTION, SO CALLED.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p70"></span>18. The third fictitious sacrament is
Extreme Unction, which is performed only by a priest, and, as they
express it, *in extremis*, with oil consecrated by the bishop, and with
this form of words, “By this holy unction, and his most tender mercy,
may God forgive you whatever sin you have committed, by the eye, the
ear, the smell, the touch, the taste” (see Calv. Epist. de Fugiend.
Illicit. Sac.). They pretend that there are two virtues in it—the
forgiveness of sins, and relief of bodily disease, if so expedient; if
not expedient, the salvation of the soul. For they say, that the
institution was set down by James, whose words are, “Is any sick among
you? let him send for the elders of the Church; and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he
have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p70.1"></span>[James
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p70.1"></span>). The same account is here to be given of
this unction as we lately gave of the laying on of hands; in other
words, it is mere hypocritical stage-play, by which, without reason or
result, they would resemble the apostles. Mark relates that the
apostles, on their first mission, agreeably to the command which they
had received of the Lord, raised the dead, cast out devils, cleansed
lepers, healed the sick, and, in healing, used oil. He says, they
“anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p70.2"></span>[Mark
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p70.2"></span>). To this James referred when he ordered the
presbyters of the Church to be called to anoint the sick. That no deeper
mystery lay under this ceremony will easily be perceived by those who
consider how great liberty both our Lord and his apostles used in those
external things.64  <span id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668.md) Our Lord,
when about to give sight to the blind man, spat on the ground, and made
clay of the spittle; some he cured by a touch, others by a word. In like
manner the apostles cured some diseases by word only, others by touch,
others by anointing. But it is probable that neither this anointing nor
any of the other things were used at random. I admit this; not, however,
that they were instruments of the cure, but only symbols to remind the
ignorant whence this great virtue proceeded, and prevent them from
ascribing the praise to the apostles. To designate the Holy Spirit and
his gifts by oil is trite and common (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p71.5"></span>[Ps.
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p71.5"></span>). But the gift of hearing disappeared with
the other miraculous powers which the Lord was pleased to give for a
time, that it might render the new preaching of the gospel for ever
wonderful. Therefore, even were we to grant that anointing was a
sacrament of those powers which were then administered by the hands of
the apostles, it pertains not to us, to whom no such powers have been
committed.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p72"></span>19. And what better reason have they for
making a sacrament of this unction, than of any of the other symbols
which are mentioned in Scripture? Why do they not dedicate some pool of
Siloam, into which, at certain seasons the sick may plunge themselves?
That, they say, were done in vain. Certainly not more in vain than
unction. Why do they not lay themselves on the dead, seeing that Paul,
in raising up the dead youth, lay upon him? Why is not clay made of dust
and spittle a sacrament? The other cases were special, but this is
commanded by James. In other words, James spake agreeably to the time
when the Church still enjoyed this blessing from God. They affirm,
indeed, that there is still the same virtue in their unction, but we
experience differently. Let no man now wonder that they have with so
much confidence deluded souls which they knew to be stupid and blind,
because deprived of the word of God, that is, of his light and life,
seeing they blush not to attempt to deceive the bodily perceptions of
those who are alive, and have all their senses about them. They make
themselves ridiculous, therefore, by pretending that they are endued
with the gift of healing. The Lord, doubtless, is present with his
people in all ages, and cures their sicknesses as often as there is
need, not less than formerly; and yet he does not exert those manifest
powers, nor dispense miracles by the hands of apostles, because that
gift was temporary, and owing, in some measure, to the ingratitude of
men, immediately ceased.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p73"></span>20. Wherefore, as the apostles, not
without cause, openly declared, by the symbol of oil, that the gift of
healing committed to them was not their own, but the power of the Holy
Spirit; so, on the other hand, these men insult the Holy Spirit by
making his power consist in a filthy oil of no efficacy. It is just as
if one were to say that all oil is the power of the Holy Spirit, because
it is called by that name in Scripture, and that every dove is the Holy
Spirit, because he appeared in that form. Let them see to this: it is
sufficient for us that we perceive, with absolute certainty, that their
unction is no sacrament, as it is neither a ceremony appointed by God,
nor has any promise. For when we require, in a sacrament, these two
things, that it be a ceremony appointed by God, and have a promise from
God, we at the same time demand that that ceremony be delivered to us,
and that that promise have reference to us.  <span
id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669.md) No man contends that circumcision is
now a sacrament of the Christian Church, although it was both an
ordinance of God, and had his promise annexed to it, because it was
neither commanded to us, nor was the promise annexed to it given us on
the same condition. The promise of which they vaunt so much in unction,
as we have clearly demonstrated, and they themselves show by experience,
has not been given to us. The ceremony behoved to be used only by those
who had been endued with the gift of healing, not by those murderers,
who do more by slaying and butchering than by curing.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p75"></span>21. Even were it granted that this
precept of unction, which has nothing to do with the present age, were
perfectly adapted to it, they will not even thus have advanced much in
support of their unction, with which they have hitherto besmeared us.
James would have all the sick to be anointed: these men besmear, with
their oil, not the sick, but half-dead carcasses, when life is quivering
on the lips, or, as they say, *in extremis*. If they have a present cure
in their sacrament, with which they can either alleviate the bitterness
of disease, or at least give some solace to the soul, they are cruel in
never curing in time. James would have the sick man to be anointed by
the elders of the Church. They admit no anointer but a priestling. When
they interpret the elders of James to be priests, and allege that the
plural number is used for honour, the thing is absurd; as if the Church
had at that time abounded with swarms of priests, so that they could set
out in long procession, bearing a dish of sacred oil. James, in ordering
simply that the sick be anointed, seems to me to mean no other anointing
than that of common oil, nor is any other mentioned in the narrative of
Mark. These men deign not to use any oil but that which has been
consecrated by a bishop, that is warmed with much breath, charmed by
much muttering, and saluted nine times on bended knee, Thrice Hail, holy
oil! thrice Hail, holy chrism! thrice Hail, holy balsam! From whom did
they derive these exorcisms? James says, that when the sick man shall
have been anointed with oil, and prayer shall have been made over him,
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him—viz. that his
guilt being forgiven, he shall obtain a mitigation of the punishment,
not meaning that sins are effaced by oil, but that the prayers by which
believers commended their afflicted brother to God would not be in vain.
These men are impiously false in saying that sins are forgiven by their
sacred, that is, abominable unction. See how little they gain, even when
they are allowed to abuse the passage of James as they list. And to save
us the trouble of a laborious proof, their own annals relieve us from
all difficulty; for they relate that Pope Innocent, who presided over
the church of Rome in the age of Augustine, ordained, that not elders
only, but all Christians, should use oil in anointing, in their own
necessity, or in that of their friends.64  <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) Our authority for this is Sigebert, in
his Chronicles.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p77"></span>OF ECCLESIASTICAL ORDERS.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p78"></span>22. The fourth place in their catalogue
is held by the sacrament of Orders, one so prolific, as to beget of
itself seven lesser sacraments. It is very ridiculous that, after
affirming that there are seven sacraments, when they begin to count,
they make out thirteen. It cannot be alleged that they are one
sacrament, because they all tend to one priesthood, and are a kind of
steps to the same thing. For while it is certain that the ceremonies in
each are different, and they themselves say that the graces are
different, no man can doubt that if their dogmas are admitted, they
ought to be called seven sacraments. And why debate it as a doubtful
matter, when they themselves plainly and distinctly declare that they
are seven? First, then, we shall glance at them in passing, and show to
how many absurdities they introduce us when they would recommend their
orders to us as sacraments; and, secondly, we shall see whether the
ceremony which churches use in ordaining ministers ought at all to be
called a sacrament. They make seven ecclesiastical orders, or degrees,
which they distinguish by the title of a sacrament. These are
Doorkeepers, Readers, Exorcists, Acolytes, Subdeacons, Deacons, and
Priests. And they say that they are seven, because of the seven kinds of
graces of the Holy Spirit with which those who are promoted to them
ought to be endued. This grace is increased and more liberally
accumulated on promotion. The mere number has been consecrated by a
perversion of Scripture, because they think they read in Isaiah that
there are seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, whereas truly not more than
six are mentioned by Isaiah, who, however, meant not to include all in
that passage. For, in other passages are mentioned the spirit of life,
of sanctification, of the adoption of sons, as well as there, the spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit
of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord.64  <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) Although others who are more acute
make not seven orders, but nine, in imitation, as they say, of the
Church triumphant. But among these, also, there is a contest; because
some insist that the clerical tonsure is the first order of all, and the
episcopate the last; while others, excluding the tonsure, class the
office of archbishop among the orders. Isiodorus distinguishes
differently, for he makes Psalmists and Readers different.64  <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) To the former, he gives the charge of
chanting; to the latter, that of reading the Scriptures for the
instruction of the common people. And this distinction is observed by
the canons. In this great variety, what would they have us to follow or
to avoid? Shall we say that there are seven orders? So the master of the
school teaches, but the most illuminated doctors determine otherwise. On
the other hand, they are at variance among themselves. Besides, the most
sacred canons call us in a different direction. Such, indeed, is the
concord of men when they discuss divine things apart from the word of
God.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p81"></span>23. But the crowning folly of all is,
that in each of these they make Christ their colleague. First, they
say64  <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md) he performed the office
of Doorkeeper when, with a whip of small cords, he drove the buyers and
sellers from the temple. He intimates that he is a Doorkeeper when he
says, “I am the door.” He assumed the office of Reader, when he read
Isaiah in the synagogue. He performed the office of Exorcist when,
touching the tongue and ears of the deaf and dumb man with spittle, he
restored his hearing. He declared that he was an Acolyte by the words,
“He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness.” He performed the
office of Subdeacon, when, girding himself with a towel, he washed the
feet of his disciples. He acted the part of a Deacon, when he
distributed his body and blood in the Supper. He performed the part of a
Priest, when, on the cross, he offered himself in sacrifice to the
Father. As these things cannot be heard without laughter, I wonder how
they could have been written without laughter, if, indeed, they were men
who wrote them. But their most noteable subtlety is that in which they
speculate on the name of Acolyte, calling him Ceroferarius—a magical
term, I presume, one certainly unknown to all nations and tongues;
ἀκόλουθος, in Greek, meaning simply *attendant*. Were I to stop and
seriously refute these things, I might myself justly be laughed at, so
frivolous are they and ludicrous.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p83"></span>24. Still, lest they should be able to
impose on silly women, their vanity must be exposed in passing. With
great pomp and solemnity they elect their readers, psalmists,
doorkeepers, acolytes, to perform those services which they give in
charge, either to boys, or at least to those whom they call laics. Who,
for the most part, lights the tapers, who pours wine and water from the
pitcher, but a boy or some mean person among laics, who gains his bread
by so doing? Do not the same persons chant? Do they not open and shut
the doors of Churches? Who ever saw, in their churches, either an
acolyte or doorkeeper performing his office? Nay, when he who as a boy
performed the office of acolyte, is admitted to the order of acolyte, he
ceases to be the very thing he begins to be called, so that they seem
professedly to wish to cast away the office when they assume the title.
See why they hold it necessary to be consecrated by sacraments, and to
receive the Holy Spirit! It is just to do nothing. If they pretend that
this is the defect of the times, because they neglect and abandon their
offices, let them, at the same time, confess that there is not in the
Church, in the present day, any use or benefit of these sacred orders
which they wondrously extol, and that their whole Church is full of
anathema, since the tapers and flagons, which none are worthy to touch
but those who have been consecrated acolytes, she allows to be handled
by boys and profane persons; since her chants, which ought to be heard
only from consecrated lips, she delegates to children. And to what end,
pray, do they consecrate exorcists? I hear that the Jews had their
exorcists, but I see they were so called from the exorcisms which they
practised (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p83.1"></span>[Acts
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p83.1"></span>). Who ever heard of those fictitious
exorcists having given one specimen of their profession? It is pretended
that power has been given them to lay their hands on energumens,
catechumens, and demoniacs, but they cannot persuade demons that they
are endued with such power, not only because demons do not submit to
their orders, but even command themselves. Scarcely will you find one in
ten who is not possessed by a wicked spirit. All, then, which they
babble about their paltry orders is a compound of ignorant and stupid
falsehoods. Of the ancient acolytes, doorkeepers, and readers, we have
spoken when explaining the government of the Church. All that we here
proposed was to combat that novel invention of a sevenfold sacrament in
ecclesiastical orders of which we nowhere read except among silly raving
Sorbonnists and Canonists.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p84"></span>25. Let us now attend to the ceremonies
which they employ. And first, all whom they enroll among their militia
they initiate into the clerical status by a common symbol. They shave
them on the top of the head, that the crown may denote regal honour,
because clergy ought to be kings in governing themselves and others.
Peter thus speaks of them: “Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p84.1"></span>[1 Pet.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p84.1"></span>.md).
But it was sacrilege in them to arrogate to themselves alone what is
given to the whole Church, and proudly to glory in a title of which they
had robbed the faithful. Peter addresses the whole Church: these men
wrest it to a few shaven crowns, as if it had been said to them alone,
Be ye holy: as if they alone had been purchased by the blood of Christ:
as if they alone had been made by Christ kings and priests unto God.
Then they assign other reasons (Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 24). The top of the
head is bared, that their mind may be shown to be free, with unveiled
face, to behold the glory of God; or that they may be taught to cut off
the vices of the eye and the lip. Or the shaving of the head is the
laying aside of temporal things, while the circumference of the crown is
the remnants of good which are retained for support. Everything is in
figure, because forsooth, the veil of the temple is not yet rent.
Accordingly, persuaded that they have excellently performed their part
because they have figured such things by their crown, they perform none
of them in reality. How long will they delude us with such masks and
impostures? The clergy, by shaving off some hair, intimate (Sent. loco
cit.) that they have cast away abundance of temporal good—that they
contemplate the glory of God—that they have mortified concupiscence of
the ear and the eye: but no class of men is more rapacious, more stupid,
more libidinous. Why do they not rather exhibit true sanctity, than give
a hypocritical semblance of it in false and lying signs?

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p85"></span>26. Moreover, when they say that the
clerical crown has its origin and nature from the Nazarenes, what else
do they say than that their mysteries are derived from Jewish
ceremonies, or rather are mere Judaism? When they add that Priscilla,
Aquila, and Paul himself, after they had taken a vow, shaved their head
that they might be purified, they betray their gross ignorance. For we
nowhere read this of Priscilla, while, with regard to Aquila, it is
uncertain, since that tonsure may refer equally well to Paul as to
Aquila (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p85.1"></span>[Acts
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p85.1"></span>). But not to leave them in possession of
what they ask—viz. that they have an example in Paul, it is to be
observed, to the more simple, that Paul never shaved his head for any
sanctification, but only in subservience to the weakness of brethren.
Vows of this kind I am accustomed to call vows of charity, not of piety;
in other words, vows not undertaken for divine worship, but only in
deference to the infirmity of the weak, as he himself says, that to the
Jews he became a Jew (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p85.2"></span>[1 Cor.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p85.2"></span>). This, therefore, he did, and that once and
for a short time, that he might accommodate himself for a little to the
Jews. When these men would, for no end, imitate the purifications of the
Nazarenes (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p85.3"></span>[Num.
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p85.3"></span>), what else do they than set up a new, while
they improperly affect to rival the ancient Judaism? In the same spirit
the Decretal Epistle was composed, which enjoins the clergy, after the
apostle, not to nourish their hair, but to shave it all round (Cap.
Prohibitur, Dist. 24); as if the apostle, in showing what is comely for
all men, had been solicitous for the spherical tonsure of the clergy.
Hence, let my readers consider what kind of force or dignity there can
be in the subsequent mysteries, to which this is the introduction.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p86"></span>27. Whence the clerical tonsure had its
origin, is abundantly clear from Augustine alone (De Opera. Monach. et
Retract). While in that age none wore long hair but the effeminate, and
those who affected an unmanly beauty and elegance, it was thought to be
of bad example to allow the clergy to do so. They were therefore
enjoined either to cut or shave their hair, that they might not have the
appearance of effeminate indulgence. And so common was the practice,
that some monks, to appear more sanctimonious than others by a notable
difference in dress, let their locks hang loose.64  <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) But when hair returned to use, and
some nations, which had always worn long hair, as France, Germany, and
England, embraced Christianity, it is probable that the clergy
everywhere shaved the head, that they might not seem to affect ornament.
At length, in a more corrupt age, when all ancient customs were either
changed, or had degenerated into superstition, seeing no reason for the
clerical tonsure (they had retained nothing but a foolish imitation),
they betook themselves to mystery, and now superstitiously obtrude it
upon us in support of their sacrament. The Doorkeepers, on consecration,
receive the keys of the Church, by which it is understood that the
custody of it is committed to them; the Readers receive the Holy Bible;
the Exorcists, forms of exorcism which they use over the possessed and
catechumens; the Acolytes, tapers and the flagon. Such are the
ceremonies which, it would seem, possess so much secret virtue, that
they cannot only be signs and badges, but even causes of invisible
grace. For this, according to their definition, they demand, when they
would have them to be classed among sacraments. But to despatch the
matter in a few words, I say that it is absurd for schools and canons to
make sacraments of those minor orders, since, even by the confession of
those who do so, they were unknown to the primitive Church, and were
devised many ages after. But sacraments as containing a divine promise
ought not to be appointed, either by angels or men, but by God only, to
whom alone it belongs to give the promise.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p88"></span>28. There remain the three orders which
they call major. Of these, what they call the subdeaconate was
transferred to this class, after the crowd of minor began to be
prolific. But as they think they have authority for these from the word
of God, they honour them specially with the name of Holy Orders. Let us
see how they wrest the ordinances of God to their own ends. We begin
with the order of presbyter or priest. To these two names they give one
meaning, understanding by them, those to whom, as they say, it pertains
to offer the sacrifice of Christ’s body and blood on the altar, to frame
prayers, and bless the gifts of God. Hence, at ordination, they receive
the patena with the host, as symbols of the power conferred upon them of
offering sacrifices to appease God, and their hands are anointed, this
symbol being intended to teach that they have received the power of
consecrating. But of the ceremonies afterwards. Of the thing itself, I
say that it is so far from having, as they pretend, one particle of
support from the word of God, that they could not more wickedly corrupt
the order which he has appointed. And first, it ought to be held as
confessed (this we maintained when treating of the Papal Mass), that all
are injurious to Christ who call themselves priests in the sense of
offering expiatory victims. He was constituted and consecrated Priest by
the Father, with an oath, after the order of Melchisedek, without end
and without successor (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.1"></span>[Psalm
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p88.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.2"></span>[Heb.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.2"></span>;
7:3). He once offered a victim of eternal expiation and reconciliation,
and now also having entered the sanctuary of heaven, he intercedes for
us. In him we all are priests, but to offer praise and thanksgiving, in
fine, ourselves, and all that is ours, to God. It was peculiar to him
alone to appease God and expiate sins by his oblation. When these men
usurp it to themselves, what follows, but that they have an impious and
sacrilegious priesthood? It is certainly wicked over much to dare to
distinguish it with the title of sacrament. In regard to the true office
of presbyter, which was recommended to us by the lips of Christ, I
willingly give it that place. For in it there is a ceremony which,
first, is taken from the Scriptures; and, secondly, is declared by Paul
to be not empty or superfluous, but to be a faithful symbol of spiritual
grace (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.3"></span>[1 Tim.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p88.3"></span>). My reason for not giving a place to the
third is, because it is not ordinary or common to all believers, but is
a special rite for a certain function. But while this honour is
attributed to the Christian ministry, Popish priests may not plume
themselves upon it. Christ ordered dispensers of his gospel and his
sacred mysteries to be ordained, not sacrificers to be inaugurated, and
his command was to preach the gospel and feed the flock, not to immolate
victims. He promised the gift of the Holy Spirit, not to make expiation
for sins, but duly to undertake and maintain the government of the
Church (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.4"></span>[Matt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p88.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.5"></span>[Mark
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p88.5"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p88.6"></span>[John
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p88.6"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p89"></span>29. With the reality the ceremonies
perfectly agree. When our Lord commissioned the apostles to preach the
gospel, he breathed upon them (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p89.1"></span>[John
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p89.1"></span>). By this symbol he represented the gift of
the Holy Spirit which he bestowed upon them. This breathing these worthy
men have retained; and, as they were bringing the Holy Spirit from their
throat, mutter over their priestlings, “Receive the Holy Spirit.”
Accordingly, they omit nothing which they do not preposterously mimic. I
say not in the manner of players (who have art and meaning in their
gestures), but like apes who imitate at random without selection. We
observe, say they, the example of the Lord. But the Lord did many things
which he did not intend to be examples to us. Our Lord said to his
disciples, “Receive the Holy Spirit” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p89.2"></span>[John
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p89.2"></span>). He said also to Lazarus, “Lazarus, come
forth” (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p89.3"></span>[John
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p89.3"></span>). He said to the paralytic, “Rise, take up
thy bed, and walk” (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p89.4"></span>[John
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p89.4"></span>.md).
Why do they not say the same to all the dead and paralytic? He gave a
specimen of his divine power when, in breathing on the apostles, he
filled them with the gift of the Holy Spirit. If they attempt to do the
same, they rival God, and do all but challenge him to the contest. But
they are very far from producing the effect, and only mock Christ by
that absurd gesture. Such, indeed, is the effrontery of some, that they
dare to assert that the Holy Spirit is conferred by them; but what truth
there is in this, we learn from experience, which cries aloud that all
who are consecrated priests, of horses become asses, and of fools,
madmen. And yet it is not here that I am contending against them; I am
only condemning the ceremony itself, which ought not to be drawn into a
precedent, since it was used as the special symbol of a miracle, so far
is it from furnishing them with an example for imitation.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p90"></span>30. But from whom, pray, did they receive
their unction? They answer, that they received it from the sons of
Aaron, from whom also their order derived its origin (Sent. Lib. 4 Dist.
14, cap. 8, et in Canon. Dist. 21, cap. 1). Thus they constantly choose
to defend themselves by perverse examples, rather than confess that any
of their rash practices is of their own devising. Meanwhile, they
observe not that in professing to be the successors of the sons of
Aaron, they are injurious to the priesthood of Christ, which alone was
adumbrated and typified by all ancient priesthoods. In him, therefore,
they were all concluded and completed, in him they ceased, as we have
repeatedly said, and as the Epistle to the Hebrews, unaided by any
gloss, declares. But if they are so much delighted with Mosaic
ceremonies, why do they not hurry oxen, calves, and lambs, to their
sacrifices? They have, indeed, a great part of the ancient tabernacle,
and of the whole Jewish worship. The only thing wanted to their religion
is, that they do not sacrifice oxen and calves. Who sees not that this
practice of unction is much more pernicious than circumcision,
especially when to it is added superstition and a Pharisaical opinion of
the merit of the work? The Jews placed their confidence of justification
in circumcision, these men look for spiritua1 gifts in unction.
Therefore, in desiring to be rivals of the Levites, they become
apostates from Christ, and discard themselves from the pastoral office.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p91"></span>31. It is, if you please, the sacred oil
which impresses an indelible character. As if oil could not be washed
away by sand and salt, or if it sticks the closer, with soap. But that
character is spiritual. What has oil to do with the soul? Have they
forgotten what they quote from Augustine, that if the word be withdrawn
from the water, there will be nothing but water, but that it is owing to
the word that it is a sacrament? What word can they show in their oil?
Is it because Moses was commanded to anoint the sons of Aaron? (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p91.1"></span>[Exod.
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p91.1"></span>). But he there receives command concerning
the tunic, the ephod, the breastplate, the mitre, the crown of holiness
with which Aaron was to be adorned; and concerning the tunics, belts,
and mitres which his sons were to wear. He receives command about
sacrificing the calf, burning its fat, about cutting and burning rams,
about sanctifying ear-rings and vestments with the blood of one of the
rams, and innumerable other observances. Having passed over all these, I
wonder why the unction of oil alone pleases them. If they delight in
being sprinkled, why are they sprinkled with oil rather than with blood?
They are attempting, forsooth, an ingenious device; they are trying, by
a kind of patchwork, to make one religion out of Christianity, Judaism,
and Paganism. Their unction, therefore, is without savour; it wants
salt, that is, the word of God. There remains the laying on of hands,
which, though I admit it to be a sacrament in true and legitimate
ordination, I do deny to have any such place in this fable, where they
neither obey the command of Christ, nor look to the end to which the
promise ought to lead us. If they would not have the sign denied them,
they must adapt it to the reality to which it is dedicated.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p92"></span>32. As to the order of the diaconate, I
would raise no dispute, if the office which existed under the apostles,
and a purer Church, were restored to its integrity. But what resemblance
to it do we see in their fictitious deacons? I speak not of the men,
lest they should complain that I am unjustly judging their doctrine by
the vices of those who profess it; but I contend that those whom their
doctrine declares to us, derive no countenance from those deacons whom
the apostolic Church appointed. They say that it belongs to their
deacons to assist the priests, and minister at all the things which are
done in the sacraments, as in baptism, in chrism, the patena, and
chalice, to bring the offerings and lay them on the altar, to prepare
and dress the table of the Lord, to carry the cross, announce and read
out the gospel and epistle to the people (Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 24, cap. 8;
Item, Cap. Perlectis, Dist. 25). Is there here one word about the true
office of deacon? Let us now attend to the appointment. The bishop alone
lays hands on the deacon who is ordained; he places the prayer-book and
stole upon his left shoulder, that he may understand that he has
received the easy yoke of the Lord, in order that he may subject to the
fear of the Lord every thing pertaining to the left side: he gives him a
text of the gospel, to remind him that he is its herald. What have these
things to do with deacons? But they act just as if one were to say he
was ordaining apostles, when he was only appointing persons to kindle
the incense, clean the images, sweep the churches, set traps for mice,
and put out dogs. Who can allow this class of men to be called apostles,
and to be compared with the very apostles of Christ? After this, let
them not pretend that those whom they appoint to mere stage-play are
deacons. Nay, they even declare, by the very name, what the nature of
the office is. For they call them Levites, and wish to trace their
nature and origin to the sons of Levi. As far as I am concerned, they
are welcome, provided they do not afterwards deck themselves in borrowed
feathers.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p93"></span>33. What use is there in speaking of
subdeacons? For, whereas in fact they anciently had the charge of the
poor, they attribute to them some kind of nugatory function, as carrying
the chalice and patena, the pitcher with water, and the napkin to the
altar, pouring out water for the hands, &c. Then, by the offerings which
they are said to receive and bring in, they mean those which they
swallow up, as if they had been destined to anathema. There is an
admirable correspondence between the office and the mode of inducting to
it—viz. receiving from the bishop the patena and chalice, and from the
archdeacon the pitcher with water, the manual and trumpery of this kind.
They call upon us to admit that the Holy Spirit is included in these
frivolities. What pious man can be induced to grant this? But to have
done at once, we may conclude the same of this as of the others, and
there is no need to repeat at length what has been explained above. To
the modest and docile (it is such I have undertaken to instruct), it
will be enough that there is no sacrament of God, unless where a
ceremony is shown annexed to a promise, or rather where a promise is
seen in a ceremony. Here there is not one syllable of a certain promise,
and it is vain, therefore, to seek for a ceremony to confirm the
promise. On the other hand, we read of no ceremony appointed by God in
regard to those usages which they employ, and, therefore, there can be
no sacrament.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p94"></span>OF MARRIAGE.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95"></span>34. The last of all is marriage, which,
while all admit it to be an institution of God, no man ever saw to be a
sacrament, until the time of Gregory. And would it ever have occurred to
the mind of any sober man? It is a good and holy ordinance of God. And
agriculture, architecture, shoemaking, and shaving, are lawful
ordinances of God; but they are not sacraments. For in a sacrament, the
thing required is not only that it be a work of God, but that it be an
external ceremony appointed by God to confirm a promise. That there is
nothing of the kind in marriage, even children can judge. But it is a
sign, they say, of a sacred thing, that is, of the spiritual union of
Christ with the Church. If by the term sign they understand a symbol set
before us by God to assure us of our faith, they wander widely from the
mark. If they mean merely a sign because it has been employed as a
similitude, I will show how acutely they reason. Paul says, “One star
differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead” (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041.md),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95.1"></span>.md).
Here is one sacrament. Christ says, “The kingdom of heaven is like to a
grain of mustard-seed” (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95.2"></span>[Mt.
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.2"></span>). Here is another sacrament. Again, “The
kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.3"></span>[Mt.
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.3"></span>). Here is a third sacrament. Isaiah says,
“He shall feed his flock like a shepherd” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.4"></span>[Isaiah
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.4"></span>). Here is a fourth sacrament. In another
passage he says, “The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.5"></span>[Isaiah
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.5"></span>). Here is a fifth sacrament. And where will
be the end or limit? Everything in this way will be a sacrament. All the
parables and similitudes in Scripture will be so many sacraments. Nay,
even theft will be a sacrament, seeing it is written, “The day of the
Lord so cometh as a thief in the night” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.6"></span>[1 Thess.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95.6"></span>.md).
Who can tolerate the ignorant garrulity of these sophists? I admit,
indeed, that whenever we see a vine, the best thing is to call to mind
what our Saviour says, “I am the true vine, and my father is the
husbandman.” “ I am the vine, ye are the branches” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.7"></span>[John 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95.7"></span>.md).
And whenever we meet a shepherd with his flock, it is good also to
remember, “I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of
mine” (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p95.8"></span>[John
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p95.8"></span>). But any man who would class such
similitudes with sacraments should be sent to bedlam.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p96"></span>35. They adduce the words of Paul, by
which they say that the name of a sacrament is given to marriage, “He
that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own
flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the Church:
for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto
his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery: but
I speak concerning Christ and the Church” (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p96.1"></span>[Eph. 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p96.1"></span>.md).
To treat Scripture thus is to confound heaven and earth. Paul, in order
to show husbands how they ought to love their wives, sets Christ before
them as an example. As he shed his bowels of affection for the Church,
which he has espoused to himself, so he would have every one to feel
affected toward his wife. Then he adds, “He that loveth his wife loveth
himself,” “even as the Lord the Church.” Moreover, to show how Christ
loved the Church as himself, nay, how he made himself one with his
spouse the Church, he applies to her what Moses relates that Adam said
of himself. For after Eve was brought into his presence, knowing that
she had been formed out of his side, he exclaimed, “This is now bone of
my bones, and flesh of my flesh” (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p96.2"></span>[Gen.
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p96.2"></span>). That all this was spiritually fulfilled in
Christ, and in us, Paul declares, when he says, that we are members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, and so one flesh with him. At
length he breaks out into the exclamation, “This is a great mystery;”
and lest any one should be misled by the ambiguity, he says, that he is
not speaking of the connection between husband and wife, but of the
spiritual marriage of Christ and the Church. And truly it is a great
mystery that Christ allowed a rib to be taken from himself, of which we
might be formed; that is, that when he was strong, he was pleased to
become weak, that we might be strengthened by his strength, and should
no longer live ourselves, but he live in us (<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p96.3"></span>[Gal.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p96.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p97"></span>36. The thing which misled them was the
term *sacrament*.64  <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md) But, was it
right that the whole Church should be punished for the ignorance of
these men? Paul called it a mystery. When the Latin interpreter might
have abandoned this mode of expression as uncommon to Latin ears, or
converted it into “secret,” he preferred calling it *sacramentum*, but
in no other sense than the Greek term μυστηπιον was used by Paul. Let
them go now and clamour against skill in languages, their ignorance of
which leads them most shamefully astray in a matter easy and obvious to
every one. But why do they so strongly urge the term sacrament in this
one passage, and in others pass it by with neglect? For both in the
First Epistle to Timothy (<span id="iv.iv.xx-p98.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p98.1"></span>.md),
and also in the Epistle to the Ephesians, it is used by the Vulgate
interpreter, and in every instance, for mystery. Let us, however, pardon
them this lapsus, though liars ought to have good memories. Marriage
being thus recommended by the title of a sacrament,64  <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676.md) can it be anything but vertiginous
levity afterwards to call it uncleanness, and pollution, and carnal
defilement? How absurd is it to debar priests from a sacrament! If they
say that they debar not from a sacrament but from carnal connection,
they will not thus escape me. They say that this connection is part of
the sacrament, and thereby figures the union which we have with Christ
in conformity of nature, inasmuch as it is by this connection that
husband and wife become one flesh; although some have here found two
sacraments, the one of God and the soul, in bridegroom and bride,
another of Christ and the Church, in husband and wife. Be this as it
may, this connection is a sacrament from which no Christian can lawfully
be debarred, unless, indeed, the sacraments of Christians accord so ill
that they cannot stand together. There is also another absurdity in
these dogmas. They affirm that in a sacrament the gift of the Holy
Spirit is conferred; this connection they hold to be a sacrament, and
yet they deny that in it the Holy Spirit is ever present.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p100"></span>37. And, that they might not delude the
Church in this matter merely, what a long series of errors, lies,
frauds, and iniquities have they appended to one error? So that you may
say they sought nothing but a hiding-place for abominations when they
converted marriage into a sacrament. When once they obtained this, they
appropriated to themselves the cognisance of conjugal causes: as the
thing was spiritual, it was not to be intermeddled with by profane
judges. Then they enacted laws by which they confirmed their
tyranny,—laws partly impious toward God, partly fraught with injustice
toward men; such as, that marriages contracted between minors, without
the consent of their parents, should be valid; that no lawful marriages
can be contracted between relations within the seventh degree, and that
such marriages, if contracted, should be dissolved. Moreover, they frame
degrees of kindred contrary to the laws of all nations, and even the
polity of Moses, and enact that a husband who has repudiated an
adulteress may not marry again—that spiritual kindred cannot be joined
in marriage—that marriage cannot be celebrated from Septuagesimo to the
Octaves of Easter, three weeks before the nativity of John, nor from
Advent to Epiphany, and innumerable others, which it were too tedious to
mention. We must now get out of their mire, in which our discourse has
stuck longer than our inclination. Methinks, however, that much has been
gained if I have, in some measure, deprived these asses of their lion’s
skin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_659"></span>[660](inst099.htm#fr_659.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p44"></span>32 632 Ambros. de iis qui init. Mysteriis
et de Sacrament.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[661](inst099.htm#fr_660.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p46"></span>33 633 Calv. adv. Concil. Trident.
Præfat. in Catechis. Latinum. Viret. de Adulter. Sacrament. cap. 2-5.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[662](inst099.htm#fr_661.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p51"></span>34 634 French, “en laquelle toutesfois
ils n’ont rien semblable a eux, sinon une folle et perverse
singerie”;—in which, however, they have nothing like them but a foolish
and perverse aping.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[663](inst099.htm#fr_662.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p53"></span>35 635 The French adds, “du ternps de
Sainct Augustin;” —of the time of St Augustine.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[664](inst099.htm#fr_663.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p55"></span>36 636 De Consecr. Dist. 5, Concil.
Aurel. cap. Ut Jejuni de Consecr. Dist. 5.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[665](inst099.htm#fr_664.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p63"></span>37 637 French, “Auquel ils font semblant
de porter une reverence inviolable;”—for whom they pretend to have an
inviolable respect.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[666](inst099.htm#fr_665.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p65"></span>38 638 August. Quæst. Vet. Test. Lib. 3
De Bapt. Parvul. De Bapt. Cont. Donat. Lib. 5

<span id="fn_666"></span>[667](inst099.htm#fr_666.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p67"></span>39 639 The French adds, “Car, comme nous
avoos assez declairé ci dessus, la promesse des clefs n’appartient
nullement a faire quelque estat particulier d’absolution, mais seulement
à la predication de l’Evangile soit qu’elle soit faite ou a plusieurs,
ou a un seul, sans y mettre difference; c’est a dire, que par icelle
promesse notre Seigneur ne fonde point une absolution speciale qui soit
faite distinctement à un chacun mais celle qui se fait indifferement a
tous pecheurs, sans addresse particuliere.”—For, as we have sufficiently
shown above, the promise of the keys pertains not to the making of any
particular state of absolution, but only to the preaching of the Gospel,
whether it is made to several or to one only, without making any
difference; that is to say, that by this promise our Lord does not found
a special absolution which is given separately to each, but one which is
given indifferently to all sinners, without particular application.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[668](inst099.htm#fr_667.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p68"></span>40 640 Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 14, cap. 1. De
Pœnit. Dist. 1, cap. 2. August. Dictum in Decret. 15. Quæst. 1, Cap.
Fermissime.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[669](inst099.htm#fr_668.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p70.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p71"></span>41 641 <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p71.1"></span>[John
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p71.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p71.2"></span>[Mt.
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p71.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p71.3"></span>[Luke
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#042.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p71.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p71.4"></span>[Acts
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p71.4"></span>;
5:16; 19:12.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[670](inst099.htm#fr_669.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p74"></span>134 D134 This distinction in no way calls
into question the value of the various sacraments which, in distinct
ages, God has been pleased to appoint. To the contrary, it affirms their
integrity and value as signs and seals of God’s covenant of grace, while
emphasizing the fact that they are specifically designed for, applicable
within, and valid for particular historical contexts. Calvin draws the
obvious inference: some sacraments are not intended for the present age.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[671](inst099.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p76"></span>42 642 The French adds, “Comment
accorderont ils cela avec ce qu’ils veulent faire accroire”?—How will
they reconcile this with what they wish to be believed?

<span id="fn_671"></span>[672](inst099.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p79"></span>43 643 <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p79.1"></span>[Isa.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p79.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p79.2"></span>[Ezek.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p79.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p79.3"></span>[Rom.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p79.3"></span>:15.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[673](inst099.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p79.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p80"></span>44 644 Isidor. Lib. 7, Etymolog,
allegatim, cap. Cleros. Dist. 21, 33, cap. Lector, et cap. Ostier.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[674](inst099.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82"></span>45 645 <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p82.1"></span>[John
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.1"></span>;
10:7; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.2"></span>[Luke
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.3"></span>[Mt.
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.4"></span>[John
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.4"></span>;
13:5; <span id="iv.iv.xx-p82.5"></span>[Mt.
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xx-p82.5"></span>; 27:50.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[675](inst099.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p87"></span>46 646 The French adds, “Voila comment la
tonsure n’estoit point une chose speciale aux clercs, mais estoit en
usance quasi à tous.”—See how the tonsure was not a thing peculiar to
the clergy, but was used, as it were, by all.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[676](inst099.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p98"></span>47 647 French, “Ills ont eto trompé du
mot de Sacrement qui est en la translation commune.”—They have been
misled by the word Sacrament, which is in the common translation.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[677](inst099.htm#fr_676.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p99"></span>48 648 Lat. Lib. 4 Dist. 26, cap. 6, et
in Decret 27, Quæst. 2, cap. Quæ Societas, etc. Gloss. eod. c. Lex
Divina. Ibid. Lib. 4 Dist. 33, cap. 2. et in Decret. 33, Quæst. 2. cap.
Quicquid, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 20. - OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.](inst100.md)
