[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst049)  [Next](inst051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xvii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 16.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p1"></span>HOW CHRIST PERFORMED THE OFFICE OF
REDEEMER IN PROCURING OUR SALVATION. THE DEATH, RESURRECTION, AND
ASCENSION OF CHRIST.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p2"></span>This chapter contains four leading
heads—I. A general consideration of the whole subject, including a
discussion of a necessary question concerning the justice of God and his
mercy in Christ, sec. 1–4. II. How Christ fulfilled the office of
Redeemer in each of its parts, sec. 5–17. His death, burial, descent to
hell, resurrection, ascension to heaven, seat at the right hand of the
Father, and return to judgment. III. A great part of the Creed being
here expounded, a statement is given of the view which ought to be taken
of the Creed commonly ascribed to the Apostles, sec. 18. IV. Conclusion,
setting forth the doctrine of Christ the Redeemer, and the use of the
doctrine, sec. 19.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p4"></span>1. Every thing needful for us exists in
Christ. How it is to be obtained.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p5"></span>2. Question as to the mode of
reconciling the justice with the mercy of God. Modes of expression used
in Scripture to teach us how miserable our condition is without Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p6"></span>3. Not used improperly; for God finds in
us ground both of hatred and love.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p7"></span>4. This confirmed from passages of
Scripture and from Augustine.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p8"></span>5. The second part of the chapter,
treating of our redemption by Christ. First generally. Redemption
extends to the whole course of our Saviour’s obedience, but is specially
ascribed to his death. The voluntary subjection of Christ. His agony.
His condemnation before Pilate. Two things observable in his
condemnation. 1. That he was numbered among transgressors. 2. That he
was declared innocent by the judge. Use to be made of this.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p9"></span>6. Why Christ was crucified. This hidden
doctrine typified in the Law, and completed by the Apostles and
Prophets. In what sense Christ was made a curse for us. The cross of
Christ connected with the shedding of his blood.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p10"></span>7. Of the death of Christ. Why he died.
Advantages from his death. Of the burial of Christ. Advantages.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p11"></span>8. Of the descent into hell. This
article gradually introduced into the Church. Must not be rejected, nor
confounded with the previous article respecting burial.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p12"></span>9. Absurd exposition concerning the
Limbus Patrum. This fable refuted.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p13"></span>10. The article of the descent to hell
more accurately expounded. A great ground of comfort.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p14"></span>11. Confirmation of this exposition
from passages of Scripture and the works of ancient Theologians. An
objection refuted. Advantages of the doctrine.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p15"></span>12. Another objection that Christ is
insulted, and despair ascribed to him in its being said that he feared.
Answer, from the statements of the Evangelists, that he did fear, was
troubled in spirit, amazed, and tempted in all respects as we are, yet
without sin. Why Christ was pleased to become weak. His fear without
sin. Refutation of another objection, with an answer to the question,
Did Christ fear death, and why? When did Christ descend to hell, and
how? What has been said refutes the heresy of Apollinaris and of the
Monothelites.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p16"></span>13. Of the resurrection of Christ. The
many advantages from it. 1. Our righteousness in the sight of God
renewed and restored. 2. His life the basis of our life and hope, also
the efficacious cause of new life in us. 3. The pledge of our future
resurrection.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p17"></span>14. Of the ascension of Christ. Why he
ascended. Advantages derived from it.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p18"></span>15. Of Christ’s seat at the Father’s
right hand. What meant by it.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p19"></span>16. Many advantages from the ascension
of Christ. 1. He gives access to the kingdom which Adam had shut up. 2.
He intercedes for us with the Father. 3. His virtue being thence
transfused into us, he works effectually in us for salvation.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p20"></span>17. Of the return of Christ to
judgment. Its nature. The quick and dead who are to be judged. Passages
apparently contradictory reconciled. Mode of judgment.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p21"></span>18. Advantages of the doctrine of
Christ’s return to judgment. Third part of the chapter, explaining the
view to be taken of the Apostles’ Creed. Summary of the Apostles’ Creed.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p22"></span>19. Conclusion of the whole chapter,
showing that in Christ the salvation of the elect in all its parts is
comprehended.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p23"></span>1. All that we have hitherto said of
Christ leads to this one result, that condemned, dead, and lost in
ourselves, we must in him seek righteousness, deliverance, life and
salvation, as we are taught by the celebrated words of Peter, “Neither
is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p23.1"></span>[Acts
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p23.1"></span>). The name of Jesus was not given him at
random, or fortuitously, or by the will of man, but was brought from
heaven by an angel, as the herald of the supreme decree;25  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) the reason also being added, “for he
shall save his people from their sins,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p24.1"></span>[Matt.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p24.1"></span>). In these words attention should be paid
to what we have elsewhere observed, that the office of Redeemer was
assigned him in order that he might be our Saviour. Still, however,
redemption would be defective if it did not conduct us by an
uninterrupted progression to the final goal of safety. Therefore, the
moment we turn aside from him in the minutest degree, salvation, which
resides entirely in him, gradually disappears; so that all who do not
rest in him voluntarily deprive themselves of all grace. The observation
of Bernard well deserves to be remembered: The name of Jesus is not only
light but food also, yea, oil, without which all the food of the soul is
dry; salt, without which as a condiment whatever is set before us is
insipid; in fine, honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, joy in the
heart, and, at the same time, medicine; every discourse where this name
is not heard is absurd (Bernard in Cantica., Serm. 15). But here it is
necessary diligently to consider in what way we obtain salvation from
him, that we may not only be persuaded that he is the author of it, but
having embraced whatever is sufficient as a sure foundation of our
faith, may eschew all that might make us waver. For seeing no man can
descend into himself, and seriously consider what he is, without feeling
that God is angry and at enmity with him, and therefore anxiously
longing for the means of regaining his favour (this cannot be without
satisfaction), the certainty here required is of no ordinary
description,—sinners, until freed from guilt, being always liable to the
wrath and curse of God, who, as he is a just judge, cannot permit his
law to be violated with impunity, but is armed for vengeance.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p25"></span>2. But before we proceed farther, we
must see in passing, how can it be said that God, who prevents us with
his mercy, was our enemy until he was reconciled to us by Christ. For
how could he have given us in his only-begotten Son a singular pledge of
his love, if he had not previously embraced us with free favour? As
there thus arises some appearance of contradiction, I will explain the
difficulty. The mode in which the Spirit usually speaks in Scripture is,
that God was the enemy of men until they were restored to favour by the
death of Christ (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>[Rom.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>); that they were cursed until their
iniquity was expiated by the sacrifice of Christ (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p25.2"></span>[Gal.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p25.2"></span>); that they were separated from God, until
by means of Christ’s body they were received into union (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p25.3"></span>[Col.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p25.3"></span>). Such modes of expression are
accommodated to our capacity, that we may the better understand how
miserable and calamitous our condition is without Christ. For were it
not said in clear terms, that Divine wrath, and vengeance, and eternal
death, lay upon us, we should be less sensible of our wretchedness
without the mercy of God, and less disposed to value the blessing of
deliverance. For example, let a person be told, Had God at the time you
were a sinner hated you, and cast you off as you deserved, horrible
destruction must have been your doom; but spontaneously and of free
indulgence he retained you in his favour, not suffering you to be
estranged from him, and in this way rescued you from danger,—the person
will indeed be affected, and made sensible in some degree how much he
owes to the mercy of God. But again, let him be told, as Scripture
teaches, that he was estranged from God by sin, an heir of wrath,
exposed to the curse of eternal death, excluded from all hope of
salvation, a complete alien from the blessing of God, the slave of
Satan, captive under the yoke of sin; in fine, doomed to horrible
destruction, and already involved in it; that then Christ interposed,
took the punishment upon himself and bore what by the just judgment of
God was impending over sinners; with his own blood expiated the sins
which rendered them hateful to God, by this expiation satisfied and duly
propitiated God the Father, by this intercession appeased his anger, on
this basis founded peace between God and men, and by this tie secured
the Divine benevolence toward them; will not these considerations move
him the more deeply, the more strikingly they represent the greatness of
the calamity from which he was delivered? In short, since our mind
cannot lay hold of life through the mercy of God with sufficient
eagerness, or receive it with becoming gratitude, unless previously
impressed with fear of the Divine anger, and dismayed at the thought of
eternal death, we are so instructed by divine truth, as to perceive that
without Christ God is in a manner hostile to us, and has his arm raised
for our destruction. Thus taught, we look to Christ alone for divine
favour and paternal love.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p26"></span>3. Though this is said in accommodation
to the weakness of our capacity, it is not said falsely. For God, who is
perfect righteousness, cannot love the iniquity which he sees in all.
All of us, therefore, have that within which deserves the hatred of God.
Hence, in respect, first, of our corrupt nature; and, secondly, of the
depraved conduct following upon it, we are all offensive to God, guilty
in his sight, and by nature the children of hell. But as the Lord wills
not to destroy in us that which is his own, he still finds something in
us which in kindness he can love. For though it is by our own fault that
we are sinners, we are still his creatures; though we have brought death
upon ourselves he had created us for life. Thus, mere gratuitous love
prompts him to receive us into favour. But if there is a perpetual and
irreconcilable repugnance between righteousness and iniquity, so long as
we remain sinners we cannot be completely received. Therefore, in order
that all ground of offence may be removed, and he may completely
reconcile us to himself, he, by means of the expiation set forth in the
death of Christ, abolishes all the evil that is in us, so that we,
formerly impure and unclean, now appear in his sight just and holy.
Accordingly, God the Father, by his love, prevents and anticipates our
reconciliation in Christ. Nay, it is because he first loves us, that he
afterwards reconciles us to himself. But because the iniquity, which
deserves the indignation of God, remains in us until the death of Christ
comes to our aid, and that iniquity is in his sight accursed and
condemned, we are not admitted to full and sure communion with God,
unless, in so far as Christ unites us. And, therefore, if we would
indulge the hope of having God placable and propitious to us, we must
fix our eyes and minds on Christ alone, as it is to him alone it is
owing that our sins, which necessarily provoked the wrath of God, are
not imputed to us.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p27"></span>4. For this reason Paul says, that God
“has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ: according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
the world,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.1"></span>[Eph.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.1"></span>). These things are clear and conformable
to Scripture, and admirably reconcile the passages in which it is said,
that “God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.2"></span>[John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.2"></span>); and yet that it was “when we were
enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.3"></span>[Rom.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.3"></span>). But to give additional assurance to
those who require the authority of the ancient Church, I will quote a
passage of Augustine to the same effect: “Incomprehensible and immutable
is the love of God. For it was not after we were reconciled to him by
the blood of his Son that he began to love us, but he loved us before
the foundation of the world, that with his only begotten Son we too
might be sons of God before we were any thing at all. Our being
reconciled by the death of Christ must not be understood as if the Son
reconciled us, in order that the Father, then hating, might begin to
love us, but that we were reconciled to him already, loving, though at
enmity with us because of sin. To the truth of both propositions we have
the attestation of the Apostle, ‘God commendeth his love toward us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us,’ (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.4"></span>[Rom.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.4"></span>). Therefore he had this love towards us
even when, exercising enmity towards him, we were the workers of
iniquity. Accordingly in a manner wondrous and divine, he loved even
when he hated us. For he hated us when we were such as he had not made
us, and yet because our iniquity had not destroyed his work in every
respect, he knew in regard to each one of us, both to hate what we had
made, and love what he had made.” Such are the words of Augustine (Tract
in <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.5"></span>Jo. 110<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p27.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28"></span>5. When it is asked then how Christ, by
abolishing sin, removed the enmity between God and us, and purchased a
righteousness which made him favourable and kind to us, it may be
answered generally, that he accomplished this by the whole course of his
obedience. This id proved by the testimony of Paul, “As by one man’s
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.1"></span>[Rom.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.1"></span>). And indeed he elsewhere extends the
ground of pardon which exempts from the curse of the law to the whole
life of Christ, “When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth
his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.2"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.2"></span>). Thus even at his baptism he declared
that a part of righteousness was fulfilled by his yielding obedience to
the command of the Father. In short, from the moment when he assumed the
form of a servant, he began, in order to redeem us, to pay the price of
deliverance. Scripture, however, the more certainly to define the mode
of salvation, ascribes it peculiarly and specially to the death of
Christ. He himself declares that he gave his life a ransom for many
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.3"></span>[Mt.
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.3"></span>). Paul teaches that he died for our sins
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.4"></span>[Rom.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.4"></span>). John Baptist exclaimed, “Behold the Lamb
of God, which taketh away the sin of the world,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.5"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.5"></span>). Paul in another passage declares, “that
we are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.6"></span>[Rom.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.6"></span>). “Again, being justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through him” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.7"></span>[Rom.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.7"></span>). Again “He has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.8"></span>[2 Cor.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.8"></span>). I will not search out all the passages,
for the list would be endless, and many are afterwards to be quoted in
their order. In the Confession of Faith, called the Apostles’ Creed, the
transition is admirably made from the birth of Christ to his death and
resurrection, in which the completion of a perfect salvation consists.
Still there is no exclusion of the other part of obedience which he
performed in life. Thus Paul comprehends, from the beginning even to the
end, his having assumed the form of a servant, humbled himself, and
become obedient to death, even the death of the cross (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.9"></span>[Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.9"></span>). And, indeed, the first step in obedience
was his voluntary subjection; for the sacrifice would have been
unavailing to justification if not offered spontaneously. Hence our
Lord, after testifying, “I lay down my life for the sheep,” distinctly
adds, “No man taketh it from me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.10"></span>[John
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.10"></span>). In the same sense Isaiah says, “ Like a
sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.11"></span>[Is.
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.11"></span>). The Gospel History relates that he came
forth to meet the soldiers; and in presence of Pilate, instead of
defending himself, stood to receive judgment. This, indeed, he did not
without a struggle, for he had assumed our infirmities also, and in this
way it behoved him to prove that he was yielding obedience to his
Father. It was no ordinary example of incomparable love towards us to
struggle with dire terrors, and amid fearful tortures to cast away all
care of himself that he might provide for us. We must bear in minds that
Christ could not duly propitiate God without renouncing his own feelings
and subjecting himself entirely to his Father’s will. To this effect the
Apostle appositely quotes a passage from the Psalms, “Lo, I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.12"></span>[Heb.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.12"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.13"></span>[Ps.
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.13"></span>). Thus, as trembling consciences find no
rest without sacrifice and ablution by which sins are expiated, we are
properly directed thither, the source of our life being placed in the
death of Christ. Moreover, as the curse consequent upon guilt remained
for the final judgment of God, one principal point in the narrative is
his condemnation before Pontius Pilate, the governor of Judea, to teach
us, that the punishment to which we were liable was inflicted on that
Just One. We could not escape the fearful judgment of God; and Christ,
that he might rescue us from it, submitted to be condemned by a mortal,
nay, by a wicked and profane man. For the name of Governor is mentioned
not only to support the credibility of the narrative, but to remind us
of what Isaiah says, that “the chastisement of our peace was upon him;”
and that “with his stripes we are healed,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.14"></span>[Is.
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.14"></span>). For, in order to remove our
condemnation, it was not sufficient to endure any kind of death. To
satisfy our ransom, it was necessary to select a mode of death in which
he might deliver us, both by giving himself up to condemnations and
undertaking our expiation. Had he been cut off by assassins, or slain in
a seditious tumult, there could have been no kind of satisfaction in
such a death. But when he is placed as a criminal at the bar, where
witnesses are brought to give evidence against him, and the mouth of the
judge condemns him to die, we see him sustaining the character of an
offender and evil-doer. Here we must attend to two points which had both
been foretold by the prophets, and tend admirably to comfort and confirm
our faith. When we read that Christ was led away from the judgment-seat
to execution, and was crucified between thieves, we have a fulfilment of
the prophecy which is quoted by the Evangelist, “He was numbered with
the transgressors,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.15"></span>[Is.
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.15"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.16"></span>[Mark
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.16"></span>). Why was it so? That he might bear the
character of a sinner, not of a just or innocent person, inasmuch as he
met death on account not of innocence, but of sin. On the other hand,
when we read that he was acquitted by the same lips that condemned him
(for Pilate was forced once and again to bear public testimony to his
innocence), let us call to mind what is said by another prophet, “I
restored that which I took not away,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.17"></span>[Ps.
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.17"></span>). Thus we perceive Christ representing
the character of a sinner and a criminal, while, at the same time, his
innocence shines forth, and it becomes manifest that he suffers for
another’s and not for his own crime. He therefore suffered under Pontius
Pilate, being thus, by the formal sentence of the judge, ranked among
criminals, and yet he is declared innocent by the same judge, when he
affirms that he finds no cause of death in him. Our acquittal is in this
that the guilt which made us liable to punishment was transferred to the
head of the Son of God (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.18"></span>[Is.
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p28.18"></span>). We must specially remember this
substitution in order that we may not be all our lives in trepidation
and anxiety, as if the just vengeance which the Son of God transferred
to himself, were still impending over us.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p29"></span>6. The very form of the death embodies
a striking truth. The cross was cursed not only in the opinion of men,
but by the enactment of the Divine Law. Hence Christ, while suspended on
it, subjects himself to the curse. And thus it behoved to be done, in
order that the whole curse, which on account of our iniquities awaited
us, or rather lay upon us, might be taken from us by being transferred
to him. This was also shadowed in the Law, since twm\`a

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p30"></span>, the word by which sin itself is
properly designated, was applied to the sacrifices and expiations
offered for sin. By this application of the term, the Spirit intended to
intimate, that they were a kind of kaqarmavton (purifications), bearing,
by substitutions the curse due to sin. But that which was represented
figuratively in the Mosaic sacrifices is exhibited in Christ the
archetype. Wherefore, in order to accomplish a full expiation, he made
his soul to !\`a

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p31"></span>, *i.e.*, a propitiatory victim for sin
(as the prophet says, <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.1"></span>[Isa.
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.1"></span>), on which the guilt and penalty being in
a manner laid, ceases to be imputed to us. The Apostle declares this
more plainly when he says, that “he made him to be sin for us, who knew
no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.2"></span>[2 Cor.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.2"></span>). For the Son of God, though spotlessly
pure, took upon him the disgrace and ignominy of our iniquities, and in
return clothed us with his purity. To the same thing he seems to refer,
when he says, that he “condemned sin in the flesh,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.3"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.3"></span>), the Father having destroyed the power of
sin when it was transferred to the flesh of Christ. This term,
therefore, indicates that Christ, in his death, was offered to the
Father as a propitiatory victim; that, expiation being made by his
sacrifice, we might cease to tremble at the divine wrath. It is now
clear what the prophet means when he says, that “the Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us all,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.4"></span>[Is.
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.4"></span>); namely, that as he was to wash away the
pollution of sins, they were transferred to him by imputation. Of this
the cross to which he was nailed was a symbol, as the Apostle declares,
“Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree:
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.5"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.5"></span>). In the same way Peter says, that he
“bare our sins in his own body on the tree,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.6"></span>[1 Peter
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.6"></span>), inasmuch as from the very symbol of the
curse, we perceive more clearly that the burden with which we were
oppressed was laid upon him. Nor are we to understand that by the curse
which he endured he was himself overwhelmed, but rather that by enduring
it he repressed broke, annihilated all its force. Accordingly, faith
apprehends acquittal in the condemnation of Christ, and blessing in his
curse. Hence it is not without cause that Paul magnificently celebrates
the triumph which Christ obtained upon the cross, as if the cross, the
symbol of ignominy, had been converted into a triumphal chariot. For he
says, that he blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to
his cross: that “having spoiled principalities and powers he made a show
of them openly, triumphing over them in it,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.7"></span>[Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.7"></span>). Nor is this to be wondered at; for, as
another Apostle declares, Christ, “through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.8"></span>[Heb.
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p31.8"></span>), and hence that transformation of the
cross which were otherwise against its nature. But that these things may
take deep root and have their seat in our inmost hearts, we must never
lose sight of sacrifice and ablution. For, were not Christ a victim, we
could have no sure conviction of his being ajpoluvtrwsi", ajntivlutron,
kai; iJlasthvrion, *our substitute-ransom and propitiation*. And hence
mention is always made of blood whenever scripture explains the mode of
redemption: although the shedding of Christ’s blood was available not
only for propitiation, but also acted as a laver to purge our
defilements.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p32"></span>7. The Creed next mentions that he “was
dead and buried”. Here again it is necessary to consider how he
substituted himself in order to pay the price of our redemption. Death
held us under its yoke, but he in our place delivered himself into its
power, that he might exempt us from it. This the Apostle means when he
says, “that he tasted death for every man,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.1"></span>[Heb.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.1"></span>). By dying he prevented us from dying; or
(which is the same thing) he by his death purchased life for us (see
Calvin in Psychopann). But in this he differed from us, that in
permitting himself to be overcome of death, it was not so as to be
engulfed in its abyss but rather to annihilate it, as it must otherwise
have annihilated us; he did not allow himself to be so subdued by it as
to be crushed by its power; he rather laid it prostrate, when it was
impending over us, and exulting over us as already overcome. In fine,
his object was, “that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver them who through fear of
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.2"></span>[Heb.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.2"></span>). This is the first fruit which his death
produced to us. Another is, that by fellowship with him he mortifies our
earthly members that they may not afterwards exert themselves in action,
and kill the old man, that he may not hereafter be in vigour and bring
forth fruit. An effect of his burials moreover is that we as his fellows
are buried to sin. For when the Apostle says, that we are ingrafted into
the likeness of Christ’s deaths and that we are buried with him unto
sin, that by his cross the world is crucified unto us and we unto the
world, and that we are dead with him, he not only exhorts us to manifest
an example of his death, but declares that there is an efficacy in it
which should appear in all Christians, if they would not render his
death unfruitful and useless. Accordingly in the death and burial of
Christ a twofold blessing is set before us—viz. deliverance from death,
to which we were enslaved, and the mortification of our flesh (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.3"></span>[Rom.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.4"></span>[Gal.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.4"></span>:14; <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.5"></span>[Col.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p32.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p33"></span>8. Here we must not omit the descent to
hell, which was of no little importance to the accomplishment of
redemption. For although it is apparent from the writings of the ancient
Fathers, that the clause which now stands in the Creed was not formerly
so much used in the churches, still, in giving a summary of doctrine, a
place must be assigned to it, as containing a matter of great importance
which ought not by any means to be disregarded. Indeed, some of the
ancient Fathers do not omit it,25  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) and hence we may conjecture, that
having been inserted in the Creed after a considerable lapse of time, it
came into use in the Church not immediately but by degrees.25  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) This much is uncontroverted, that it
was in accordance with the general sentiment of all believers, since
there is none of the Fathers who does not mention Christ’s descent into
hell, though they have various modes of explaining it. But it is of
little consequence by whom and at what time it was introduced. The chief
thing to be attended to in the Creed is, that it furnishes us with a
full and every way complete summary of faith, containing nothing but
what has been derived from the infallible word of God. But should any
still scruple to give it admission into the Creed, it will shortly be
made plain, that the place which it holds in a summary of our redemption
is so important, that the omission of it greatly detracts from the
benefit of Christ’s death. There are some again who think that the
article contains nothing new, but is merely a repetition in different
words of what was previously said respecting burial, the word Hell
(Infernis) being often used in Scripture for sepulchre. I admit the
truth of what they allege with regard to the not infrequent use of the
term *infernos* for *sepulchre*; but I cannot adopt their opinion, for
two obvious reasons. First, What folly would it have been, after
explaining a matter attended with no difficulty in clear and unambiguous
terms, afterwards to involve rather than illustrate it by clothing it in
obscure phraseology? When two expressions having the same meaning are
placed together, the latter ought to be explanatory of the former. But
what kind of explanation would it be to say, the expression, “*Christ
was buried*”, means, that “*he descended into hell*”? My second reason
is the improbability that a superfluous tautology of this description
should have crept into this compendium, in which the principal articles
of faith are set down summarily in the fewest possible number of words.
I have no doubt that all who weigh the matter with some degree of care
will here agree with me.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p36"></span>9. Others interpret differently—viz.
That Christ descended to the souls of the Patriarchs who died under the
law, to announce his accomplished redemption, and bring them out of the
prison in which they were confined. To this effect they wrest the
passage25  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) in the Psalms “He
hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder.”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p37.1"></span>[Ps.
107:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p37.1"></span>); and also the passage in Zechariah, “I
have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p37.2"></span>[Zech.
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p37.2"></span>). But since the psalm foretells the
deliverance of those who were held captive in distant lands, and
Zechariah comparing the Babylonish disaster into which the people had
been plunged to a deep dry well or abyss, at the same time declares,
that the salvation of the whole Church was an escape from a profound
pit, I know not how it comes to pass, that posterity imagined it to be a
subterraneous cavern, to which they gave the name of *Limbus*. Though
this fable has the countenance of great authors, and is now also
seriously defended by many as truth,26  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) it is nothing but a fable. To conclude
from it that the souls of the dead are in prison is childish. And what
occasion was there that the soul of Christ should go down thither to set
them at liberty? I readily admit that Christ illumined them by the power
of his Spirit, enabling them to perceive that the grace of which they
had only had a foretaste was then manifested to the world. And to this
not improbably the passage of Peter may be applied, wherein he says,
that Christ “went and preached to the spirits that were in prison,” (or
rather “a watch-tower”) (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p38.2"></span>[I Pet.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p38.2"></span>). The purport of the context is, that
believers who had died before that time were partakers of the same grace
with ourselves: for he celebrates the power of Christ’s death, in that
he penetrated even to the dead, pious souls obtaining an immediate view
of that visitation for which they had anxiously waited; while, on the
other hand, the reprobate were more clearly convinced that they were
completely excluded from salvation. Although the passage in Peter is not
perfectly definite, we must not interpret as if he made no distinction
between the righteous and the wicked: he only means to intimate, that
the death of Christ was made known to both.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p39"></span>10. But, apart from the Creed, we must
seek for a surer exposition of Christ’s descent to hell: and the word of
God furnishes us with one not only pious and holy, but replete with
excellent consolation. Nothing had been done if Christ had only endured
corporeal death. In order to interpose between us and God’s anger, and
satisfy his righteous judgment, it was necessary that he should feel the
weight of divine vengeance. Whence also it was necessary that he should
engage, as it were, at close quarters with the powers of hell and the
horrors of eternal death. We lately quoted from the Prophet, that the
“chastisement of our peace was laid upon him” that he “was bruised for
our iniquities” that he “bore our infirmities;” expressions which
intimate, that, like a sponsor and surety for the guilty, and, as it
were, subjected to condemnation, he undertook and paid all the penalties
which must have been exacted from them, the only exception being, that
the pains of death could not hold him. Hence there is nothing strange in
its being said that he descended to hell, seeing he endured the death
which is inflicted on the wicked by an angry God. It is frivolous and
ridiculous to object that in this way the order is perverted, it being
absurd that an event which preceded burial should be placed after it.
But after explaining what Christ endured in the sight of man, the Creed
appropriately adds the invisible and incomprehensible judgment which he
endured before God, to teach us that not only was the body of Christ
given up as the price of redemption, but that there was a greater and
more excellent price—that he bore in his soul the tortures of condemned
and ruined man.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p40"></span>11. In this sense, Peter says that God
raised up Christ, “having loosed the pains of death: because it was not
possible he should be holden of it,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p40.1"></span>[Acts
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p40.1"></span>). He does not mention death simply, but
says that the Son of God endured the pains produced by the curse and
wrath of God, the source of death. How small a matter had it been to
come forth securely, and as it were in sport to undergo death. Herein
was a true proof of boundless mercy, that he shunned not the death he so
greatly dreaded. And there can be no doubt that, in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Apostle means to teach the same thing, when he says that he
“was heard in that he feared,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p40.2"></span>[Heb.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p40.2"></span>). Some instead of “feared,” use a term
meaning reverence or piety, but how inappropriately, is apparent both
from the nature of the thing and the form of expression.26  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) Christ then praying in a loud voice,
and with tears, is heard in that he feared, not so as to be exempted
from death, but so as not to be swallowed up of it like a sinner, though
standing as our representative. And certainly no abyss can be imagined
more dreadful than to feel that you are abandoned and forsaken of God,
and not heard when you invoke him, just as if he had conspired your
destruction. To such a degree was Christ dejected, that in the depth of
his agony he was forced to exclaim, “My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?” The view taken by some, that he here expressed the opinion
of others rather than his own conviction, is most improbable; for it is
evident that the expression was wrung from the anguish of his inmost
soul. We do not, however, insinuate that God was ever hostile to him or
angry with him.26  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) How could he
be angry with the beloved Son, with whom his soul was well pleased? or
how could he have appeased the Father by his intercession for others if
He were hostile to himself? But this we say, that he bore the weight of
the divine anger, that, smitten and afflicted, he experienced all the
signs of an angry and avenging God. Hence Hilary argues, that to this
descent we owe our exemption from death. Nor does he dissent from this
view in other passages, as when he says, “The cross, death, hell, are
our life.” And again, “The Son of God is in hell, but man is brought
back to heaven.” And why do I quote the testimony of a private writer,
when an Apostle asserts the same thing, stating it as one fruit of his
victory that he delivered “them who through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage?” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p42.1"></span>[Heb.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p42.1"></span>). He behoved therefore, to conquer the
fear which incessantly vexes and agitates the breasts of all mortals;
and this he could not do without a contest. Moreover it will shortly
appear with greater clearness that his was no common sorrow, was not the
result of a trivial cause. Thus by engaging with the power of the devil,
the fear of death, and the pains of hell, he gained the victory, and
achieved a triumph, so that we now fear not in death those things which
our Prince has destroyed.26  <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256)

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p44"></span>12. Here some miserable creatures, who,
though unlearned, are however impelled more by malice than ignorance,
cry out that I am offering an atrocious insult to Christ, because it
were most incongruous to hold that he feared for the safety of his soul.
And then in harsher terms they urge the calumnious charge that I
attribute despair to the Son of God, a feeling the very opposite of
faith. First, they wickedly raise a controversy as to the fear and dread
which Christ felt, though these are openly affirmed by the Evangelists.
For before the hour of his death arrived, he was troubled in spirit, and
affected with grief; and at the very onset began to be exceedingly
amazed. To speak of these feelings as merely assumed, is a shameful
evasion. It becomes us, therefore (as Ambrose truly teaches), boldly to
profess the agony of Christ, if we are not ashamed of the cross. And
certainly had not his soul shared in the punishment, he would have been
a Redeemer of bodies only. The object of his struggle was to raise up
those who were lying prostrate; and so far is this from detracting from
his heavenly glory, that his goodness, which can never be sufficiently
extolled, becomes more conspicuous in this, that he declined not to bear
our infirmities. Hence also that solace to our anxieties and griefs
which the Apostle sets before us: “We have not an high priest who cannot
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all respects
tempted like as we are, yet without sin,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p44.1"></span>[Heb.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p44.1"></span>). These men pretend that a thing in its
nature vicious is improperly ascribed to Christ; as if they were wiser
than the Spirit of God, who in the same passage reconciles the two
things—viz. that he was tempted in all respects like as we are, and yet
was without sin. There is no reason, therefore, to take alarm at
infirmity in Christ, infirmity to which he submitted not under the
constraint of violence and necessity, but merely because he loved and
pitied us. Whatever he spontaneously suffered, detracts in no degree
from his majesty. One thing which misleads these detractors is, that
they do not recognise in Christ an infirmity which was pure and free
from every species of taint, inasmuch as it was kept within the limits
of obedience. As no moderation can be seen in the depravity of our
nature, in which all affections with turbulent impetuosity exceed their
due bounds, they improperly apply the same standard to the Son of God.
But as he was upright, all his affections were under such restraint as
prevented every thing like excess. Hence he could resemble us in grief,
fear, and dread, but still with this mark of distinction. Thus refuted,
they fly off to another cavil, that although Christ feared death, yet he
feared not the curse and wrath of God, from which he knew that he was
safe. But let the pious reader consider how far it is honourable to
Christ to make him more effeminate and timid than the generality of men.
Robbers and other malefactors contumaciously hasten to death, many men
magnanimously despise it, others meet it calmly. If the Son of God was
amazed and terror-struck at the prospect of it, where was his firmness
or magnanimity? We are even told, what in a common death would have been
deemed most extraordinary, that in the depth of his agony his sweat was
like great drops of blood falling to the ground. Nor was this a
spectacle exhibited to the eyes of others, since it was from a secluded
spot that he uttered his groans to his Father. And that no doubt may
remain, it was necessary that angels should come down from heaven to
strengthen him with miraculous consolation. How shamefully effeminate
would it have been (as I have observed) to be so excruciated by the fear
of an ordinary death as to sweat drops of blood, and not even be revived
by the presence of angels? What? Does not that prayer, thrice repeated,
“Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p44.2"></span>[Mt.
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p44.2"></span>), a prayer dictated by incredible
bitterness of soul, show that Christ had a fiercer and more arduous
struggle than with ordinary death?

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p45"></span>Hence it appears that these triflers,
with whom I am disputing, presume to talk of what they know not, never
having seriously considered what is meant and implied by ransoming us
from the justice of God. It is of consequence to understand aright how
much our salvation cost the Son of God. If any one now ask, Did Christ
descend to hell at the time when he deprecated death? I answer, that
this was the commencement, and that from it we may infer how dire and
dreadful were the tortures which he endured when he felt himself
standing at the bar of God as a criminal in our stead. And although the
divine power of the Spirit veiled itself for a moment, that it might
give place to the infirmity of the flesh, we must understand that the
trial arising from feelings of grief and fear was such as not to be at
variance with faith. And in this was fulfilled what is said in Peter’s
sermon as to having been loosed from the pains of death, because “it was
not possible he could be holden of it,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p45.1"></span>[Acts
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p45.1"></span>). Though feeling, as it were, forsaken of
God, he did not cease in the slightest degree to confide in his
goodness. This appears from the celebrated prayer in which, in the depth
of his agony, he exclaimed, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p45.2"></span>[Mt.
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p45.2"></span>). Amid all his agony he ceases not to call
upon his God, while exclaiming that he is forsaken by him. This refutes
the Apollinarian heresy as well as that of those who are called
Monothelites. Apollinaris pretended, that in Christ the eternal Spirit
supplied the place of a soul, so that he was only half a man; as if he
could have expiated our sins in any other way than by obeying the
Father. But where does the feeling or desire of obedience reside but in
the soul? And we know that his soul was troubled in order that ours,
being free from trepidation, might obtain peace and quiet. Moreover, in
opposition to the Monothelites, we see that in his human he felt a
repugnance to what he willed in his divine nature. I say nothing of his
subduing the fear of which we have spoken by a contrary affection. This
appearance of repugnance is obvious in the words, “Father, save me from
this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy
name,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p45.3"></span>[John
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p45.3"></span>). Still, in this perplexity, there was no
violent emotion, such as we exhibit while making the strongest
endeavours to subdue our own feelings.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p46"></span>13. Next follows the resurrection from
the dead, without which all that has hitherto been said would be
defective. For seeing that in the cross, death, and burial of Christ,
nothing but weakness appears, faith must go beyond all these, in order
that it may be provided with full strength. Hence, although in his death
we have an effectual completion of salvation, because by it we are
reconciled to God, satisfaction is given to his justice, the curse is
removed, and the penalty paid; still it is not by his death, but by his
resurrection, that we are said to be begotten again to a living hope
(<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p46.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p46.1"></span>); because, as he, by rising again, became
victorious over death, so the victory of our faith consists only in his
resurrection. The nature of it is better expressed in the words of Paul,
“Who (Christ) was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for
our justification,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p46.2"></span>[Rom.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p46.2"></span>); as if he had said, By his death sin was
taken away, by his resurrection righteousness was renewed and restored.
For how could he by dying have freed us from death, if he had yielded to
its power? how could he have obtained the victory for us, if he had
fallen in the contest?

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p47"></span>Our salvation may be thus divided
between the death and the resurrection of Christ: by the former sin was
abolished and death annihilated; by the latter righteousness was
restored and life revived, the power and efficacy of the former being
still bestowed upon us by means of the latter. Paul accordingly affirms,
that he was declared to be the Son of God by his resurrection (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.1"></span>[Rom.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.1"></span>), because he then fully displayed that
heavenly power which is both a bright mirror of his divinity, and a sure
support of our faith; as he also elsewhere teaches, that “though he was
crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.2"></span>[2 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.2"></span>). In the same sense, in another passage,
treating of perfection, he says, “That I may know him and the power of
his resurrection,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.3"></span>[Phil.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.3"></span>). Immediately after he adds, “being made
conformable unto his death.” In perfect accordance with this is the
passage in Peter, that God “raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory, that your faith and hope might be in God,” ( <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.4"></span>[1 Pet.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.4"></span>). Not that faith founded merely on his
death is vacillating, but that the divine power by which he maintains
our faith is most conspicuous in his resurrection. Let us remember,
therefore, that when death only is mentioned, everything peculiar to the
resurrection is at the same time included, and that there is a like
synecdoche in the term *resurrection*, as often as it is used apart from
death, everything peculiar to death being included. But as, by rising
again, he obtained the victory, and became the resurrection and the
life, Paul justly argues, “If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain;
ye are yet in your sins,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.5"></span>[1 Cor.
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.5"></span>). Accordingly, in another passage, after
exulting in the death of Christ in opposition to the terrors of
condemnation, he thus enlarges, “Christ that died, yea rather, that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh
intercession for us,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.6"></span>[Rom.
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.6"></span>). Then, as we have already explained that
the mortification of our flesh depends on communion with the cross, so
we must also understand, that a corresponding benefit is derived from
his resurrection. For as the Apostle says, “Like as Christ was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.7"></span>[Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.7"></span>). Accordingly, as in another passage, from
our being dead with Christ, he inculcates, “Mortify therefore your
members which are upon the earth,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.8"></span>[Col.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.8"></span>); so from our being risen with Christ he
infers, “seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the
right hand of God,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.9"></span>[Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.9"></span>). In these words we are not only urged by
the example of a risen Saviour to follow newness of life, but are taught
that by his power we are renewed unto righteousness. A third benefit
derived from it is, that, like an earnest, it assures us of our own
resurrection, of which it is certain that his is the surest
representation. This subject is discussed at length (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.10"></span>[1 Cor.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p47.10"></span>). But it is to be observed, in passing,
that when he is said to have “risen from the dead,” these terms express
the reality both of his death and resurrection, as if it had been said,
that he died the same death as other men naturally die, and received
immortality in the same mortal flesh which he had assumed.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p48"></span>14. The resurrection is naturally
followed by the ascension into heaven. For although Christ, by rising
again, began fully to display his glory and virtue, having laid aside
the abject and ignoble condition of a mortal life, and the ignominy of
the cross, yet it was only by his ascension to heaven that his reign
truly commenced. This the Apostle shows, when he says he ascended “that
he might fill all things,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.1"></span>[Eph.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.1"></span>); thus reminding us, that under the
appearance of contradiction, there is a beautiful harmony, inasmuch as
though he departed from us, it was that his departure might be more
useful to us than that presence which was confined in a humble
tabernacle of flesh during his abode on the earth. Hence John, after
repeating the celebrated invitation, “If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink,” immediately adds, “the Holy Ghost was not yet given;
because that Jesus was not yet glorified,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.2"></span>[John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.2"></span>). This our Lord himself also declared to
his disciples, “It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not
away the Comforter will not come unto you,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.3"></span>[John
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.3"></span>). To console them for his bodily absence,
he tells them that he will not leave them comfortless, but will come
again to them in a manner invisible indeed, but more to be desired,
because they were then taught by a surer experience that the government
which he had obtained, and the power which he exercises would enable his
faithful followers not only to live well, but also to die happily. And,
indeed we see how much more abundantly his Spirit was poured out, how
much more gloriously his kingdom was advanced, how much greater power
was employed in aiding his followers and discomfiting his enemies. Being
raised to heaven, he withdrew his bodily presence from our sight, not
that he might cease to be with his followers, who are still pilgrims on
the earth, but that he might rule both heaven and earth more immediately
by his power; or rather, the promise which he made to be with us even to
the end of the world, he fulfilled by this ascension, by which, as his
body has been raised above all heavens, so his power and efficacy have
been propagated and diffused beyond all the bounds of heaven and earth.
This I prefer to explain in the words of Augustine rather than my own:
“Through death Christ was to go to the right hand of the Father, whence
he is to come to judge the quick and the dead, and that in corporal
presence, according to the sound doctrine and rule of faith. For, in
spiritual presence, he was to be with them after his ascension,”
(August. Tract. in Joann. 109). In another passage he is more full and
explicit: “In regard to ineffable and invisible grace, is fulfilled what
he said, Lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the world (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.4"></span>[Mt.
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p48.4"></span>); but in regard to the flesh which the
Word assumed in regard to his being born of a Virgin, in regard to his
being apprehended by the Jews, nailed to the tree, taken down from the
cross, wrapt in linen clothes, laid in the sepulchre, and manifested on
his resurrection, it may be said, Me ye have not always with you. Why?
because, in bodily presence, he conversed with his disciples forty days,
and leading them out where they saw, but followed not, he ascended into
heaven, and is not here: for there he sits at the right hand of the
Father: and yet he is here, for the presence of his Godhead was not
withdrawn. Therefore, as regards his divine presence, we have Christ
always: as regards his bodily presence, it was truly said to the
disciples, Me ye have not always. For a few days the Church had him
bodily present. Now, she apprehends him by faith, but sees him not by
the eye,” (August. Tract. 51).

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p49"></span>15. Hence it is immediately added, that
he “sitteth at the right hand of God the Father;” a similitude borrowed
from princes, who have their assessors to whom they commit the office of
ruling and issuing commands. Thus Christ, in whom the Father is pleased
to be exalted, and by whose hand he is pleased to reign, is said to have
been received up, and seated on his right hand (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p49.1"></span>[Mark
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p49.1"></span>); as if it had been said, that he was
installed in the government of heaven and earth, and formally admitted
to possession of the administration committed to him, and not only
admitted for once, but to continue until he descend to judgment. For so
the Apostle interprets, when he says, that the Father “set him at his
own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come; and has put all things
under his feet, and given him to be the head over all things to the
Church.”26  <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) You see to what end
he is so seated namely, that all creatures both in heaven and earth
should reverence his majesty, be ruled by his hand, do him implicit
homage, and submit to his power. All that the Apostles intends when they
so often mention his seat at the Father’s hand, is to teach, that every
thing is placed at his disposal. Those, therefore, are in error, who
suppose that his blessedness merely is indicated. We may observe, that
there is nothing contrary to this doctrine in the testimony of Stephen,
that he saw him standing (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.7"></span>[Acts
7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.7"></span>), the subject here considered being not
the position of his body, but the majesty of his empire, *sitting*
meaning nothing more than presiding on the judgment-seat of heaven.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p51"></span>16. From this doctrine faith derives
manifold advantages.26  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) First,
it perceives that the Lord, by his ascension to heaven, has opened up
the access to the heavenly kingdom, which Adam had shut. For having
entered it in our flesh, as it were in our name, it follows, as the
Apostle says, that we are in a manner now seated in heavenly places, not
entertaining a mere hope of heaven, but possessing it in our head.
Secondly, faith perceives that his seat beside the Father is not without
great advantage to us. Having entered the temple not made with hands, he
constantly appears as our advocate and intercessor in the presence of
the Father; directs attention to his own righteousness, so as to turn it
away from our sins; so reconciles him to us, as by his intercession to
pave for us a way of access to his throne, presenting it to miserable
sinners, to whom it would otherwise be an object of dread, as replete
with grace and mercy. Thirdly, it discerns his power, on which depend
our strength, might, resources, and triumph over hell, “When he ascended
up on high, he led captivity captive,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p52.3"></span>[Eph.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p52.3"></span>). Spoiling his foes, he gave gifts to his
people, and daily loads them with spiritual riches. He thus occupies his
exalted seat, that thence transferring his virtue unto us, he may
quicken us to spiritual life, sanctify us by his Spirit, and adorn his
Church with various graces, by his protection preserve it safe from all
harm, and by the strength of his hand curb the enemies raging against
his cross and our salvation; in fine, that he may possess all power in
heaven and earth, until he have utterly routed all his foes, who are
also ours and completed the structure of his Church. Such is the true
nature of the kingdom, such the power which the Father has conferred
upon him, until he arrive to complete the last act by judging the quick
and the dead.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p53"></span>17. Christ, indeed, gives his followers
no dubious proofs of present power, but as his kingdom in the world is
in a manner veiled by the humiliation of a carnal condition, faith is
most properly invited to meditate on the visible presence which he will
exhibit on the last day. For he will descend from heaven in visible
form, in like manner as he was seen to ascend,26  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) and appear to all, with the ineffable
majesty of his kingdom, the splendour of immortality, the boundless
power of divinity, and an attending company of angels. Hence we are told
to wait for the Redeemer against that day on which he will separate the
sheep from the goats and the elect from the reprobate, and when not one
individual either of the living or the dead shall escape his judgment.
From the extremities of the universe shall be heard the clang of the
trumpet summoning all to his tribunal; both those whom that day shall
find alive, and those whom death shall previously have removed from the
society of the living. There are some who take the words, quick and
dead, in a different sense;26  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)
and, indeed, some ancient writers appear to have hesitated as to the
exposition of them; but our meaning being plain and clear, is much more
accordant with the Creed which was certainly written for popular use.
There is nothing contrary to it in the Apostle’s declaration, that it is
appointed unto all men once to die. For though those who are surviving
at the last day shall not die after a natural manner, yet the change
which they are to undergo, as it shall resemble, is not improperly
called, death (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.1"></span>[Heb.
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.1"></span>). “We shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.2"></span>[1 Cor.
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.2"></span>). What does this mean? Their mortal life
shall perish and be swallowed up in one moment, and be transformed into
an entirely new nature. Though no one can deny that that destruction of
the flesh will be death, it still remains true that the quick and the
dead shall be summoned to judgment (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.3"></span>[1 Thess.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.3"></span>); for “the dead in Christ shall rise
first; then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds to meet the lord in the air.” Indeed, it is
probable, that these words in the Creed were taken from Peter’s sermon
as related by Luke (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.4"></span>[Acts
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.4"></span>), and from the solemn charge of Paul to
Timothy (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.5"></span>[2 Tim.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p55.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p56"></span>18. It is most consolatory to think,
that judgment is vested in him who has already destined us to share with
him in the honour of judgment (<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p56.1"></span>[Mt.
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p56.1"></span>); so far is it from being true, that he
will ascend the judgment-seat for our condemnation. How could a most
merciful prince destroy his own people? how could the head disperse its
own members? how could the advocate condemn his clients? For if the
Apostle, when contemplating the interposition of Christ, is bold to
exclaim, “Who is he that condemneth?” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p56.2"></span>[Rom.
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p56.2"></span>), much more certain is it that Christ, the
intercessor, will not condemn those whom he has admitted to his
protection. It certainly gives no small security, that we shall be
sisted at no other tribunal than that of our Redeemer, from whom
salvation is to be expected; and that he who in the Gospel now promises
eternal blessedness, will then as judge ratify his promise.26  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) The end for which the Father has
honoured the Son by committing all judgment to him (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p57.1"></span>[John
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p57.1"></span>), was to pacify the consciences of his
people when alarmed at the thought of judgment. Hitherto I have followed
the order of the Apostles’ Creed, because it states the leading articles
of redemption in a few words, and may thus serve as a tablet in which
the points of Christian doctrine, most deserving of attention, are
brought separately and distinctly before us.26  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) I call it the Apostles’ Creed, though
I am by no means solicitous as to its authorship. The general consent of
ancient writers certainly does ascribe it to the Apostles, either
because they imagined it was written and published by them for common
use, or because they thought it right to give the sanction of such
authority to a compendium faithfully drawn up from the doctrine
delivered by their hands. I have no doubt, that, from the very
commencement of the Church, and, therefore, in the very days of the
Apostles, it held the place of a public and universally received
confession, whatever be the quarter from which it originally proceeded.
It is not probable that it was written by some private individual, since
it is certain that, from time immemorial, it was deemed of sacred
authority by all Christians. The only point of consequence we hold to be
incontrovertible—viz. that it gives, in clear and succinct order, a full
statement of our faith, and in every thing which it contains is
sanctioned by the sure testimony of Scripture. This being understood, it
were to no purpose to labour anxiously, or quarrel with any one as to
the authorship, unless, indeed, we think it not enough to possess the
sure truth of the Holy Spirit, without, at the same time, knowing by
whose mouth it was pronounced, or by whose hand it was written.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p59"></span>19. When we see that the whole sum of
our salvation, and every single part of it, are comprehended in Christ,
we must beware of deriving even the minutes portion of it from any other
quarter. If we seek salvation, we are taught by the very name of Jesus
that he possesses it;27  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) if we
seek any other gifts of the Spirit, we shall find them in his unction;
strength in his government; purity in his conception; indulgence in his
nativity, in which he was made like us in all respects, in order that he
might learn to sympathise with us: if we seek redemption, we shall find
it in his passion; acquittal in his condemnation; remission of the curse
in his cross; satisfaction in his sacrifice; purification in his blood;
reconciliation in his descent to hell; mortification of the flesh in his
sepulchre; newness of life in his resurrection; immortality also in his
resurrection; the inheritance of a celestial kingdom in his entrance
into heaven; protection, security, and the abundant supply of all
blessings, in his kingdom; secure anticipation of judgment in the power
of judging committed to him. In fine, since in him all kinds of
blessings are treasured up, let us draw a full supply from him, and none
from any other quarter. Those who, not satisfied with him alone,
entertain various hopes from others, though they may continue to look to
him chiefly, deviate from the right path by the simple fact, that some
portion of their thought takes a different direction. No distrust of
this description can arise when once the abundance of his blessings is
properly known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](inst050.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p24"></span>56 256 Latin, “Supremi decreti.”
French, “Decret eternel et inviolable;”—Eternal and inviolable decree.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](inst050.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p34"></span>57 257 It is not adverted to by
Augustine, Lib. 1. De Symbolo de Catechumenos.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](inst050.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p35"></span>58 258 The French of this sentence is,
“Dont on peut conjecturer qu’il a esté tantost aprés le tems des
Apostres adjousté; mais que peu a peu il est venu en usage.”—Whence we
may conjecture that it was added some time after the days of the
Apostles, but gradually came into use.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](inst050.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p37"></span>59 259 The French is, “Pour colorer
leur fantasie, ils tirent par les cheveux quelques temoignages.”—To
colour their fancy, they pull by the hair (violently wrest) certain
passages.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](inst050.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p38"></span>60 260 See Justin, Ambrose, Jerome. The
opinions of the Fathers and Rabbis on Hell and Limbus are collected by
Peter Martyr, Loci Communes, Lib. 3 Loc. 16 sect. 8; see Augustine,
<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p38.1"></span>Ep. 99<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](inst050.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p41"></span>61 261 French, “Les autres translatent
Reverence ou Pieté; mais la Grammaire et la matiere qui est la tracté
monstrent que c’est mal ˆ propos.”—Others translate Reverence or Piety;
but Grammar and the subject-matter show that they do it very
unseasonably

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](inst050.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p42"></span>62 262 See Cyril. Lib. 2 De Recta Fide
ad Reginas; Item, Hilarius de Trinitate, Lib. 4 c. 2 and 3.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](inst050.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p43"></span>63 263 Vide Luther, tom. 1 in Concione
de Morte, fol. 87.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](inst050.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p50"></span>64 264 <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.1"></span>[Ephes.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.2"></span>[Phil.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.3"></span>[1
Cor. 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.3"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.4"></span>[Ephes.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.5"></span>[Acts
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.5"></span>; 3:21; <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.6"></span>[Heb.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p50.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](inst050.htm#fr_258) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p52"></span>65 265 August. de Fide et Symbolo, cap.
8; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p52.1"></span>[Eph.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p52.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p52.2"></span>[Heb.
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p52.2"></span>; 9:11.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](inst050.htm#fr_259) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p54"></span>66 266 <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.1"></span>[Acts
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.2"></span>[Mt.
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.2"></span>; 25:31; <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.3"></span>[1 Thess.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](inst050.htm#fr_260) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p54.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p55"></span>67 267 The French is, “Il y en a aucuns
qui exposent par les vivans et les morts les bons et les mauvais.”—There
are some who, by the quick and the dead, understand the good and the
bad.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](inst050.htm#fr_261) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p57"></span>68 268 Vide Ambros. de Jac. et Vita
Beata, Lib. 1 c. 6.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](inst050.htm#fr_262) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p58"></span>69 269 The French is, “Jusques ici j’ay
suivi l’ordre du Symbole qu’on appelle des Apostres, pource que la nous
pouvons voir comme en un tableau, par les articles qui y sont contenus,
en quoy gist nostre salut: et par ce moyen aussi entendons a quelles
choses il nous faut arrester pour obtenir salut en Jesus
Christ.”—Hitherto I have followed the order of what is called the
Apostles’ Creed, because there we may see, as in a tablet, by the
articles which are contained in it, wherein consists our salvation, and
by this means also understand on that things we ought to dwell in order
to obtain salvation in Jesus Christ.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](inst050.htm#fr_263) <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p60"></span>70 270 <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.1"></span>[Acts
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.2"></span>[1
Cor. 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.3"></span>[Heb.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.4"></span>[Gal.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p60.4"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 17. - CHRIST RIGHTLY AND PROPERLY SAID TO HAVE MERITED
GRACE AND SALVATION FOR US.](inst051)
