[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst005)  [Next](inst007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v"></span>

## <span id="ii.v-p0.1"></span>INSTITUTIONS OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION

## <span id="ii.v-p0.2"></span>PREFATORY ADDRESS TO HIS MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY, THE MOST MIGHTY AND ILLUSTRIOUS MONARCH, FRANCIS, KING OF THE FRENCH,

### <span id="ii.v-p0.3"></span>HIS SOVEREIGN;  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) JOHN CALVIN PRAYS PEACE AND SALVATION IN CHRIST.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="ii.v-p3"></span>Sire,—When I first engaged in this work,
nothing was farther from my thoughts than to write what should
afterwards be presented to your Majesty. My intention was only to
furnish a kind of rudiments, by which those who feel some interest in
religion might be trained to true godliness. And I toiled at the task
chiefly for the sake of my countrymen the French, multitudes of whom I
perceived to be hungering and thirsting after Christ, while very few
seemed to have been duly imbued with even a slender knowledge of him.
That this was the object which I had in view is apparent from the work
itself, which is written in a simple and elementary form adapted for
instruction.

<span id="ii.v-p4"></span>But when I perceived that the fury of certain
bad men had risen to such a height in your realm, that there was no
place in it for sound doctrine, I thought it might be of service if I
were in the same work both to give instruction to my countrymen, and
also lay before your Majesty a Confession, from which you may learn what
the doctrine is that so inflames the rage of those madmen who are this
day, with fire and sword, troubling your kingdom. For I fear not to
declare, that what I have here given may be regarded as a summary of the
very doctrine which, they vociferate, ought to be punished with
confiscation, exile, imprisonment, and flames, as well as exterminated
by land and sea.

<span id="ii.v-p5"></span>I am aware, indeed, how, in order to render
our cause as hateful to your Majesty as possible, they have filled your
ears and mind with atrocious insinuations; but you will be pleased, of
your clemency, to reflect, that neither in word nor deed could there be
any innocence, were it sufficient merely to accuse. When any one, with
the view of exciting prejudice, observes that this doctrine, of which I
am endeavouring to give your Majesty an account, has been condemned by
the suffrages of all the estates, and was long ago stabbed again and
again by partial sentences of courts of law, he undoubtedly says nothing
more than that it has sometimes been violently oppressed by the power
and faction of adversaries, and sometimes fraudulently and insidiously
overwhelmed by lies, cavils, and calumny. While a cause is unheard, it
is violence to pass sanguinary sentences against it; it is fraud to
charge it, contrary to its deserts, with sedition and mischief.

<span id="ii.v-p6"></span>That no one may suppose we are unjust in thus
complaining, you yourself, most illustrious Sovereign, can bear us
witness with what lying calumnies it is daily traduced in your presence,
as aiming at nothing else than to wrest the sceptres of kings out of
their hands, to overturn all tribunals and seats of justice, to subvert
all order and government, to disturb the peace and quiet of society, to
abolish all laws, destroy the distinctions of rank and property, and, in
short, turn all things upside down. And yet, that which yon hear is but
the smallest portion of what is said; for among the common people are
disseminated certain horrible insinuations—insinuations which, if well
founded, would justify the whole world in condemning the doctrine with
its authors to a thousand fires and gibbets. Who can wonder that the
popular hatred is inflamed against it, when credit is given to those
most iniquitous accusations? See, why all ranks unite with one accord in
condemning our persons and our doctrine!

<span id="ii.v-p7"></span>Carried away by this feeling, those who sit in
judgment merely give utterance to the prejudices which they have imbibed
at home, and think they have duly performed their part if they do not
order punishment to be inflicted on any one until convicted, either on
his own confession, or on legal evidence. But of what crime convicted?
“Of that condemned doctrine,” is the answer. But with what justice
condemned? The very essence of the defence was, not to abjure the
doctrine itself, but to maintain its truth. On this subject, however,
not a whisper is allowed!

<span id="ii.v-p8"></span>Justice, then, most invincible Sovereign,
entitles me to demand that you will undertake a thorough investigation
of this cause, which has hitherto been tossed about in any kind of way,
and handled in the most irregular manner, without any order of law, and
with passionate heat rather than judicial gravity.

<span id="ii.v-p9"></span>Let it not be imagined that I am here framing
my own private defence, with the view of obtaining a safe return to my
native land. Though I cherish towards it the feelings which become me as
a man, still, as matters now are, I can be absent from it without
regret. The cause which I plead is the common cause of all the godly,
and therefore the very cause of Christ—a cause which, throughout your
realm, now lies, as it were, in despair, torn and trampled upon in all
kinds of ways, and that more through the tyranny of certain Pharisees
than any sanction from yourself. But it matters not to inquire how the
thing is done; the fact that it is done cannot be denied. For so far
have the wicked prevailed, that the truth of Christ, if not utterly
routed and dispersed, lurks as if it were ignobly buried; while the poor
Church, either wasted by cruel slaughter or driven into exile, or
intimidated and terror—struck, scarcely ventures to breathe. Still her
enemies press on with their wonted rage and fury over the ruins which
they have made, strenuously assaulting the wall, which is already giving
way. Meanwhile, no man comes forth to offer his protection against such
furies. Any who would be thought most favourable to the truth, merely
talk of pardoning the error and imprudence of ignorant men For so those
modest personages  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) speak; giving the
name of *error and imprudence* to that which they know to be  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) the infallible truth of God, and of
*ignorant men* to those whose intellect they see that Christ has not
despised, seeing he has deigned to intrust them with the mysteries of
his heavenly wisdom.  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) Thus all are
ashamed of the Gospel.

<span id="ii.v-p13"></span>Your duty, most serene Prince, is, not to
shut either your ears or mind against a cause involving such mighty
interests as these: how the glory of God is to be maintained on the
earth inviolate, how the truth of God is to preserve its dignity, how
the kingdom of Christ is to continue amongst us compact and secure. The
cause is worthy of your ear, worthy of your investigation, worthy of
your throne.

<span id="ii.v-p14"></span>The characteristic of a true sovereign is, to
acknowledge that, in the administration of his kingdom, he is a minister
of God. He who does not make his reign subservient to the divine glory,
acts the part not of a king, but a robber. He, moreover, deceives
himself who anticipates long prosperity to any kingdom which is not
ruled by the sceptre of God, that is, by his divine word. For the
heavenly oracle is infallible which has declared, that “where there is
no vision the people perish” (<span id="ii.v-p14.1"></span>[Prov.
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#018)<span id="ii.v-p14.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.v-p15"></span>Let not a contemptuous idea of our
insignificance dissuade you from the investigation of this cause. We,
indeed, are perfectly conscious how poor and abject we are: in the
presence of God we are miserable sinners, and in the sight of men most
despised—we are (if you will) the mere dregs and off—scoutings of the
world, or worse, if worse can be named: so that before God there remains
nothing of which we can glory save only his mercy, by which, without any
merit of our own, we are admitted to the hope of eternal salvation:
 <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) and before men not even this much
remains,  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) since we can glory only in
our infirmity, a thing which, in the estimation of men, it is the
greatest ignominy even tacitly  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) to
confess. But our doctrine must stand sublime above all the glory of the
world, and invincible by all its power, because it is not ours, but that
of the living God and his Anointed, whom the Father has appointed King,
that he may rule from sea to sea, and from the rivers even to the ends
of the earth; and so rule as to smite the whole earth and its strength
of iron and brass, its splendour of gold and silver, with the mere rod
of his mouth, and break them in pieces like a potter’s vessel; according
to the magnificent predictions of the prophets respecting his kingdom
(<span id="ii.v-p18.1"></span>[Dan.
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)<span id="ii.v-p18.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.v-p18.2"></span>[Isaiah
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span id="ii.v-p18.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.v-p18.3"></span>[Psalm
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="ii.v-p18.3"></span>).

<span id="ii.v-p19"></span>Our adversaries, indeed, clamorously maintain
that our appeal to the word of God is a mere pretext,—that we are, in
fact, its worst corrupters. How far this is not only malicious calumny,
but also shameless effrontery, you will be able to decide, of your own
knowledge, by reading our Confession. Here, however, it may be necessary
to make some observations which may dispose, or at least assist, you to
read and study it with attention.

<span id="ii.v-p20"></span>When Paul declared that all prophecy ought to
be according to the analogy of faith (<span id="ii.v-p20.1"></span>[Rom.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)<span id="ii.v-p20.1"></span>), he
laid down the surest rule for determining the meaning of Scripture. Let
our doctrine be tested by this rule and our victory is secure. For what
accords better and more aptly with faith than to acknowledge ourselves
divested of all virtue that we may be clothed by God, devoid of all
goodness that we may be filled by Him, the slaves of sin that he may
give us freedom, blind that he may enlighten, lame that he may cure, and
feeble that he may sustain us; to strip ourselves of all ground of
glorying that he alone may shine forth glorious, and we be glorified in
him? When these things, and others to the same effect, are said by us,
they interpose, and querulously complain, that in this way we overturn
some blind light of nature, fancied preparatives, free will, and works
meritorious of eternal salvation, with their own supererogations also;
 <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) because they cannot bear that the
entire praise and glory of all goodness, virtue, justice, and wisdom,
should remain with God. But we read not of any having been blamed for
drinking too much of the fountain of living water; on the contrary,
those are severely reprimanded who “have hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns, that can hold no water” (<span id="ii.v-p21.1"></span>[Jer.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span id="ii.v-p21.1"></span>).
Again, what more agreeable to faith than to feel assured that God is a
propitious Father when Christ is acknowledged as a brother and
propitiator, than confidently to expect all prosperity and gladness from
Him, whose ineffable love towards us was such that He “spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all” (<span
id="ii.v-p21.2"></span>[Rom. 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="ii.v-p21.2"></span>), than to rest in the sure hope of salvation and
eternal life whenever Christ, in whom such treasures are hid, is
conceived to have been given by the Father? Here they attack us, and
loudly maintain that this sure confidence is not free from arrogance and
presumption. But as nothing is to be presumed of ourselves, so all
things are to be presumed of God; nor are we stript of vain—glory for
any other reason than that we may learn to glory in the Lord. Why go
farther? Take but a cursory view, most valiant King, of all the parts of
our cause, and count us of all wicked men the most iniquitous, if you do
not discover plainly, that “therefore we both labour and suffer reproach
because we trust in the living God” (<span id="ii.v-p21.3"></span>[1
Tim. 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v-p21.3"></span>); because we believe it to be “life eternal” to
know “the only true God, and Jesus Christ,” whom he has sent (<span
id="ii.v-p21.4"></span>[John 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="ii.v-p21.4"></span>). For this hope some of us are in bonds, some
beaten with rods, some made a gazing—stock, some proscribed, some most
cruelly tortured, some obliged to flee; we are all pressed with straits,
loaded with dire execrations, lacerated by slanders, and treated with
the greatest indignity.

<span id="ii.v-p22"></span>Look now to our adversaries (I mean the
priesthood, at whose beck and pleasure others ply their enmity against
us), and consider with me for a little by what zeal they are actuated.
The true religion which is delivered in the Scriptures, and which all
ought to hold, they readily permit both themselves and others to be
ignorant of, to neglect and despise; and they deem it of little moment
what each man believes concerning God and Christ, or disbelieves,
provided he submits to the judgment of the Church with what they call1
 <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) implicit faith; nor are they greatly
concerned though they should see the glow of God dishonoured by open
blasphemies, provided not a finger is raised against the primacy of the
Apostolic See and the authority of holy mother Church.1  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) Why, then, do they war for the mass,
purgatory, pilgrimage, and similar follies, with such fierceness and
acerbity, that though they cannot prove one of them from the word of
God, they deny godliness can be safe without faith in these things—faith
drawn out, if I may so express it, to its utmost stretch? Why? just
because their belly is their God, and their kitchen their religion; and
they believe, that if these were away they would not only not be
Christians, but not even men. For although some wallow in luxury, and
others feed on slender crusts, still they all live by the same pot,
which without that fuel might not only cool, but altogether freeze. He,
accordingly, who is most anxious about his stomach, proves the fiercest
champion of his faith. In short, the object on which all to a man are
bent, is to keep their kingdom safe or their belly filled; not one gives
even the smallest sign of sincere zeal.

<span id="ii.v-p25"></span>Nevertheless, they cease not to assail our
doctrine, and to accuse and defame it in what terms they may, in order
to render it either hated or suspected. They call it new, and of recent
birth; they carp at it as doubtful and uncertain; they bid us tell by
what miracles it has been confirmed; they ask if it be fair to receive
it against the consent of so many holy Fathers and the most ancient
custom; they urge us to confess either that it is schismatical in giving
battle to the Church, or that the Church must have been without life
during the many centuries in which nothing of the kind was heard.
Lastly, they say there is little need of argument, for its quality may
be known by its fruits, namely, the large number of sects, the many
seditious disturbances, and the great licentiousness which it has
produced. No doubt, it is a very easy matter for them, in presence of an
ignorant and credulous multitude, to insult over an undefended cause;
but were an opportunity of mutual discussion afforded, that acrimony
which they now pour out upon us in frothy torrents, with as much license
as impunity,1  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) would assuredly boil
dry.

<span id="ii.v-p27"></span>1. First, in calling it new, they are
exceedingly injurious to God, whose sacred word deserved not to be
charged with novelty. To them, indeed, I very little doubt it is new, as
Christ is new, and the Gospel new; but those who are acquainted with the
old saying of Paul, that Christ Jesus “died for our sins, and rose again
for our justification” (<span id="ii.v-p27.1"></span>[Rom.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="ii.v-p27.1"></span>),
will not detect any novelty in us. That it long lay buried and unknown
is the guilty consequence of man’s impiety; but now when, by the
kindness of God, it is restored to us, it ought to resume its antiquity
just as the returning citizen resumes his rights.

<span id="ii.v-p28"></span>2. It is owing to the same ignorance that
they hold it to be doubtful and uncertain; for this is the very thing of
which the Lord complains by his prophet, “The ox knoweth his owner, and
the ass his master’s crib; but Israel doth not know, my people doth not
consider” (<span id="ii.v-p28.1"></span>[Isaiah
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="ii.v-p28.1"></span>). But
however they may sport with its uncertainty, had they to seal their own
doctrine with their blood, and at the expense of life, it would be seen
what value they put upon it. Very different is our confidence—a
confidence which is not appalled by the terrors of death, and therefore
not even by the judgment—seat of God.

<span id="ii.v-p29"></span>3. In demanding miracles from us, they act
dishonestly; for we have not coined some new gospel, but retain the very
one the truth of which is confirmed by all the miracles which Christ and
the apostles ever wrought. But they have a peculiarity which we have
not—they can confirm their faith by constant miracles down to the
present day! Way rather, they allege miracles which might produce
wavering in minds otherwise well disposed; they are so frivolous and
ridiculous, so vain and false. But were they even exceedingly wonderful,
they could have no effect against the truth of God, whose name ought to
be hallowed always, and everywhere, whether by miracles, or by the
natural course of events. The deception would perhaps be more specious
if Scripture did not admonish us of the legitimate end and use of
miracles. Mark tells us (<span id="ii.v-p29.1"></span>[Mark
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)<span id="ii.v-p29.1"></span>)
that the signs which followed the preaching of the apostles were wrought
in confirmation of it; so Luke also relates that the Lord “gave
testimony to the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be
done” by the hands of the apostles (<span id="ii.v-p29.2"></span>[Acts
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)<span id="ii.v-p29.2"></span>).
Very much to the same effect are those words of the apostle, that
salvation by a preached gospel was confirmed, “The Lord bearing witness
with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles” (<span
id="ii.v-p29.3"></span>[Heb. 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004)<span
id="ii.v-p29.3"></span>). Those things which we are told are seals of
the gospel, shall we pervert to the subversion of the gospel? What was
destined only to confirm the truth, shall we misapply to the
confirmation of lies? The proper course, therefore, is, in the first
instance, to ascertain and examine the doctrine which is said by the
Evangelist to precede; then after it has been proved, but not till then,
it may receive confirmation from miracles. But the mark of sound
doctrine given by our Saviour himself is its tendency to promote the
glory not of men, but of God (<span id="ii.v-p29.4"></span>[John
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018)<span id="ii.v-p29.4"></span>;
8:50). Our Saviour having declared this to be test of doctrine, we are
in error if we regard as miraculous, works which are used for any other
purpose than to magnify the name of God.1  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) And it becomes us to remember that Satan
has his miracles, which, although they are tricks rather than true
wonders, are still such as to delude the ignorant and unwary. Magicians
and enchanters have always been famous for miracles, and miracles of an
astonishing description have given support to idolatry: these, however,
do not make us converts to the superstitions either of magicians or
idolaters. In old times, too, the Donatists used their power of working
miracles as a battering-ram, with which they shook the simplicity of the
common people. We now give to our opponents the answer which Augustine
then gave to the Donatists (in Joan. Tract. 23), “The Lord put us on our
guard against those wonder—workers, when he foretold that false prophets
would arise, who, by lying signs and divers wonders, would, if it were
possible, deceive the very elect” (<span id="ii.v-p30.1"></span>[Mt.
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="ii.v-p30.1"></span>).
Paul, too, gave warning that the reign of antichrist would be “withall
power, and signs, and lying wonders” (<span id="ii.v-p30.2"></span>[2
Thess. 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span
id="ii.v-p30.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.v-p31"></span>But our opponents tell us that their miracles
are wrought not by idols, not by sorcerers, not by false prophets, but
by saints: as if we did not know it to be one of Satan’s wiles to
transform himself “into an angel of light” (<span
id="ii.v-p31.1"></span>[2 Cor.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="ii.v-p31.1"></span>).
The Egyptians, in whose neighbourhood Jeremiah was buried, anciently
sacrificed and paid other divine honours to him (Hieron. in Praef.
Jerem). Did they not make an idolatrous abuse of the holy prophet of
God? and yet, in recompense for so venerating his tomb, they thought1
 <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) that they were cured of the bite
of serpents. What, then, shall we say but that it has been, and always
will be, a most just punishment of God, to send on those who do not
receive the truth in the love of it, “strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie”? (<span id="ii.v-p32.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011)<span id="ii.v-p32.1"></span>).
We, then, have no lack of miracles, sure miracles, that cannot be
gainsaid; but those to which our opponents lay claim are mere delusions
of Satan, inasmuch as they draw off the people from the true worship of
God to vanity.

<span id="ii.v-p33"></span>4. It is a calumny to represent us as opposed
to the Fathers (I mean the ancient writers of a purer age), as if the
Fathers were supporters of their impiety. Were the contest to be decided
by such authority (to speak in the most moderate terms), the better part
of the victory would be ours.1  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)
While there is much that is admirable and wise in the writings of those
Fathers, and while in some things it has fared with them as with
ordinary men; these pious sons, forsooth, with the peculiar acuteness of
intellect, and judgment, and soul, which belongs to them, adore only
their slips and errors, while those things which are well said they
either overlook, or disguise, or corrupt; so that it may be truly said
their only care has been to gather dross among gold. Then, with
dishonest clamour, they assail us as enemies and despisers of the
Fathers. So far are we from despising them, that if this were the proper
place, it would give us no trouble to support the greater part of the
doctrines which we now hold by their suffrages. Still, in studying their
writings, we have endeavoured to remember (<span
id="ii.v-p34.1"></span>[1 Cor.
3:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#021)<span id="ii.v-p34.1"></span>;
see also Augustin. <span id="ii.v-p34.2"></span>Ep. 28<span
id="ii.v-p34.2"></span>), that all things are ours, to serve, not lord
it over us, but that we axe Christ’s only, and must obey him in all
things without exception. He who does not draw this distinction will not
have any fixed principles in religion; for those holy men were ignorant
of many things, are often opposed to each other, and are sometimes at
variance with themselves.

<span id="ii.v-p35"></span>It is not without cause (remark our
opponents) we are thus warned by Solomon, “Remove not the ancient
landmarks which thy fathers have set” (<span
id="ii.v-p35.1"></span>[Prov.
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#028)<span id="ii.v-p35.1"></span>).
But the same rule applies not to the measuring of fields and the
obedience of faith. The rule applicable to the latter is, “Forget also
thine own people, and thy father’s house” (<span
id="ii.v-p35.2"></span>[Ps. 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v-p35.2"></span>). But if they are so fond of allegory, why do
they not understand the apostles, rather than any other class of
Fathers, to be meant by those whose landmarks it is unlawful to remove?
This is the interpretation of Jerome, whose words they have quoted in
their canons. But as regards those to whom they apply the passage, if
they wish the landmarks to be fixed, why do they, whenever it suits
their purpose, so freely overleap them?

<span id="ii.v-p36"></span>Among the Fathers there were two, the one of
whom said,1  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) “Our God neither eats
nor drinks, and therefore has no need of chalices and salvers;” and the
other,1  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) “Sacred rites do not
require gold, and things which are not bought with gold, please not by
gold.” They step beyond the boundary, therefore, when in sacred matters
they are so much delighted with gold, driver, ivory, marble, gems, and
silks, that unless everything is overlaid with costly show, or rather
insane luxury1  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) , they think God is
not duly worshipped.

<span id="ii.v-p40"></span>It was a Father who said,1  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) “He ate flesh freely on the day on which
others abstained from it, because he was a Christian.” They overleap the
boundaries, therefore, when they doom to perdition every soul that,
during Lent, shall have tasted flesh.

<span id="ii.v-p42"></span>There were two Fathers, the one of whom
said,2  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) “A monk not labouring with
his own hands is no better than a violent man and a robber;” and the
other,2  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) “Monks, however assiduous
they may be in study, meditation, and prayer, must not live by others.”
This boundary, too, they transgressed, when they placed lazy
gormandising monks in dens and stews, to gorge themselves on other men’s
substance.

<span id="ii.v-p45"></span>It was a Father who said,2  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) “It is a horrid abomination to see in
Christian temples a painted image either of Christ or of any saint.” Nor
was this pronounced by the voice era single individual; but an
Ecclesiastical Council also decreed,2  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) “Let nought that is worshipped be
depicted on walls.”2  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) Very far are
they from keeping within these boundaries when they leave not a corner
without images.

<span id="ii.v-p49"></span>Another Father counselled,2  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) “That after performing the office of
humanity to the dead in their burial, we should leave them at rest.”
These limits they burst through when they keep up a perpetual anxiety
about the dead.

<span id="ii.v-p51"></span>It is a Father who testifies,2  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) “That the substance of bread and wine in
the Eucharist does not cease but remains, just as the nature and
substance of man remains united to the Godhead in the Lord Jesus
Christ.” This boundary they pass in pretending that, as soon as the
words of our Lord are pronounced, the substance of bread and wine
ceases, and is transubstantiated into body and blood.

<span id="ii.v-p53"></span>They were Fathers, who, as they exhibited
only one Eucharist to the whole Church,2  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) and kept back from it the profane and
flagitious; so they, in the severest terms, censured all those2  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) who, being present, did not communicate
How far have they removed these landmarks, in filling not churches only,
but also private houses, with their masses, admitting all and sundry to
be present, each the more willingly the more largely he pays, however
wicked and impure he may be,—not inviting any one to faith in Christ and
faithful communion in the sacraments, but rather vending their own work
for the grace and merits of Christ!2  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

<span id="ii.v-p57"></span>There were two Fathers, the one of whom
decided that those were to be excluded altogether from partaking of
Christ’s sacred supper,3  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) who,
contented with communion in one kind, abstained from the other; while
the other Father strongly contends3  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) that the blood of the Lord ought not to
be denied to the Christian people, who, in confessing him, are enjoined
to shed their own blood. These landmarks, also, they removed, when, by
an unalterable law, they ordered the very thing which the former Father
punished with excommunication, and the latter condemned for a valid
reason.

<span id="ii.v-p60"></span>It was a Father who pronounced it rashness,3
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) in an obscure question, to decide
in either way without clear and evident authority from Scripture. They
forgot this landmark when they enacted so many constitutions, so many
canons, and so many dogmatical decisions, without sanction from the word
of God.

<span id="ii.v-p62"></span>It was a Father who reproved Montanus, among
other heresies,3  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) for being the
first who imposed laws of fasting. They have gone far beyond this
landmark also in enjoining fasting under the strictest laws.

<span id="ii.v-p64"></span>It was a Father who denie that the ministers
of the Church should be interdicted from marrying, and pronounced
married life to be a state of chastity; and there were other Fathers who
assented to his decision. These boundaries they overstepped in rigidly
binding their priests to celibacy.

<span id="ii.v-p65"></span>It was a Father who thought3  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) that Christ only should be listened to,
from its being said, “hear him;” and that regard is due not to what
others before us have said or done, but only to what Christ, the head of
all, has commanded. This landmark they neither observe themselves nor
allow to be observed by others, while they subject themselves and others
to any master whatever, rather than Christ.

<span id="ii.v-p67"></span>There is a Father who contends3  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) that the Church ought not to prefer
herself to Christ, who always judges truly, whereas ecclesiastical
judges, who are but men, are generally deceived. Having burst through
this barrier also, they hesitate not to suspend the whole authority of
Scripture on the judgment of the Church.3  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="ii.v-p70"></span>All the Fathers with one heart execrated, and
with one mouth proteste against, contaminating the word of God with the
subtleties sophists, and involving it in the brawls of dialecticians. Do
they keep within these limits when the sole occupation of their lives is
to entwine and entangle the simplicity of Scripture with endless
disputes, and worse than sophistical jargon? So much so, that were the
Fathers to rise from their graves, and listen to the brawling art which
bears the name of speculative theology, there is nothing they would
suppose it less to be than a discussion of a religious nature.

<span id="ii.v-p71"></span>But my discourse would far exceed its just
limits were I to show, in detail, how petulantly those men shake off the
yoke of the Fathers, while they wish to be thought their most obedient
sons. Months, nay, years would fail me; and yet so deplorable and
desperate is their effrontery, that they presume to chastise us for
overstepping the ancient landmarks!

<span id="ii.v-p72"></span>5. Then, again, it is to no purpose they call
us to the bar of custom. To make everything yield to custom would be to
do the greatest injustice. Were the judgments of mankind correct, custom
would be regulated by the good. But it is often far otherwise in point
of fact; for, whatever the many are seen to do, forthwith obtains the
force of custom. But human affairs have scarcely ever been so happily
constituted as that the better course pleased the greater number. Hence
the private vices of the multitude have generally resulted in public
error, or rather that common consent in vice which these worthy men
would have to be law. Any one with eyes may perceive that it is not one
flood of evils which has deluged us; that many fatal plagues have
invaded the globe; that all things rush headlong; so that either the
affairs of men must be altogether despaired of, or we must not only
resist, but boldly attack prevailing evils. The cure is prevented by no
other cause than the length of time during which we have been accustomed
to the disease. But be it so that public error must have a place in
human society, still, in the kingdom of God, we must look and listen
only to his eternal truth, against which no series of years, no custom,
no conspiracy, can plead prescription. Thus Isaiah formerly taught the
people of God, “Say ye not, A confederacy, to all to whom this people
shall say, A confederacy;” i.e. do not unite with the people in an
impious consent; “neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify
the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your
dread” (<span id="ii.v-p72.1"></span>[Is.
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012)<span id="ii.v-p72.1"></span>).
Now, therefore, let them, if they will, object to us both past ages and
present examples; if we sanctify the Lord of hosts, we shall not be
greatly afraid. Though many ages should have consented to like
ungodliness, He is strong who taketh vengeance to the third and fourth
generation; or the whole world should league together in the same
iniquity. He taught experimentally what the end is of those who sin with
the multitude, when He destroyed the whole human race with a flood,
saving Noah with his little family, who, by putting his faith in Him
alone, “condemned the world” (<span id="ii.v-p72.2"></span>[Heb.
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007)<span id="ii.v-p72.2"></span>). In
short, depraved custom is just a kind of general pestilence in which men
perish not the less that they fall in a crowd. It were well, moreover,
to ponder the observation of Cyprian,3  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) that those who sin in ignorance, though
they cannot be entirely exculpated, seem, however, to be, in some sense,
excusable; whereas those who obstinately reject the truth, when
presented to them by the kindness of God, have no defence to offer.4
 <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)

<span id="ii.v-p75"></span>6. Their dilemma does not push us so
violently as to oblige us to confess, either that the Church was a
considerable time without life, or that we have now a quarrel with the
Church. The Church of Christ assuredly has lived, and will live, as long
as Christ shall reign at the right hand of the Father. By his hand it is
sustained, by his protection defended, by his mighty power preserved in
safety. For what he once undertook he will undoubtedly perform, he will
be with iris people always, “even to the end of the world” (<span
id="ii.v-p75.1"></span>[Mt. 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v-p75.1"></span>). With the Church we wage no war, since, with
one consent, in common with the whole body of the faithful, we worship
and adore one God, and Christ Jesus the Lord, as all the pious have
always adored him. But they themselves err not a little from the truth
in not recognising any church but that which they behold with the bodily
eye, and in endeavouring to circumscribe it by limits, within which it
cannot be confined.

<span id="ii.v-p76"></span>The hinges on which the controversy turns are
these: first, in their contending that the form of the Church is always
visible and apparent; and, secondly, in their placing this form in the
see of the Church of Rome and its hierarchy. We, on the contrary,
maintain, both that the Church may exist without any apparent form, and,
moreover, that the form is not ascertained by that external splendour
which they foolishly admire, but by a very different mark, namely, by
the pure preaching of the word of God, and the due administration of the
sacraments. They make an outcry whenever the Church cannot be pointed to
with the finger. But how oft was it the fate of the Church among the
Jews to be so defaced that no comeliness appeared? What do we suppose to
have been the splendid form when Elijah complained that he was left
alone? (<span id="ii.v-p76.1"></span>[1 Kings
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014)<span id="ii.v-p76.1"></span>).
How long after the advent of Christ did it lie hid without form? How
often since has it been so oppressed by wars, seditions, and heresies,
that it was nowhere seen in splendour? Had they lived at that time,
would they have believed there was any Church? But Elijah learned that
there remained seven thousand men who had not bowed the knee to Baal;
nor ought we to doubt that Christ has always reigned on earth ever since
he ascended to heaven. Had the faithful at that time required some
discernible form, must they not have forthwith given way to despondency?
And, indeed, Hilary accounted it a very great fault in his day, that men
were so possessed with a foolish admiration of Episcopal dignity as not
to perceive the deadly hydra lurking under that mask. His words are
(Cont. Auxentium), “One advice I give: Beware of Antichrist; for,
unhappily, a love of walls has seized you; unhappily, the Church of God
which you venerate exists in houses and buildings; unhappily, under
these you find the name of peace. Is it doubtful that in these
Antichrist will have his seat? Safer to me are mountains, and woods, and
lakes, and dungeons, and whirlpools; since in these prophets, dwelling
or immersed, did prophesy.”

<span id="ii.v-p77"></span>And what is it at the present day that the
world venerates in its horned bishops, unless that it imagines those who
are seen presiding over celebrated cities to be holy prelates of
religion? Away, then, with this absurd mode of judging!4  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) Let us rather reverently admit, that as
God alone knows who are his, so he may sometimes withdraw the external
manifestation of his Church from the view of men. This, I allow, is a
fearful punishment which God sends on the earth; but if the wickedness
of men so deserves, why do we strive to oppose the just vengeance of
God?4  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) It was thus that God, in
past ages, punished the ingratitude of men; for after they had refused
to obey his truth, and had extinguished his light, he allowed them, when
blinded by sense, both to be deluded by lying vanities and plunged in
thick darkness, so that no face of a true Church appeared. Meanwhile,
however, though his own people were dispersed and concealed amidst
errors and darkness, he saved them from destruction. No wonder; for he
knew how to preserve them even in the confusion of Babylon and the flame
of the fiery furnace.

<span id="ii.v-p80"></span>But as to the wish that the form of the
Church should be ascertained by some kind of vain pomp, how perilous it
is I will briefly indicate, rather than explain, that I may not exceed
all bounds. What they say is, that the Pontiff,4  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) who holds the apostolic see, and the
priests who are anointed and consecrated by him,4  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) provided they have the insignia of
fillets and mitres, represent the Church, and ought to be considered as
in the place of the Church, and therefore cannot err. Why so? because
they are pastors of the Church, and consecrated to the Lord. And were
not Aaron and other prefects of Israel pastors? But Aaron and his sons,
though already set apart to the priesthood, erred notwithstanding when
they made the calf (<span id="ii.v-p82.1"></span>[Exod.
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)<span id="ii.v-p82.1"></span>).
Why, according to this view, should not the four hundred prophets who
lied to Ahab represent the Church? (<span id="ii.v-p82.2"></span>[1
Kings 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011)<span
id="ii.v-p82.2"></span>, &c.). The Church, however, stood on the side of
Micaiah. He was alone, indeed, and despised, but from his mouth the
truth proceeded. Did not the prophets also exhibit both the name and
face of the Church, when, with one accord, they rose up against
Jeremiah, and with menaces boasted of it as a thing impossible that the
law should perish from the priest, or counsel from the wise, or the word
from the prophet? (<span id="ii.v-p82.3"></span>[Jer.
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018)<span id="ii.v-p82.3"></span>).
In opposition to the whole body of the prophets, Jeremiah is sent alone
to declare from the Lord (<span id="ii.v-p82.4"></span>[Jer.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009)<span id="ii.v-p82.4"></span>),
that a time would come when the law would perish from the priest,
counsel from the wise, and the word from the prophet. Was not like
splendour displayed in that council when the chief priests, scribes, and
Pharisees assembled to consult how they might put Jesus to death? Let
them go, then, and cling to the external mask, while they make Christ
and all the prophets of God schismatics, and, on the other hand, make
Satan’s ministers the organs of the Holy Spirit!

<span id="ii.v-p83"></span>But if they are sincere, let them answer me
in good faith,—in what place, and among whom, do they think the Church
resided, after the Council of Basle degraded and deposed Eugenius from
the popedom, and substituted Amadeus in his place? Do their utmost, they
cannot deny that that Council was legitimate as far as regards external
forms, and was summoned not only by one Pontiff, but by two. Eugenius,
with the whole herd of cardinals and bishops who had joined him in
plotting the dissolution of the Council, was there condemned of
contumacy, rebellion, and schism. Afterwards, however, aided by the
favour of princes, he got back his popedom safe. The election of
Amadeus, duly made by the authority of a general holy synod, went to
smoke; only he himself was appeased with a cardinal’s cap, like a piece
of offal thrown to a barking dog. Out of the lap of these rebellious and
contumacious schismatics proceeded all future popes, cardinals, bishops,
abbots, and presbyters. Here they are caught, and cannot escape. For, on
which party will they bestow the name of Church? Will they deny it to
have been a general Council, though it lacked nothing as regards
external majesty, having been solemnly called by two bulls, consecrated
by the legate of the Roman See as its president, constituted regularly
in all respects, and continuing in possession of all its honours to the
last? Will they admit that Eugenius, and his whole train, through whom
they have all been consecrated, were schismatical? Let them, then,
either define the form of the Church differently, or, however numerous
they are, we will hold them all to be schismatics in having knowingly
and willingly received ordination from heretics. But had it never been
discovered before that the Church is not tied to external pomp, we are
furnished with a lengthened proof in their own conduct, in proudly
vending themselves to the world under the specious title of Church,
notwithstanding that they are the deadly pests of the Church. I speak
not of their manners and of those tragical atrocities with which their
whole life teems, since it is said that they are Pharisees who should be
heard, not imitated. By devoting some portion of your leisure to our
writings, you will see, not obscurely, that their doctrine—the very
doctrine to which they say it is owing that they are the Church—is a
deadly murderer of souls, the firebrand, ruin, and destruction of the
Church.

<span id="ii.v-p84"></span>7. Lastly, they are far from candid when they
invidiously number up the disturbances, tumults, and disputes, which the
preaching of our doctrine has brought in its train, and the fruits
which, in many instances, it now produces; for the doctrine itself is
undeservedly charged with evils which ought to be ascribed to the malice
of Satan. It is one of the characteristics of the divine word, that
whenever it appears, Satan ceases to slumber and sleep. This is the
surest and most unerring test for distinguishing it from false doctrines
which readily betray themselves, while they are received by all with
willing ears, and welcomed by an applauding world. Accordingly, for
several ages, during which all things were immersed in profound
darkness, almost all mankin were mere jest and sport to the god of this
world, who, like any Sardanapalus, idled and luxuriated undisturbed. For
what else could he do but laugh and sport while in tranquil and
undisputed possession of his kingdom? But when light beaming from above
somewhat dissipated the darkness—when the strong man arose and aimed a
blow at his kingdom—then, indeed, he began to shake off his wonted
torpor, and rush to arms. And first he stirred up the hands of men, that
by them he might violently suppress the dawning truth; but when this
availed him not, he turned to snares, exciting dissensions and disputes
about doctrine by means of his Catabaptists, and other portentous
miscreants, that he might thus obscure, and, at length, extinguish the
truth. And now be persists in assailing it with both engines,
endeavouring to pluck up the true seed by the violent hand of man, and
striving, as much as in him lies, to choke it with his tares, that it
may not grow and bear knit. But it will be in vain, if we listen to the
admonition of the Lord, who long ago disclosed his wiles, that we might
not be taken unawares, and armed us with full protection against all his
machinations. But how malignant to throw upon the word of God itself the
blame either of the seditions which wicked men and rebels, or of the
sects which impostors stir up against it! The example, however, is not
new. Elijah was interrogated whether it were not he that troubled
Israel. Christ was seditious, according to the Jews; and the apostles
were charged with the crime of popular commotion. What else do those
who, in the present day, impute to us all the disturbances, tumults, and
contentions which break out against us? Elijah, however, has taught us
our answer (<span id="ii.v-p84.1"></span>[1 Kings
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018)<span id="ii.v-p84.1"></span>). It
is not we who disseminate errors or stir up tumults, but they who resist
the mighty power of God.

<span id="ii.v-p85"></span>But while this single answer is sufficient to
rebut the rash charges of these men, it is necessary, on the other hand,
to consult for the weakness of those who take the alarm at such
scandals, and not unfrequently waver in perplexity. But that they may
not fall away in this perplexity, and forfeit their good degree, let
them know that the apostles in their day experienced the very things
which now befall us. There were then unlearned and unstable men who, as
Peter tells us (<span id="ii.v-p85.1"></span>[2 Pet.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)<span id="ii.v-p85.1"></span>),
wrested the inspired writings of Paul to their own destruction. There
were despisers of God, who, when they heard that sin abounded in order
that grace might more abound, immediately inferred, “We will continue in
sin that grace may abound” (<span id="ii.v-p85.2"></span>[Rom.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)<span id="ii.v-p85.2"></span>);
when they heard that believers were not under the law, but under grace,
forthwith sung out, “We will sin because we are not under the law, but
under grace” (<span id="ii.v-p85.3"></span>[Rom.
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)<span id="ii.v-p85.3"></span>).
There were some who charged the apostle with being the minister of sin.
Many false prophets entered in privily to pull down the churches which
he had reared. Some preached the gospel through envy and strife, not
sincerely (<span id="ii.v-p85.4"></span>[Phil.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015)<span
id="ii.v-p85.4"></span>)—maliciously even—thinking to add affliction to
his bonds. Elsewhere the gospel made little progress. All sought their
own, not the things which were Jesus Christ’s. Others went back like the
dog to his vomit, or the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire. Great numbers perverted their spiritual freedom to carnal
licentiousness. False brethren crept in to the imminent danger of the
faithful. Among the brethren themselves various quarrels arose. What,
then, were the apostles to do? Were they either to dissemble for the
time, or rather lay aside and abandon that gospel which they saw to be
the seed—bed of so many strifes, the source of so many perils, the
occasion of so many scandals? In straits of this kind, they remembered
that “Christ was a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence,” “set up
for the fall and rising again of many,” and “for a sign to be spoken
against” (<span id="ii.v-p85.5"></span>[Luke
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)<span id="ii.v-p85.5"></span>);
and, armed with this assurance, they proceeded boldly through all perils
from tumults and scandals. It becomes us to be supported by the same
consideration, since Paul declares that it is a neverfailing
characteristic of the gospel to be a “savour of death unto death in them
that perish” (<span id="ii.v-p85.6"></span>[2 Cor.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.v-p85.6"></span>),
although rather destined to us for the purpose of being a savour of life
unto life, and the power of God for the salvation of believers. This we
should certainly experience it to be, did we not by our ingratitude
corrupt this unspeakable gift of God, and turn to our destruction what
ought to be our only saving defence.4  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)

<span id="ii.v-p87"></span>But to return, Sire.4  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) Be not moved by the absurd insinuations
with which our adversaries are striving to frighten you into the belief
that nothing else is wished and aimed at by this new gospel (for so they
term it), than opportunity for sedition and impunity for all kinds of
vice. Our Go is not the author of division, but of peace; and the Son of
God, who came to destroy the works of the devil, is not the minister of
sin. We, too, are undeservedly charged with desires of a kind for which
we have never given even the smallest suspicion. We, forsooth, meditate
the subversion of kingdoms; we, whose voice was never heard in faction,
and whose life, while passed under you, is known to have been always
quiet and simple; even now, when exiled from our home, we nevertheless
cease not to pray for all prosperity to your person and your kingdom.
We, forsooth, are aiming after an unchecked indulgence in vice, in whose
manners, though there is much to be blamed, there is nothing which
deserves such an imputation; nor (thank God) have we profited so little
in the gospel that our life may not be to these slanderers an example of
chastity, kindness, pity, temperance, patience, moderation, or any other
virtue. It is plain, indeed, that we fear God sincerely, and worship him
in truth, since, whether by life or by death, we desire his name to be
hallowed; and hatred herself has been forced to bear testimony to the
innocence and civil integrity of some of our people on whom death was
inflicted for the very thing which deserved the highest praise. But if
any, under pretext of the gospel, excite tumults (none such have as yet
been detected in your realm), if any use the liberty of the grace of God
as a cloak for licentiousness (I know of numbers who do), there are laws
and legal punishments by which they may be punished up to the measure of
their deserts—only, in the mean time, let not the gospel of God be evil
spoken of because of the iniquities of evil men.

<span id="ii.v-p89"></span>Sire,4  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)
That you may not lend too credulous an ear to the accusations of our
enemies, their virulent injustice has been set before you at sufficient
length; I fear even more than sufficient, since this preface has grown
almost to the bulk of a full apology. My object, however, was not to
frame a defence, but only with a view to the hearing of our cause, to
mollify your mind, now indeed turned away and estranged from us—I add,
even inflamed against us—but whose good will, we are confident, we
should regain, would you but once, with calmness and composure, read
this our Confession, which we desire your Majesty to accept instead of a
defence. But if the whispers of the malevolent so possess your ear, that
the accused are to have no opportunity of pleading their cause; if those
vindictive furies, with your connivance, are always to rage with bonds,
scourgings, tortures, maimings, and burnings, we, indeed, like sheep
doomed to slaughter, shall be reduced to every extremity; yet so that,
in our patience, we will possess our souls, and wait for the strong hand
of the Lord, which, doubtless, will appear in its own time, and show
itself armed, both to rescue the poor from affliction, and also take
vengeance on the despisers, who are now exulting so securely.5  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="ii.v-p92"></span>Most illustrious King, may the Lord, the King
of kings, establish your throne in righteousness, and your sceptre in
equity.

<span id="ii.v-p93"></span>Basle, 1st August 1536.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](inst006.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.v-p0.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span> In the last edition by Calvin, the words are,
as here translated, simply, “Principsuo.” In the edition published at
Basle in 1536, the words are, “Principi ac Domino suo sibiobservando.”

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](inst006.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p2"></span>Ed. 1536. “In Domino.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](inst006.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p10"></span> “Modesti homines,” not in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](inst006.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p11"></span> “Quam norunt,” not in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](inst006.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p12"></span> The words, “Quorum ingenium non adeo
despicabile Christi fuisse vident,” not in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](inst006.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p16"></span>6 The words stand thus in the Ed. 1536: “Qua
salvi nullo nostro merito factisumus.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](inst006.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p17"></span>7 “Non ita multum,” not in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](inst006.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p18"></span>8 “Cum nutu,” not in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](inst006.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p21"></span>9 The only word in the Ed. 1536 after “free
will,” is “merita.”

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](inst006.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p23"></span> 10 “Ut aiunt,” not in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](inst006.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p24"></span>1 11 No part of this sentence from “provided”
is in the Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](inst006.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p26"></span>2 12 “Tam licenter quam impune,” not in Ed.
1536.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](inst006.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.v-p29.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p30"></span>3 13 No part of the passage, beginning above,
“The deception,” &c., is in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](inst006.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p32"></span>4 14 Instead of “thought they were cured,”
the Ed. 1536 says simply, “they were cured” (curarentur).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](inst006.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p34"></span>5 15 “Ut modestissime etiam loquar,” not in
the Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](inst006.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p37"></span>6 16 1. Acatius in lib. 11 cap 16, F.
Triport. Hist.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](inst006.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p38"></span>7 17 2 Ambr. lib. 2. De Officiis, cap. 28.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](inst006.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p39"></span>8 18 Instead of the words here
translated—viz. “exquisito splendore vel potius insanc luxu,” the Ed.
1536 has only the word “luxu.”

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](inst006.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p41"></span>9 19 3. Spiridion. Trip. Hist. lib. 1 cap. 10

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](inst006.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p43"></span> 20 4. Trip. Hist. lib. 8 cap 1

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](inst006.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p44"></span>1 21 August. De Opere Monach cap 7

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](inst006.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p46"></span>2 22 6 Epiph. Epist. ab Hieron. versa

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](inst006.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p47"></span>3 23 7 Conc. Elibert. can. 36.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](inst006.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p48"></span>4 24 No part of this sentence is in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](inst006.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p50"></span>5 25 8. Ambr de Abraha. lib. 1 c. 7

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](inst006.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.v-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p52"></span>6 26 9. Gelasius Papa in Conc. Rom.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](inst006.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.v-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p54"></span>7 27 10. Chrys. in 1. cap. Ephes.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](inst006.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p55"></span>8 28 11. Calixt. Papa, De Consecrat. dist. 2

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](inst006.htm#fr_28) <span
id="ii.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p56"></span>9 29 Instead of the whole passage, beginning
at bottom of p. 11, “It is a Father who testifies,” &c., the Ed. 1536
has the following sentence: “Ex patribus erat qui negavit in sacramento
coenae esse verum corpus sed mysterium duntaxat corporis; sic enim ad
verbum loquitur.” On the margin, reference is made to the author of an
unfinished Tract on Matthew, forming the 11th Homil. among the works of
Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](inst006.htm#fr_29) <span
id="ii.v-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p58"></span> 30 12 Gelas. can. Comperimus, De Consec.
dist. 2.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](inst006.htm#fr_30) <span
id="ii.v-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p59"></span>1 31 13 Cypr. Epist. 2, lib. 1. De Lapsis.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](inst006.htm#fr_31) <span
id="ii.v-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p61"></span>2 32 14 August. lib. 2 De Peccat. Mer. cap.
uit.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](inst006.htm#fr_32) <span
id="ii.v-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p63"></span>3 33 15 Apollon. De quo Eccles. Hist. lib 5
cap. 12.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](inst006.htm#fr_33) <span
id="ii.v-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p66"></span>5 35 17 Cypr. Epist. 2, lib. 2

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](inst006.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.v-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p68"></span>6 36 18 Aug. cap. 2, Cont. Cresconium
Grammat.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](inst006.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.v-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p69"></span>7 37 No part of this passage is in Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](inst006.htm#fr_36) <span
id="ii.v-p72.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p73"></span>9 39 Epist. 3, lib. 2; et in Epist ad Julian.
De Haeret. Baptiz.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](inst006.htm#fr_37) <span
id="ii.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p74"></span> 40 No part of this sentence is in ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](inst006.htm#fr_38) <span
id="ii.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p78"></span>1 41 No part of the passage beginning above
is in the Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](inst006.htm#fr_39) <span
id="ii.v-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p79"></span>2 42 In the last Ed., “justae Dei ultionis:”
in Ed. 1536, “divinae zustitiae.”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](inst006.htm#fr_40) <span
id="ii.v-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p81"></span>3 43 “Papa Romanus,” in the Ed. 1536.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](inst006.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.v-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p82"></span>4 44 Instead of the words, “qui ab eo
instites inuncti et consecrati, infulis modo et lituis insigniti sunt,”
the Ed. 1536 has only “episcopi alii.”

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](inst006.htm#fr_42) <span
id="ii.v-p85.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p86"></span>6 46 Instead of the concluding part of the
sentence beginning “though rather,” &c., and stopping at the reference,
the Ed. 1536 simply continues the quotation “odor vitae in vitam iis qui
salvi sunt.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](inst006.htm#fr_43) <span
id="ii.v-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p88"></span>7 47 Instead of “Rex” simply, the E. 1536 has
“magnanime Rex.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](inst006.htm#fr_44) <span
id="ii.v-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p90"></span>9 49 In Ed. 1536, “Rex magnificentissime”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](inst006.htm#fr_45) <span
id="ii.v-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p91"></span> 50 The words, “qui tanta securitate nunc
exsultant,” not in Ed. 1536.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE EPISTLE TO THE READER](inst007)
