[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst033)  [Next](inst035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.i-p0.1"></span>ARGUMENT.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span>The First Part of the Apostles’ Creed—viz.
the knowledge of God the Creator, being disposed of, we now come to the
Second Part, which relates to the knowledge of God as a Redeemer in
Christ. The subjects treated of accordingly are, *first*, the Occasion
of Redemption—viz. Adam’s fall; and, *secondly*, Redemption itself. The
first five chapters are devoted to the former subject, and the remainder
to the latter.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>Under the Occasion of Redemption, the Fall
is considered not only in a general way, but also specially in its
effects. Hence the first four chapters treat of original sin, free will,
the corruption of human nature, and the operation of God in the heart.
The fifth chapter contains a refutation of the arguments usually urged
in support of free will.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>The subject of redemption may be reduced to
five particular heads:

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span>I. The character of him in whom salvation
for lost man must be sought, Chap. 6.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span>II. How he was manifested to the world,
namely, in a twofold manner. First, under the Law. Here the Decalogue is
expounded, and some other points relating to the law discussed, Chap. 7
and 8. Secondly, under the Gospel. Here the resemblance and difference
of the two dispensations are considered, Chap. 9, 10, 11.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span>III. What kind of person Christ was, and
behaved to be, in order to perform the office of Mediator—viz. God and
man in one person, Chap. 12, 13, 14.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span>IV. For what end he was sent into the world
by the Father. Here Christ’s prophetical, kingly, and priestly offices
are considered, Chap. 15.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>V. In what way, or by what successive
steps, Christ fulfilled the office of our Redeemer, Chap. 16. Here are
considered his crucifixion, death, burial, descent to hell,
resurrection, ascension to heaven, and seat at the right hand of the
Father, together with the practical use of the whole doctrine. Chapter
17 contains an answer to the question, Whether Christ is properly said
to have merited the grace of God for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 1. - THROUGH THE FALL AND REVOLT OF ADAM, THE WHOLE HUMAN
RACE MADE ACCURSED AND DEGENERATE. OF ORIGINAL SIN.](inst035.md)
