[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst048)  [Next](inst050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xvi"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xvi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 15.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p1"></span>THREE THINGS BRIEFLY TO BE REGARDED IN
CHRIST—VIZ. HIS OFFICES OF PROPHET, KING, AND PRIEST.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p2"></span>The principal parts of this chapter
are—I. Of the Prophetical Office of Christ, its dignity and use, sec. 1,
2. II. The nature of the Kingly power of Christ, and the advantage we
derive from it, sec. 3–5. III. Of the Priesthood of Christ, and the
efficacy of it, sec. 6.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p4"></span>1. Among heretics and false Christians,
Christ is found in name only; but by those who are truly and effectually
called of God, he is acknowledged as a Prophet, King, and Priest. In
regard to the Prophetical Office, the Redeemer of the Church is the same
from whom believers under the Law hoped for the full light of
understanding.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p5"></span>2. The unction of Christ, though it has
respect chiefly to the Kingly Office, refers also to the Prophetical and
Priestly Offices. The dignity, necessity, and use of this unction.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p6"></span>3. From the spirituality of Christ’s
kingdom its eternity is inferred. This twofold, referring both to the
whole body of the Church, and to its individual members.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p7"></span>4. Benefits from the spiritual kingdom of
Christ. 1. It raises us to eternal life. 2. It enriches us with all
things necessary to salvation. 3. It makes us invincible by spiritual
foes. 4. It animates us to patient endurance. 5. It inspires confidence
and triumph. 6. It supplies fortitude and love.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p8"></span>5. The unction of our Redeemer heavenly.
Symbol of this unction. A passage in the apostle reconciled with others
previously quoted, to prove the eternal kingdom of Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p9"></span>6. What necessary to obtain the benefit
of Christ’s Priesthood. We must set out with the death of Christ. From
it follows, 1. His intercession for us. 2. Confidence in prayer. 3.
Peace of conscience. 4. Through Christ, Christians themselves become
priests. Grievous sin of the Papists in pretending to sacrifice Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p10"></span>1. Though heretics pretend the name of
Christ, truly does Augustine affirm (Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 5), that
the foundation is not common to them with the godly, but belongs
exclusively to the Church: for if those things which pertain to Christ
be diligently considered, it will be found that Christ is with them in
name only, not in reality. Thus in the present day, though the Papists
have the words, Son of God, Redeemer of the world, sounding in their
mouths, yet, because contented with an empty name, they deprive him of
his virtue and dignity; what Paul says of “not holding the head,” is
truly applicable to them (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>[Col.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>). Therefore, that faith may find in Christ
a solid ground of salvation, and so rest in him, we must set out with
this principle, that the office which he received from the Father
consists of three parts. For he was appointed both Prophet, King, and
Priest; though little were gained by holding the names unaccompanied by
a knowledge of the end and use. These too are spoken of in the Papacy,
but frigidly, and with no great benefit, the full meaning comprehended
under each title not being understood. We formerly observed, that though
God, by supplying an uninterrupted succession of prophets, never left
his people destitute of useful doctrine, such as might suffice for
salvation; yet the minds of believers were always impressed with the
conviction that the full light of understanding was to be expected only
on the advent of the Messiah. This expectation, accordingly, had reached
even the Samaritans, to whom the true religion had never been made
known. This is plain from the expression of the woman, “I know that
Messiah cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us
all things,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.2"></span>[John
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.2"></span>). Nor was this a mere random presumption
which had entered the minds of the Jews. They believed what sure oracles
had taught them. One of the most remarkable passages is that of Isaiah,
“Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
commander to the people,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.3"></span>[Is.
54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.3"></span>); that is, in the same way in which he had
previously in another place styled him “Wonderful, Counsellor,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.4"></span>[Is.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.4"></span>).25  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248.md) For this reason, the apostle
commending the perfection of gospel doctrine, first says that “God, at
sundry times and in divers manners spake in times past unto the
prophets,” and then adds, that he “has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p11.1"></span>[Heb.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p11.1"></span>.md).
But as the common office of the prophets was to hold the Church in
suspense, and at the same time support it until the advent of the
Mediator; we read, that the faithful, during the dispersion, complained
that they were deprived of that ordinary privilege. “We see not our
signs: there is no more any prophet, neither is there among us any that
knoweth how long,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p11.2"></span>[Ps.
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p11.2"></span>). But when Christ was now not far distant,
a period was assigned to Daniel “to seal up the vision and prophecy,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p11.3"></span>[Daniel
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p11.3"></span>), not only that the authority of the
prediction there spoken of might be established, but that believers
might, for a time, patiently submit to the want of the prophets, the
fulfilment and completion of all the prophecies being at hand.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p12"></span>2. Moreover, it is to be observed, that
the name *Christ* refers to those three offices: for we know that under
the law, prophets as well as priests and kings were anointed with holy
oil. Whence, also, the celebrated name of Messiah was given to the
promised Mediator. But although I admit (as, indeed, I have elsewhere
shown) that he was so called from a view to the nature of the kingly
office, still the prophetical and sacerdotal unctions have their proper
place, and must not be overlooked. The former is expressly mentioned by
Isaiah in these words: “The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: because
the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he has
sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captive, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>[Isa.
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>.md).
We see that he was anointed by the Spirit to be a herald and witness of
his Father’s grace, and not in the usual way; for he is distinguished
from other teachers who had a similar office. And here, again, it is to
be observed, that the unction which he received, in order to perform the
office of teacher, was not for himself, but for his whole body, that a
corresponding efficacy of the Spirit might always accompany the
preaching of the Gospel. This, however, remains certain, that by the
perfection of doctrine which he brought, an end was put to all the
prophecies, so that those who, not contented with the Gospel, annex
somewhat extraneous to it, derogate from its authority. The voice which
thundered from heaven, “This is my beloved Son, hear him” gave him a
special privilege above all other teachers. Then from him, as head, this
unction is diffused through the members, as Joel has foretold, “Your
sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.2"></span>[Joel
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.2"></span>). Paul’s expressions, that he was “made
unto us wisdom,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.3"></span>[1 Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.3"></span>), and elsewhere, that in him “are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.4"></span>[Col.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.4"></span>), have a somewhat different meaning,
namely, that out of him there is nothing worth knowing, and that those
who, by faith, apprehend his true character, possess the boundless
immensity of heavenly blessings. For which reason, he elsewhere says, “I
determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.5"></span>[1 Cor.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p12.5"></span>). And most justly: for it is unlawful to go
beyond the simplicity of the Gospel. The purpose of this prophetical
dignity in Christ is to teach us, that in the doctrine which he
delivered is substantially included a wisdom which is perfect in all its
parts.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p13"></span>3. I come to the Kingly office, of which
it were in vain to speak, without previously reminding the reader that
its nature is spiritual; because it is from thence we learn its
efficacy, the benefits it confers, its whole power and eternity.
Eternity, moreover, which in Daniel an angel attributes to the office of
Christ (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.1"></span>[Dan.
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.1"></span>), in Luke an angel justly applies to the
salvation of his people (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.2"></span>[Luke
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.2"></span>). But this is also twofold, and must be
viewed in two ways; the one pertains to the whole body of the Church the
other is proper to each member. To the former is to be referred what is
said in the Psalms, “Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not
lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the
sun before me. It shall be established for ever, as the moon, and as a
faithful witness in heaven,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.3"></span>[Ps.
89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.3"></span>). There can be no doubt that God here
promises that he will be, by the hand of his Son, the eternal governor
and defender of the Church. In none but Christ will the fulfilment of
this prophecy be found; since immediately after Solomon’s death the
kingdom in n great measure lost its dignity, and, with ignominy to the
family of David, was transferred to a private individual. Afterwards
decaying by degrees, it at length came to a sad and dishonourable end.
In the same sense are we to understand the exclamation of Isaiah, “Who
shall declare his generation?” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.4"></span>[Isaiah
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.4"></span>). For he asserts that Christ will so
survive death as to be connected with his members. Therefore, as often
as we hear that Christ is armed with eternal power, let us learn that
the perpetuity of the Church is thus effectually secured; that amid the
turbulent agitations by which it is constantly harassed, and the
grievous and fearful commotions which threaten innumerable disasters, it
still remains safe. Thus, when David derides the audacity of the enemy
who attempt to throw off the yoke of God and his anointed, and says,
that kings and nations rage “in vain,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.5"></span>[Ps.
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.5"></span>), because he who sitteth in the heaven is
strong enough to repel their assaults, assuring believers of the
perpetual preservation of the Church, he animates them to have good hope
whenever it is occasionally oppressed. So, in another place, when
speaking in the person of God, he says, “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.6"></span>[Ps.
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.6"></span>), he reminds us, that however numerous and
powerful the enemies who conspire to assault the Church, they are not
possessed of strength sufficient to prevail against the immortal decree
by which he appointed his Son eternal King. Whence it follows that the
devil, with the whole power of the world, can never possibly destroy the
Church, which is founded on the eternal throne of Christ. Then in regard
to the special use to be made by each believer, this same eternity ought
to elevate us to the hope of a blessed immortality. For we see that
every thing which is earthly, and of the world, is temporary, and soon
fades away. Christ, therefore, to raise our hope to the heavens,
declares that his kingdom is not of this world (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.7"></span>[John
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p13.7"></span>). In fine, let each of us, when he hears
that the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, be roused by the thought to
entertain the hope of a better life, and to expect that as it is now
protected by the hand of Christ, so it will be fully realised in a
future life.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p14"></span>4. That the strength and utility of the
kingdom of Christ cannot, as we have said, be fully perceived without
recognising it as spiritual, is sufficiently apparent, even from this,
that having during the whole course of our lives to war under the cross,
our condition here is bitter and wretched. What then would it avail us
to be ranged under the government of a heavenly King, if its benefits
were not realised beyond the present earthly life? We must, therefore,
know that the happiness which is promised to us in Christ does not
consist in external advantages—such as leading a joyful and tranquil
life, abounding in wealth, being secure against all injury, and having
an affluence of delights, such as the flesh is wont to long for—but
properly belongs to the heavenly life. As in the world the prosperous
and desirable condition of a people consists partly in the abundance of
temporal good and domestic peace, and partly in the strong protection
which gives security against external violence; so Christ also enriches
his people with all things necessary to the eternal salvation of their
souls and fortifies them with courage to stand unassailable by all the
attacks of spiritual foes. Whence we infer, that he reigns more for us
than for himself, and that both within us and without us; that being
replenished, in so far as God knows to be expedient, with the gifts of
the Spirit, of which we are naturally destitute, we may feel from their
first fruits, that we are truly united to God for perfect blessedness;
and then trusting to the power of the same Spirit, may not doubt that we
shall always be victorious against the devil, the world, and every thing
that can do us harm. To this effect was our Saviour’s reply to the
Pharisees, “The kingdom of God is within you.” “The kingdom of God
cometh not with observation,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p14.1"></span>[Luke
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p14.1"></span>). It is probable that on his declaring
himself to be that King under whom the highest blessing of God was to be
expected, they had in derision asked him to produce his insignia. But to
prevent those who were already more than enough inclined to the earth
from dwelling on its pomp, he bids them enter into their consciences,
for “the kingdom of God” is “righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p14.2"></span>[Rom.
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p14.2"></span>). These words briefly teach what the
kingdom of Christ bestows upon us. Not being earthly or carnal, and so
subject to corruption, but spiritual, it raises us even to eternal life,
so that we can patiently live at present under toil, hunger, cold,
contempt, disgrace, and other annoyances; contented with this, that our
King will never abandon us, but will supply our necessities until our
warfare is ended, and we are called to triumph: such being the nature of
his kingdom, that he communicates to us whatever he received of his
Father. Since then he arms and equips us by his power, adorns us with
splendour and magnificence, enriches us with wealth, we here find most
abundant cause of glorying, and also are inspired with boldness, so that
we can contend intrepidly with the devil, sin, and death. In fine,
clothed with his righteousness, we can bravely surmount all the insults
of the world: and as he replenishes us liberally with his gifts, so we
can in our turn bring forth fruit unto his glory.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p15"></span>5. Accordingly, his royal unction is not
set before us as composed of oil or aromatic perfumes; but he is called
the Christ of God, because “the Spirit of the Lord” rested upon him;
“the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and
might, the Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.1"></span>[Isaiah
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.1"></span>). This is the oil of joy with which the
Psalmist declares that he was anointed above his fellows (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.2"></span>[Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.2"></span>). For, as has been said, he was not
enriched privately for himself, but that he might refresh the parched
and hungry with his abundance. For as the Father is said to have given
the Spirit to the Son without measure (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.3"></span>[John
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.3"></span>), so the reason is expressed, that we might
all receive of his fulness, and grace for grace (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.4"></span>[John
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.4"></span>). From this fountain flows the copious
supply (of which Paul makes mention, <span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.5"></span>[Eph.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.5"></span>.md)
by which grace is variously distributed to believers according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Here we have ample confirmation of what I
said, that the kingdom of Christ consists in the Spirit, and not in
earthly delights or pomp, and that hence, in order to be partakers with
him, we must renounce the world. A visible symbol of this grace was
exhibited at the baptism of Christ, when the Spirit rested upon him in
the form of a dove. To designate the Spirit and his gifts by the term
“*unction*” is not new, and ought not to seem absurd (see <span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.6"></span>[1 John
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.6"></span>), because this is the only quarter from
which we derive life; but especially in what regards the heavenly life,
there is not a drop of vigour in us save what the Holy Spirit instils,
who has chosen his seat in Christ, that thence the heavenly riches, of
which we are destitute, might flow to us in copious abundance. But
because believers stand invincible in the strength of their King, and
his spiritual riches abound towards them, they are not improperly called
Christians. Moreover, from this eternity of which we have spoken, there
is nothing derogatory in the expression of Paul, “Then cometh the end,
when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.7"></span>[1 Cor.
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.7"></span>); and also, “Then shall the Son also
himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may
be all in and” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.8"></span>[1 Cor.
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.8"></span>); for the meaning merely is, that, in that
perfect glory, the administration of the kingdom will not be such as it
now is. For the Father has given all power to the Son, that by his hand
he may govern, cherish, sustain us, keep us under his guardianship, and
give assistance to us. Thus, while we wander far as pilgrims from God,
Christ interposes, that he may gradually bring us to full communion with
God. And, indeed, his sitting at the right hand of the Father has the
same meaning as if he was called the vicegerent of the Father, entrusted
with the whole power of government. For God is pleased, mediately (so to
speak) in his person to rule and defend the Church. Thus also his being
seated at the right hand of the Father is explained by Paul, in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, to mean, that “he is the head over all things
to the Church, which is his body,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.9"></span>[Eph.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.9"></span>). Nor is this different in purport from
what he elsewhere teaches, that God has “given him a name which is above
every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.10"></span>[Phil.
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.10"></span>). For in these words, also, he commends an
arrangement in the kingdom of Christ, which is necessary for our present
infirmity. Thus Paul rightly infers that God will then be the only Head
of the Church, because the office of Christ, in defending the Church,
shall then have been completed. For the same reason, Scripture
throughout calls him *Lord*, the Father having appointed him over us for
the express purpose of exercising his government through him. For though
many lordships are celebrated in the world, yet Paul says, “To us there
is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.11"></span>[1 Cor.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.11"></span>). Whence it is justly inferred that he is
the same God, who, by the mouth of Isaiah, declared, “The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King: he will save us,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.12"></span>[Isaiah
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.12"></span>). For though he every where describes all
the power which he possesses as the benefit and gift of the Father, the
meaning simply is, that he reigns by divine authority, because his
reason for assuming the office of Mediator was, that descending from the
bosom and incomprehensible glory of the Father, he might draw near to
us. Wherefore there is the greater reason that we all should with one
consent prepare to obey, and with the greatest alacrity yield implicit
obedience to his will. For as he unites the offices of King and Pastor
towards believers, who voluntarily submit to him, so, on the other hand,
we are told that he wields an iron sceptre to break and bruise all the
rebellious like a potter’s vessel (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.13"></span>[Ps.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.13"></span>). We are also told that he will be the
Judge of the Gentiles, that he will cover the earth with dead bodies,
and level down every opposing height (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.14"></span>[Ps.
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p15.14"></span>). Of this examples are seen at present,
but full proof will be given at the final judgment, which may be
properly regarded as the last act of his reign.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p16"></span>6. With regard to his Priesthood, we
must briefly hold its end and use to be, that as a Mediator, free from
all taint, he may by his own holiness procure the favour of God for us.
But because a deserved curse obstructs the entrance, and God in his
character of Judge is hostile to us, expiation must necessarily
intervene, that as a priest employed to appease the wrath of God, he may
reinstate us in his favour. Wherefore, in order that Christ might fulfil
this office, it behoved him to appear with a sacrifice. For even under
the law of the priesthood it was forbidden to enter the sanctuary
without blood, to teach the worshipper that however the priest might
interpose to deprecate, God could not be propitiated without the
expiation of sin. On this subject the Apostle discourses at length in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, from the seventh almost to the end of the
tenth chapter. The sum comes to this, that the honour of the priesthood
was competent to none but Christ, because, by the sacrifice of his
death, he wiped away our guilt, and made satisfaction for sin. Of the
great importance of this matter, we are reminded by that solemn oath
which God uttered, and of which he declared he would not repent, “Thou
art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.1"></span>[Ps.
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.1"></span>). For, doubtless, his purpose was to ratify
that point on which he knew that our salvation chiefly hinged. For, as
has been said, there is no access to God for us or for our prayers until
the priest, purging away our defilements, sanctify us, and obtain for us
that favour of which the impurity of our lives and hearts deprives us.
Thus we see, that if the benefit and efficacy of Christ’s priesthood is
to reach us, the commencement must be with his death. Whence it follows,
that he by whose aid we obtain favour, must be a perpetual intercessor.
From this again arises not only confidence in prayer, but also the
tranquillity of pious minds, while they recline in safety on the
paternal indulgence of God, and feel assured, that whatever has been
consecrated by the Mediator is pleasing to him. But since God under the
Law ordered sacrifices of beasts to be offered to him, there was a
different and new arrangement in regard to Christ—viz. that he should be
at once victim and priest, because no other fit satisfaction for sin
could be found, nor was any one worthy of the honour of offering an only
begotten son to God. Christ now bears the office of priest, not only
that by the eternal law of reconciliation he may render the Father
favourable and propitious to us, but also admit us into this most
honourable alliance. For we though in ourselves polluted, in him being
priests (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.2"></span>[Rev.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.2"></span>), offer ourselves and our all to God, and
freely enter the heavenly sanctuary, so that the sacrifices of prayer
and praise which we present are grateful and of sweet odour before him.
To this effect are the words of Christ, “For their sakes I sanctify
myself,” (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.3"></span>[John
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.3"></span>); for being clothed with his holiness,
inasmuch as he has devoted us to the Father with himself (otherwise we
were an abomination before him), we please him as if we were pure and
clean, nay, even sacred. Hence that unction of the sanctuary of which
mention is made in Daniel (<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.4"></span>[Dan.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p16.4"></span>). For we must attend to the contrast
between this unction and the shadowy one which was then in use; as if
the angel had said, that when the shadows were dispersed, there would be
a clear priesthood in the person of Christ. The more detestable,
therefore, is the fiction of those who, not content with the priesthood
of Christ, have dared to take it upon themselves to sacrifice him, a
thing daily attempted in the Papacy, where the mass is represented as an
immolation of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](inst049.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xvi-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p11"></span>55 255 Calvin translates, “Angelum vel
Interpretem magni consilii;”—“the Angel or interpreter of the great
counsel.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 16. - HOW CHRIST PERFORMED THE OFFICE OF REDEEMER IN
PROCURING OUR SALVATION. THE DEATH, RESURRECTION, AND ASCENSION OF
CHRIST.](inst050.md)
