[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst009)  [Next](inst011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

## <span id="ii.ix-p0.1"></span>METHOD AND ARRANGEMENT,OR SUBJECT OF THE WHOLE WORK.

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span>\[From an epitome of the institutions, by
gaspar olevian.\]

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span>The subject handled by the author of these
Christian Institutes is twofold: the former, the knowledge of God, which
leads to a blessed immortality; and the latter (which is subordinate to
the former), the knowledge of ourselves. With this view the author
simply adopts the arrangement of the Apostles’ Creed, as that with which
all Christians are most familiar. For as the Creed consists of four
parts, the first relating to God the Father, the second to the Son, the
third to the Holy Spirit, and the fourth to the Church, so the author,
in fulfilment of his task, divides his Institutes into four parts,
corresponding to those of the Creed. Each of these parts it will now be
proper to explain separately.

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span>I. The first article of the Apostles’ Creed
is concerning *God the Father*, the creation, preservation, and
government of the universe, as implied in his omnipotence. Accordingly,
the First Book of the Institutes treats of the knowledge of God,
considered as the Creator, Preserver, and Governor of the world, and of
every thing contained in it. It shows both wherein the true knowledge of
the Creator consists, and what the end of this knowledge is, chap. 1 and
2; that it is not learned at school, but that every one is self-taught
it from the womb, chap. 3. Such, however, is man’s depravity, that he
stifles and corrupts this knowledge, partly by ignorance, partly by
wicked design; and hence does not by means of it either glorify God as
he ought, or attain to happiness, chap. 4. This inward knowledge is
aided from without, namely by the creatures in which, as in a mirror,
the perfections of God may be contemplated. But man does not properly
avail himself of this assistance, and hence to those to whom God is
pleased to make himself more intimately known for salvation, he
communicates his written word. This leads to a consideration of the Holy
Scriptures, in which God has revealed that not the Father only, but
along with the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit, is that Creator of
heaven and earth, whom, in consequence of our innate depravity we were
unable, either from innate natural knowledge, or the beautiful mirror of
the world, to know so as to glorify. Here the author treats of the
manifestation of God in Scripture; and in connection with it, of the one
divine essence in three persons. But, lest man should lay the blame of
his voluntary blindness on God, the author shows in what state man was
created at first, introducing dissertations on the image of God, free
will, and original righteousness. The subject of Creation being thus
disposed of, the preservation and government of the world is considered
in the three last chapters, which contain a very full discussion of the
doctrine of Divine Providence.

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span>II. As man, by sinning, forfeited the
privileges conferred on him at his creation, recourse must be had to
Christ. Accordingly, the next article in the Creed is, *And in Jesus
Christ his only Son, &c.* In like manner, the Second Book of the
Institutes treats of the knowledge of God considered as a Redeemer in
Christ, And showing man his falls conducts him to Christ the Mediator.
Here the subject of original sin is considered, and it is shown that man
has no means within himself, by which he can escape from guilt, and the
impending curse: that, on the contrary, until he is reconciled and
renewed, every thing that proceeds from him is of the nature of sin.
This subject is considered as far as the 6th chapter. Man being thus
utterly undone in himself, and incapable of working out his own cure by
thinking a good thought, or doing what is acceptable to God, must seek
redemption without himself—viz. in Christ. The end for which the Law was
given, was not to secure worshipers for itself, but to conduct them unto
Christ. This leads to an exposition of the Moral Law. Christ was known
to the Jews under the Law as the author of salvation, but is more fully
revealed under the Gospel in which he was manifested to the world. Hence
arises the doctrine concerning the similarity and difference of the two
Testaments, the Old and the New, the Law and the Gospel. These topics
occupy as far as the 12th chapter. It is next shown that, in order to
secure a complete salvation, it was necessary that the eternal Son of
God should become man, and assume a true human nature. It is also shown
in what way these two natures constitute one person. In order to
purchase a full salvation by his own merits, and effectually apply it,
Christ was appointed to the offices of Prophet, Priest, and King. The
mode in which Christ performs these offices is considered, and also
whether in point of fact he did accomplish the work of redemption. Here
an exposition is given of the articles relating to Christ’s death,
resurrection, and ascension into heaven. In conclusion, it is proved
that Christ is rightly and properly said to have merited divine grace
and salvation for us.

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span>III. So long as Christ is separated from us
we have no benefit from him. We must be ingrafted in him like branches
in the vine. Hence the Creed, after treating of Christ, proceeds in its
third article, *I believe in the Holy Spirit*,—the Holy Spirit being the
bond of union between us and Christ. In like manner, the Third Book of
the Institutes treats of the Holy Spirit which unites us to Christ, and,
in connection with it, of faith, by which we embrace Christ with a
double benefit—viz. that of gratuitous righteousness which he imputes to
us, and regeneration, which he begins in us by giving us repentance. In
order to show the worthlessness of a faith which is not accompanied with
a desire of repentance, the author, before proceeding to a full
discussion of justification, treats at length from chapter 3-10 of
repentance, and the constant study of it—repentance, which Christ, when
apprehended by faith, begets in us by his Spirit. Chapter 11 treats of
the primary and peculiar benefit of Christ when united to us by the Holy
Spirit—viz. justification. This subject is continued to the 20th
chapter, which treats of prayer, the hand, as it were, to receive the
blessings which faith knows to be treasured up for it with God,
according to the word of promise. But, as the Holy Spirit, who creates
and preserves our faith, does not unite all men to Christ, who is the
sole author of salvation, chapter 21 treats of the eternal election of
God, to which it is owing that we, in whom he foresaw no good which he
had not previously bestowed, are given to Christ, and united to him by
the effectual calling of the Gospel. This subject is continued to the
25th chapter, which treats of complete regeneration and felicity,
namely, the final resurrection to which we must raise our eyes, seeing
that, in regard to fruition, the happiness of the godly is only begun in
this world.

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span>IV. Since the Holy Spirit does not ingraft
all men into Christ, or endue them with faith, and those whom he does so
endue he does not ordinarily endue without means, but uses for that
purpose the preaching of the Gospel and the dispensation of the
Sacraments, together with the administration of all kinds of discipline,
the Creed contains the following article, *I believe in the Holy
Catholic Church*, namely, that Church which, when lying in eternal
death, the Father, by gratuitous election, freely reconciled to himself
in Christ, and endued with the Holy Spirit, that, being ingrafted into
Christ, it might have communion with him as its proper head; whence flow
perpetual remission of sins, and full restoration to eternal life.
Accordingly the Church is treated of in the first fourteen chapters of
the Fourth Book, which thereafter treats of the means which the Holy
Spirit employs in calling us effectually from spiritual death, and
preserving the Church, in other words, Baptism and the Lord’s Supper.
These means are, as it were, the royal sceptre of Christ, by which,
through the efficacy of his Spirit, he commences his spiritual reign in
the Church, advances it from day to day, and after this life, without
the use of means, finally perfects it. This subject is continued to the
20th chapter.

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span>And because civil governments are, in this
life, the hospitable entertainers (*hospitia*) of the Church (though
civil government is distinct from the spiritual kingdom of Christ), the
author shows how great blessings they are, blessings which the Church is
bound gratefully to acknowledge, until we are called away from this
tabernacle to the heavenly inheritance, where God will be all in all.

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span>Such is the arrangement of the Institutes
which may be thus summed up: Man being at first created upright, but
afterwards being not partially but totally ruined, finds his entire
salvation out of himself in Christ, to whom being united by the Holy
Spirit freely given without any foresight of future works, he thereby
obtains a double blessing—viz. full imputation of righteousness, which
goes along with us even to the grave, and the commencement of
sanctification, which daily advances till at length it is perfected in
the day of regeneration or resurrection of the body, and this, in order
that the great mercy of God may be celebrated in the heavenly mansions,
throughout eternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: GENERAL INDEX OF CHAPTERS.](inst011.md)
