[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst014)  [Next](inst016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.ii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 1.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p1"></span>THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD AND OF OURSELVES
MUTUALLY CONNECTED. —NATURE OF THE CONNECTION.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p2"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.ii-p3"></span>1. The sum of true wisdom—viz. the
knowledge of God and of ourselves. Effects of the latter.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p4"></span>2. Effects of the knowledge of God, in
humbling our pride, unveiling our hypocrisy, demonstrating the absolute
perfections of God, and our own utter helplessness.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p5"></span>3. Effects of the knowledge of God
illustrated by the examples, 1. of holy patriarchs; 2. of holy angels;
3. of the sun and moon.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p6"></span>1. Our wisdom, in so far as it ought to be
deemed true and solid Wisdom, consists almost entirely of two parts: the
knowledge of God and of ourselves. But as these are connected together
by many ties, it is not easy to determine which of the two precedes and
gives birth to the other. For, in the first place, no man can survey
himself without forthwith turning his thoughts towards the God in whom
he lives and moves; because it is perfectly obvious, that the endowments
which we possess cannot possibly be from ourselves; nay, that our very
being is nothing else than subsistence in God alone. In the second
place, those blessings which unceasingly distil to us from heaven, are
like streams conducting us to the fountain. Here, again, the infinitude
of good which resides in God becomes more apparent from our poverty. In
particular, the miserable ruin into which the revolt of the first man
has plunged us, compels us to turn our eyes upwards; not only that while
hungry and famishing we may thence ask what we want, but being aroused
by fear may learn humility. For as there exists in man something like a
world of misery, and ever since we were stript of the divine attire our
naked shame discloses an immense series of disgraceful properties every
man, being stung by the consciousness of his own unhappiness, in this
way necessarily obtains at least some knowledge of God. Thus, our
feeling of ignorance, vanity, want, weakness, in short, depravity and
corruption, reminds us (see Calvin on <span
id="iv.i.ii-p6.1"></span>[John
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.ii-p6.1"></span>),
that in the Lord, and none but He, dwell the true light of wisdom, solid
virtue, exuberant goodness. We are accordingly urged by our own evil
things to consider the good things of God; and, indeed, we cannot aspire
to Him in earnest until we have begun to be displeased with ourselves.
For what man is not disposed to rest in himself? Who, in fact, does not
thus rest, so long as he is unknown to himself; that is, so long as he
is contented with his own endowments, and unconscious or unmindful of
his misery? Every person, therefore, on coming to the knowledge of
himself, is not only urged to seek God, but is also led as by the hand
to find him.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p7"></span>2. On the other hand, it is evident that
man never attains to a true self-knowledge until he have previously
contemplated the face of God, and come down after such contemplation to
look into himself. For (such is our innate pride) we always seem to
ourselves just, and upright, and wise, and holy, until we are convinced,
by clear evidence, of our injustice, vileness, folly, and impurity.
Convinced, however, we are not, if we look to ourselves only, and not to
the Lord also —He being the only standard by the application of which
this conviction can be produced. For, since we are all naturally prone
to hypocrisy, any empty semblance of righteousness is quite enough to
satisfy us instead of righteousness itself. And since nothing appears
within us or around us that is not tainted with very great impurity, so
long as we keep our mind within the confines of human pollution,
anything which is in some small degree less defiled delights us as if it
were most pure just as an eye, to which nothing but black had been
previously presented, deems an object of a whitish, or even of a
brownish hue, to be perfectly white. Nay, the bodily sense may furnish a
still stronger illustration of the extent to which we are deluded in
estimating the powers of the mind. If, at mid-day, we either look down
to the ground, or on the surrounding objects which lie open to our view,
we think ourselves endued with a very strong and piercing eyesight; but
when we look up to the sun, and gaze at it unveiled, the sight which did
excellently well for the earth is instantly so dazzled and confounded by
the refulgence, as to oblige us to confess that our acuteness in
discerning terrestrial objects is mere dimness when applied to the sun.
Thus too, it happens in estimating our spiritual qualities. So long as
we do not look beyond the earth, we are quite pleased with our own
righteousness, wisdom, and virtue; we address ourselves in the most
flattering terms, and seem only less than demigods. But should we once
begin to raise our thoughts to God, and reflect what kind of Being he
is, and how absolute the perfection of that righteousness, and wisdom,
and virtue, to which, as a standard, we are bound to be conformed, what
formerly delighted us by its false show of righteousness will become
polluted with the greatest iniquity; what strangely imposed upon us
under the name of wisdom will disgust by its extreme folly; and what
presented the appearance of virtuous energy will be condemned as the
most miserable impotence. So far are those qualities in us, which seem
most perfect, from corresponding to the divine purity.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p8"></span>3. Hence that dread and amazement with
which as Scripture uniformly relates, holy men were struck and
overwhelmed whenever they beheld the presence of God. When we see those
who previously stood firm and secure so quaking with terror, that the
fear of death takes hold of them, nay, they are, in a manner, swallowed
up and annihilated, the inference to be drawn is that men are never duly
touched and impressed with a conviction of their insignificance, until
they have contrasted themselves with the majesty of God. Frequent
examples of this consternation occur both in the Book of Judges and the
Prophetical Writings;5  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) so much so,
that it was a common expression among the people of God, “We shall die,
for we have seen the Lord.” Hence the Book of Job, also, in humbling men
under a conviction of their folly, feebleness, and pollution, always
derives its chief argument from descriptions of the Divine wisdom,
virtue, and purity. Nor without cause: for we see Abraham the readier to
acknowledge himself but dust and ashes the nearer he approaches to
behold the glory of the Lord, and Elijah unable to wait with unveiled
face for His approach; so dreadful is the sight. And what can man do,
man who is but rottenness and a worm, when even the Cherubim themselves
must veil their faces in very terror? To this, undoubtedly, the Prophet
Isaiah refers, when he says (<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.7"></span>[Isaiah
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.7"></span>),
“The moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of
Hosts shall reign;” *i.e.*, when he shall exhibit his refulgence, and
give a nearer view of it, the brightest objects will, in comparison, be
covered with darkness.

<span id="iv.i.ii-p10"></span>But though the knowledge of God and the
knowledge of ourselves are bound together by a mutual tie, due
arrangement requires that we treat of the former in the first place, and
then descend to the latter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](inst015.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.i.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii-p9"></span>3 53 <span id="iv.i.ii-p9.1"></span>[Judges
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.2"></span>[Isaiah
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.3"></span>[Ezek.
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.3"></span>:14;
<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.4"></span>[Job
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.4"></span>,
&c.; <span id="iv.i.ii-p9.5"></span>[Gen.
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#027)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.6"></span>[1 Kings
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.ii-p9.6"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 2. - WHAT IT IS TO KNOW GOD,TENDENCY OF THIS
KNOWLEDGE.](inst016)
