[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst002)  [Next](inst004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

## <span id="ii.ii-p0.1"></span>INTRODUCTION

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span>*By* The Rev. John Murray, M.A., Th.M.

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>THE publication in English of another edition
of the *opus magnum* of Christian theology is an event fraught with much
encouragement. Notwithstanding the decadence so patent in our
present-day world and particularly in the realm of Christian thought and
life, the publishers have confidence that there is sufficient interest
to warrant such an undertaking. If this faith is justified we have
reason for thanksgiving to God. For what would be a better harbinger of
another Reformation than widespread recourse to the earnest and sober
study of the Word of God which would be evinced by the readiness
carefully to peruse *The Institutes of the Christian Religion*.

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span>Dr. B. B. Warfield in his admirable article,
“On the Literary History of the *Institutes*,” has condensed for us the
appraisal accorded Calvin’s work by the critics who have been most
competent to judge. Among these tributes none expresses more adequately,
and none with comparable terseness, the appraisal which is Calvin’s due
than that of the learned Joseph Scaliger, “Solus inter theologos
Calvinus.”

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>It would be a presumptuous undertaking to try
to set forth all the reasons why Calvin holds that position of eminence
in the history of Christian theology. By the grace and in the overruling
providence of God there was the convergence of multiple factors, and all
of these it would be impossible to trace in their various interrelations
and interactions. One of these, however, calls for special mention.
Calvin was an exegete and biblical theologian of the first rank. No
other one factor comparably served to equip Calvin for the successful
prosecution of his greatest work which in 1559 received its definitive
edition.

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>The attitude to Scripture entertained by
Calvin and the principles which guided him in its exposition are nowhere
stated with more simplicity and fervor than in the Epistle Dedicatory to
his first commentary, the commentary on the epistle to the Romans. “Such
veneration,” he says, “we ought indeed to entertain for the Word of God,
that we ought not to pervert it in the least degree by varying
expositions; for its majesty is diminished, I know not how much,
especially when not expounded with great discretion and with great
sobriety. And if it be deemed a great wickedness to contaminate any
thing that is dedicated to God, he surely cannot be endured, who, with
impure, or even with unprepared hands, will handle that very thing,
which of all things is the most sacred on earth. It is therefore an
audacity, closely allied to a sacrilege, rashly to turn Scripture in any
way we please, and to indulge our fancies as in sport; which has been
done by many in former times” (English Translation, Grand Rapids, 1947,
p. 27).

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span>It was Calvin preeminently who set the
pattern for the exercise of that sobriety which guards the science of
exegesis against those distortions and perversions to which allegorizing
methods are ever prone to subject the interpretation and application of
Scripture. The debt we owe to Calvin in establishing sound canons of
interpretation and in thus directing the future course of exegetical
study is incalculable. It is only to be lamented that too frequently the
preaching of Protestant and even Reformed communions has not been
sufficiently grounded in the hermeneutical principles which Calvin so
nobly exemplified.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>One feature of Calvin’s exegetical work is
his concern for the analogy of Scripture. He is always careful to take
account of the unity and harmony of Scripture teaching. His expositions
are not therefore afflicted with the vice of expounding particular
passages without respect to the teaching of Scripture elsewhere and
without respect to the system of truth set forth in the Word of God. His
exegesis, in a word, is theologically oriented. It is this quality that
lies close to that which was *par excellence* his genius.

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span>However highly we assess Calvin’s exegetical
talent and product, his eminence as an exegete must not be allowed to
overshadow what was, after all, his greatest gift. He was *par
excellence* a theologian. It was his systematizing genius preeminently
that equipped him for the prosecution and completion of his masterpiece.

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span>When we say that he was *par excellence* a
theologian we must dissociate from our use of this word every notion
that is suggestive of the purely speculative. No one has ever fulminated
with more passion and eloquence against “vacuous and meteoric
speculation” than has Calvin. And no one has ever been more keenly
conscious that the theologian’s task was the humble and, at the same
time, truly noble one of being a disciple of the Scripture. “No man,” he
declares, “can have the least knowledge of true and sound, doctrine,
without having been a disciple of the Scripture. Hence originates all
true wisdom, when we embrace with reverence the testimony which God hath
been pleased therein to deliver concerning himself. For obedience is the
source, not only of an absolutely perfect and complete faith, but of all
right knowledge of God” (*Inst.* 1, 6, 2). In the words of William
Cunningham: “In theology there is, of course, no room for originality
properly so called, for its whole materials are contained in the actual
statements of God’s word; and he is the greatest and best theologian who
has most accurately apprehended the meaning of the statements of
Scripture—who, by comparing and combining them, has most fully and
correctly brought out the whole mind of God on all the topics on which
the Scriptures give us information—who classifies and digests the truths
of Scripture in the way best fitted to commend them to the apprehension
and acceptance of men—and who can most clearly and forcibly bring out
their scriptural evidence, and most skillfully and effectively defend
them against the assaults of adversaries . . . Calvin was far above the
weakness of aiming at the invention of novelties in theology, or of
wishing to be regarded as the discoverer of new opinions” (*The
Reformers and the Theology of the Reformation*, Edinburgh, 1866, p.
296). As we bring even elementary understanding to bear upon our reading
of the *Institutes* we shall immediately discover the profound sense of
the majesty of God, veneration for the Word of God, and the jealous care
for faithful exposition and systematization which were marked features
of the author. And because of this we shall find the *Institutes* to be
suffused with the warmth of godly fear. The *Institutes* is not only the
classic of Christian theology; it is also a model of Christian devotion.
For what Calvin sought to foster was that “pure and genuine religion”
which consists in “faith united with the serious fear of God, such fear
as may embrace voluntary reverence and draw along with it legitimate
worship such as is prescribed in the law” (*Inst.* 1, 2, 2).

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>The present edition is from the translation
made by Henry Beveridge in 1845 for the Calvin Translation Society. The
reader may be assured that the translation faithfully reflects the
teaching of Calvin but must also bear in mind that no translation can
perfectly convey the thought of the original. It may also be added that
a more adequate translation of Calvin’s *Institutes* into English is a
real *desideratum*. In fulfilling this need the translator or
translators would perform the greatest service if the work of
translation were supplemented by footnotes in which at crucial points,
where translation is difficult or most accurate translation impossible,
the Latin text would be reproduced and comment made on its more exact
import. Furthermore, footnotes which would supply the reader with
references to other places in Calvin’s writings where he deals with the
same subject would be an invaluable help to students of Calvin and to
the cause of truth. Admittedly such work requires linguistic skill of
the highest order, thorough knowledge of Calvin’s writings, and deep
sympathy with his theology. It would also involve prodigious labour. We
may hope that the seed being sown by the present venture may bear fruit
some day in such a harvest.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>John Murray,

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span>Professor of Systematic Theology,

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>Westminster Theological Seminary.

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span>Philadelphia, Penna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE PRINTERS TO THE READERS.](inst004.md)
