[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst056)  [Next](inst058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.v-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 4.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span>PENITENCE, AS EXPLAINED IN THE SOPHISTICAL
JARGON OF THE SCHOOLMEN, WIDELY DIFFERENT FROM THE PURITY REQUIRED BY
THE GOSPEL. OF CONFESSION AND SATISFACTION.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are,—I. The
orthodox doctrine of repentance being already expounded, the false
doctrine is refuted in the present chapter; a general summary survey
being at the same time taken of the doctrine of the Schoolmen, sec. 1,
2. II. Its separate parts are afterwards examined. Contrition, sec. 2
and 3. Confession, sec. 4-20. Sanctification, from sec. 20 to the end of
the chapter.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span>1. Errors of the Schoolmen in delivering
the doctrine of repentance. 1. Errors in defining it. Four different
definitions considered. 2. Absurd division. 3. Vain and puzzling
questions. 4. Mode in which they entangle themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span>2. The false doctrine of the Schoolmen
necessary to be refuted. Of contrition. Their view of it examined.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>3. True and genuine contrition.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span>4. Auricular confession. Whether or not of
divine authority. Arguments of Canonists and Schoolmen. Allegorical
argument founded on Judaism. Two answers. Reason why Christ sent the
lepers to the priests.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span>5. Another allegorical argument. Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>6. A third argument from two passages of
Scripture. These passages expounded.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>7. Confession proved not to be of divine
authority. The use of it free for almost twelve hundred years after
Christ. Its nature. When enacted into a law. Confirmation from the
history of the Church. A representation of the ancient auricular
confession still existing among the Papists, to bear judgment against
them. Confession abolished in the Church of Constantinople.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span>8. This mode of confession disapproved by
Chrysostom, as shown by many passages.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span>9. False confession being thus refuted,
the confession enjoined by the word of God is considered. Mistranslation
in the old version. Proof from Scripture that confession should be
directed to God alone.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span>10. Effect of secret confession thus made
to God. Another kind of confession made to men.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span>11. Two forms of the latter
confession—viz. public and private. Public confession either ordinary or
extraordinary. Use of each. Objection to confession and public prayer.
Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span>12. Private confession of two kinds. 1.
On our own account. 2. On account of our neighbor. Use of the former.
Great assistance to be obtained from faithful ministers of the Church.
Mode of procedure. Caution to be used.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>13. The use of the latter recommended by
Christ. What comprehended under it. Scripture sanctions no other method
of confession.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span>14. The power of the keys exercised in
these three kinds of confession. The utility of this power in regard to
public confession and absolution. Caution to be observed.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span>15. Popish errors respecting confession.
1. In enjoining on all the necessity of confessing every sin. 2.
Fictitious keys. 3. Pretended mandate to loose and bind. 4. To whom the
office of loosing and binding committed.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span>16. Refutation of the first error, from
the impossibility of so confessing, as proved by the testimony of David.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p20"></span>17. Refuted farther from the testimony of
conscience. Impossible to observe this most rigid obligation.
Necessarily leads to despair or indifference. Confirmation of the
preceding remarks by an appeal to conscience.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p21"></span>18. Another refutation of the first error
from analogy. Sum of the whole refutation. Third refutation, laying down
the surest rule of confession. Explanation of the rule. Three objections
answered.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p22"></span>19. Fourth objection—viz. that auricular
confession does no harm, and is even useful. Answer, unfolding the
hypocrisy, falsehood, impiety, and monstrous abominations of the patrons
of this error.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p23"></span>20. Refutation of the second error. 1.
Priests not successors of the Apostles. 2. They have not the Holy
Spirit, who alone is arbiter of the keys.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p24"></span>21. Refutation of the third error. 1.
They are ignorant of the command and promise of Christ. By abandoning
the word of God they run into innumerable absurdities.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p25"></span>22. Objection to the refutation of the
third error. Answers, reducing the Papists to various absurdities.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p26"></span>23. Refutation of the fourth error. 1.
Petitio principii. 2. Inversion of ecclesiastical discipline. Three
objections answered.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p27"></span>24. Conclusion of the whole discussion
against this fictitious confession.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p28"></span>25. Of satisfaction, to which the
Sophists assign the third place in repentance. Errors and falsehoods.
These views opposed by the terms,—1. Forgiveness. 2. Free forgiveness.
3. God destroying iniquities. 4. By and on account of Christ. No need of
our satisfaction.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p29"></span>26. Objection, confining the grace and
efficacy of Christ within narrow limits. Answers by both John the
Evangelist and John the Baptist. Consequence of these answers.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p30"></span>27. Two points violated by the fiction of
satisfaction. First, the honor of Christ impaired. Secondly, the
conscience cannot find peace. Objection, confining the forgiveness of
sins to Catechumens, refuted.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p31"></span>28. Objection, founded on the arbitrary
distinction between venial and mortal sins. This distinction insulting
to God and repugnant to Scripture. Answer, showing the true distinction
in regard to venial sin.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p32"></span>29. Objection, founded on a distinction
between guilt and the punishment of it. Answer, illustrated by various
passages of Scripture. Admirable saying of Augustine.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p33"></span>30. Answer, founded on a consideration of
the efficacy of Christ’s death, and the sacrifices under the law. Our
true satisfaction.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p34"></span>31. An objection, perverting six passages
of Scripture. Preliminary observations concerning a twofold judgment on
the part of God. 1. For punishment. 2. For correction.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p35"></span>32. Two distinctions hence arising.
Objection, that God is often angry with his elect. Answer, God in
afflicting his people does not take his mercy from them. This confirmed
by his promise, by Scripture, and the uniform experience of the Church.
Distinction between the reprobate and the elect in regard to punishment.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p36"></span>33. Second distinction. The punishment of
the reprobate a commencement of the eternal punishment awaiting them;
that of the elect designed to bring them to repentance. This confirmed
by passages of Scripture and of the Fathers.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p37"></span>34. Two uses of this doctrine to the
believer. In affliction he can believe that God, though angry, is still
favourable to him. In the punishment of the reprobate, he sees a prelude
to their final doom.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p38"></span>35. Objection, as to the punishment of
David, answered. Why all men here subjected to chastisement.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p39"></span>36. Objections, founded on five other
passages, answered.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p40"></span>37. Answer continued.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p41"></span>38. Objection, founded on passages in the
Fathers. Answer, with passages from Chrysostom and Augustine.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p42"></span>39. These satisfactions had reference to
the peace of the Church, and not to the throne of God. The Schoolmen
have perverted the meaning of some absurd statements by obscure monks.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p43"></span>1. I come now to an examination of what
the scholastic sophists teach concerning repentance. This I will do as
briefly as possible; for I leave no intention to take up every point,
lest this work, which I am desirous to frame as a compendium of
doctrine, should exceed all bounds. They have managed to envelop a
matter, otherwise not much involved, in so many perplexities, that it
will be difficult to find an outlet if once you get plunged but a little
way into their mire. And, first, in giving a definition, they plainly
show they never understood what repentance means. For they fasten on
some expressions in the writings of the Fathers which are very far from
expressing the nature of repentance. For instance, that to *repent* is
to deplore past sins and not commit what is to be deplored. Again that
it is to bewail past evils and not to sin to do what is to be bewailed.
Again, that it is a kind of grieving revenge, punishing in itself what
it grieves to have committed. Again, that it is sorrow of heart and
bitterness of soul for the evils which the individual has committed, or
to which he has consented.32  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)
Supposing we grant that these things were well said by Fathers (though,
if one were inclined to dispute, it were not difficult to deny it), they
were not, however said with the view of describing repentance but only
of exhorting penitents not again to fall into the same faults from which
they had been delivered. But if all descriptions of this kind are to be
converted into definitions, there are others which have as good a title
to be added. For instance, the following sentence of Chrysostom:
“Repentance is a medicine for the cure of sin, a gift bestowed from
above, an admirable virtue, a grace surpassing the power of laws.”
Moreover, the doctrine which they32  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) afterwards deliver is somewhat worse
than their definition. For they are so keenly bent on external
exercises, that all you can gather from immense volumes33  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) is, that repentance is a discipline,
and austerity, which serves partly to subdue the flesh, partly to
chasten and punish sins: of internal renovation of mind, bringing with
it true amendment of life, there is a strange silence.33  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) No doubt, they talk much of contrition
and attrition, torment the soul with many scruples, and involve it in
great trouble and anxiety; but when they seem to have deeply wounded the
heart, they cure all its bitterness by a slight sprinkling of
ceremonies. Repentance thus shrewdly defined, they divide into
contrition of the heart, confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of
works.33  <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) This is not more
logical than the definition, though they would be thought to have spent
their whole lives in framing syllogisms.33  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) But if any one argues from the
definition (a mode of argument prevalent with dialecticians) that a man
may weep over his past sins and not commit things that cause weeping;
may bewail past evils, and not commit things that are to be bewailed;
may punish what he is grieved for having committed, though he does not
confess it with the mouth,—how will they defend their division? For if
he may be a true penitent and not confess, repentance can exist without
confession. If they answer, that this division refers to repentance
regarded as a sacrament, or is to be understood of repentance in its
most perfect form, which they do not comprehend in their definitions,
the mistake does not rest with me: let them blame themselves for not
defining more purely and clearly. When any matter is discussed, I
certainly am dull enough to refer everything to the definition as the
hinge and foundation of the whole discussion. But granting that this is
a license which masters have, let us now survey the different parts in
their order. In omitting as frivolous several things which they vend
with solemn brow as mysteries, I do it not from ignorance. It were not
very difficult to dispose of all those points which they plume
themselves on their acuteness and subtilty in discussing; but I consider
it a sacred duty not to trouble the reader to no purpose with such
absurdities. It is certainly easy to see from the questions which they
move and agitate, and in which they miserably entangle themselves, that
they are pealing of things they know not. Of this nature are the
following: Whether repentance of one sin is pleasing to God, while there
is an obstinate adherence to other sins. Again, whether punishments
divinely indicted are available for satisfaction. Again, whether
repentance can be several times repeated for mortal sins, whereas they
grossly and wickedly define that daily repentance has to do with none
but venial sins. In like manner, with gross error, they greatly torment
themselves with a saying of Jerome, that repentance is a second plank
after shipwreck.33  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) Herein they
show that they have never awoke from brutish stupor, so as to obtain a
distant view of the thousandth part of their sins.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p51"></span>2. I would have my readers to observe,
that the dispute here relates not to a matter of no consequence;33
 <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) but to one of the most
important of all—viz. the forgiveness of sins. For while they require
three things in repentance—viz. compunction of heart, confession of the
mouth, and satisfaction of work33  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) —they at the same time teach that
these are necessary to obtain the pardon of sins. If there is any thing
in the whole compass of religion which it is of importance to us to
know, this certainly is one of the most important—viz. to perceive and
rightly hold by what means, what rule, what terms, with what facility or
difficulty, forgiveness of sins may be obtained. Unless our knowledge
here is clear and certain, our conscience can have no rest at all, no
peace with God, no confidence or security, but is continually trembling,
fluctuating, boiling, and distracted; dreads, hates, and shuns the
presence of God. But if forgiveness of sins depends on the conditions to
which they bind it, nothing can be more wretched and deplorable than our
situation. *Contrition* they represent as the first step in obtaining
pardon; and they exact it as due, that is, full and complete: meanwhile,
they decide not when one may feel secure of having performed this
contrition in due measure. I admit that we are bound strongly and
incessantly to urge every man bitterly to lament his sins, and thereby
stimulate himself more and more to dislike and hate them. For this is
the “repentance to salvation not to be repented of,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p53.1"></span>[2 Cor.
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p53.1"></span>). But when such bitterness of sorrow is
demanded as may correspond to the magnitude of the offense, and be
weighed in the balance with confidence of pardon, miserable consciences
are sadly perplexed and tormented when they see that the contrition due
for sin is laid upon them, and yet that they have no measure of what is
due, so as to enable them to determine that they have made full payment.
If they say, we are to do what in us lies, we are always brought back to
the same point;33  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) for when will
any man venture to promise himself that he has done his utmost in
bewailing sin? Therefore, when consciences, after a lengthened struggle
and long contests with themselves, find no haven in which they may rest,
as a means of alleviating their condition in some degree, they extort
sorrow and wring out tears, in order to perfect their contrition.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p55"></span>3. If they say that this is calumny on my
part, let them come forward and point out a single individual who, by
this doctrine of contrition, has not either been driven to despair, or
has not, instead of true, opposed pretended fear to the justice of God.
We have elsewhere observed, that forgiveness of sins never can be
obtained without repentance, because none but the afflicted, and those
wounded by a consciousness of sins, can sincerely implore the mercy of
God; but we, at the same time, added, that repentance cannot be the
cause of the forgiveness of sins: and we also did away with that torment
of souls—the dogma that it must be performed as due. Our doctrine was,
that the soul looked not to its own compunction or its own tears, but
fixed both eyes on the mercy of God alone. Only we observed, that those
who labour and are heavy laden are called by Christ, seeing he was sent
“to preach good tidings to the meek;” “to bind up the broken-hearted; to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that are bound;” “to comfort all that mourn.”33  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) Hence the Pharisees were excluded,
because, full of their own righteousness, they acknowledged not their
own poverty; and despisers, because, regardless of the divine anger,
they sought no remedy for their wickedness. Such persons neither labour
nor are heavy laden, are not broken-hearted, bound, nor in prison. But
there is a great difference between teaching that forgiveness of sins is
merited by a full and complete contrition (which the sinner never can
give), and instructing him to hunger and thirst after the mercy of God,
that recognizing his wretchedness, his turmoil, weariness, and
captivity, you may show him where he should seek refreshment, rest, and
liberty; in fine, teach him in his humility to give glory to God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p57"></span>4. *Confession* has ever been a subject
of keen contest between the Canonists and the Scholastic Theologians;
the former contending that confession is of divine authority—the latter
insisting, on the contrary, that it is merely enjoined by ecclesiastical
constitution. In this contest great effrontery has been displayed by the
Theologians, who have corrupted and violently wrested every passage of
Scripture they have quoted in their favour.33  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) And when they saw that even thus they
could not gain their object, those who wished to be thought particularly
acute had recourse to the evasion that confession is of divine authority
in regard to the substance, but that it afterwards received its form
from positive enactment. Thus the silliest of these quibblers refer the
citation to divine authority, from its being said, “Adam, where art
thou?” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p58.1"></span>[Gen.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#009),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.v-p58.1"></span>);
and also the exception from Adam having replied as if excepting, “The
women whom thou gavest to be with me,” &c.; but say that the form of
both was appointed by civil law. Let us see by what arguments they prove
that this confession, formed or unformed, is a divine commandment. The
Lord, they say, sent the lepers to the priests (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p58.2"></span>[Mt.
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.v-p58.2"></span>).
What? did he send them to confession? Who ever heard tell that the
Levitical priests were appointed to hear confession? Here they resort to
allegory. The priests were appointed by the Mosaic law to discern
between leper and leper: sin is spiritual leprosy; therefore it belongs
to the priests to decide upon it. Before I answer, I would ask, in
passing, why, if this passage makes them judges of spiritual leprosy,
they claim the cognizance of natural and carnal leprosy? This, for
sooth, is not to play upon Scripture!34  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) The law gives the cognizance of
leprosy to the Levitical priests: let us usurp this to ourselves. Sin is
spiritual leprosy: let us also have cognizance of sin. I now give my
answer: There being a change of the priesthood, there must of necessity
be a change of the law. All the sacerdotal functions were transferred to
Christ, and in him fulfilled and ended (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p59.1"></span>[Heb.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p59.1"></span>). To him alone, therefore, all the rights
and honors of the priesthood have been transferred. If they are so fond
then of hunting out allegories, let them set Christ before them as the
only priest, and place full and universal jurisdiction on his tribunal:
this we will readily admit. Besides, there is an incongruity in their
allegory: it classes a merely civil enactment among ceremonies. Why,
then, does Christ send the lepers to the priests? Lest the priests
should be charged with violating the law, which ordained that the person
cured of leprosy should present himself before the priest, and be
purified by the offering of a sacrifice, he orders the lepers who had
been cleansed to do what the law required. “Go and show thyself to the
priest, and offer for thy cleansing according as Moses commanded for a
testimony unto them.” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p59.2"></span>[Luke
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p59.2"></span>). And assuredly this miracle would be a
testimony to them: they had pronounced them lepers; they now pronounce
them cured. Whether they would or not, they are forced to become
witnesses to the miracles of Christ. Christ allows them to examine the
miracle, and they cannot deny it: yet, as they still quibble, they have
need of a testimony. So it is elsewhere said, “This gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all
nations,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p59.3"></span>[Mt.
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p59.3"></span>). Again, “Ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
Gentiles,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p59.4"></span>[Mt.
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p59.4"></span>); that is, in order that, in the judgment of
Gods they might be more filly convicted. But if they prefer taking the
view of Chrysostom (Hom. 12 de Muliere Cananæa), he shows that this was
done by Christ for the sake of the Jews also, that he might not be
regarded as a violator of the law. But we are ashamed to appeal to the
authority of any man in a matter so clear, when Christ declares that he
left the legal right of the priests entire, as professed enemies of the
Gospel, who were always intent on making a clamour if their mouths were
not stopped. Wherefore, let the Popish priests, in order to retain this
privilege, openly make common cause with those whom it was necessary to
restrain, by forcible means, from speaking evil of Christ.34  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) For there is here no reference to his
true ministers.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p61"></span>5. They draw their second argument from
the same fountain,—I mean allegory; as if allegories were of much avail
in confirming any doctrine. But, indeed, let them avail, if those which
I am able to produce are not more specious than theirs. They say, then,
that the Lord, after raising Lazarus, commanded his disciples to “loose
him and let him go,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p61.1"></span>[John
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p61.1"></span>). Their first statement is untrue: we
nowhere read that the Lord said this to the disciples; and it is much
more probable that he spoke to the Jews who were standing by, that from
there being no suspicion of fraud the miracle might be more manifest,
and his power might be the more conspicuous from his raising the dead
without touching him, by a mere word. In the same way, I understand that
our Lord, to leave no ground of suspicion to the Jews, wished them to
roll back the stone, feel the stench, perceive the sure signs of death,
see him rise by the mere power of a word, and first handle hint when
alive. And this is the view of Chrysostom (Serm. C. Jud. Gent. et
Haeret). But granting that it was said to the disciples, what can they
gain by it? That the Lord gave the apostles the power of loosing? How
much more aptly and dexterously might we allegorize and say, that by
this symbol the Lord designed to teach his followers to loose those whom
he raises up; that is, not to bring to remembrance the sins which he
himself had forgotten, not to condemn as sinners those whom he had
acquitted, not still to upbraid those whom he had pardoned, not to be
stern and severe in punishing, while he himself was merciful and ready
to forgive. Certainly nothing should more incline us to pardon than the
example of the Judge who threatens that he will be inexorable to the
rigid and inhumane. Let them go now and vend their allegories.34  <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p63"></span>6. They now come to closer quarters,
while they support their view by passages of Scripture which they think
clearly in their favour.34  <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)
Those who came to John’s baptism confessed their sins, and James bids us
confess our sins one to another (<span id="iv.iii.v-p64.1"></span>[James
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p64.1"></span>). It is not strange that those who wished to
be baptized confessed their sins. It has already been mentioned, that
John preached the baptism of repentance, baptized with water unto
repentance. Whom then could he baptize, but those who confessed that
they were sinners? Baptism is a symbol of the forgiveness of sins; and
who could be admitted to receive the symbol but sinners acknowledging
themselves as such? They therefore confessed their sins that they might
be baptized. Nor without good reason does James enjoin us to confess our
sins one to another. But if they would attend to what immediately
follows, they would perceive that this gives them little support. The
words are, “Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another.”
He joins together mutual confession and mutual prayer. If, then, we are
to confess to priests only, we are also to pray for them only. What? It
would even follow from the words of James, that priests alone can
confess. In saying that we are to confess mutually, he must be
addressing those only who can hear the confession of others. He says,
“allelous”, *mutually, by turns*, or, if they prefer it, *reciprocally*.
But those only can confess reciprocally who are fit to hear confession.
This being a privilege which they bestow upon priests only, we also
leave them the office of confessing to each other. Have done then with
such frivolous absurdities, and let us receive the true meaning of the
apostle, which is plain and simple; *first*, That we are to deposit our
infirmities in the breasts of each other, with the view of receiving
mutual counsel, sympathy, and comfort; and, *secondly*, That mutually
conscious of the infirmities of our brethren we are to pray to the Lord
for them. Why then quote James against us who so earnestly insist on
acknowledgment of the divine mercy? No man can acknowledge the mercy of
God without previously confessing his own misery. Nay, we pronounce
every man to be anathema who does not confess himself a sinner before
God, before his angels, before the Church; in short, before all men.
“The Scripture has concluded all under sin,” “that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God,” that God alone
may be justified and exalted (<span id="iv.iii.v-p64.2"></span>[Gal.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)<span id="iv.iii.v-p64.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.v-p64.3"></span>[Rom.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span id="iv.iii.v-p64.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.v-p65"></span>7. I wonder at their effrontery in
venturing to maintain that the confession of which they speak is of
divine authority. We admit that the use of it is very ancient; but we
can easily prove that at one time it was free. It certainly appears,
from their own records, that no law or constitution respecting it was
enacted before the days of Innocent III. Surely if there had been a more
ancient law they would have fastened on it, instead of being satisfied
with the decree of the Council of Lateral, and so making themselves
ridiculous even to children. In other matters, they hesitate not to coin
fictitious decrees, which they ascribe to the most ancient Councils,
that they may blind the eyes of the simple by veneration for antiquity.
In this instance it has not occurred to them to practice this deception,
and hence, themselves being witnesses, three centuries have not yet
elapsed since the bridle was put, and the necessity of confession
imposed by Innocent III. And to say nothing of the time, the mere
barbarism of the terms used destroys the authority of the law. For when
these worthy fathers enjoin that every person of *both sexes* (utriusque
sexus) must once a year confess his sins to his own priest, men of wit
humorously object that the precept binds hermaphrodites only, and has no
application to any one who is either a male or a female. A still grosser
absurdity has been displayed by their disciples, who are unable to
explain what is meant by one’s own priest (proprius sacerdos). Let all
the hired ravers of the Pope babble as they may,34  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) we hold that Christ is not the author
of this law, which compels men to enumerate their sins; nay, that twelve
hundred years elapsed after the resurrection of Christ before any such
law was made, and that, consequently, this tyranny was not introduced
until piety and doctrine were extinct, and pretended pastors had usurped
to themselves unbridled license. There is clear evidence in historians,
and other ancient writers, to show that this was a politic discipline
introduced by bishops, not a law enacted by Christ or the Apostles. Out
of many I will produce only one passage, which will be no obscure proof.
Sozomen34  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) relates,34  <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) that this constitution of the bishops
was carefully observed in the Western churches, but especially at Rome;
thus intimating that it was not the universal custom of all churches. He
also says, that one of the presbyters was specially appointed to take
charge of this duty. This abundantly confutes their falsehood as to the
keys being given to the whole priesthood indiscriminately for this
purpose, since the function was not common to all the priests, but
specially belonged to the one priest whom the bishop had appointed to
it. He it was (the same who at present in each of the cathedral churches
has the name of penitentiary) who had cognizance of offenses which were
more heinous, and required to be rebuked for the sake of example. He
afterwards adds, that the same custom existed at Constantinople, until a
certain matron, while pretending to confess, was discovered to have used
it as a cloak to cover her intercourse with a deacon. In consequence of
that crime, Nectarius, the bishop of that church—a man famous for
learning and sanctity—abolished the custom of confessing. Here, then,
let these asses prick up their ears. If auricular confession was a
divine law, how could Nectarius have dared to abolish or remodel it?
Nectarius, a holy man of God, approved by the suffrage of all antiquity,
will they charge with heresy and schism? With the same vote they will
condemn the church of Constantinople, in which Sozomen affirms that the
custom of confessing was not only disguised for a time, but even in his
own memory abolished. Nay, let them charge with defections not only
Constantinople but all the Eastern churches, which (if they say true)
disregarded an inviolable law enjoined on all Christians.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p69"></span>8. This abrogation is clearly attested in
so many passages by Chrysostom, who lived at Constantinople, and was
himself prelate of the church, that it is strange they can venture to
maintain the contrary: “Tell your sins”, says he, “that you may efface
them: if you blush to tell another what sins you have committed, tell
them daily in your soul. I say not, tell them to your fellow-servant who
may upbraid you, but tell them to God who cures them. Confess your sins
upon your bed, that your conscience may there daily recognize its
iniquities.” Again, “Now, however, it is not necessary to confess before
witnesses; let the examination of your faults be made in your own
thought: let the judgment be without a witness: let God alone see you
confessing.” Again, “I do not lead you publicly into the view of your
fellow servants; I do not force you to disclose your sins to men; review
and lay open your conscience before God. Show your wounds to the Lord,
the best of physicians, and seek medicine from him. Show to him who
upbraids not, but cures most kindly.” Again, “Certainly tell it not to
man lest he upbraid you. Nor must you confess to your fellow servant,
who may make it public; but show your wounds to the Lord, who takes care
of you, who is kind and can cure.” He afterwards introduces God speaking
thus: “I oblige you not to come into the midst of a theatre, and have
many witnesses; tell your sins to me alone in private, that I may cure
the ulcer.”34  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) Shall we say that
Chrysostom, in writing these and similar passages, carried his
presumption so far as to free the consciences of men from those chains
with which they are bound by the divine law? By no means; but knowing
that it was not at all prescribed by the word of God, he dares not exact
it as necessary.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p71"></span>9. But that the whole matter may be more
plainly unfolded, we shall first honestly state the nature of confession
as delivered in the word of God, and thereafter subjoin their
inventions—not all of them indeed (who could drink up that boundless
sea?) but those only which contain summary of their secret confession.
Here I am grieved to mention how frequently the old interpreter34  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) has rendered the word *confess*
instead of *praise*, a fact notorious to the most illiterate, were it
not fitting to expose their effrontery in transferring to their
tyrannical edict what was written concerning the praises of God. To
prove that confession has the effect of exhilarating the mind, they
obtrude the passage in the psalm, “with the voice of joy and praise,”
(Vulgate, *confessionis*) (<span id="iv.iii.v-p72.1"></span>[Ps.
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p72.1"></span>). But if such a metamorphosis is valid, any
thing may be made of any thing. But, as they have lost all shame, let
pious readers reflect how, by the just vengeance of God, they have been
given over to a reprobate mind, that their audacity may be the more
detestable. If we are disposed to acquiesce in the simple doctrine of
Scripture, there will be no danger of our being misled by such glosses.
There one method of confessing is prescribed; since it is the Lord who
forgives, forgets and wipes away sins, to him let us confess them, that
we may obtain pardon. He is the physician, therefore let us show our
wounds to him. He is hurt and offended, let us ask peace of him. He is
the discerner of the heart, and knows all one thoughts; let us hasten to
pour out our hearts before him. He it is, in fine, who invites sinners;
let us delay not to draw near to him. “I acknowledge my sin unto thee,”
says David; “and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p72.2"></span>[Ps.
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p72.2"></span>). Another specimen of David’s confessions is
as follows: “Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving
kindness,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p72.3"></span>[Ps.
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p72.3"></span>). The following is Daniel’s confession: “We
have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and
have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and thy judgments,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p72.4"></span>[Dan.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.v-p72.4"></span>).
Other examples every where occur in Scripture: the quotation of them
would almost fill a volume. “If we confess our sins,” says John, “he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p72.5"></span>[1 John
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.v-p72.5"></span>).
To whom are we to confess? to Him surely;—that is, we are to fall down
before him with a grieved and humbled heart, and sincerely accusing and
condemning ourselves, seek forgiveness of his goodness and mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p73"></span>10. He who has adopted this confession
from the heart and as in the presence of God, will doubtless have a
tongue ready to confess whenever there is occasion among men to publish
the mercy of God. He will not be satisfied to whisper the secret of his
heart for once into the ear of one individual, but will often, and
openly, and in the hearing of the whole world, ingenuously make mention
both of his own ignominy, and of the greatness and glory of the Lord. In
this way David, after he was accused by Nathan, being stung in his
conscience, confesses his sin before God and men. “I have sinned unto
the Lord,” says he (<span id="iv.iii.v-p73.1"></span>[2 Sam.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p73.1"></span>); that is, I have now no excuse, no evasion;
all must judge me a sinner; and that which I wished to be secret with
the Lord must also be made manifest to men. Hence the secret confession
which is made to God is followed by voluntary confession to men,
whenever that is conducive to the divine glory or our humiliation. For
this reason the Lord anciently enjoined the people of Israel that they
should repeat the words after the priest, and make public confession of
their iniquities in the temple; because he foresaw that this was a
necessary help to enable each one to form a just idea of himself. And it
is proper that by confession of our misery, we should manifest the mercy
of our God both among ourselves and before the whole world.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p74"></span>11. It is proper that this mode of
confession should both be ordinary in the Church, and also be specially
employed on extraordinary occasions, when the people in common happen to
have fallen into any fault. Of this latter description we have an
example in the solemn confession which the whole people made under the
authority and guidance of Ezra and Nehemiah (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p74.1"></span>[Neh. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.v-p74.1"></span>).
For their long captivity, the destruction of the temple, and suppression
of their religion, having been the common punishment of their defection,
they could not make meet acknowledgment of the blessing of deliverance
without previous confession of their guilt. And it matters not though in
one assembly it may sometimes happen that a few are innocent, seeing
that the members of a languid and sickly body cannot boast of soundness.
Nay, it is scarcely possible that these few have not contracted some
taint, and so bear part of the blame. Therefore, as often as we are
afflicted with pestilence, or war, or famine, or any other calamity
whatsoever, if it is our duty to retake ourselves to mourning, fasting,
and other signs of guiltiness, confession also, on which all the others
depend, is not to be neglected. That ordinary confession which the Lord
has moreover expressly commended, no sober man, who has reflected on its
usefulness, will venture to disapprove. Seeing that in every sacred
assembly we stand in the view of God and angels, in what way should our
service begin but in acknowledging our own unworthiness? But this you
will say is done in every prayer; for as often as we pray for pardon, we
confess our sins. I admit it. But if you consider how great is our
carelessness, or drowsiness, or sloth, you will grant me that it would
be a salutary ordinance if the Christian people were exercised in
humiliation by some formal method of confession. For though the ceremony
which the Lord enjoined on the Israelites belonged to the tutelage of
the Law, yet the thing itself belongs in some respect to us also. And,
indeed, in all well ordered churches, in observance of an useful custom,
the minister, each Lord’s day, frames a formula of confession in his own
name and that of the people, in which he makes a common confession of
iniquity, and supplicates pardon from the Lord. In short, by this key a
door of prayer is opened privately for each, and publicly for all.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p75"></span>12. Two other forms of private confession
are approved by Scripture. The one is made on our own account, and to it
reference is made in the passage in James, “Confess your sins one to
another,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p75.1"></span>[James
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p75.1"></span>); for the meaning is, that by disclosing our
infirmities to each other, we are to obtain the aid of mutual counsel
and consolation. The other is to be made for the sake of our neighbor,
to appease and reconcile him if by our fault he has been in any respect
injured. In the former, although James, by not specifying any particular
individual into whose bosom we are to disburden our feelings, leaves us
the free choice of confessing to any member of the church who may seem
fittest; yet as for the most part pastors are to be supposed better
qualified than others, our choice ought chiefly to fall upon them. And
the ground of preference is, that the Lord, by calling them to the
ministry, points them out as the persons by whose lips we are to be
taught to subdue and correct our sins, and derive consolation from the
hope of pardon. For as the duty of mutual admonition and correction is
committed to all Christians, but is specially enjoined on ministers, so
while we ought all to console each other mutually and confirm each other
in confidence in the divine mercy, we see that ministers, to assure our
consciences of the forgiveness of fins, are appointed to be the
witnesses and sponsors of it, so that they are themselves said to
forgive sins and loose souls (<span id="iv.iii.v-p75.2"></span>[Mt.
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p75.2"></span>; 18:18). When you hear this attributed to
them, reflect that it is for your use. Let every believer, therefore,
remember, that if in private he is so agonized and afflicted by a sense
of his sins that he cannot obtain relief without the aid of others, it
is his duty not to neglect the remedy which God provides for him—viz. to
have recourse for relief to a private confession to his own pastor, and
for consolation privately implore the assistance of him whose business
it is, both in public and private, to solace the people of God with
Gospel doctrine. But we are always to use moderation, lest in a matter
as to which God prescribes no certain rule, our consciences be burdened
with a certain yoke. Hence it follows first, that confession of this
nature ought to be free so as not to be exacted of all, but only
recommended to those who feel that they have need of it; and, secondly,
even those who use it according to their necessity must neither be
compelled by any precept, nor artfully induced to enumerate all their
sins, but only in so far as they shall deem it for their interest, that
they may obtain the full benefit of consolation. Faithful pastors, as
they would both eschew tyranny in their ministry, and superstition in
the people, must not only leave this liberty to churches, but defend and
strenuously vindicate it.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p76"></span>13. Of the second form of confession, our
Savior speaks in Matthew. “If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and
there remember that thy brother has ought against thee; leave there thy
gift before the altar; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p76.1"></span>[Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="iv.iii.v-p76.1"></span>).
Thus love, which has been interrupted by our fault, must be restored by
acknowledging and asking pardon for the fault. Under this head is
included the confession of those who by their sin have given offense to
the whole Church (*supra*, sec. 10). For if Christ attaches so much
importance to the offense of one individual, that he forbids the
sacrifice of all who have sinned in any respect against their brethren,
until by due satisfaction they have regained their favor, how much
greater reason is there that he, who by some evil example has offended
the Church should be reconciled to it by the acknowledgment of his
fault? Thus the member of the Church of Corinth was restored to
communion after he had humbly submitted to correction (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p76.2"></span>[2 Cor.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.v-p76.2"></span>).
This form of confession existed in the ancient Christian Church, as
Cyprian relates: “They practice repentance,” says he, “for a proper
time, then they come to confession, and by the laying on of the hands of
the bishop and clergy, are admitted to communion.” Scripture knows
nothing of any other form or method of confessing, and it belongs not to
us to bind new chains upon consciences which Christ most strictly
prohibits from being brought into bondage. Meanwhile, that the flock
present themselves before the pastor whenever they would partake of the
Holy Supper, I am so far from disapproving, that I am most desirous it
should be everywhere observed. For both those whose conscience is
hindered may thence obtain singular benefit, and those who require
admonition thus afford an opportunity for it; provided always no
countenance is given to tyranny and superstition.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p77"></span>14. The *power of the keys* has place in
the three following modes of confession,—either when the whole Church,
in a formal acknowledgment of its defects,34  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) supplicates pardon; or when a private
individual, who has given public offense by some notable delinquency,
testifies his repentance; or when he who from disquiet of conscience
needs the aid of his minister, acquaints him with his infirmity. With
regard to the reparation of offense, the case is different. For though
in this also provision is made for peace of conscience, yet the
principal object is to suppress hatred, and reunite brethren in the bond
of peace. But the benefit of which I have spoken is by no means to be
despised, that we may the more willingly confess our sins. For when the
whole Church stands as it were at the bar of God, confesses her guilt,
and finds her only refuge in the divine mercy, it is no common or light
solace to have an ambassador of Christ present, invested with the
mandate of reconciliations by whom she may hear her absolution
pronounced. Here the utility of the keys is justly commended when that
embassy is duly discharged with becoming order and reverence. In like
manner, when he who has as it were become an alien from the Church
receives pardon, and is thus restored to brotherly unity, how great is
the benefit of understanding that he is pardoned by those to whom Christ
said, “Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p78.1"></span>[John
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p78.1"></span>). Nor is private absolution of less benefit
or efficacy when asked by those who stand in need of a special remedy
for their infirmity. It not seldom happens, that he who hears general
promises which are intended for the whole congregation of the faithful,
nevertheless remains somewhat in doubts, and is still disquieted in
mind, as if his own remission were not yet obtained. Should this
individual lay open the secret wound of his soul to his pastor, and hear
these words of the Gospel specially addressed to him, “Son, be of good
cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p78.2"></span>[Mt.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p78.2"></span>),35  <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343)
his mind will feel secure, and escape from the trepidation with which it
was previously agitated. But when we treat of the keys, us must always
beware of dreaming of any power apart from the preaching of the Gospel.
This subject will be more fully explained when we come to treat of the
government of the Church (Book 4 chap. 11, 12). There we shall see, that
whatever privilege of binding and loosing Christ has bestowed on his
Church is annexed to the word. This is especially true with regard to
the ministry of the keys, the whole power of which consists in this,
that the grace of the Gospel is publicly and privately sealed on the
minds of believers by means of those whom the Lord has appointed; and
the only method in which this can be done is by preaching.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p80"></span>15. What say the Roman theologians? That
all persons of both sexes,35  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) so
soon as they shall have reached the years of discretion, must, once a
year at least, confess all their sins to their own priest; that the sin
is not discharged unless the resolution to confess has been firmly
conceived; that if this resolution is not carried into effect when an
opportunity offers, there is no entrance into Paradise; that the priest,
moreover has the power of the keys, by which he can loose and bind the
sinner; because the declaration of Christ is not in vain: “Whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p81.1"></span>[Mt.
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p81.1"></span>). Concerning this power, however they wage a
fierce war among themselves. Some say there is only one key
essentially—viz. the power of binding and loosing; that knowledge,
indeed, is requisite for the proper use of it, but only as an accessory,
not as essentially inherent in it. Others seeing that this gave too
unrestrained license, have imagined two keys—viz. discernment and power.
Others, again, seeing that the license of priests was curbed by such
restraint, have forged other keys (*infra*, sec. 21), the authority of
discerning to be used in defining, and the power to carry their
sentences into execution; and to these they add knowledge as a
counselor. This binding and loosing, however, they do not venture to
interpret simply, to forgive and wipe away sins, because they hear the
Lord proclaiming by the prophet, “I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me
there is no savior.” “I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p81.2"></span>[Isa.
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#011),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.v-p81.2"></span>).
But they say it belongs to the priest to declare who are bound or
loosed, and whose sins are remitted or retained; to declare, moreover,
either by confession, when he absolves and retains sins, or by sentence,
when he excommunicates or admits to communion in the Sacraments. Lastly,
perceiving that the knot is not yet untied, because it may always be
objected that persons are often undeservedly bound and loosed, and
therefore not bound or loosed in heaven; as their ultimate resource,
they answer, that the conferring of the keys must be taken with
limitations because Christ has promised that the sentence of the priest,
properly pronounced, will be approved at his judgment-seat according as
the bound or loosed asked what they merited. They say, moreover, that
those keys which are conferred by bishops at ordination were given by
Christ to all priests but that the free use of them is with those only
who discharge ecclesiastical functions; that with priests excommunicated
or suspended the keys themselves indeed remain, but tied and rusty.
Those who speak thus may justly be deemed modest and sober compared with
others, who on a new anvil have forged new keys, by which they say that
the treasury of heaven is locked up: these we shall afterwards consider
in their own place (chap. 5 sec. 2).

<span id="iv.iii.v-p82"></span>16. To each of these views I will briefly
reply. As to their binding the souls of believers by their laws, whether
justly or unjustly, I say nothing at present, as it will be seen at the
proper place; but their enacting it as a law, that all sins are to be
enumerated; their denying that sin is discharged except under the
condition that the resolution to confess has been firmly conceived;
their pretence that there is no admission into Paradise if the
opportunity of confession has been neglected, are things which it is
impossible to bear. Are all sins to be enumerated? But David, who, I
presume, had honestly pondered with himself as to the confession of his
sins, exclaimed, “Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from
secret faults,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p82.1"></span>[Ps.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p82.1"></span>); and in another passage, “Mine iniquities
are gone over my head: as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p82.2"></span>[Ps.
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p82.2"></span>). He knew how deep was the abyss of our
sins, how numerous the forms of wickedness, how many heads the hydra
carried, how long a tail it drew. Therefore, he did not sit down to make
a catalogue, but from the depth of his distress cried unto the Lord, “I
am overwhelmed, and buried, and sore vexed; the gates of hell have
encircled me: let thy right hand deliver me from the abyss into which I
am plunged, and from the death which I am ready to die.” Who can now
think of a computation of his sins when he sees David’s inability to
number his?

<span id="iv.iii.v-p83"></span>17. By this ruinous procedure, the souls
of those who were affected with some sense of God have been most cruelly
racked. First, they retook themselves to calculation, proceeding
according to the formula given by the Schoolmen, and dividing their sins
into boughs, branches, twigs, and leaves; then they weighed the
qualities, quantities, and circumstances; and in this way, for some
time, matters proceeded. But after they had advanced farther, when they
looked around, nought was seen but sea and sky; no road, no harbor. The
longer the space they ran over, a longer still met the eye; nay, lofty
mountains began to rise, and there seemed no hope of escape; none at
least till after long wanderings. They were thus brought to a dead halt,
till at length the only issue was found in despair. Here these cruel
murderers, to ease the wounds which they had made, applied certain
fomentations. Every one was to do his best. But new cares again
disturbed, nay, new torments excruciated their souls. “I have not spent
enough of time; I have not exerted myself sufficiently: many things I
have omitted through negligence: forgetfulness proceeding from want of
care is not excusable.” Then new drugs were supplied to alleviate their
pains. “Repent of your negligence; and provided it is not done supinely,
it will be pardoned.” All these things, however, could not heal the
wound, being not so much alleviations of the sore as poison besmeared
with honey, that its bitterness might not at once offend the taste, but
penetrate to the vitals before it could be detected. The dreadful voice,
therefore, was always heard pealing in their ears, “Confess all your
sins,” and the dread thus occasioned could not be pacified without sure
consolation. Here let my readers consider whether it be possible to take
an account of the actions of a whole year, or even to collect the sins
committed in a single day, seeing every man’s experience convinces him
that at evening, in examining the faults of that single day, memory gets
confused, so great is the number and variety presented. I am not
speaking of dull and heartless hypocrites, who, after animadverting on
three or four of their grosser offenses, think the work finished; but of
the true worshipers of God, who, after they have performed their
examination, feeling themselves overwhelmed, still add the words of
John: “If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knoweth all things,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p83.1"></span>[1 John
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p83.1"></span>); and, therefore, tremble at the thought of
that Judge whose knowledge far surpasses our comprehension.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p84"></span>18. Though a good part of the world
rested in these soothing suggestions, by which this fatal poison was
somewhat tempered, it was not because they thought that God was
satisfied, or they had quite satisfied themselves; it was rather like an
anchor cast out in the middle of the deep, which for a little interrupts
the navigation, or a weary, worn-out traveler, who lies down by the
way.35  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) I give myself no trouble
in proving the truth of this fact. Every one can be his own witness. I
will mention generally what the nature of this law is. First. The
observance of it is simply impossible; and hence its only results to
destroy, condemn, confound, to plunge into ruin and despair. Secondly,
By withdrawing sinners from a true sense of their sins, it makes them
hypocritical, and ignorant both of God and themselves. For, while they
are wholly occupied with the enumeration of their sins, they lose sight
of that lurking hydra, their secret iniquities and internal defilements,
the knowledge of which would have made them sensible of their misery.
But the surest rule of confession is, to acknowledge and confess our
sins to be an abyss so great as to exceed our comprehension. On this
rule we see the confession of the publican was formed, “God be merciful
to me, a sinner,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p85.1"></span>[Luke
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p85.1"></span>); as if he had said, How great, how very
great a sinner, how utterly sinful I am! the extent of my sins I can
neither conceive nor express. Let the depth of thy mercy engulf the
depth of sin! What! you will say, are we not to confess every single
sin? Is no confession acceptable to God but that which is contained in
the words, “I am a sinner”? Nay, our endeavor must rather be, as much as
in us lies, to pour out our whole heart before the Lord. Nor are we only
in one word to confess ourselves sinners, but truly and sincerely
acknowledge ourselves as such; to feel with our whole soul how great and
various the pollutions of our sins are; confessing not only that we are
impure, but what the nature of our impurity is, its magnitude and its
extent; not only that we are debtors, but what the debts are which
burden us, and how they were incurred; not only that we are wounded, but
how numerous and deadly are the wounds. When thus recognizing himself,
the sinner shall have poured out his whole heart before God, let him
seriously and sincerely reflect that a greater number of sins still
remains, and that their recesses are too deep for him thoroughly to
penetrate. Accordingly, let him exclaim with David, “Who can understand
his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p85.2"></span>[Ps.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p85.2"></span>). But when the Schoolmen affirm that sins
are not forgiven, unless the resolution to confess has been firmly
conceived, and that the gate of Paradise is closed on him who has
neglected the opportunity of confessing when offered, far be it from us
to concede this to them. The remission of sins is not different now from
what it has ever been. In all the passages in which we read that sinners
obtained forgiveness from God, we read not that they whispered into the
ear of some priest.35  <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) Indeed,
they could not then confess, as priests were not then confessionaries,
nor did the confessional itself exist. And for many ages afterwards,
this mode of confession, by which sins were forgiven on this condition,
was unheard of: But not to enter into a long discussion, as if the
matter were doubtful, the word of God, which abideth for ever, is plain,
“When the wicked shall turn away from all his sins that he has
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p86.1"></span>[Ezek.
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p86.1"></span>). He who presumes to add to this declaration
binds not sins, but the mercy of God. When they contend that judgment
cannot be given unless the case is known, the answer is easy, that they
usurp the right of judging, being only self-created judges. And it is
strange, how confidently they lay down principles, which no man of sound
mind will admit. They give out, that the office of binding and loosing
has been committed to them, as a kind of jurisdiction annexed to the
right of inquiry. That the jurisdiction was unknown to the Apostles
their whole doctrine proclaims. Nor does it belong to the priest to know
for certainty whether or not a sinner is loosed, but to Him from whom
acquittal is asked; since he who only hears can ever know whether or not
the enumeration is full and complete. Thus there would be no absolution,
without restricting it to the words of him who is to be judged. We may
add, that the whole system of loosing depends on faith and repentance,
two things which no man can know of another, so as to pronounce
sentence. It follows, therefore, that the certainty of binding and
loosing is not subjected to the will of an earthly judge, because the
minister of the word, when he duly executes his office, can only acquit
conditionally, when, for the sake of the sinner, he repeats the words,
“Whose soever sins ye remit;” lest he should doubt of the pardon, which,
by the command and voice of God, is promised to be ratified in heaven.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p87"></span>19. It is not strange, therefore, that we
condemn that auricular confession, as a thing pestilent in its nature,
and in many ways injurious to the Church, and desire to see it
abolished. But if the thing were in itself indifferent, yet, seeing it
is of no use or benefit, and has given occasion to so much impiety,
blasphemy, and error, who does not think that it ought to be immediately
abolished? They enumerate some of its uses, and boast of them as very
beneficial, but they are either fictitious or of no importance. One
thing they specially commend, that the blush of shame in the penitent is
a severe punishment, which makes him more cautious for the future, and
anticipates divine punishment, by his punishing himself. As if a man was
not sufficiently humbled with shame when brought under the cognizance of
God at his supreme tribunal. Admirable proficiency—if we cease to sin
because we are ashamed to make one man acquainted with it, and blush not
at having God as the witness of our evil conscience! The assertion,
however, as to the effect of shame, is most unfounded, for we may every
where see, that there is nothing which gives men greater confidence and
license in sinning than the idea, that after making confession to
priests, they can *wipe their lip, and say, I have not done it*. And not
only do they during the whole year become bolder in sin, but, secure
against confession for the remainder of it, they never sigh after God,
never examine themselves, but continue heaping sins upon sins, until, as
they suppose, they get rid of them all at once. And when they have got
rid of them, they think they are disburdened of their load, and imagine
they have deprived God of the right of judging, by giving it to the
priest; have made God forgetful, by making the priest conscious.
Moreover, who is glad when he sees the day of confession approaching?
Who goes with a cheerful mind to confess, and does not rather, as if he
were dragged to prison with a rope about his neck, go unwillingly, and,
as it were, struggling against it? with the exception, perhaps, of the
priests themselves, who take a fond delight in the mutual narrative of
their own misdeeds, as a kind of merry tales. I will not pollute my page
by retailing the monstrous abominations with which auricular confession
teems; I only say, that if that holy man (Nectarius, of whom supra sec.
7) did not act unadvisedly when for one rumour of whoredom he banished
confession from his church, or rather from the memory of his people, the
innumerable acts of prostitution, adultery, and incest, which it
produces in the present day, warn us of the necessity of abolishing it.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p88"></span>20. As to the pretence of the
confessionaries respecting the power of the keys, and their placing in
it, so to speak, the sum and substance of their kingdom, we must see
what force it ought to have. Were the keys then (they ask), given
without a cause? Was it said without a cause, “Whatsoever ye shall bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven?” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p88.1"></span>[Mt.
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p88.1"></span>). Do we make void the word of Christ? I
answer, that there was a weighty reason for giving the keys, as I lately
explained, and will again show at greater length when I come to treat of
Excommunication (Book 4, cap. 12). But what if I should cut off the
handle for all such questions with one sword—viz. that priests are
neither vicars nor successors of the Apostles? But that also will be
elsewhere considered (Book 4, cap. 6). Now, at the very place where they
are most desirous to fortify themselves, they erect a battering-ram, by
which all their own machinations are overthrown. Christ did not give his
Apostles the power of binding and loosing before he endued them with the
Holy Spirit. I deny, therefore, that any man, who has not previously
received the Holy Spirit, is competent to possess the power of the keys.
I deny that any one can use the keys, unless the Holy Spirit precede,
teaching and dictating what is to be done. They pretend, indeed, that
they have the Holy Spirit, but by their works deny him; unless, indeed,
we are to suppose that the Holy Spirit is some vain thing of no value,
as they certainly do feign, but we will not believe them. With this
engine they are completely overthrown; whatever be the door of which
they boast of having the key, we must always ask, whether they have the
Holy Spirit, who is arbiter and ruler of the keys? If they reply, that
they have, we must again ask, whether the Holy Spirit can err? This they
will not venture to say distinctly, although by their doctrine they
indirectly insinuate it. Therefore, we must infer, that no priestlings
have the power of the keys, because they every where and
indiscriminately loose what the Lord was pleased should be bound, and
bind what he has ordered to be loosed.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p89"></span>21. When they see themselves convicted on
the clearest evidence, of loosing and binding worthy and unworthy
without distinction, they lay claim to power without knowledge. And
although they dare not deny that knowledge is requisite for the proper
use, they still affirm that the power itself has been given to bad
administrators. This, however, is the power, “Whatsoever ye shall bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven.” Either the promise of Christ must be
false, or those who are endued with this power bind and loose properly.
There is no room for the evasion, that the words of Christ are limited,
according to the merits of him who is loosed or bound. We admit, that
none can be bound or loosed but those who are worthy of being bound or
loosed. But the preachers of the Gospel and the Church have the word by
which they can measure this worthiness. By this word preachers of the
Gospel can promise forgiveness of sins to all who are in Christ by
faith, and can declare a sentence of condemnation against all, and upon
all, who do not embrace Christ. In this word the Church declares, that
“neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,” “nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit
the kingdom of God,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p89.1"></span>[1 Cor.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.v-p89.1"></span>).
Such it binds in sure fetters. By the same word it looses and consoles
the penitent. But what kind of power is it which knows not what is to be
bound or loosed? You cannot bind or loose without knowledge. Why, then,
do they say, that they absolve by authority given to them, when
absolution is uncertain? As regards us, this power is merely imaginary,
if it cannot be used. Now, I holds either that there is no use, or one
so uncertain as to be virtually no use at all. For when they confess
that a good part of the priests do not use the keys duly, and that power
without the legitimate use is ineffectual, who is to assure me, that the
one by whom I am loosed is a good dispenser of the keys? But if he is a
bad one, what better has he given me than this nugatory
dispensation,—What is to be bound or loosed in you I know not, since I
have not the proper use of the keys; but if you deserve it, I absolve
you? As much might be done, I say not by a laic (since they would
scarcely listen to such a statement), but by the Turk or the devil. For
it is just to say, I have not the word of God, the sure rule for
loosing, but authority has been given me to absolve you, if you deserve
it. We see, therefore, what their object was, when they defined (see
sec. 16) the keys as authority to discern and power to execute; and
said, that knowledge is added as a counselor, and counsels the proper
use; their object was to reign libidinously and licentiously, without
God and his word.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p90"></span>22. Should any one object, first, that
the lawful ministers of Christ will be no less perplexed in the
discharge of their duty, because the absolution, which depends on faith,
will always be equivocal; and, secondly, that sinners will receive no
comfort at all, or cold comfort, because the minister, who is not a fit
judge of their faith, is not certain of their absolution, we are
prepared with an answer. They say that no sins are remitted by the
priest, but such sins as he is cognizant of; thus, according to them,
remission depends on the judgment of the priest, and unless he
accurately discriminate as to who are worthy of pardon, the whole
procedure is null and void. In short, the power of which they speak is a
jurisdiction annexed to examination, to which pardon and absolution are
restricted. Here no firm footing can be found, nay, there is a profound
abyss; because, where confession is not complete, the hope of pardon
also is defective; next, the priest himself must necessarily remain in
suspense, while he knows not whether the sinner gives a faithful
enumeration of his sins; lastly, such is the rudeness and ignorance of
priests, that the greater part of them are in no respect fitter to
perform this office than a cobbler to cultivate the fields, while almost
all the others have good reason to suspect their own fitness. Hence the
perplexity and doubt as to the Popish absolution, from their choosing to
found it on the person of the priest, and not on his person only, but on
his knowledge, so that he can only judge of what is laid before him
investigated, and ascertained. Now, if any should ask at these good
doctors, whether the sinner is reconciled to God when some sins are
remitted? I know not what answer they could give, unless that they
should be forced to confess, that whatever the priest pronounces with
regard to the remission of sins which have been enumerated to him will
be unavailing, so long as others are not exempted from condemnation. On
the part of the penitent, again, it is hence obvious in what a state of
pernicious anxiety his conscience will be held; because, while he leans
on what they call the discernment of the priest, he cannot come to any
decision from the word of God. From all these absurdities the doctrine
which we deliver is completely free. For absolution is conditional,
allowing the sinner to trust that God is propitious to him, provided he
sincerely seek expiation in the sacrifice of Christ, and accept of the
grace offered to him. Thus, he cannot err who, in the capacity of a
herald, promulgates what has been dictated to him from the word of God.
The sinner, again, can receive a clear and sure absolution when, in
regard to embracing the grace of Christ, the simple condition annexed is
in terms of the general rule of our Master himself,—a rule impiously
spurned by the Papacy,—“According to your faith be it unto you,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p90.1"></span>[Mt.
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p90.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.v-p91"></span>23. The absurd jargon which they make of
the doctrine of Scripture concerning the power of the keys, I have
promised to expose elsewhere; the proper place will be in treating of
the Government of the Church (Book 4, c. 12). Meanwhile, let the reader
remember how absurdly they wrest to auricular and secret confession what
was said by Christ partly of the preaching of the Gospel, and partly of
excommunication. Wherefore, when they object that the power of loosing
was given to the Apostles, and that this power priests exercise by
remitting sins acknowledged to them, it is plain that the principle
which they assume is false and frivolous: for the absolution which is
subordinate to faith is nothing else than an evidence of pardon, derived
from the free promise of the Gospel, while the other absolution, which
depends on the discipline of the Church, has nothing to do with secret
sins; but is more a matter of example for the purpose of removing the
public offense given to the Church. As to their diligence in searching
up and down for passages by which they may prove that it is not
sufficient to confess sins to God alone, or to laymen, unless the priest
take cognizance, it is vile and disgraceful. For when the ancient
fathers advise sinners to disburden themselves to their pastor, we
cannot understand them to refer to a recital which was not then in use.
Then, so unfair are Lombard and others like-minded, that they seem
intentionally to have devoted themselves to spurious books, that they
might use them as a cloak to deceive the simple. They, indeed,
acknowledge truly, that as forgiveness always accompanies repentance, no
obstacle properly remains after the individual is truly penitent, though
he may not have actually confessed; and, therefore, that the priest does
not so much remit sins, as pronounce and declare that they are remitted;
though in the term *declaring*, they insinuate a gross error,
surrogating ceremony35  <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) in place
of doctrine. But in pretending that he who has already obtained pardon
before God is acquitted in the face of the Church, they unseasonably
apply to the special use of every individual, that which we have already
said was designed for common discipline when the offense of a more
heinous and notorious transgression was to be removed. Shortly after
they pervert and destroy their previous moderation, by adding that there
is another mode of remission, namely, by the infliction of penalty and
satisfaction, in which they arrogate to their priests the right of
dividing what God has every where promised to us entire. While He simply
requires repentance and faith, their division or exception is altogether
blasphemous. For it is just as if the priest, assuming the office of
tribune, were to interfere with God,35  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) and try to prevent him from admitting
to his favor by his mere liberality any one who had not previously lain
prostrate at the tribunicial bench, and there been punished.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p94"></span>24. The whole comes to this,35  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) when they wish to make God the author
of this fictitious confession their vanity is proved as I have shown
their falsehood in expounding the few passages which they cite. But
while it is plain, that the law was imposed by men, I say that it is
both tyrannical and insulting to God, who, in binding consciences to his
word, would have them free from human rule. Then when confession is
prescribed as necessary to obtain pardon, which God wished to be free, I
say that the sacrilege is altogether intolerable, because nothing
belongs more peculiarly to God than the forgiveness of sins, in which
our salvation consists. I have, moreover, shown that this tyranny was
introduced when the world was sunk in shameful barbarism.35  <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) Besides, I have proved that the law is
pestiferous, inasmuch as when the fear of God exists, it plunges men
into despair, and when there is security soothing itself with vain
flattery, it blunts it the more. Lastly, I have explained that all the
mitigations which they employ have no other tendency than to entangle,
obscure, and corrupt the pure doctrine, and cloak their iniquities with
deceitful colors.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p97"></span>25. In repentance they assign the third
place to satisfaction, all their absurd talk as to which can be refuted
in one word. They say,35  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) that
it is not sufficient for the penitent to abstain from past sins, and
change his conduct for the better, unless he satisfy God for what he has
done; and that there are many helps by which we may redeem sins, such as
tears, fastings oblations,35  <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352)
and offices of charity; that by them the Lord is to be propitiated; by
them the debts due to divine justice are to be paid; by them our faults
are to be compensated; by them pardon is to be deserved: for though in
the riches of his mercy he has forgiven the guilt, he yet, as a just
discipline, retains the penalty, and that this penalty must be bought
off by satisfaction. The sum of the whole comes to this: that we indeed
obtain pardon of our sins from the mercy of God, but still by the
intervention of the merit of works, by which the evil of our sins is
compensated, and due satisfaction made to divine justice. To such false
views I oppose the free forgiveness of sins, one of the doctrines most
clearly taught in Scripture.36  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353)
First, what is forgiveness but a gift of mere liberality? A creditor is
not said to forgive when he declares by granting a discharge, that the
money has been paid to him; but when, without any payment, through
voluntary kindness, he expunges the debt. And why is the term *gratis*
(free) afterwards added, but to take away all idea of satisfaction? With
what confidence, then, do they still set up their satisfactions, which
are thus struck down as with a thunderbolt? What? When the Lord
proclaims by Isaiah, “I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins,” does
he not plainly declare, that the cause and foundation of forgiveness is
to be sought from his goodness alone? Besides, when the whole of
Scripture bears this testimony to Christ, that through his name the
forgiveness of sins is to be obtained (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p100.5"></span>[Acts
10:43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#043)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p100.5"></span>), does it not plainly exclude all other
names? How then do they teach that it is obtained by the name of
satisfaction? Let them not deny that they attribute this to
satisfactions, though they bring them in as subsidiary aids.36  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) For when Scripture says, *by the name
of Christ*, it means, that we are to bring nothing, pretend nothing of
our own, but lean entirely on the recommendation of Christ. Thus Paul,
after declaring that “God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them,” immediately adds the
reason and the method, “For he has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p101.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p101.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.v-p102"></span>26. But with their usual perverseness,
they maintain that both the forgiveness of sins and reconciliation take
place at once when we are received into the favor of God through Christ
in baptism; that in lapses after baptism we must rise again by means of
satisfactions; that the blood of Christ is of no avail unless in so far
as it is dispensed by the keys of the Church. I speak not of a matter as
to which there can be any doubt; for this impious dogma is declared in
the plainest terms, in the writings not of one or two, but of the whole
Schoolmen. Their master (Sent. Lib. 3, Dist. 9), after acknowledging,
according to the doctrine of Peter, that Christ “bare our sins in his
own body on the tree,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p102.1"></span>[1 Pet.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p102.1"></span>), immediately modifies the doctrine by
introducing the exception, that in baptism all the temporal penalties of
sin are relaxed; but that after baptism they are lessened by means of
repentance, the cross of Christ and our repentance thus co-operating
together. St. John speaks very differently, “If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins.” “I write unto you, little children, because
your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p102.2"></span>[1 John
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p102.2"></span>). He certainly is addressing believers, and
while setting forth Christ as the propitiation for sins, shows them that
there is no other satisfaction by which an offended God can be
propitiated or appeased. He says not: God was once reconciled to you by
Christ; now, seek other methods; but he makes him a perpetual advocate,
who always, by his intercession, reinstates us in his Fathered favour—a
perpetual propitiation by which sins are expiated. For what was said by
another John will ever hold true, “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sins of the world,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p102.3"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p102.3"></span>). He, I say, took them away, and no other;
that is, since he alone is the Lamb of God, he alone is the offering for
our sins; he alone is expiation; he alone is satisfaction. For though
the right and power of pardoning properly belongs to the Father, when he
is distinguished from the Son, as has already been seen, Christ is here
exhibited in another view, as transferring to himself the punishment due
to us, and wiping away our guilt in the sight of God. Whence it follows
that we could not be partakers of the expiation accomplished by Christ,
were he not possessed of that honor of which those who try to appease
God by their compensations seek to rob him.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p103"></span>27. Here it is necessary to keep two
things in view: that the honor of Christ be preserved entire and
unimpaired, and that the conscience, assured of the pardon of sin, may
have peace with God. Isaiah says that the Farther “has laid on him the
iniquity of us all;” that “with his stripes we are healed,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p103.1"></span>[Isa.
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.v-p103.1"></span>).
Peter repeating the same thing, in other words says, that he “bare our
sins in his own body on the tree,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p103.2"></span>[1
Pet. 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p103.2"></span>). Paul’s words are, “God sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh,” “being made a curse for us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p103.3"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.v-p103.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.v-p103.4"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p103.4"></span>); in other words, the power and curse of
sin was destroyed in his flesh when he was offered as a sacrifice, on
which the whole weight of our sins was laid, with their curse and
execration, with the fearful judgment of God, and condemnation to death.
Here there is no mention of the vain dogma, that after the initial
cleansing no man experiences the efficacy of Christ’s passion in any
other way than by means of satisfying penance: we are directed to the
satisfaction of Christ alone for every fall. Now call to mind their
pestilential dogma: that the grace of God is effective only in the first
forgiveness of sins; but if we afterwards fall, our works co-operate in
obtaining the second pardon. If these things are so, do the properties
above attributed to Christ remain entire? How immense the difference
between the two propositions—that our iniquities were laid upon Christ,
that in his own person he might expiate them, and that they are expiated
by our works; that Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and that God
is to be propitiated by works. Then, in regard to pacifying the
conscience, what pacification will it be to be told that sins are
redeemed by satisfactions? How will it be able to ascertain the measure
of satisfaction? It will always doubt whether God is propitious; will
always fluctuate, always tremble. Those who rest satisfied with petty
satisfactions form too contemptible an estimate of the justice of God,
and little consider the grievous heinousness of sin, as shall afterwards
be shown. Even were we to grant that they can buy off some sins by due
satisfaction, still what will they do while they are overwhelmed with so
many sins that not even a hundred lives, though wholly devoted to the
purpose, could suffice to satisfy for them? We may add, that all the
passages in which the forgiveness of sins is declared refer not only to
catechumens,36  <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) but to the
regenerate children of God; to those who have long been nursed in the
bosom of the Church. That embassy which Paul so highly extols, “we pray
you in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p104.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p104.1"></span>), is not directed to strangers, but to
those who had been regenerated long before. Setting satisfactions
altogether aside, he directs us to the cross of Christ. Thus when he
writes to the Colossians that Christ had “made peace through the blood
of his cross,” “to reconcile all things unto himself,” he does not
restrict it to the moment at which we are received into the Church but
extends it to our whole course. This is plain from the context, where he
says that in him “we have redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p104.2"></span>[Col.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p104.2"></span>). It is needless to collect more passages,
as they are ever occurring.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p105"></span>28. Here they take refuge in the absurd
distinction that some sins are *venial* and others *mortal*; that for
the latter a weighty satisfaction is due, but that the former are purged
by easier remedies; by the Lord’s Prayer, the sprinkling of holy water,
and the absolution of the Mass. Thus they insult and trifle with God.36
 <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) And yet, though they have the
terms venial and mortal sin continually in their mouth, they have not
yet been able to distinguish the one from the other, except by making
impiety and impurity of heart36  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357)
to be venial sin. We, on the contrary, taught by the Scripture standard
of righteousness and unrighteousness, declare that “the wages of sin is
death;” and that “the soul that sinneth, it shall die,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p107.1"></span>[Rom.
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p107.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p107.2"></span>[Ezek.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p107.2"></span>). The sins of believers are venial, not
because they do not merit death, but because by the mercy of God there
is “now no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus” their sin
being not imputed, but effaced by pardon. I know how unjustly they
calumniate this our doctrine; for they say it is the paradox of the
Stoics concerning the equality of sins: but we shall easily convict them
out of their own mouths. I ask them whether, among those sins which they
hold to be mortal, they acknowledge a greater and a less? If so, it
cannot follow, as a matter of course, that all sins which are mortal are
equal. Since Scripture declares that the wages of sin is death,—that
obedience to the law is the way to life,—the transgression of it the way
to death,—they cannot evade this conclusion. In such a mass of sins,
therefore, how will they find an end to their satisfactions? If the
satisfaction for one sin requires one day, while preparing it they
involve themselves in more sins; since no man, however righteous, passes
one day without falling repeatedly. While they prepare themselves for
their satisfactions, number, or rather numbers without number, will be
added.36  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) Confidence in
satisfaction being thus destroyed, what more would they have? How do
they still dare to think of satisfying?

<span id="iv.iii.v-p109"></span>29. They endeavor, indeed, to
disentangle themselves, but it is impossible. They pretend a distinction
between penalty and guilt, holding that the guilt is forgiven by the
mercy of God; but that though the guilt is remitted, the punishment
which divine justice requires to be paid remains. Satisfactions then
properly relate to the remission of the penalty. How ridiculous this
levity! They now confess that the remission of guilt is gratuitous; and
yet they are ever and anon telling as to merit it by prayers and tears,
and other preparations of every kind. Still the whole doctrine of
Scripture regarding the remission of sins is diametrically opposed to
that distinction. But although I think I have already done more than
enough to establish this, I will subjoin some other passages, by which
these slippery snakes will be so caught as to be afterwards unable to
writhe even the tip of their tail: “Behold, the days come, saith the
Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah.” “I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember
their sin no more,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p109.1"></span>[Jer.
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p109.1"></span>). What this means we learn from another
Prophet, when the Lord says, “When the righteous turneth away from his
righteousness” “all his righteousness that he has done shall not be
mentioned.” “Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness
that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall
save his soul alive,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p109.2"></span>[Ezek.
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#024),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p109.2"></span>). When he declares that he will not
remember righteousness, the meaning is, that he will take no account of
it to reward it. In the same way, not to remember sins is not to bring
them to punishment. The same thing is denoted in other passages,36
 <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) by casting them behind his
back, blotting them out as a cloud, casting them into the depths of the
sea, not imputing them, hiding them. By such forms of expression the
Holy Spirit has explained his meaning not obscurely, if we would lend a
willing ear. Certainly if God punishes sins, he imputes them; if he
avenges, he remembers; if he brings them to judgment, he has not hid
them; if he examines, he has not cast them behind his back; if he
investigates, he has not blotted them out like a cloud; if he exposes
them, he has not thrown them into the depths of the sea. In this way
Augustine clearly interprets: “If God has covered sins, he willed not to
advert to them; if he willed not to advert, he willed not to animadvert;
if he willed not to animadvert, he willed not to punish: he willed not
to take knowledge of them, he rather willed to pardon them. Why then did
he say that sins were hid? Just that they might not be seen. What is
meant by God seeing sins but punishing them?” (August. in <span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.3"></span>[Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.3"></span>). But let us hear from another prophetical
passage on what terms the Lord forgives sins: “Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson,
they shall be as wool,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p110.4"></span>[Isa.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.4"></span>). In Jeremiah again we read: “In those
days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, they shall
not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.5"></span>[Jer.
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.5"></span>). Would you briefly comprehend the meaning
of these words? Consider what, on the contrary, is meant by these
expressions, “that transgression is sealed up in a bag;” “that the
iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid;” that “the sin of Judah
is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond.”36
 <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) If they mean, as they certainly
do, that vengeance will be recompensed, there can be no doubt that, by
the contrary passages, the Lord declares that he renounces all thought
of vengeance. Here I must entreat the reader not to listen to any
glosses of mine, but only to give some deference to the word of God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p112"></span>30. What, pray, did Christ perform for
us if the punishment of sin is still exacted? For when we say that he
“bare our sins in his own body on the tree,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p112.1"></span>[1 Pet.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p112.1"></span>), all we mean is, that he endured the
penalty and punishment which was due to our sins. This is more
significantly declared by Isaiah, when he says that the “chastisement
(or correction) of our peace was upon him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p112.2"></span>[Isaiah
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p112.2"></span>). But what is the correction of our peace,
unless it be the punishment due to our sins, and to be paid by us before
we could be reconciled to God, had he not become our substitute? Thus
you clearly see that Christ bore the punishment of sin that he might
thereby exempt his people from it. And whenever Paul makes mention of
the redemption procured by him,36  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) he calls it ἀπολύτροσις, by which he
does not simply mean *redemption*, as it is commonly understood, but the
very *price* and satisfaction of redemption.36  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) For which reason, he also says, that
Christ gave himself an ἀντίλυτρον (ransom) for us. “What is propitiation
with the Lord (says Augustine) but sacrifice? And what is sacrifice but
that which was offered for us in the death of Christ?” But we have our
strongest argument in the injunctions of the Mosaic Law as to expiating
the guilt of sin. The Lord does not there appoint this or that method of
satisfying, but requires the whole compensation to be made by sacrifice,
though he at the same time enumerates all the rites of expiation with
the greatest care and exactness. How comes it that he does not at all
enjoin works as the means of procuring pardon, but only requires
sacrifices for expiation, unless it were his purpose thus to testify
that this is the only kind of satisfaction by which his justice is
appeased? For the sacrifices which the Israelites then offered were not
regarded as human works, but were estimated by their anti type, that is,
the sole sacrifice of Christ. The kind of compensation which the Lord
receives from us is elegantly and briefly expressed by Hosea: “Take with
you words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously,” here is remission: “so will we render the
calves of our lips,” here is satisfaction (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p114.1"></span>[Hos.
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p114.1"></span>). I know that they have still a more
subtile evasion,37  <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) by making a
distinction between eternal and temporal punishment; but as they define
temporal punishment to be any kind of infliction with which God visits
either the body or the soul, eternal death only excepted, this
restriction avails them little. The passages which we have quoted above
say expressly that the terms on which God receives us into favor are
these—viz. he remits all the punishment which we deserved by pardoning
our guilt. And whenever David or the other prophets ask pardon for their
sins, they deprecate punishment. Nay, a sense of the divine justice
impels them to this. On the other hand, when they promise mercy from the
Lord, they almost always discourse of punishments and the forgiveness of
them. Assuredly, when the Lord declares in Ezekiel, that he will put an
end to the Babylonish captivity, not “for your sakes, O house of Israel,
but for mine holy name’s sake,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p115.1"></span>[Ezek.
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p115.1"></span>), he sufficiently demonstrates that both
are gratuitous. In short, if we are freed from guilt by Christ, the
punishment consequent upon guilt must cease with it.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p116"></span>31. But since they also arm themselves
with passages of Scripture, let us see what the arguments are which they
employ. David, they say, when upbraided by Nathan the Prophet for
adultery and murder, receives pardon of the sin, and yet by the death of
the son born of adultery is afterwards punished (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.1"></span>[2 Sam.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.1"></span>). Such punishments which were to be
inflicted after the remission of the guilt, we are taught to ransom by
satisfactions. For Daniel exhorted Nebuchadnezzar: “Break off thy sins
by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p116.2"></span>[Dan.
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.2"></span>). And Solomon says, “by mercy and truth
iniquity is purged” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p116.3"></span>[Prov.
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.3"></span>); and again, “love covereth all sins,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p116.4"></span>[Prov.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.4"></span>). This sentiment is confirmed by Peter
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p116.5"></span>[1 Pet.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.5"></span>). Also in Luke, our Lord says of the woman
that was a sinner, “Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she
loved much,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p116.6"></span>[Luke
7:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.6"></span>). How perverse and preposterous the
judgment they ever form of the doings of God!37  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) Had they observed, what certainly they
ought not to have overlooked, that there are two kinds of divine
judgment, they would have seen in the correction of David a very
different form of punishment from that which must be thought designed
for vengeance. But since it in no slight degree concerns us to
understand the purpose of God in the chastisements by which he
animadverts upon our sins and how much they differ from the exemplary
punishments which he indignantly inflicts on the wicked and reprobate, I
think it will not be improper briefly to glance at it. For the sake of
distinction, we may call the one kind of judgment *punishment*, the
other *chastisement*. In judicial punishment, God is to be understood as
taking vengeance on his enemies, by displaying his anger against them,
confounding, scattering, and annihilating them. By divine punishment,
properly so called, let us then understand punishment accompanied with
indignation. In judicial chastisement, he is offended, but not in wrath;
he does not punish by destroying or striking down as with a thunderbolt.
Hence it is not properly punishment or vengeance, but correction and
admonition. The one is the act of a judge, the other of a father. When
the judge punishes a criminal, he animadverts upon the crime, and
demands the penalty. When a father corrects his son sharply, it is not
to mulct or avenge, but rather to teach him, and make him more cautious
for the future. Chrysostom in his writings employs a simile which is
somewhat different, but the same in purport. He says, “A son is whipt,
and a slave is whipt, but the latter is punished as a slave for his
offense: the former is chastised as a free-born son, standing in need of
correction.” The correction of the latter is designed to prove and amend
him; that of the former is scourging and punishment.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p118"></span>32. To have a short and clear view of
the whole matter, we must make two distinctions. First, whenever the
infliction is designed to avenge, then the curse and wrath of God
displays itself. This is never the case with believers. On the contrary,
the chastening of God carries his blessing with it, and is an evidence
of love, as Scripture teaches.37  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) This distinction is plainly marked
throughout the word of God. All the calamities which the wicked suffer
in the present life are depicted to us as a kind of anticipation of the
punishment of hell. In these they already see, as from a distance, their
eternal condemnation; and so far are they from being thereby reformed,
or deriving any benefit, that by such preludes they are rather prepared
for the fearful doom which finally awaits them. The Lord chastens his
servants sore, but does not give them over unto death (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.4"></span>[Ps.
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.4"></span>). When afflicted, they acknowledge it is
good for them, that they may learn his statutes (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.5"></span>[Ps.
119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.5"></span>). But as we everywhere read that the saints
received their chastisements with placid mind, so inflictions of the
latter kind they always most earnestly deprecated. “O Lord, correct me,”
says Jeremiah, “but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring
me to nothing. Pour out thy furry upon the heathen that know thee not,
and upon the families that call not on thy name,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.6"></span>[Jer.
10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.6"></span>). David says “O Lord, rebuke me not in
thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.7"></span>[Ps.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.7"></span>). There is nothing inconsistent with this
in its being repeatedly said, that the Lord is angry with his saints
when he chastens them for their sins (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.8"></span>[Ps.
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.8"></span>). In like manner, in Isaiah, “And in that
day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou west angry
with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.9"></span>[Isa.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.9"></span>). Likewise in Habakkuk, “In wrath remember
mercy,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p119.10"></span>[Hab.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.10"></span>); and in Micah, “I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.11"></span>[Mic.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.11"></span>). Here we are reminded not only that those
who are justly punished gain nothing by murmuring, but that believers
obtain a mitigation of their pain by reflecting on the divine intention.
For the same reason, he is said to profane his inheritance; and yet we
know that he will never profane it. The expression refers not to the
counsel or purpose of God in punishing, but to the keen sense of pain,
endured by those who are visited with any measure of divine severity.
For the Lord not only chastens his people with a slight degree of
austerity, but sometimes so wounds them, that they seem to themselves on
the very eve of perdition. He thus declares that they have deserved his
anger, and it is fitting so to do, that they may be dissatisfied with
themselves for their sins, may be more careful in their desires to
appease God, and anxiously hasten to seek his pardon; still, at this
very time, he gives clearer evidence of his mercy than of his anger. For
He who cannot deceive has declared, that the covenant made with us in
our true Solomon37  <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) stands fast
and will never be broken, “If his children forsake my law, and walk not
in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments; then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and
their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving-kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.1"></span>[Ps.
89:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.1"></span>). To assure us of this mercy, he says, that
the *rod* with which he will chastise the posterity of Solomon will be
the “rod of men,” and “the stripes of the children of men,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.2"></span>[2 Sam.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.2"></span>). While by these terms he denotes
moderation and levity, he, at the same time, intimates, that those who
feel the hand of God opposed to them cannot but tremble and be
confounded. How much regard he has to this levity in chastening his
Israel he shows by the Prophet, “Behold, I have refined thee, but not
with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.3"></span>[Isa.
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.3"></span>). Although he tells them that they are
chastisements with a view to purification, he adds, that even these are
so tempered, that they are not to be too much crushed by them. And this
is very necessary, for the more a man reveres God, and devotes himself
to the cultivation of piety, the more tender he is in bearing his anger
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p120.4"></span>[Ps.
90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.4"></span>; and ibid. Calv). The reprobate, though
they groan under the lash,37  <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367)
yet because they weigh not the true cause, but rather turn their back,
as well upon their sins as upon the divine judgment, become hardened in
their stupor; or, because they murmur and kick, and so rebel against
their judge, their infatuated violence fills them with frenzy and
madness. Believers, again, admonished by the rod of God, immediately
begin to reflect on their sins, and, struck with fear and dread, retake
themselves as suppliants to implore mercy. Did not God mitigate the
pains by which wretched souls are excruciated, they would give way a
hundred times, even at slight signs of his anger.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p122"></span>33. The second distinction is, that when
the reprobate are brought under the lash of God, they begin in a manner
to pay the punishment due to his justice; and though their refusal to
listen to these proofs of the divine anger will not escape with
impunity, still they are not punished with the view of bringing them to
a better mind, but only to teach them by dire experience that God is a
judge and avenger. The sons of God are beaten with rods, not that they
may pay the punishment due to their faults, but that they may thereby be
led to repent. Accordingly, we perceive that they have more respect to
the future than to the past. I prefer giving this in the words of
Chrysostom rather than my own: “His object in imposing a penalty upon
us, is not to inflict punishment on our sins but to correct us for the
future,” (Chrysost. Serm. de Pœnit. et Confess). So also Augustine, “The
suffering at which you cry, is medicine, not punishment; chastisement,
not condemnation. Do not drive away the rod, if you would not be driven
away from the inheritance. Know, brethren, that the whole of that misery
of the human race, under which the world groans, is a medicinal pain,
not a penal sentence,” (August. in <span
id="iv.iii.v-p122.1"></span>[Psal.
102](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.v-p122.1"></span>,
circa finem). It seemed proper to quote these passages, lest any one
should think the mode of expression which I have used to be novel or
uncommon. To the same effect are the indignant terms in which the Lord
expostulates with his people, for their ingratitude in obstinately
despising all his inflictions. In Isaiah he says, “Why should ye be
stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more. The whole head is sick
and the whole heart faint,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p122.2"></span>[Isa.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.v-p122.2"></span>).
But as such passages abound in the Prophets, it is sufficient briefly to
have shown, that the only purpose of God in punishing his Church is to
subdue her to repentance. Thus, when he rejected Saul from the kingdoms
he punished in vengeance (<span id="iv.iii.v-p122.3"></span>[1 Sam.
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p122.3"></span>); when he deprived David of his child, he
chastised for amendment (<span id="iv.iii.v-p122.4"></span>[2 Sam.
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p122.4"></span>). In this sense Paul is to be understood
when he says, “When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p122.5"></span>[1 Cor.
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p122.5"></span>); that is, while we as sons of God are
afflicted by our heavenly Father’s hand, it is not punishment to
confound, but only chastisement to train us. On this subject Augustine
is plainly with us (De Peccator. Meritis ac Remiss. Lib. 2 cap. 33, 34).
For he shows that the punishments with which men are equally chastened
by God are to be variously considered; because the saints after the
forgiveness of their sins have struggles and exercises, the reprobate
without forgiveness are punished for their iniquity. Enumerating the
punishments inflicted on David and other saints, he says, it was
designed, by thus humbling them, to prove and exercise their piety. The
passage in Isaiah, in which it is said, “Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished that her
iniquity is pardoned; for she has received of the Lord’s hands double
for all her sins,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p122.6"></span>[Isa.
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p122.6"></span>), proves not that the pardon of sin depends
on freedom from punishment. It is just as if he had said, Sufficient
punishment has now been exacted; as for their number and heinousness you
have long been oppressed with sorrow and mourning, it is time to send
you a message of complete mercy, that your minds may be filled with joy
on feeling me to be a Father. For God there assumes the character of a
father who repents even of the just severity which he has been compelled
to us, towards his son.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p123"></span>34. These are the thoughts with which
the believer ought to be provided in the bitterness of affliction, “The
time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God,” “the city
which is called by my name,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p123.1"></span>[1 Pet.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p123.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p123.2"></span>[Jer.
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p123.2"></span>). What could the sons of God do, if they
thought that the severity which they feel was vengeance? He who, smitten
by the hand of God, thinks that God is a judge inflicting punishment,
cannot conceive of him except as angry and at enmity with him; cannot
but detest the rod of God as curse and condemnation; in short, Can never
persuade himself that he is loved by God, while he feels that he is
still disposed to inflict punishment upon him. He only profits under the
divine chastening who considers that God, though offended with his sins,
is still propitious and favorable to him. Otherwise, the feeling must
necessarily be what the Psalmist complains that he had experienced, “Thy
wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy
waves.” Also what Moses says, “For we are consumed by thine anger, and
by thy wrath we are troubled. Thou hast set our iniquities before thee,
our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. For all our days are
passed away in thy wrath; we spend our years as a tale that is told,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p123.3"></span>[Ps.
90:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p123.3"></span>). On the other hand, David speaking of
fatherly chastisements, to show how believers are more assisted than
oppressed by them, thus sings “Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest,
O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law; that thou mayest give him rest
from the days of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p123.4"></span>[Ps.
94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p123.4"></span>). It is certainly a sore temptation, when
God, sparing unbelievers and overlooking their crimes, appears more
rigid towards his own people. Hence, to solace them, he adds the
admonition of the law which teaches them, that their salvation is
consulted when they are brought back to the right path, whereas the
wicked are borne headlong in their errors, which ultimately lead to the
pit. It matters not whether the punishment is eternal or temporary. For
disease, pestilence, famine, and war, are curses from God, as much as
even the sentence of eternal death, whenever their tendency is to
operate as instruments of divine wrath and vengeance against the
reprobate.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p124"></span>35. All, if I mistake not, now see what
view the Lord had in chastening David, namely, to prove that murder and
adultery are most offensive to God, and to manifest this offensiveness
in a beloved and faithful servant, that David himself might be taught
never again to dare to commit such wickedness; still, however, it was
not a punishment designed in payment of a kind of compensation to God.
In the same way are we to judge of that other correction, in which the
Lord subjects his people to a grievous pestilence, for the disobedience
of David in forgetting himself so far as to number the people. He indeed
freely forgave David the guilt of his sin; but because it was necessary,
both as a public example to all ages and also to humble David himself,
not to allow such an offense to go unpunished, he chastened him most
sharply with his whip. We ought also to keep this in view in the
universal curse of the human race. For since after obtaining grace we
still continue to endure the miseries denounced to our first parent as
the penalty of transgression, we ought thereby to be reminded, how
offensive to God is the transgression of his law, that thus humbled and
dejected by a consciousness of our wretched condition, we may aspire
more ardently to true happiness. But it were most foolish in any one to
imagine, that we are subjected to the calamities of the present life for
the guilt of sin. This seems to me to have been Chrysostom’s meaning
when he said, “If the purpose of God in inflicting punishment is to
bring those persisting in evil to repentance, when repentance is
manifested punishment would be superfluous,” (Chrysos. Homily. 3 de
Provid.). Wherefore, as he knows what the disposition of each requires,
he treats one with greater harshness and another with more indulgence.
Accordingly, when he wishes to show that he is not excessive in exacting
punishment, he upbraids a hard hearted and obstinate people, because,
after being smitten, they still continued in sin (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.1"></span>[Jer.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.1"></span>). In the same sense he complains, that
“Ephraim is a cake not turned” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p124.2"></span>[Hos.
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.2"></span>), because chastisement did not make a due
impression on their minds, and, correcting their vices, make them fit to
receive pardon. Surely he who thus speaks shows, that as soon as any one
repents he will be ready to receive him, and that the rigor which he
exercises in chastising faults is wrung from him by our perverseness,
since we should prevent him by a voluntary correction. Such, however,
being the hardness and rudeness of all hearts, that they stand
universally in need of castigation, our infinitely wise Parent has seen
it meet to exercise all without exception, during their whole lives,
with chastisement. It is strange how they fix their eyes so intently on
the one example of David, and are not moved by the many examples in
which they might have beheld the free forgiveness of sins. The publican
is said to have gone down from the temple justified (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.3"></span>[Luke
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.3"></span>); no punishment follows. Peter obtained the
pardon of his sin (<span id="iv.iii.v-p124.4"></span>[Luke
22:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.4"></span>). “We read of his tears,” says Ambrose
(Serm. 46, De Poenit. Petri), “we read not of satisfaction.” To the
paralytic it is said, “Son, be of good cheer; thy sina be forgiven
thee,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p124.5"></span>[Mt.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p124.5"></span>); no penance is enjoined. All the acts of
forgiveness mentioned in Scripture are gratuitous. The rule ought to be
drawn from these numerous examples, rather than from one example which
contains a kind of specialty.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p125"></span>36. Daniel, in exhorting Nebuchadnezzar
to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor (<span id="iv.iii.v-p125.1"></span>[Dan.
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p125.1"></span>), meant not to intimate, that righteousness
and mercy are able to propitiate God and redeem from punishment (far be
it from us to suppose that there ever was any other ἀπολύτροσις
(*ransom*) than the blood of Christ); but the breaking off referred to
in that passage has reference to man rather than to God: as if he had
said, O king, you have exercised an unjust and violent domination, you
have oppressed the humble, spoiled the poor, treated your people harshly
and unjustly; instead of unjust exaction, instead of violence and
oppression, now practice mercy and justice. In like manner, Solomon
says, that love covers a multitude of sins; not, however, with God, but
among men. For the whole verse stands thus, “Hatred stirreth up strifes;
but love covereth all sins,” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p125.2"></span>[Prov.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p125.2"></span>). Here, after his manner, he contrasts the
evils produced by hatred with the fruits of charity, in this sense,
Those who hate are incessantly biting, carping at, upbraiding,
lacerating each other, making every thing a fault; but those who love
mutually conceal each other’s faults, wink at many, forgive many: not
that the one approves the vices of the other, but tolerates and cures by
admonishing, rather than exasperates by assailing. That the passage is
quoted by Peter (<span id="iv.iii.v-p125.3"></span>[1 Pet.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.v-p125.3"></span>)
in the same sense we cannot doubt, unless we would charge him with
corrupting or craftily wresting Scripture. When it is said, that “by
mercy and truth iniquity is purged,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p125.4"></span>[Prov.
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p125.4"></span>), the meaning is, not that by them
compensation is made to the Lord, so that he being thus satisfied remits
the punishment which he would otherwise have exacted; but intimation is
made after the familiar manner of Scripture, that those who, forsaking
their vices and iniquities turn to the Lord in truth and piety, will
find him propitious: as if he had said, that the wrath of God is calmed,
and his judgment is at rest, whenever we rest from our wickedness. But,
indeed, it is not the cause of pardon that is described, but rather the
mode of true conversion; just as the Prophets frequently declare, that
it is in vain for hypocrites to offer God fictitious rites instead of
repentance, seeing his delight is in integrity and the duties of
charity.37  <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) In like manner,
also, the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, commending kindness and
humanity, reminds us, that “with such sacrifices God is well pleased,”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p126.1"></span>[Heb.
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p126.1"></span>). And indeed when Christ, rebuking the
Pharisees because, intent merely on the outside of the cup and platter,
they neglected purity of heart, enjoins them, in order that they may be
clean in all respects, to give alms, does he exhort them to give
satisfaction thereby? He only tells them what the kind of purity is
which God requires. Of this mode of expression we have treated elsewhere
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p126.2"></span>[Mt.
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p126.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p126.3"></span>[Luke
11:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p126.3"></span>; see Calv. In Harm. Evang).

<span id="iv.iii.v-p127"></span>37. In regard to the passage in Luke
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p127.1"></span>[Luke
7:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p127.1"></span>, sq). no man of sober judgment, who reads
the parable there employed by our Lord, will raise any controversy with
us. The Pharisee thought that the Lord did not know the character of the
woman whom he had so easily admitted to his presence. For he presumed
that he would not have admitted her if he had known what kind of a
sinner she was; and from this he inferred, that one who could be
deceived in this way was not a prophet. Our Lord, to show that she was
not a sinner, inasmuch as she had already been forgiven, spake this
parable: “There was a certain creditor which had two debtors; the one
owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when they had nothing
to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me, therefore, which of them
will love him most?” The Pharisee answers: “I suppose that he to whom he
forgave most.” Then our Savior rejoins: “Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much.” By these words it is plain he does not
make love the cause of forgiveness, but the proof of it. The similitude
is borrowed from the case of a debtor, to whom a debt of five hundred
pence had been forgiven. It is not said that the debt is forgiven
because he loved much, but that he loved much because it was forgiven.
The similitude ought to be applied in this way: You think this woman is
a sinner; but you ought to have acknowledged her as not a sinner, in
respect that her sins have been forgiven her. Her love ought to have
been to you a proof of her having obtained forgiveness, that love being
an expression of gratitude for the benefit received. It is an argument a
*posteriori*, by which something is demonstrated by the results produced
by it. Our Lord plainly attests the ground on which she had obtained
forgiveness, when he says, “Thy faith has saved thee.” By faith,
therefore, we obtain forgiveness: by love we give thanks, and bear
testimony to the loving-kindness of the Lord.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p128"></span>38. I am little moved by the numerous
passages in the writings of the Fathers relating to satisfaction. I see
indeed that some (I will frankly say almost all whose books are extant)
have either erred in this matter, or spoken too roughly and harshly; but
I cannot admit that they were so rude and unskillful as to write these
passages in the sense in which they are read by our new
satisfactionaries. Chrysostom somewhere says, “When mercy is implored
interrogation ceases; when mercy is asked, judgment rages not; when
mercy is sought, there is no room for punishment; where there is mercy,
no question is asked; where there is mercy, the answer gives pardon,”
(Chrysos. Hom. 2 in <span id="iv.iii.v-p128.1"></span>[Psal.
50](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.v-p128.1"></span>).
How much soever these words may be twisted, they can never be reconciled
with the dogmas of the Schoolmen. In the book *De Dogmatibus
Ecclesiasticis*, which is attributed to Augustine, you read (cap. 54),
“The satisfaction of repentance is to cut off the causes of sins, and
not to indulge an entrance to their suggestions.” From this it appears
that the doctrine of satisfaction, said to be paid for sins committed,
was every where derided in those ages; for here the only satisfaction
referred to is caution, abstinence from sin for the future. I am
unwilling to quote what Chrysostom says (Hom. 10 in Genes) that God
requires nothing more of us than to confess our faults before him with
tears, as similar sentiments abound both in his writings and those of
others. Augustine indeed calls works of mercy remedies for obtaining
forgiveness of sins (Enchir. ad Laur.); but lest any one should stumble
at the expression, he himself, in another passage, obviates the
difficulty. “The flesh of Christ,” says he, “is the true and only
sacrifice for sins—not only for those which are all effaced in baptism,
but those into which we are afterwards betrayed through infirmity, and
because of which the whole Church daily cries, ‘Forgive us our debts,’
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p128.2"></span>[Mt.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p128.2"></span>). And they are forgiven by that special
sacrifice.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p129"></span>39. By satisfaction, however, they, for
the most part, meant not compensation to be paid to God, but the public
testimony, by which those who had been punished with excommunication,
and wished again to be received into communion, assured the Church of
their repentance. For those penitents were enjoined certain fasts and
other things, by which they might prove that they were truly, and from
the heart, weary of their former life, or rather might obliterate the
remembrance of their past deeds: in this way they were said to give
satisfaction, not to God, but to the Church. The same thing is expressed
by Augustine in a passage in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium, cap. 65.37
 <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) From that ancient custom the
satisfactions and confessions now in use took their rise. It is indeed a
viperish progeny, not even a vestige of the better form now remaining. I
know that ancient writers sometimes speak harshly; nor do I deny, as I
lately said, that they have perhaps erred; but dogmas, which were
tainted with a few blemishes now that they have fallen into the unwashed
hands of those men, are altogether defiled. And if we were to decide the
contest by authority of the Fathers, what kind of Fathers are those whom
they obtrude upon us? A great part of those, from whom Lombard their
Coryphaeus framed his centos, are extracted from the absurd dreams of
certain monks passing under the names of Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, and
Chrysostom. On the present subject almost all his extracts are from the
book of Augustine *De Paenitentia*, a book absurdly compiled by some
rhapsodist, alike from good and bad authors—a book which indeed bears
the name of Augustine, but which no person of the least learning would
deign to acknowledge as his. Wishing to save my readers trouble, they
will pardon me for not searching minutely into all their absurdities.
For myself it were not very laborious, and might gain some applause, to
give a complete exposure of dogmas which have hitherto been vaunted as
mysteries; but as my object is to give useful instruction, I desist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](inst057.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p44"></span>28 328 The first definition is that of
Gregory, and is contained Sentent. Lib. 4 Dist. 14, c. 1. The second,
which is that of Ambrose, is given same place, and also Decret. Dist. 3,
de Pœnitentia C. Pœnit. Prior. The third is Augustine’s, as stated in
the same place, and C. Pœnit Poster. The fourth is from Ambrose, and is
given Dist. 1, de Pœnit C. Vera Pœitentia.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](inst057.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p45"></span>29 329 French “Ces bons
glosateurs;”—these worthy glossers.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](inst057.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p46"></span>30 330 Latin, “Immensis
voluminibus.”—French, “Leur gros bobulaire de livres;”—their large
lumbering books.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](inst057.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p47"></span>31 331 Latin, “Mirum silentium.”—French,
“Il n’en est nulles nouuelles en leur quartier;”—there are no news in
their quarter.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](inst057.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p48"></span>32 332 Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 16, cap. 1; De
pœnit. Dist. 1; C. Perfecta Pœnit.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](inst057.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p49"></span>33 333 French, “Combien qu’ils
n’estudient autre chose en toute leur vie que la Dialectique, que est
l’art de definir et partir;”—although they study nought else during
their whole life but Dialectics, which is the art of defining and
dividing.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](inst057.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p50"></span>34 334 Latin, “Secundam tabulam post
naufragium.”—French, “Une seconde planche, sur laquelle celui que estoit
pour perir en lar mer, nage pour venir au port;”—a second plank on which
he who was on the point of perishing in the sea swims to gain the
harbour.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](inst057.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p52"></span>35 335 Latin, “De saini umbra
rixam.”—French, “En un combat frivole;”—engaged in a frivolous combat.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](inst057.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p53"></span>36 336 Luther (adv. Bullam Antichristi,
Art. 6) shows that those who set down these three parts of repentance,
speak neither according to Scripture nor the ancient Fathers.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](inst057.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p54"></span>37 337 French, “Nous tournerons toujours
en un même circuit”—we shall always revolve in the same circle.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](inst057.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p56"></span>38 338 <span
id="iv.iii.v-p56.1"></span>[Mt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p56.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p56.2"></span>[Is.
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.v-p56.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.v-p56.3"></span>[Luke
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)<span id="iv.iii.v-p56.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](inst057.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p58"></span>39 339 Erasmus, in a letter to the
Augustine Steuchus in 1531, while flattering, at the same time laughs at
him, for thinking that the fifth chapter of Numbers sufficiently proves,
in opposition to Luther, that auricular confession is of God.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](inst057.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p59"></span>40 340 French, “N’est ce pas bien se
jouer des Escritures, de les tourner en ceste facon?”—is it not indeed
to make game of Scripture, to turn it in this fashion?

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](inst057.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p59.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p60"></span>41 341 The French is, “Car ce que Jesus
Christ laisse aux Prestres de la loy, n’appartient en rien à ses vrais
ministres;”—for that which Jesus Christ leaves to the Priests, belongs
not in any respect to his true ministers.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](inst057.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p62"></span>42 342 French, “Qu’ils voisent
maintenant, et facent un bouclier de leur allegories;”—let them go now
and make a buckler of their allegories,

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](inst057.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p64"></span>43 343 Augustin. Epist. 54.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](inst057.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p66"></span>44 344 French, “Quoy que tous les
advocats et procureurs du Pape, et tous les caphars qu’il a à louage
gazouillent:”—whatever all the advocates and procurators of the Pope,
and all the caphars whom he has in his pay may gabble.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](inst057.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p67"></span>45 345 The French adds, “l’un des auteurs
de l’Histoire Ecclesiastique;”—one of the authors of the Ecclesiastical
History.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](inst057.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p68"></span>46 346 Eccles Hist. Lib. 7 cap. 17, et
Trepont. Hist. Lib. ix.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](inst057.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p70"></span>47 347 Chrysost. Hom. 2 in <span
id="iv.iii.v-p70.1"></span>[Psal.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p70.1"></span>.Serm. de pœnit. et Confess. Hom. 5 De
Incomprehensibili Dei. Nat. cont. Anomeos. Item, Hom. 4 de Lazaro.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](inst057.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p72"></span>48 348 Latin, “Vetus interpres.”—French,
“Le translateur tant Grec qui Latin;”—the Greek as well as Latin
translator.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](inst057.htm#fr_342) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p78"></span>49 349 As to the form of repentance
enjoined by the primitive Church for more flagrant offences, see Book 4
Chap 1 sec. 29.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](inst057.htm#fr_343) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p78.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p79"></span>50 350 The French is, “Et que le Pasteur
addressant sa parole à lui, l’asseure comme lui appliquant en
particulier la doctrine generale;”—and when the Pastor, addressing his
discourse to him, assures him as applying the general doctrine to him in
particular.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](inst057.htm#fr_344) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p81"></span>51 351 “C Omnis utriusque sexus;”—every
one of both sexes. Innocent’s decree is in the Lateran Council, De Summa
Trinitate et Fide Cathol. It is also given Sent. Lib. 4 Dist. 14, cap.
2, et Dist. 18. cap 2.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](inst057.htm#fr_345) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p85"></span>52 352 The French is, “Mais comme les
nautonniers fichans l’anchre au milieu de la mer, se reposent du trauail
de leur navigation; ou comme un perlin lassé ou defaillant se sied au
milieu de la voye pour reposer: en telle maniere ils prenoyent ce repos,
combien qu’il ne leur fust suffisant;”—but as mariners casting anchor in
the midst of the sea, repose from the toil of navigation; or as a
pilgrim, weary or faint, sits down in the middle of the way to rest
himself: in this way they took this rest, though it was not sufficient
for them.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](inst057.htm#fr_346) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p85.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p86"></span>53 353 “Tous ceux que nous lisons avoir
obtenu de Christ la remission de leurs pechez, ne sont pas dits s’etre
confessés à l’aureille de quelque Messire Jean;”—None of whom we read as
having obtained the forgiveness of their sins from Christ, are said to
have confessed in the ear of some Mess John.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](inst057.htm#fr_347) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p92"></span>54 354 Latin simply, “ceremoniam.”
French, “la ceremonie de faire une croix sur le dos;”—the ceremony of
making a cross upon the back

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](inst057.htm#fr_348) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p93"></span>55 355 French, “Car cela vaut autant
comme si les prestres se faisoyent conterolleurs de Dieu;”—for that is
as much as if the priests made themselves controllers of God.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](inst057.htm#fr_349) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p95"></span>56 356 See on the subject of this
section, Calv. ad Concil. Trident. Also Vera Ecclesiæ Reformandæ Ratio,
Epist. ad Sadoletum. Epist. adversus Theologos Parisienses. De
Scandalis. De Necessitate Reformandæ Ecclesiæ, Lib. 4.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](inst057.htm#fr_350) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p96"></span>57 357 French, “une barbarie si vileine
que rien plus;”—a barbarism so vile that nothing could be more so.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](inst057.htm#fr_351) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p98"></span>58 358 See Lombard, Sent. Lib. 4 Dist 10,
c. 4. C. Non suffcit. de Pœnit. C. (middle of same Dist.) C. Nullus
(same Dist). See also on the subject of satisfaction, infra, s. 29, and
chap. 16 sec. 4.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](inst057.htm#fr_352) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p99"></span>59 359 The French adds, “aumosnes;”—alms.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](inst057.htm#fr_353) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p100"></span>60 360 <span
id="iv.iii.v-p100.1"></span>[Isa.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.v-p100.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.v-p100.2"></span>[Rom.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.v-p100.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.v-p100.3"></span>[Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p100.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p100.4"></span>[Tit.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.v-p100.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](inst057.htm#fr_354) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p100.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p101"></span>61 361 The French is, “Et ne faut pas
qu’ils disent, que combien que les satisfactions en soyent moyens,
neantmoins ce n’est pas en leur nom, mais au nom de Jesus Christ;”—and
they must not say that though satisfactions are the means, nevertheless
it is not in their name, but in the name of Jesus Christ.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](inst057.htm#fr_355) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p103.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p104"></span>62 362 Latin, “Catechumenos.”—French,
“Ceux qui ne sont point encore baptisez;”—those who are not yet
baptised.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](inst057.htm#fr_356) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p106"></span>63 363 See on this Section, Book 2 chap
8 s 58, 59.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](inst057.htm#fr_357) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p107"></span>64 364 The French adds, “Qui est le plus
horrible peché devant Dieu;”—which is the most heinous sin in the sight
of God.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](inst057.htm#fr_358) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p107.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p108"></span>65 365 French, “Et quand ils voudront
satisfaire pour plusieurs, ils en commettront encore davantage jusques à
venir à un abysme sans fin. Je traite encore des plus justes;”—And when
they would satisfy for several sins, they will commit still more, until
they come at last to a bottomless abyss. I’m still speaking of the best.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](inst057.htm#fr_359) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p109.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p110"></span>66 366 <span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.1"></span>[Isa
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.1"></span>; Isa44:22; <span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.2"></span>[Micah
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.2"></span>; PS 32:1&gt;Ps. 32:1

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](inst057.htm#fr_360) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p110.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p111"></span>67 367 <span
id="iv.iii.v-p111.1"></span>[Job
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p111.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p111.2"></span>[Hos.
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p111.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p111.3"></span>[Jer.
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.v-p111.3"></span>

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](inst057.htm#fr_361) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p112.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p113"></span>68 368 <span
id="iv.iii.v-p113.1"></span>[Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p113.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p113.2"></span>[1Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p113.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p113.3"></span>[Eph.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.v-p113.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.v-p113.4"></span>[Col.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p113.4"></span>; Tim 2:6

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](inst057.htm#fr_362) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p113.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p114"></span>69 369 The French adds, “Que nous
appellons Rancon en Francois;”—which we call Ransom in French.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](inst057.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p115"></span>70 370 See Calvin, ad Concil.
Tridentini, Sess. cap. 1. ad 15

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](inst057.htm#fr_364) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p116.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p117"></span>71 371 For a full expositon of these
passages, see infra, sec. 35-37.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](inst057.htm#fr_365) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p119"></span>72 372 <span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.1"></span>[Job
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p119.2"></span>[Prov.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.v-p119.3"></span>[Heb.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.v-p119.3"></span>

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](inst057.htm#fr_366) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p119.12"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p120"></span>73 373 French, “Car l’alliance qu’il a
une fois faite avec Jesus Christ et ses membres;”—For the covenant which
he once made with Jesus Christ and his members.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](inst057.htm#fr_367) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p120.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p121"></span>74 374 French, “Car combien les
reprouvés souspirent ou grincent les dents sous les coups;”—For though
the reprobate sigh or gnash their teeth under the strokes.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](inst057.htm#fr_368) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p125.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p126"></span>75 375 French, “Integrité, pitié,
droiture, et choses semblables;”—intregrity, pity, uprightness, and the
like.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](inst057.htm#fr_369) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p129.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p130"></span>76 376 It is quoted in the Decret. c. in
Art. de Pœnit. Dist. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 5. - OF THE MODES OF SUPPLEMENTING SATISFACTIONVIZ.
INDULGENCES AND PURGATORY.](inst058)
