[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst088)  [Next](inst090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.x-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 9.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p1"></span>OF COUNCILS AND THEIR AUTHORITY.56  <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574)

<span id="iv.iv.x-p3"></span>Since Papists regard their Councils as
expressing the sentiment and consent of the Church, particularly as
regards the authority of declaring dogmas and the exposition of them, it
was necessary to treat of Councils before proceeding to consider that
part of ecclesiastical power which relates to doctrine. I. First, the
authority of Councils in delivering dogmas is discussed, and it is shown
that the Spirit of God is not so bound to the Pastors of the Church as
opponents suppose. Their objections refuted, sec. 1-7. II. The errors,
contradictions, and weaknesses, of certain Councils exposed. A
refutation of the subterfuge, that those set over us are to be obeyed
without distinction, sec. 8-12. III. Of the authority of Councils as
regards the interpretation of Scripture, sec. 13, 14.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p4"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p5"></span>1. The true nature of Councils.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p6"></span>2. Whence the authority of Councils is
derived. What meant by assembling in the name of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p7"></span>3. Objection, that no truth remains in the
Church if it be not in Pastors and Councils. Answer, showing by passages
from the Old Testament that Pastors were often devoid of the spirit of
knowledge and truth.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p8"></span>4. Passages from the New Testament showing
that our times were to be subject to the same evil. This confirmed by
the example of almost all ages.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p9"></span>5. All not Pastors who pretend to be so.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p10"></span>6. Objection, that General Councils
represent the Church. Answer, showing the absurdity of this objection
from passages in the Old Testament.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p11"></span>7. Passages to the same effect from the
New Testament.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p12"></span>8. Councils have authority only in so far
as accordant with Scripture. Testimony of Augustine. Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, and Ephesus, Subsequent Councils more impure, and to be
received with limitation.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p13"></span>9. Contradictory decisions of Councils.
Those agreeing with divine truth to be received. Those at variance with
it to be rejected. This confirmed by the example of the Council of
Constantinople and the Council of Nice; also of the Council of
Chalcedon, and second Council of Ephesus.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p14"></span>10. Errors of purer Councils. Four causes
of these errors. An example from the Council of Nice.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p15"></span>11. Another example from the Council of
Chalcedon. The same errors in Provincial Councils.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p16"></span>12. Evasion of the Papists. Three answers.
Conclusion of the discussion as to the power of the Church in relation
to doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p17"></span>13. Last part of the chapter. Power of the
Church in interpreting Scripture. From what source interpretation is to
be derived. Means of preserving unity in the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p18"></span>14. Impudent attempt of the Papists to
establish their tyranny refuted. Things at variance with Scripture
sanctioned by their Councils. Instance in the prohibition of marriage
and communion in both kinds.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p19"></span>1. Were I now to concede all that they ask
concerning the Church, it would not greatly aid them in their object.
For everything that is said of the Church they immediately transfer to
councils, which, in their opinion, represent the Church. Nay, when they
contend so doggedly for the power of the Church, their only object is to
devolve the whole which they extort on the Roman Pontiff and his
conclave. Before I begin to discuss this question, two points must be
briefly premised. First, though I mean to be more rigid in discussing
this subject, it is not because I set less value than I ought on ancient
councils. I venerate them from my heart, and would have all to hold them
in due honour.56  <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575) But there must
be some limitation, there must be nothing derogatory to Christ.
Moreover, it is the right of Christ to preside over all councils, and
not share the honour with any man. Now, I hold that he presides only
when he governs the whole assembly by his word and Spirit. Secondly, in
attributing less to councils than my opponents demand, it is not because
I have any fear that councils are favourable to their cause and adverse
to ours. For as we are amply provided by the word of the Lord with the
means of proving our doctrine and overthrowing the whole Papacy, and
thus have no great need of other aid, so, if the case required it,
ancient councils furnish us in a great measure with what might be
sufficient for both purposes.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p21"></span>2. Let us now proceed to the subject
itself. If we consult Scripture on the authority of councils, there is
no promise more remarkable than that which is contained in these words
of our Saviour, “Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.” But this is just as applicable to any
particular meeting as to a universal council. And yet the important part
of the question does not lie here, but in the condition which is
added—viz. that Christ will be in the midst of a council, provided it be
assembled in his name. Wherefore, though our opponents should name
councils of thousands of bishops it will little avail them; nor will
they induce us to believe that they are, as they maintain, guided by the
Holy Spirit, until they make it credible that they assemble in the name
of Christ: since it is as possible for wicked and dishonest to conspire
against Christ, as for good and honest bishops to meet together in his
name. Of this we have a clear proof in very many of the decrees which
have proceeded from councils. But this will be afterwards seen. At
present I only reply in one word, that our Saviour’s promise is made to
those only who assemble in his name. How, then, is such an assembly to
be defined? I deny that those assemble in the name of Christ who,
disregarding his command by which he forbids anything to be added to the
word of God or taken from it, determine everything at their own
pleasure, who, not contented with the oracles of Scripture, that is,
with the only rule of perfect wisdom, devise some novelty out of their
own head (<span id="iv.iv.x-p21.1"></span>[Deut.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.x-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.x-p21.2"></span>[Rev.
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p21.2"></span>). Certainly, since our Saviour has not
promised to be present with all councils of whatever description, but
has given a peculiar mark for distinguishing true and lawful councils
from others, we ought not by any means to lose sight of the distinction.
The covenant which God anciently made with the Levitical priests was to
teach at his mouth (<span id="iv.iv.x-p21.3"></span>[Mal.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.x-p21.3"></span>).
This he always required of the prophets, and we see also that it was the
law given to the apostles. On those who violate this covenant God
bestows neither the honour of the priesthood nor any authority. Let my
opponents solve this difficulty if they would subject my faith to the
decrees of man, without authority from the word of God.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p22"></span>3. Their idea that the truth cannot remain
in the Church unless it exist among pastors, and that the Church herself
cannot exist unless displayed in general councils, is very far from
holding true if the prophets have left us a correct description of their
own times. In the time of Isaiah there was a Church at Jerusalem which
the Lord had not yet abandoned. But of pastors he thus speaks: “His
watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they
cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are
greedy dogs which never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot
understand: they all look to their own way” (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p22.1"></span>[Isa. 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.1"></span>).
In the same way Hosea says, “The watchman of Ephraim was with my God:
but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in
the house of his God” (<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.2"></span>[Hosea
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.2"></span>).
Here, by ironically connecting them with God, he shows that the pretext
of the priesthood was vain. There was also a Church in the time of
Jeremiah. Let us hear what he says of pastors: “From the prophet even
unto the priest, every one dealeth falsely.” Again, “The prophets
prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, neither have I commanded
them, neither spake unto them” (<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.3"></span>[Jer.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.3"></span>;
14:14). And not to be prolix with quotations, read the whole of his
thirty-third and fortieth chapters. Then, on the other hand, Ezekiel
inveighs against them in no milder terms. “There is a conspiracy of her
prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey;
they have devoured souls.” “Her priests have violated my law, and
profaned mine holy things” (<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.4"></span>[Ezek.
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.4"></span>).
There is more to the same purpose. Similar complaints abound throughout
the prophets; nothing is of more frequent recurrence.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p23"></span>4. But perhaps, though this great evil
prevailed among the Jews, our age is exempt from it. Would that it were
so; but the Holy Spirit declared that it would be otherwise. For Peter’s
words are clear, “But there were false prophets among the people, even
as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily will bring in
damnable heresies” (<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.1"></span>[2 Peter
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.1"></span>).
See how he predicts impending danger, not from ordinary believers, but
from those who should plume themselves on the name of pastors and
teachers. Besides, how often did Christ and his apostles foretell that
the greatest dangers with which the Church was threatened would come
from pastors? (<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.2"></span>[Matt.
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.2"></span>).
Nay, Paul openly declares, that Antichrist would have his seat in the
temple of God (<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.3"></span>[2 Thess.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.3"></span>);
thereby intimating, that the fearful calamity of which he was speaking
would come only from those who should have their seat in the Church as
pastors. And in another passage he shows that the introduction of this
great evil was almost at hand. For in addressing the Elders of Ephesus,
he says, “I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall
men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them”
(<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.4"></span>[Acts
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.4"></span>).
How great corruption might a long series of years introduce among
pastors, when they could degenerate so much within so short a time? And
not to fill my pages with details, we are reminded by the examples of
almost every age, that the truth is not always cherished in the bosoms
of pastors, and that the safety of the Church depends not on their
state. It was becoming that those appointed to preserve the peace and
safety of the Church should be its presidents and guardians; but it is
one thing to perform what you owe, and another to owe what you do not
perform.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p24"></span>5. Let no man, however, understand me as
if I were desirous in everything rashly and unreservedly to overthrow
the authority of pastors.56  <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576) All
I advise is, to exercise discrimination, and not suppose, as a matter of
course, that all who call themselves pastors are so in reality. But the
Pope, with the whole crew of his bishops, for no other reason but
because they are called pastors, shake off obedience to the word of God,
invert all things, and turn them hither and thither at their pleasure;
meanwhile, they insist that they cannot be destitute of the light of
truth, that the Spirit of God perpetually resides in them, that the
Church subsists in them, and dies with them, as if the Lord did not
still inflict his judgments, and in the present day punish the world for
its wickedness, in the same way in which he punished the ingratitude of
the ancient people—namely, by smiting pastors with astonishment and
blindness (<span id="iv.iv.x-p25.1"></span>[Zech.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p25.1"></span>).
These stupid men understand not that they are just chiming in with those
of ancient times who warred with the word of God. For the enemies of
Jeremiah thus set themselves against the truth, “Come, and let us devise
devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest,
nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet” (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p25.2"></span>[Jer.
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p25.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.x-p26"></span>6. Hence it is easy to reply to their
allegation concerning general councils. It cannot be denied, that the
Jews had a true Church under the prophets. But had a general council
then been composed of the priests, what kind of appearance would the
Church have had? We hear the Lord denouncing not against one or two of
them, but the whole order: “The priests shall be astonished, and the
prophets shall wonder” (<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.1"></span>[Jer.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.1"></span>).
Again, “The law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the
ancients” (<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.2"></span>[Ezek.
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.2"></span>).
Again, “Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a
vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the
sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over
them,” &c. (<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.3"></span>[Micah
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.3"></span>).
Now, had all men of this description been collected together, what
spirit would have presided over their meeting? Of this we have a notable
instance in the council which Ahab convened (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p26.4"></span>[1 Kings
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.x-p26.4"></span>).
Four hundred prophets were present. But because they had met with no
other intention than to flatter the impious king, Satan is sent by the
Lord to be a lying spirit in all their mouths. The truth is there
unanimously condemned. Micaiah is judged a heretic, is smitten, and cast
into prison. So was it done to Jeremiah, and so to the other prophets.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p27"></span>7. But there is one memorable example
which may suffice for all. In the council which the priests and
Pharisees assembled at Jerusalem against Christ (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p27.1"></span>[John
11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p27.1"></span>), what is wanting, in so far as external
appearance is concerned? Had there been no Church then at Jerusalem,
Christ would never have joined in the sacrifices and other ceremonies. A
solemn meeting is held; the high priest presides; the whole sacerdotal
order take their seats, and yet Christ is condemned, and his doctrine is
put to flight. This atrocity proves that the Church was not at all
included in that council. But there is no danger that anything of the
kind will happen with us. Who has told us so? Too much security in a
matter of so great importance lies open to the charge of sluggishness.
Nay, when the Spirit, by the mouth of Paul, foretells, in distinct
terms, that a defection will take place, a defection which cannot come
until pastors first forsake God (<span id="iv.iv.x-p27.2"></span>[2
Thess. 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p27.2"></span>), why do we spontaneously walk blindfold to
our own destruction? Wherefore, we cannot on any account admit that the
Church consists in a meeting of pastors, as to whom the Lord has nowhere
promised that they would always be good, but has sometimes foretold that
they would be wicked. When he warns us of danger, it is to make us use
greater caution.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p28"></span>8. What, then, you will say, is there no
authority in the definitions of councils? Yes, indeed; for I do not
contend that all councils are to be condemned, and all their acts
rescinded, or, as it is said, made one complete erasure. But you are
bringing them all (it will be said) under subordination, and so leaving
every one at liberty to receive or reject the decrees of councils as he
pleases. By no means; but whenever the decree of a council is produced,
the first thing I would wish to be done is, to examine at what time it
was held, on what occasion, with what intention, and who were present at
it; next I would bring the subject discussed to the standard of
Scripture. And this I would do in such a way that the decision of the
council should have its weight, and be regarded in the light of a prior
judgment, yet not so as to prevent the application of the test which I
have mentioned. I wish all had observed the method which Augustine
prescribes in his Third Book against Maximinus, when he wished to
silence the cavils of this heretic against the decrees of councils, “I
ought not to oppose the Council of Nice to you, nor ought you to oppose
that of Ariminum to me, as prejudging the question. I am not bound by
the authority of the latter, nor you by that of the former. Let thing
contend with thing, cause with cause, reason with reason, on the
authority of Scripture, an authority not peculiar to either, but common
to all.” In this way, councils would be duly respected, and yet the
highest place would be given to Scripture, everything being brought to
it as a test. Thus those ancient Councils of Nice, Constantinople, the
first of Ephesus, Chalcedon, and the like, which were held for refuting
errors, we willingly embrace, and reverence as sacred, in so far as
relates to doctrines of faith, for they contain nothing but the pure and
genuine interpretation of Scripture, which the holy Fathers with
spiritual prudence adopted to crush the enemies of religion who had then
arisen. In some later councils, also, we see displayed a true zeal for
religion, and moreover unequivocal marks of genius, learning, and
prudence. But as matters usually become worse and worse, it is easy to
see in more modern councils how much the Church gradually degenerated
from the purity of that golden age. I doubt not, however, that even in
those more corrupt ages, councils had their bishops of better character.
But it happened with them as the Roman senators of old complained in
regard to their decrees. Opinions being numbered, not weighed, the
better were obliged to give way to the greater number. They certainly
put forth many impious sentiments. There is no need here to collect
instances, both because it would be tedious, and because it has been
done by others so carefully, as not to leave much to be added.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p29"></span>9. Moreover, why should I review the
contests of council with council? Nor is there any ground for whispering
to me, that when councils are at variance, one or other of them is not a
lawful council. For how shall we ascertain this? Just, if I mistake not,
by judging from Scripture that the decrees are not orthodox. For this
alone is the sure law of discrimination. It is now about nine hundred
years since the Council of Constantinople, convened under the Emperor
Leo, determined that the images set up in temples were to be thrown down
and broken to pieces. Shortly after, the Council of Nice, which was
assembled by Irene, through dislike of the former, decreed that images
were to be restored. Which of the two councils shall we acknowledge to
be lawful? The latter has usually prevailed, and secured a place for
images in churches. But Augustine maintains that this could not be done
without the greatest danger of idolatry. Epiphanius, at a later period,
speaks much more harshly (Epist. ad Joann. Hierosolym. et Lib. 3 contra
Hæres.). For he says, it is an unspeakable abomination to see images in
a Christian temple. Could those who speak thus approve of that council
if they were alive in the present day? But if historians speak true, and
we believe their acts, not only images themselves, but the worship of
them, were there sanctioned. Now it is plain that this decree emanated
from Satan. Do they not show, by corrupting and wresting Scripture, that
they held it in derision? This I have made sufficiently clear in a
former part of the work (see Book I. chap. 11 sec. 14). Be this as it
may, we shall never be able to distinguish between contradictory and
dissenting councils, which have been many, unless we weigh them all in
that balance for men and angels, I mean, the word of God. Thus we
embrace the Council of Chalcedon, and repudiate the second of Ephesus,
because the latter sanctioned the impiety of Eutyches, and the former
condemned it. The judgment of these holy men was founded on the
Scriptures, and while we follow it, we desire that the word of God,
which illuminated them, may now also illuminate us. Let the Romanists
now go and boast after their manner, that the Holy Spirit is fixed and
tied to their councils.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p30"></span>10. Even in their ancient and purer
councils there is something to be desiderated, either because the
otherwise learned and prudent men who attended, being distracted by the
business in hand, did not attend to many things beside; or because,
occupied with grave and more serious measures, they winked at some of
lesser moment; or simply because, as men, they were deceived through
ignorance, or were sometimes carried headlong by some feeling in excess.
Of this last case (which seems the most difficult of all to avoid) we
have a striking example in the Council of Nice, which has been
unanimously received, as it deserves, with the utmost veneration. For
when the primary article of our faith was there in peril, and Arius, its
enemy, was present, ready to engage any one in combat, and it was of the
utmost moment that those who had come to attack Arius should be agreed,
they nevertheless, feeling secure amid all these dangers, nay, as it
were, forgetting their gravity, modesty, and politeness, laying aside
the discussion which was before them (as if they had met for the express
purpose of gratifying Arius), began to give way to intestine
dissensions, and turn the pen, which should have been employed against
Arius, against each other. Foul accusations were heard, libels flew up
and down, and they never would have ceased from their contention until
they had stabbed each other with mutual wounds, had not the Emperor
Constantine interfered, and declaring that the investigation of their
lives was a matter above his cognisance, repressed their intemperance by
flattery rather than censure. In how many respects is it probable that
councils, held subsequently to this, have erred? Nor does the fact stand
in need of a long demonstration; any one who reads their acts will
observe many infirmities, not to use a stronger term.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p31"></span>11. Even Leo, the Roman Pontiff, hesitates
not to charge the Council of Chalcedon, which he admits to be orthodox
in its doctrines, with ambition and inconsiderate rashness. He denies
not that it was lawful, but openly maintains that it might have erred.
Some may think me foolish in labouring to point out errors of this
description, since my opponents admit that councils may err in things
not necessary to salvation. My labour, however, is not superfluous. For
although compelled, they admit this in word, yet by obtruding upon us
the determination of all councils, in all matters without distinction,
as the oracles of the Holy Spirit, they exact more than they had at the
outset assumed. By thus acting what do they maintain but just that
councils cannot err, of if they err, it is unlawful for us to perceive
the truth, or refuse assent to their errors? At the same time, all I
mean to infer from what I have said is, that though councils, otherwise
pious and holy, were governed by the Holy Spirit, he yet allowed them to
share the lot of humanity, lest we should confide too much in men. This
is a much better view than that of Gregory Nanzianzen, who says (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p31.1"></span>Ep. 55<span id="iv.iv.x-p31.1"></span>), that
he never saw any council end well. In asserting that all, without
exception, ended ill, he leaves them little authority. There is no
necessity for making separate mention of provincial councils, since it
is easy to estimate, from the case of general councils, how much
authority they ought to have in framing articles of faith, and deciding
what kind of doctrine is to be received.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p32"></span>12. But our Romanists, when, in defending
their cause, they see all rational grounds slip from beneath them,
betake themselves to a last miserable subterfuge. Although they should
be dull in intellect and counsel, and most depraved in heart and will,
still the word of the Lord remains, which commands us to obey those who
have the rule over us (<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.1"></span>[Heb.
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.1"></span>). Is it indeed so? What if I should deny that
those who act thus have the rule over us? They ought not to claim for
themselves more than Joshua had, who was both a prophet of the Lord and
an excellent pastor. Let us then hear in what terms the Lord introduced
him to his office. “This book of the law shall not depart out of thy
mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest
observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then shalt
thou make thy way prosperous, and thou shalt have good success” (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.2"></span>[Josh. 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.2"></span>).
Our spiritual rulers, therefore, will be those who turn not from the law
of the Lord to the right hand or the left. But if the doctrine of all
pastors is to be received without hesitation, why are we so often and so
anxiously admonished by the Lord not to give heed to false prophets?
“Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the
prophets that prophesy unto you; they make you vain: they speak a vision
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord” (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.3"></span>[Jer.
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.3"></span>). Again, “Beware of false prophets, which
come to you in sheep’s clothing but inwardly they are ravening wolves”
(<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.4"></span>[Mt.
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.4"></span>).
In vain also would John exhort us to try the spirits whether they be of
God (<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.5"></span>[1 John
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.5"></span>).
From this judgment not even angels are exempted (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.6"></span>[Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.6"></span>);
far less Satan with his lies. And what is meant by the expression, “If
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch”? (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.7"></span>[Mt.
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.7"></span>)
Does it not sufficiently declare that there is a great difference among
the pastors who are to be heard, that all are not to be heard
indiscriminately? Wherefore they have no ground for deterring us by
their name, in order to draw us into a participation of their blindness,
since we see, on the contrary, that the Lord has used special care to
guard us from allowing ourselves to be led away by the errors of others,
whatever be the mask under which they may lurk. For if the answer of our
Saviour is true, blind guides, whether high priests, prelates, or
pontiffs, can do nothing more than hurry us over the same precipice with
themselves. Wherefore, let no names of councils, pastors, and bishops
(which may be used on false pretences as well as truly), hinder us from
giving heed to the evidence both of words and facts, and bringing all
spirits to the test of the divine word, that we may prove whether they
are of God.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p33"></span>13. Having proved that no power was given
to the Church to set up any new doctrine, let us now treat of the power
attributed to them in the interpretation of Scripture. We readily admit,
that when any doctrine is brought under discussion, there is not a
better or surer remedy than for a council of true bishops to meet and
discuss the controverted point. There will be much more weight in a
decision of this kind, to which the pastors of churches have agreed in
common after invoking the Spirit of Christ, than if each, adopting it
for himself, should deliver it to his people, or a few individuals
should meet in private and decide. Secondly, When bishops have assembled
in one place, they deliberate more conveniently in common, fixing both
the doctrine and the form of teaching it, lest diversity give offence.
Thirdly, Paul prescribes this method of determining doctrine. For when
he gives the power of deciding to a single church, he shows what the
course of procedure should be in more important cases—namely, that the
churches together are to take common cognisance. And the very feeling of
piety tells us, that if any one trouble the Church with some novelty in
doctrine, and the matter be carried so far that there is danger of a
greater dissension, the churches should first meet, examine the
question, and at length, after due discussion, decide according to
Scripture, which may both put an end to doubt in the people, and stop
the mouths of wicked and restless men, so as to prevent the matter from
proceeding farther. Thus when Arius arose, the Council of Nice was
convened, and by its authority both crushed the wicked attempts of this
impious man, and restored peace to the churches which he had vexed, and
asserted the eternal divinity of Christ in opposition to his
sacrilegious dogma. Thereafter, when Eunomius and Macedonius raised new
disturbances, their madness was met with a similar remedy by the Council
of Constantinople; the impiety of Nestorius was defeated by the Council
of Ephesus. In short, this was from the first the usual method of
preserving unity in the Church whenever Satan commenced his
machinations. But let us remember, that all ages and places are not
favoured with an Athanasius, a Basil, a Cyril, and like vindicators of
sound doctrine, whom the Lord then raised up. Nay, let us consider what
happened in the second Council of Ephesus when the Eutychian heresy
prevailed. Flavianus, of holy memory, with some pious men, was driven
into exile, and many similar crimes were committed, because, instead of
the Spirit of the Lord, Dioscorus, a factious man, of a very bad
disposition, presided. But the Church was not there. I admit it; for I
always hold that the truth does not perish in the Church though it be
oppressed by one council, but is wondrously preserved by the Lord to
rise again, and prove victorious in his own time. I deny, however, that
every interpretation of Scripture is true and certain which has received
the votes of a council.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p34"></span>14. But the Romanists have another end in
view when they say that the power of interpreting Scripture belongs to
councils, and that without challenge. For they employ it as a pretext
for giving the name of an interpretation of Scripture to everything
which is determined in councils. Of purgatory, the intercession of
saints, and auricular confession, and the like, not one syllable can be
found in Scripture. But as all these have been sanctioned by the
authority of the Church, or, to speak more correctly, have been received
by opinion and practice, every one of them is to be held as an
interpretation of Scripture. And not only so, but whatever a council has
determined against Scripture is to have the name of an interpretation.
Christ bids all drink of the cup which he holds forth in the Supper. The
Council of Constance prohibited the giving of it to the people, and
determined that the priest alone should drink. Though this is
diametrically opposed to the institution of Christ (<span
id="iv.iv.x-p34.1"></span>[Mt.
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p34.1"></span>), they will have it to be regarded as his
interpretation. Paul terms the prohibition of marriage a doctrine of
devils (<span id="iv.iv.x-p34.2"></span>[1 Tim.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.x-p34.2"></span>);
and the Spirit elsewhere declares that “marriage is honourable in all”
(<span id="iv.iv.x-p34.3"></span>[Heb.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p34.3"></span>).
Having afterwards interdicted their priests from marriage, they insist
on this as a true and genuine interpretation of Scripture, though
nothing can be imagined more alien to it. Should any one venture to open
his lips in opposition, he will be judged a heretic, since the
determination of the Church is without challenge, and it is unlawful to
have any doubt as to the accuracy of her interpretation. Why should I
assail such effrontery? to point to it is to condemn it. Their dogma
with regard to the power of approving Scripture I intentionally omit.
For to subject the oracles of God in this way to the censure of men, and
hold that they are sanctioned because they please men, is a blasphemy
which deserves not to be mentioned. Besides, I have already touched upon
it (Book 1 chap. 7; 8 sec. 9). I will ask them one question, however. If
the authority of Scripture is founded on the approbation of the Church,
will they quote the decree of a council to that effect? I believe they
cannot. Why, then, did Arius allow himself to be vanquished at the
Council of Nice by passages adduced from the Gospel of John? According
to these, he was at liberty to repudiate them, as they had not
previously been approved by any general council. They allege an old
catalogue, which they call the Canon, and say that it originated in a
decision of the Church. But I again ask, In what council was that Canon
published? Here they must be dumb. Besides, I wish to know what they
believe that Canon to be. For I see that the ancients are little agreed
with regard to it. If effect is to be given to what Jerome says (Præf.
in Lib. Solom.), the Maccabees, Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, and the like,
must take their place in the Apocrypha: but this they will not tolerate
on any account.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_574"></span>[575](inst089.htm#fr_574) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p2"></span>61 561 See Calvin’s Antidote to the
Articles of Sorbonne; Letter to Sadolet; Necessity of Reforming the
Church; Antidote to the Council of Trent; Remarks on the Paternal
Admonition of the Pope.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[576](inst089.htm#fr_575) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p20"></span>62 562 French , “Si je tien ici la bride
roide pour ne lascher rien facilement à nos adversaires, ce n’est pas a
dire pourtant que je prise les conciles anciens moins que je ne doy. Car
je les honore de bonne affection, et desire que chacun les estime, et
les ait en reverence.”—If I here keep the reins tight, and do not easily
yield anything to our opponents, it is not because I prize ancient
councils less than I ought. For I honour them sincerely and desire that
every man esteem them, and hold them in reverence.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[577](inst089.htm#fr_576) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p25"></span>63 563 French, “Toutesfois je ne veux
point que ces propos soyent entendus comme si je vouloye amoindrir
l’authorité des pasteurs, et induire le peuple à la mepriser
legerement.”—However, I would not have these statements to be understood
as if I wished to lessen the authority of pastors, and induce the people
lightly to despise it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 10. - OF THE POWER OF MAKING LAWS. THE CRUELTY OF THE
POPE AND HIS ADHERENTS, IN THIS RESPECT, IN TYRANNICALLY OPPRESSING AND
DESTROYING SOULS.](inst090)
