[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst038)  [Next](inst040.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.vi"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 5.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENTS USUALLY ALLEGED IN SUPPORT
OF FREE WILL REFUTED.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>Objections reduced to three principal
heads:—I. Four absurdities advanced by the opponents of the orthodox
doctrine concerning the slavery of the will, stated and refuted, sec.
1–5. II. The passages of Scripture which they pervert in favour of their
error, reduced to five heads, and explained, sec. 6–15. III. Five other
passages quoted in defence of free will expounded, sec. 16–19.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p4"></span>1. Absurd fictions of opponents first
refuted, and then certain passages of Scripture explained. Answer by a
negative. Confirmation of the answer.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p5"></span>2. Another absurdity of Aristotle and
Pelagius. Answer by a distinction. Answer fortified by passages from
Augustine, and supported by the authority of an Apostle.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p6"></span>3. Third absurdity borrowed from the words
of Chrysostom. Answer by a negative.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p7"></span>4. Fourth absurdity urged of old by the
Pelagians. Answer from the works of Augustine. Illustrated by the
testimony of our Saviour. Another answer, which explains the use of
exhortations.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p8"></span>5. A third answer, which contains a fuller
explanation of the second. Objection to the previous answers. Objection
refuted. Summary of the previous answers.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p9"></span>6. First class of arguments which the
Neo-Pelagians draw from Scripture in defence of free will. 1. The Law
demands perfect obedience and therefore God either mocks us, or requires
things which are not in our power. Answer by distinguishing precepts
into three sorts. The first of these considered in this and the
following section.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p10"></span>7. This general argument from the Law of
no avail to the patrons of free will. Promises conjoined with precepts,
prove that our sal vation is to be found in the grace of God. Objection,
that the Law was given to the persons living at the time. Answer,
confirmed by passages from Augustine.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p11"></span>8. A special consideration of the three
classes of precepts of no avail to the defenders of free will. 1.
Precepts enjoining us to turn to God. 2. Precepts which simply speak of
the observance of the Law. 3. Precepts which enjoin us to persevere in
the grace of God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p12"></span>9. Objection. Answer. Confirmation of the
answer from Jeremiah. Another objection refuted.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p13"></span>10. A second class of arguments in
defence of free will drawn from the promises of God—viz. that the
promises which God makes to those who seek him are vain if it is not in
our power to do, or not do, the thing required. Answer, which explains
the use of promises, and removes the supposed inconsistency.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p14"></span>11. Third class of arguments drawn from
the divine upbraidings,—that it is in vain to upbraid us for evils which
it is not in our power to avoid. Answer. Sinners are condemned by their
own consciences, and, therefore, the divine upbraidings are just.
Moreover, there is a twofold use in these upbraidings. Various passages
of Scripture explained by means of the foregoing answers.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p15"></span>12. Objection founded on the words of
Moses. Refutation by the words of an Apostle. Confirmation by argument.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16"></span>13. Fourth class of arguments by the
defenders of free will. God waits to see whether or not sinners will
repent; therefore they can repent. Answer by a dilemma. Passage in Hosea
explained.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p17"></span>14. Fifth class of arguments in defence
of free will. God and bad works described as our own, and therefore we
are capable of both. Answer by an exposition, which shows that this
argument is unavailing. Objection drawn from analogy. Answer. The nature
and mode of divine agency in the elect.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p18"></span>15. Conclusion of the answer to the last
class of arguments.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p19"></span>16. Third and last division of the
chapter discussing certain passages of Scripture. 1. A passage from
Genesis. Its true meaning explained.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p20"></span>17. 2. Passage from the Epistle to the
Romans. Explanation. Refutation of an objection. Another refutation. A
third refutation from Augustine. 3. A passage from First Corinthians.
Answer to it.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p21"></span>18. 4. A passage from Ecclesiastes.
Explanation. Another explanation.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p22"></span>19. 5. A passage from Luke. Explanation.
Allegorical arguments weak. Another explanation. A third explanation. A
fourth from Augustine. Conclusion and summary of the whole discussion
concerning free will.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p23"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p24"></span>1. Enough would seem to have been said on
the subject of man’s will, were there not some who endeavour to urge him
to his ruin by a false opinion of liberty, and at the same time, in
order to support their own opinion, assail ours. First, they gather
together some absurd inferences, by which they endeavour to bring odium
upon our doctrine, as if it were abhorrent to common sense, and then
they oppose it with certain passages of Scripture (*infra*, sec. 6).
Both devices we shall dispose of in their order. If sin, say they, is
necessary, it ceases to be sin; if it is voluntary, it may be avoided.
Such, too, were the weapons with which Pelagius assailed Augustine. But
we are unwilling to crush them by the weight of his name, until we have
satisfactorily disposed of the objections themselves. I deny, therefore,
that sin ought to be the less imputed because it is necessary; and, on
the other hand, I deny the inference, that sin may be avoided because it
is voluntary. If any one will dispute with God, and endeavour to evade
his judgment, by pretending that he could not have done otherwise, the
answer already given is sufficient, that it is owing not to creation,
but the corruption of nature, that man has become the slave of sin, and
can will nothing but evil. For whence that impotence of which the wicked
so readily avail themselves as an excuse, but just because Adam
voluntarily subjected himself to the tyranny of the devil? Hence the
corruption by which we are held bound as with chains, originated in the
first man’s revolt from his Maker. If all men are justly held guilty of
this revolt, let them not think themselves excused by a necessity in
which they see the clearest cause of their condemnation. But this I have
fully explained above; and in the case of the devil himself, have given
an example of one who sins not less voluntarily that he sins
necessarily. I have also shown, in the case of the elect angels, that
though their will cannot decline from good, it does not therefore cease
to be will. This Bernard shrewdly explains when he says (Serm. 81, in
Cantica), that we are the more miserable in this, that the necessity is
voluntary; and yet this necessity so binds us who are subject to it,
that we are the slaves of sin, as we have already observed. The second
step in the reasoning is vicious, because it leaps from *voluntary* to
*free*; whereas we have proved above, that a thing may be done
voluntarily, though not subject to free choice.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25"></span>2. They add, that unless virtue and vice
proceed from free choice, it is absurd either to punish man or reward
him. Although this argument is taken from Aristotle, I admit that it is
also used by Chrysostom and Jerome. Jerome, however, does not disguise
that it was familiar to the Pelagians. He even quotes their words, “If
grace acts in us, grace, and not we who do the work, will be crowned,”
(*Hieron. in Ep. ad Ctesiphont. et Dialog. 1*) With regard to
punishment, I answer, that it is properly inflicted on those by whom the
guilt is contracted. What matters it whether you sin with a free or an
enslaved judgment, so long as you sin voluntarily, especially when man
is proved to be a sinner because he is under the bondage of sin? In
regard to the rewards of righteousness, is there any great absurdity in
acknowledging that they depend on the kindness of God rather than our
own merits? How often do we meet in Augustine with this expression,—“God
crowns not our merits but his own gifts; and the name of reward is given
not to what is due to our merits, but to the recompense of grace
previously bestowed?” Some seem to think there is acuteness in the
remark, that there is no place at all for the mind, if good works do not
spring from free will as their proper source; but in thinking this so
very unreasonable they are widely mistaken. Augustine does not hesitate
uniformly to describe as necessary the very thing which they count it
impious to acknowledge. Thus he asks, “What is human merit? He who came
to bestow not due recompense but free grace, though himself free from
sin, and the giver of freedom, found all men sinners,” (Augustin. in
<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>[Psal.
31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>.md).
Again, “If you are to receive your due, you must be punished. What then
is done? God has not rendered you due punishment, but bestows upon you
unmerited grace. If you wish to be an alien from grace, boast your
merits,” (in <span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.2"></span>[Psal.
70](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.2"></span>.md).
Again, “You are nothing in yourself, sin is yours, merit God’s.
Punishment is your due; and when the reward shall come, God shall crown
his own gifts, not your merits,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.3"></span>Ep.
52<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.3"></span>). To the same effect he elsewhere
says (De Verb. Apostol. Serm. 15), that grace is not of merit, but merit
of grace. And shortly after he concludes, that God by his gifts
anticipates all our merit, that he may thereby manifest his own merit,
and give what is absolutely free, because he sees nothing in us that can
be a ground of salvation. But why extend the list of quotations, when
similar sentiments are ever and anon recurring in his works? The
abettors of this error would see a still better refutation of it, if
they would attend to the source from which the apostle derives the glory
of the saints,—“Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called;
and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them
he also glorified,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.4"></span>[Rom.
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p25.4"></span>). On what ground, then, the apostle being
judge (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.5"></span>[2 Tim.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.5"></span>.md),
are believers crowned? Because by the mercy of God, not their own
exertions, they are predestinated, called, and justified. Away, then,
with the vain fear, that unless free will stand, there will no longer be
any merit! It is most foolish to take alarm, and recoil from that which
Scripture inculcates. “If thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as
if thou hadst not received it?” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p25.6"></span>[1
Cor. 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p25.6"></span>). You see how every thing is denied to free
will, for the very purpose of leaving no room for merit. And yet, as the
beneficence and liberality of God are manifold and inexhaustible, the
grace which he bestows upon us, inasmuch as he makes it our own, he
recompenses as if the virtuous acts were our own.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p26"></span>3. But it is added, in terms which seem
to be borrowed from Chrysostom (Homil. 22, in Genes.), that if our will
possesses not the power of choosing good or evil, all who are partakers
of the same nature must be alike good or alike bad. A sentiment akin to
this occurs in the work De Vocatione Gentium (lib. 4 c. 4), usually
attributed to Ambrose, in which it is argued, that no one would ever
decline from faith, did not the grace of God leave us in a mutable
state. It is strange that such men should have so blundered. How did it
fail to occur to Chrysostom, that it is divine election which
distinguishes among men? We have not the least hesitation to admit what
Paul strenuously maintains, that all, without exception, are depraved
and given over to wickedness; but at the same time we add, that through
the mercy of God all do not continue in wickedness. Therefore, while we
all labour naturally under the same disease, those only recover health
to whom the Lord is pleased to put forth his healing hand. The others
whom, in just judgment, he passes over, pine and rot away till they are
consumed. And this is the only reason why some persevere to the end, and
others, after beginning their course, fall away. Perseverance is the
gift of God, which he does not lavish promiscuously on all, but imparts
to whom he pleases. If it is asked how the difference arises—why some
steadily persevere, and others prove deficient in steadfastness, we can
give no other reason than that the Lord, by his mighty power,
strengthens and sustains the former, so that they perish not, while he
does not furnish the same assistance to the latter, but leaves them to
be monuments of instability.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27"></span>4. Still it is insisted, that
exhortations are vain, warnings superfluous, and rebukes absurd, if the
sinner possesses not the power to obey. When similar objections were
urged against Augustine, he was obliged to write his book, De
Correptione et Gratia, where he has fully disposed of them. The
substance of his answer to his opponents is this: “O, man! learn from
the precept what you ought to do; learn from correction, that it is your
own fault you have not the power; and learn in prayer, whence it is that
you may receive the power.” Very similar is the argument of his book, De
Spiritu et Litera, in which he shows that God does not measure the
precepts of his law by human strength, but, after ordering what is
right, freely bestows on his elect the power of fulfilling it. The
subject, indeed, does not require a long discussion. For we are not
singular in our doctrine, but have Christ and all his apostles with us.
Let our opponents, then, consider how they are to come off victorious in
a contest which they wage with such antagonists. Christ declares,
“without me ye can do nothing,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>[John
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>). Does he the less censure and chastise
those who, without him, did wickedly? Does he the less exhort every man
to be intent on good works? How severely does Paul inveigh against the
Corinthians for want of charity (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27.2"></span>[1
Cor. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p27.2"></span>); and yet at the same time, he prays that
charity may be given them by the Lord. In the Epistle to the Romans, he
declares that “it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God that showeth mercy,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27.3"></span>[Rom.
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p27.3"></span>). Still he ceases not to warn, exhort, and
rebuke them. Why then do they not expostulate with God for making sport
with men, by demanding of them things which he alone can give, and
chastising them for faults committed through want of his grace? Why do
they not admonish Paul to spare those who have it not in their power to
will or to run, unless the mercy of God, which has forsaken them,
precede? As if the doctrine were not founded on the strongest
reason—reason which no serious inquirer can fail to perceive. The extent
to which doctrine, and exhortation, and rebuke, are in themselves able
to change the mind, is indicated by Paul when he says, “Neither is he
that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth
the increase,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27.4"></span>[1 Cor
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p27.4"></span>.md)
in like manner, we see that Moses delivers the precepts of the Law under
a heavy sanction, and that the prophets strongly urge and threaten
transgressors though they at the same time confess, that men are wise
only when an understanding heart is given them; that it is the proper
work of God to circumcise the heart, and to change it from stone into
flesh; to write his law on their inward parts; in short, to renew souls
so as to give efficacy to doctrine.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p28"></span>5. What purpose, then, is served by
exhortations? It is this: As the wicked, with obstinate heart, despise
them, they will be a testimony against them when they stand at the
judgment-seat of God; nay, they even now strike and lash their
consciences. For, however they may petulantly deride, they cannot
disapprove them. But what, you will ask, can a miserable mortal do, when
softness of heart, which is necessary to obedience, is denied him? I
ask, in reply, Why have recourse to evasion, since hardness of heart
cannot be imputed to any but the sinner himself? The ungodly, though
they would gladly evade the divine admonitions, are forced, whether they
will or not, to feel their power. But their chief use is to be seen in
the case of believers, in whom the Lord, while he always acts by his
Spirit, also omits not the instrumentality of his word, but employs it,
and not without effect. Let this, then, be a standing truth, that the
whole strength of the godly consists in the grace of God, according to
the words of the prophet, “I will give them one heart, and I will put a
new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their
flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my
statutes,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Ezek.
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>.md).
But it will be asked, why are they now admonished of their duty, and not
rather left to the guidance of the Spirit? Why are they urged with
exhortations when they cannot hasten any faster than the Spirit impels
them? and why are they chastised, if at any time they go astray, seeing
that this is caused by the necessary infirmity of the flesh? “O, man!
who art thou that replies against God?” If, in order to prepare us for
the grace which enables us to obey exhortation, God sees meet to employ
exhortation, what is there in such an arrangement for you to carp and
scoff at? Had exhortations and reprimands no other profit with the godly
than to convince them of sin, they could not be deemed altogether
useless. Now, when, by the Spirit of God acting within, they have the
effect of inflaming their desire of good, of arousing them from
lethargy, of destroying the pleasure and honeyed sweetness of sin,
making it hateful and loathsome, who will presume to cavil at them as
superfluous?

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29"></span>Should any one wish a clearer reply, let
him take the following:—God works in his elect in two ways: inwardly, by
his Spirit; outwardly, by his Word. By his Spirit illuminating their
minds, and training their hearts to the practice of righteousness, he
makes them new creatures, while, by his Word, he stimulates them to long
and seek for this renovation. In both, he exerts the might of his hand
in proportion to the measure in which he dispenses them. The Word, when
addressed to the reprobate, though not effectual for their amendment,
has another use. It urges their consciences now, and will render them
more inexcusable on the day of judgment. Thus, our Saviour, while
declaring that none can come to him but those whom the Father draws, and
that the elect come after they have heard and learned of the Father
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>[John
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044.md),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p29.1"></span>.md),
does not lay aside the office of teacher, but carefully invites those
who must be taught inwardly by the Spirit before they can make any
profit. The reprobate, again, are admonished by Paul, that the doctrine
is not in vain; because, while it is in them a savour of death unto
death, it is still a sweet savour unto God (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p29.2"></span>[2 Cor.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p29.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p30"></span>6. The enemies of this doctrine are at
great pains in collecting passages of Scripture, as if, unable to
accomplish any thing by their weight, they were to overwhelm us by their
number. But as in battle, when it is come to close quarters, an
unwarlike multitude, how great soever the pomp and show they make, give
way after a few blows, and take to flight,18  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) so we shall have little difficulty
here in disposing of our opponents and their host. All the passages
which they pervert in opposing us are very similar in their import; and
hence, when they are arranged under their proper heads, one answer will
suffice for several; it is not necessary to give a separate
consideration to each. Precepts seem to be regarded as their stronghold.
These they think so accommodated to our abilities, as to make it follow
as a matter of course, that whatever they enjoin we are able to perform.
Accordingly, they run over all the precepts, and by them fix the measure
of our power. For, say they, when God enjoins meekness, submission,
love, chastity, piety, and holiness, and when he forbids anger, pride,
theft, uncleanness, idolatry, and the like, he either mocks us, or only
requires things which are in our power.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32"></span>All the precepts which they thus heap
together may be divided into three classes. Some enjoin a first
conversion unto God, others speak simply of the observance of the law,
and others inculcate perseverance in the grace which has been received.
We shall first treat of precepts in general, and then proceed to
consider each separate class. That the abilities of man are equal to the
precepts of the divine law, has long been a common idea, and has some
show of plausibility. It is founded, however, on the grossest ignorance
of the law. Those who deem it a kind of sacrilege to say, that the
observance of the law is impossible, insist, as their strongest
argument, that, if it is so, the Law has been given in vain (*infra*,
Chap. 7 sec. 5). For they speak just as if Paul had never said anything
about the Law. But what, pray, is meant by saying, that the Law “was
added because of transgressions;” “by the law is the knowledge of sin;”
“I had not known sin but by the law;” “the law entered that the offence
might abound?” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.1"></span>[Gal.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.2"></span>[Rom.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.2"></span>;
7:7; 5:20). Is it meant that the Law was to be limited to our strength,
lest it should be given in vain? Is it not rather meant that it was
placed far above us, in order to convince us of our utter feebleness?
Paul indeed declares, that charity is the end and fulfilling of the Law
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.3"></span>[1 Tim.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p32.3"></span>.md).
But when he prays that the minds of the Thessalonians may be filled with
it, he clearly enough acknowledges that the Law sounds in our ears
without profit, if God do not implant it thoroughly in our hearts (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p32.4"></span>[1 Thess.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p32.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p33"></span>7. I admit, indeed, that if the Scripture
taught nothing else on the subject than that the Law is a rule of life
by which we ought to regulate our pursuits, I should at once assent to
their opinion; but since it carefully and clearly explains that the use
of the Law is manifold, the proper course is to learn from that
explanation what the power of the Law is in man. In regard to the
present question, while it explains what our duty is it teaches that the
power of obeying it is derived from the goodness of God, and it
accordingly urges us to pray that this power may be given us. If there
were merely a command and no promise, it would be necessary to try
whether our strength were sufficient to fulfil the command; but since
promises are annexed, which proclaim not only that aid, but that our
whole power is derived from divine grace, they at the same time
abundantly testify that we are not only unequal to the observance of the
Law, but mere fools in regard to it. Therefore, let us hear no more of a
proportion between our ability and the divine precepts, as if the Lord
had accommodated the standard of justice which he was to give in the Law
to our feeble capacities. We should rather gather from the promises hove
ill provided we are, having in everything so much need of grace. But say
they, Who will believe that the Lord designed his Law for blocks and
stones? There is no wish to make any one believe this. The ungodly are
neither blocks nor stones, when, taught by the Law that their lusts are
offensive to God, they are proved guilty by their own confession; nor
are the godly blocks or stones, when admonished of their powerlessness,
they take refuge in grace. To this effect are the pithy sayings of
Augustine, “God orders what we cannot do, that we may know what we ought
to ask of him. There is a great utility in precepts, if all that is
given to free will is to do greater honour to divine grace. Faith
acquires what the Law requires; nay, the Law requires, in order that
faith may acquire what is thus required; nay, more, God demands of us
faith itself, and finds not what he thus demands, until by giving he
makes it possible to find it.” Again, he says, “Let God give what he
orders, and order what he wills.”18  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p35"></span>8. This will be more clearly seen by
again attending to the three classes of precepts to which we above
referred. Both in the Law and in the Prophets, God repeatedly calls upon
us to turn to him.18  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md) But, on
the other hand, a prophet exclaims, “Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented.” He orders us to circumcise the foreskins of our hearts; but
Moses declares, that that circumcision is made by his own hand. In many
passages he demands a new heart, but in others he declares that he gives
it. As Augustine says, “What God promises, we ourselves do not through
choice or nature, but he himself does by grace.” The same observation is
made, when, in enumerating the rules of Tichonius, he states the third
in effect to be—that we distinguish carefully between the Law and the
promises, or between the commands and grace (Augustin. de Doctrine
Christiana, lib. 3). Let them now go and gather from precepts what man’s
power of obedience is, when they would destroy the divine grace by which
the precepts themselves are accomplished. The precepts of the second
class are simply those which enjoin us to worship God, to obey and
adhere to his will, to do his pleasure, and follow his teaching. But
innumerable passages testify that every degree of purity, piety,
holiness, and justices which we possess, is his gift. Of the third class
of precepts is the exhortation of Paul and Barnabas to the proselytes,
as recorded by Luke; they “persuaded them to continue in the grace of
God,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p36.6"></span>[Acts
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.6"></span>). But the source from which this power of
continuance must be sought is elsewhere explained by Paul, when he says,
“Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.7"></span>[Eph.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.7"></span>). In another passage he says, “Grieve not
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p36.8"></span>[Eph.
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.8"></span>). But as the thing here enjoined could not
be performed by man, he prays in behalf of the Thessalonians, that God
would count them “worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good
pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.9"></span>[2 Thess.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.9"></span>). In the same way, in the Second Epistle to
the Corinthians, when treating of alms, he repeatedly commends their
good and pious inclination. A little farther on, however, he exclaims,
“Thanks be to God, which put the same earnest care into the heart of
Titus for you. For indeed he accepted the exhortation,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.10"></span>[2 Cor.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.10"></span>). If Titus could not even perform the
office of being a mouth to exhort others, except in so far as God
suggested, how could the others have been voluntary agents in acting, if
the Lord Jesus had not directed their hearts?

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p37"></span>9. Some, who would be thought more acute,
endeavour to evade all these passages, by the quibble, that there is
nothing to hinder us from contributing our part, while God, at the same
time, supplies our deficiencies. They, moreover, adduce passages from
the Prophets, in which the work of our conversion seems to be shared
between God and ourselves; “Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of hosts,
and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord of hosts,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p37.1"></span>[Zech.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p37.1"></span>.md).
The kind of assistance which God gives us has been shown above (sect. 7,
8), and need not now be repeated. One thing only I ask to be conceded to
me, that it is vain to think we have a power of fulfilling the Law,
merely because we are enjoined to obey it. Since, in order to our
fulfilling the divine precepts, the grace of the Lawgiver is both
necessary, and has been promised to us, this much at least is clear,
that more is demanded of us than we are able to pay. Nor can any cavil
evade the declaration in Jeremiah, that the covenant which God made with
his ancient people was broken, because it was only of the letter—that to
make it effectual, it was necessary for the Spirit to interpose and
train the heart to obedience (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p37.2"></span>[Jer.
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p37.2"></span>). The opinion we now combat is not aided by
the words, “Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you.” The turning there
spoken of is not that by which God renews the heart unto repentance; but
that in which, by bestowing prosperity, he manifests his kindness and
favour, just in the same way as he sometimes expresses his displeasure
by sending adversity. The people complaining under the many calamities
which befell them, that they were forsaken by God, he answers, that his
kindness would not fail them, if they would return to a right course,
and to himself, the standard of righteousness. The passage, therefore,
is wrested from its proper meaning when it is made to countenance the
idea that the work of conversion is divided between God and man
(*supra*, Chap. 2 sec. 27). We have only glanced briefly at this
subject, as the proper place for it will occur when we come to treat of
the Law (Chap. 7 sec. 2 and 3).

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38"></span>10. The second class of objections is
akin to the former. They allege the promises in which the Lord makes a
paction with our will. Such are the following: “Seek good, and not evil,
that ye may live,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.1"></span>[Amos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p38.1"></span>). “If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall
eat the good of the land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it,”
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.2"></span>[Isa.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.2"></span>.md).
“If thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then thou
shalt not remove,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.3"></span>[Jer.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.3"></span>.md).
“It shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice
of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all the commandments which I
command thee this days that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above
all nations of the earth,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.4"></span>[Deut.
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p38.4"></span>). There are other similar passages (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p38.5"></span>[Lev.
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p38.5"></span>,
&c). They think that the blessings contained in these promises are
offered to our will absurdly and in mockery, if it is not in our power
to secure or reject them. It is, indeed, an easy matter to indulge in
declamatory complaint on this subject, to say that we are cruelly
mocked18  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md) by the Lord, when he
declares that his kindness depends on our wills if we are not masters of
our wills—that it would be a strange liberality on the part of God to
set his blessings before us, while we have no power of enjoying them,—a
strange certainty of promises, which, to prevent their ever being
fulfilled, are made to depend on an impossibility. Of promises of this
description, which have a condition annexed to them, we shall elsewhere
speak, and make it plain that there is nothing absurd in the impossible
fulfilment of them. In regard to the matter in hand, I deny that God
cruelly mocks us when he invites us to merit blessings which he knows we
are altogether unable to merit. The promises being offered alike to
believers and to the ungodly, have their use in regard to both. As God
by his precepts stings the consciences of the ungodly, so as to prevent
them from enjoying their sins while they have no remembrance of his
judgments, so, in his promises, he in a manner takes them to witness how
unworthy they are of his kindness. Who can deny that it is most just and
most becoming in God to do good to those who worship him, and to punish
with due severity those who despise his majesty? God, therefore,
proceeds in due order, when, though the wicked are bound by the fetters
of sin, he lays down the law in his promises, that he will do them good
only if they depart from their wickedness. This would be right, though
His only object were to let them understand that they are deservedly
excluded from the favour due to his true worshipers. On the other hand,
as he desires by all means to stir up believers to supplicate his grace,
it surely should not seem strange that he attempts to accomplish by
promises the same thing which, as we have shown, he to their great
benefit accomplishes by means of precepts. Being taught by precepts what
the will of God is, we are reminded of our wretchedness in being so
completely at variance with that will, and, at the same time, are
stimulated to invoke the aid of the Spirit to guide us into the right
path. But as our indolence is not sufficiently aroused by precepts,
promises are added, that they may attract us by their sweetness, and
produce a feeling of love for the precept. The greater our desire of
righteousness, the greater will be our earnestness to obtain the grace
of God. And thus it is, that in the protestations, *if we be willing*,
*if thou shalt hearken*, the Lord neither attributes to us a full power
of willing and hearkening, nor yet mocks us for our impotence.18  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md)

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p41"></span>11. The third class of objections is not
unlike the other two. For they produce passages in which God upbraids
his people for their ingratitude, intimating that it was not his fault
that they did not obtain all kinds of favour from his indulgence. Of
such passages, the following are examples: “The Amalekites and the
Canaanites are before you, and ye shall fall by the sword: because ye
are turned away from the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be with you,”
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p41.1"></span>[Num.
14:43](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p41.1"></span>). “Because ye have done all these works,
saith the Lord, and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but
ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not; therefore will I do
unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto
the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to
Shiloh,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p41.2"></span>[Jer.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p41.2"></span>.md).
“They obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done
nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p41.3"></span>[Jer.
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p41.3"></span>). How, they ask, can such upbraiding be
directed against those who have it in their power immediately to
reply,—Prosperity was dear to us: we feared adversity; that we did not,
in order to obtain the one and avoid the other, obey the Lord, and
listen to his voice, is owing to its not being free for us to do so in
consequence of our subjection to the dominion of sin; in vain,
therefore, are we upbraided with evils which it was not in our power to
escape. But to say nothing of the pretext of necessity, which is but a
feeble and flimsy defence of their conduct, can they, I ask, deny their
guilt? If they are held convicted of any fault, the Lord is not unjust
in upbraiding them for having, by their own perverseness, deprived
themselves of the advantages of his kindness. Let them say, then,
whether they can deny that their own will is the depraved cause of their
rebellion. If they find within themselves a fountain of wickedness, why
do they stand declaiming about extraneous causes, with the view of
making it appear that they are not the authors of their own destruction?
If it be true that it is not for another’s faults that sinners are both
deprived of the divine favour, and visited with punishment, there is
good reason why they should hear these rebukes from the mouth of God. If
they obstinately persist in their vices, let them learn in their
calamities to accuse and detest their own wickedness, instead of
charging God with cruelty and injustice. If they have not manifested
docility, let them, under a feeling of disgust at the sins which they
see to be the cause of their misery and ruin, return to the right path,
and, with serious contrition, confess the very thing of which the Lord
by his rebuke reminds them. Of what use those upbraidings of the
prophets above quoted are to believers, appears from the solemn prayer
of Daniel, as given in his ninth chapter. Of their use in regard to the
ungodly, we see an example in the Jews, to whom Jeremiah was ordered to
explain the cause of their miseries, though the event could not be
otherwise than the Lord had foretold. “Therefore thou shalt speak these
words unto them; but they will not hearken unto thee: thou shalt also
call unto them; but they will not answer thee,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p41.4"></span>[Jer.
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p41.4"></span>). Of what use, then, was it to talk to the
deaf? It was, that even against their will they might understand that
what they heard was true, and that it was impious blasphemy to transfer
the blame of their wickedness to God, when it resided in themselves.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42"></span>These few explanations will make it very
easy for the reader to disentangle himself from the immense heap of
passages (containing both precepts and reprimands) which the enemies of
divine grace are in the habit of piling up, that they may thereon erect
their statue of free will. The Psalmist upbraids the Jews as “a stubborn
and rebellious generation; a generation that set not their heart
aright,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.1"></span>[Psalm
78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.1"></span>); and in another passage, he exhorts the men
of his time, “Harden not your heart,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.2"></span>[Psalm
95:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.2"></span>). This implies that the whole blame of the
rebellion lies in human depravity. But it is foolish thence to infer,
that the heart, the preparation of which is from the Lord, may be
equally bent in either direction. The Psalmist says, “I have inclined my
heart to perform thy statutes alway,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.3"></span>[Psalm
119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.3"></span>); meaning, that with willing and cheerful
readiness of mind he had devoted himself to God. He does not boast,
however, that he was the author of that disposition, for in the same
psalm he acknowledges it to be the gift of God. We must, therefore,
attend to the admonition of Paul, when he thus addresses believers,
“Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God
which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure,”
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.4"></span>[Phil.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.4"></span>.md).
He ascribes to them a part in acting that they may not indulge in carnal
sloth, but by enjoining fear and trembling, he humbles them so as to
keep them in remembrance, that the very thing which they are ordered to
do is the proper work of God—distinctly intimating, that believers act
(if I may so speak) *passively* in as much as the power is given them
from heaven, and cannot in any way be arrogated to themselves.
Accordingly, when Peter exhorts us to “add to faith virtue,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.5"></span>[2 Pet.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.5"></span>.md),
he does not concede to us the possession of a second place, as if we
could do anything separately. He only arouses the sluggishness of our
flesh, by which faith itself is frequently stifled. To the same effect
are the words of Paul. He says, “Quench not the Spirit,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.6"></span>[1 Thess.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.6"></span>); because a spirit of sloth, if not guarded
against, is ever and anon creeping in upon believers. But should any
thence infer that it is entirely in their own power to foster the
offered light, his ignorance will easily be refuted by the fact, that
the very diligence which Paul enjoins is derived only from God (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.7"></span>[2 Cor.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.7"></span>.md).
We are often commanded to purge ourselves of all impurity, though the
Spirit claims this as his peculiar office. In fine, that what properly
belongs to God is transferred to us only by way of concession, is plain
from the words of John, “He that is begotten of God keepeth himself,”
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.8"></span>[1 John
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.8"></span>). The advocates of free will fasten upon the
expression as if it implied, that we are kept partly by the power of
God, partly by our own, whereas the very keeping of which the Apostle
speaks is itself from heaven. Hence, Christ prays his Father to keep us
from evil (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.9"></span>[John
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.9"></span>), and we know that believers, in their
warfare against Satan, owe their victory to the armour of God.
Accordingly, Peter, after saying, “Ye have purified your souls in
obeying the truth,” immediately adds by way of correction, “through the
Spirit,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.10"></span>[1 Pet.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.10"></span>). In fine, the nothingness of human
strength in the spiritual contest is briefly shown by John, when he
says, that “Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin; for his seed
remaineth in him” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p42.11"></span>[1 John
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.11"></span>). He elsewhere gives the reasons “This is
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.12"></span>[1 John
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p42.12"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p43"></span>12. But a passage is produced from the
Law of Moses, which seems very adverse to the view now given. After
promulgating the Law, he takes the people to witness in these terms:
“This commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from
thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest
say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may
hear it, and do it? But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.1"></span>[Deut.
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p43.1"></span>.md).
Certainly, if this is to be understood of mere precepts, I admit that it
is of no little importance to the matter in hand. For, though it were
easy to evade the difficulty by saying, that the thing here treated of
is not the observance of the law, but the facility and readiness of
becoming acquainted with it, some scruple, perhaps, would still remain.
The Apostle Paul, however, no mean interpreter, removes all doubt when
he affirms, that Moses here spoke of the doctrine of the Gospel (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.2"></span>[Rom.
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.2"></span>). If any one is so refractory as to contend
that Paul violently wrested the words in applying them to the Gospel,
though his hardihood is chargeable with impiety, we are still able,
independently of the authority of the Apostle, to repel the objection.
For, if Moses spoke of precepts merely, he was only inflating the people
with vain confidence. Had they attempted the observance of the law in
their own strength, as a matter in which they should find no difficulty,
what else could have been the result than to throw them headlong? Where,
then, was that easy means of observing the law, when the only access to
it was over a fatal precipice?18  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) Accordingly, nothing is more certain
than that under these words is comprehended the covenant of mercy, which
had been promulgated along with the demands of the law. A few verses
before, he had said, “The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p44.1"></span>[Deut.
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p44.1"></span>). Therefore, the readiness of which he
immediately after speaks was placed not in the power of man, but in the
protection and help of the Holy Spirit, who mightily performs his own
work in our weakness. The passage, however, is not to be understood of
precepts simply, but rather of the Gospel promises, which, so far from
proving any power in us to fulfil righteousness, utterly disprove it.
This is confirmed by the testimony of Paul, when he observes that the
Gospel holds forth salvation to us, not under the harsh arduous, and
impossible terms on which the law treats with us (namely, that those
shall obtain it who fulfil all its demands), but on terms easy,
expeditious, and readily obtained. This passage, therefore, tends in no
degree to establish the freedom of the human will.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p45"></span>13. They are wont also to adduce certain
passages in which God is said occasionally to try men, by withdrawing
the assistance of his grace, and to wait until they turn to him, as in
Hosea, “I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offence, and seek my face,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p45.1"></span>[Hosea
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p45.1"></span>). It were absurd (say they), that the Lord
should wait till Israel should seek his face, if their minds were not
flexible, so as to turn in either direction of their own accord. As if
anything were more common in the prophetical writings than for God to
put on the semblance of rejecting and casting off his people until they
reform their lives. But what can our opponents extract from such
threats? If they mean to maintain that a people, when abandoned by God,
are able of themselves to think of turning unto him, they will do it in
the very face of Scripture. On the other hand, if they admit that divine
grace is necessary to conversion, why do they dispute with us? But while
they admit that grace is so far necessary, they insist on reserving some
ability for man. How do they prove it? Certainly not from this nor any
similar passage; for it is one thing to withdraw from man, and look to
what he will do when thus abandoned and left to himself, and another
thing to assist his powers (whatever they may be), in proportion to
their weakness. What, then, it will be asked, is meant by such
expressions? I answer, just the same as if God were to say, Since
nothing is gained by admonishing, exhorting, rebuking this stubborn
people, I will withdraw for a little, and silently leave them to be
afflicted; I shall see whether, after long calamity, any remembrance of
me will return, and induce them to seek my face. But by the departure of
the Lord to a distance is meant the withdrawal of prophecy. By his
waiting to see what men will do is meant that he, while silent, and in a
manner hiding himself, tries them for a season with various afflictions.
Both he does that he may humble us the more; for we shall sooner be
broken than corrected by the strokes of adversity, unless his Spirit
train us to docility. Moreover, when the Lord, offended and, as it were,
fatigued with our obstinate perverseness, leaves us for a while (by
withdrawing his word, in which he is wont in some degree to manifest his
presence), and makes trial of what we will do in his absence, from this
it is erroneously inferred, that there is some power of free will, the
extent of which is to be considered and tried, whereas the only end
which he has in view is to bring us to an acknowledgment of our utter
nothingness.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p46"></span>14. Another objection is founded on a
mode of speaking which is constantly observed both in Scripture and in
common discourse. God works are said to be ours, and we are said to do
what is holy and acceptable to God, just as we are said to commit sin.
But if sins are justly imputed to us, as proceeding from ourselves, for
the same reason (say they) some share must certainly be attributed to us
in works of righteousness. It could not be accordant with reason to say,
that we do those things which we are incapable of doing of our own
motion, God moving us, as if we were stones. These expressions,
therefore, it is said, indicate that while, in the matter of grace, we
give the first place to God, a secondary place must be assigned to our
agency. If the only thing here insisted on were, that good works are
termed *ours*, I, in my turn, would reply, that the bread which we ask
God to give us is also termed *ours*. What, then, can be inferred from
the title of possession, but simply that, by the kindness and free gift
of Gods that becomes ours which in other respects is by no means due to
us? Therefore let them either ridicule the same absurdity in the Lord’s
Prayer, or let them cease to regard it as absurd, that good works should
be called ours, though our only property in them is derived from the
liberality of God. But there is something stronger in the fact, that we
are often said in Scripture to worship God, do justice, obey the law,
and follow good works. These being proper offices of the mind and will,
how can they be consistently referred to the Spirit, and, at the same
time, attributed to us, unless there be some concurrence on our part
with the divine agency? This difficulty will be easily disposed of if we
attend to the manner in which the Holy Spirit acts in the righteous. The
similitude with which they invidiously assail us is foreign to the
purpose; for who is so absurd as to imagine that movement in man differs
in nothing from the impulse given to a stone? Nor can anything of the
kind be inferred from our doctrine. To the natural powers of man we
ascribe approving and rejecting, willing and not willing, striving and
resisting—viz. approving vanity, rejecting solid good, willing evil and
not willing good, striving for wickedness and resisting righteousness.
What then does the Lord do? If he sees meet to employ depravity of this
description as an instrument of his anger, he gives it whatever aim and
direction he pleases, that, by a guilty hand, he may accomplish his own
good work. A wicked man thus serving the power of God, while he is bent
only on following his own lust, can we compare to a stone, which, driven
by an external impulse, is borne along without motion, or sense, or will
of its own? We see how wide the difference is. But how stands the case
with the godly, as to whom chiefly the question is raised? When God
erects his kingdom in them, he, by means of his Spirit, curbs their
will, that it may not follow its natural bent, and be carried hither and
thither by vagrant lusts; bends, frames trains, and guides it according
to the rule of his justice, so as to incline it to righteousness and
holiness, and establishes and strengthens it by the energy of his
Spirit, that it may not stumble or fall. For which reason Augustine thus
expresses himself (De Corrept. et Gratia, cap. 2), “It will be said we
are therefore acted upon, and do not act. Nay, you act and are acted
upon, and you then act well when you are acted upon by one that is good.
The Spirit of God who actuates you is your helper in acting, and bears
the name of helper, because you, too, do something.” In the former
member of this sentence, he reminds us that the agency of man is not
destroyed by the motion of the Holy Spirit, because nature furnishes the
will which is guided so as to aspire to good. As to the second member of
the sentence, in which he says that the very idea of help implies that
we also do something, we must not understand it as if he were
attributing to us some independent power of action; but not to foster a
feeling of sloth, he reconciles the agency of God with our own agency,
by saying, that to wish is from nature, to wish well is from grace.
Accordingly, he had said a little before, “Did not God assist us, we
should not only not be able to conquer, but not able even to fight.”

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p47"></span>15. Hence it appears that the grace of
God (as this name is used when regeneration is spoken of) is the rule of
the Spirit, in directing and governing the human will. Govern he cannot,
without correcting, reforming, renovating (hence we say that the
beginning of regeneration consists in the abolition of what is ours); in
like manner, he cannot govern without moving, impelling, urging, and
restraining. Accordingly, all the actions which are afterwards done are
truly said to be wholly his. Meanwhile, we deny not the truth of
Augustine’s doctrine, that the will is not destroyed, but rather
repaired, by grace—the two things being perfectly consistent—viz. that
the human will may be said to be renewed when its vitiosity and
perverseness being corrected, it is conformed to the true standard of
righteousness and that, at the same time, the will may be said to be
made new, being so vitiated and corrupted that its nature must be
entirely changed. There is nothing then to prevent us from saying, that
our will does what the Spirit does in us, although the will contributes
nothing of itself apart from grace. We must, therefore, remember what we
quoted from Augustine, that some men labour in vain to find in the human
will some good quality properly belonging to it. Any intermixture which
men attempt to make by conjoining the effort of their own will with
divine grace is corruption, just as when unwholesome and muddy water is
used to dilute wine. But though every thing good in the will is entirely
derived from the influence of the Spirit, yet, because we have naturally
an innate power of willing, we are not improperly said to do the things
of which God claims for himself all the praise; first, because every
thing which his kindness produces in us is our own (only we must
understand that it is not of ourselves); and, secondly, because it is
our mind, our will, our study which are guided by him to what is good.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p48"></span>16. The other passages which they gather
together from different quarters will not give much trouble to any
person of tolerable understanding, who pays due attention to the
explanations already given. They adduce the passage of Genesis, “Unto
thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p48.1"></span>[Gen.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p48.1"></span>.md).
This they interpret of sin, as if the Lord were promising Cain that the
dominion of sin should not prevail over his mind, if he would labour in
subduing it. We, however, maintain that it is much more agreeable to the
context to understand the words as referring to Abel, it being there the
purpose of God to point out the injustice of the envy which Cain had
conceived against his brother. And this He does in two ways, by showing,
first, that it was vain to think he could, by means of wickedness,
surpass his brother in the favour of God, by whom nothing is esteemed
but righteousness; and, secondly, how ungrateful he was for the kindness
he had already received, in not being able to bear with a brother who
had been subjected to his authority. But lest it should be thought that
we embrace this interpretation because the other is contrary to our
view, let us grant that God does here speak of sin. If so, his words
contain either an order or a promise. If an order, we have already
demonstrated that this is no proof of man’s ability; if a promise, where
is the fulfilment of the promise when Cain yielded to the sin over which
he ought to have prevailed? They will allege a tacit condition in the
promise, as if it were said that he would gain the victory if he
contended. This subterfuge is altogether unavailing. For, if the
dominion spoken of refers to sin, no man can have any doubt that the
form of expression is imperative, declaring not what we are able, but
what it is our duty to do, even if beyond our ability. Although both the
nature of the case, and the rule of grammatical construction, require
that it be regarded as a comparison between Cain and Abel, we think the
only preference given to the younger brother was, that the elder made
himself inferior by his own wickedness.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p49"></span>17. They appeal, moreover, to the
testimony of the Apostle Paul, because he says, “It is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p49.1"></span>[Rom.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p49.1"></span>). From this they infer, that there is
something in will and endeavour, which, though weak in themselves,
still, being mercifully aided by God, are not without some measure of
success. But if they would attend in sober earnest to the subject there
handled by Paul, they would not so rashly pervert his meaning. I am
aware they can quote Origin and Jerome18  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) in support of this exposition. To
these I might, in my turn, oppose Augustine. But it is of no consequence
what they thought, if it is clear what Paul meant. He teaches that
salvation is prepared for those only on whom the Lord is pleased to
bestow his mercy—that ruin and death await all whom he has not chosen.
He had proved the condition of the reprobate by the example of Pharaoh,
and confirmed the certainty of gratuitous election by the passage in
Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.” Thereafter he
concludes, that it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,
but of God that showeth mercy. If these words are understood to mean
that the will or endeavour are not sufficient, because unequal to such a
task, the Apostle has not used them very appropriately. We must
therefore abandon this absurd mode of arguing, “It is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth;” therefore, there is some will, some
running. Paul’s meaning is more simple—there is no will nor running by
which we can prepare the way for our salvation—it is wholly of the
divine mercy. He indeed says nothing more than he says to Titus, when he
writes, “After that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p50.1"></span>[Titus 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p50.1"></span>.md).
Those who argue that Paul insinuated there was some will and some
running when he said, “It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
runneth,” would not allow me to argue after the same fashion, that we
have done some righteous works, because Paul says that we have attained
the divine favour, “not by works of righteousness which we have done.”
But if they see a flaw in this mode of arguing, let them open their
eyes, and they will see that their own mode is not free from a similar
fallacy. The argument which Augustine uses is well founded, “If it is
said, ‘It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,’ because
neither will nor running are sufficient; it may, on the other hand, be
retorted, it is not ‘of God that showeth mercy,’ because mercy does not
act alone,” (August. <span id="iv.ii.vi-p50.2"></span>Ep. 170<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p50.2"></span>, ad Vital. See also Enchirid. ad Laurent.
cap. 32). This second proposition being absurd, Augustine justly
concludes the meaning of the words to be, that there is no good will in
man until it is prepared by the Lord; not that we ought not to will and
run, but that both are produced in us by God. Some, with equal
unskilfulness, wrest the saying of Paul, “We are labourers together with
God,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p50.3"></span>[1 Cor.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p50.3"></span>.md).
There cannot be a doubt that these words apply to ministers only, who
are called “labourers with God,” not from bringing any thing of their
own, but because God makes use of their instrumentality after he has
rendered them fit, and provided them with the necessary endowments.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p51"></span>18. They appeal also to Ecclesiasticus,
who is well known to be a writer of doubtful authority. But, though we
might justly decline his testimony, let us see what he says in support
of free will. His words are, “He himself made man from the beginning,
and left him in the hand of his counsel; If thou wilt, to keep the
commandments, and perform acceptable faithfulness. He has set fire and
water before thee: stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou wilt. Before
man is life and death; and whether him liketh shall be given him,”
(<span id="iv.ii.vi-p51.1"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
15:14-17](../../../bib/apo/sir015.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p51.1"></span>). Grant that man received at his creation a
power of acquiring life or death; what, then, if we, on the other hand,
can reply that he has lost it? Assuredly I have no intention to
contradict Solomon, who asserts that “God has made man upright;” that
“they have sought out many inventions,” (<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p51.2"></span>[Eccl.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p51.2"></span>). But since man, by degenerating, has made
shipwreck of himself and all his blessings, it certainly does not
follow, that every thing attributed to his nature, as originally
constituted, applies to it now when vitiated and degenerate. Therefore,
not only to my opponents, but to the author of Ecclesiasticus himself
(whoever he may have been), this is my answer: If you mean to tell man
that in himself there is a power of acquiring salvation, your authority
with us is not so great as, in the least degree, to prejudice the
undoubted word of God; but if only wishing to curb the malignity of the
fleshy which by transferring the blame of its own wickedness to God, is
wont to catch at a vain defence, you say that rectitude was given to
man, in order to make it apparent he was the cause of his own
destruction, I willingly assent. Only agree with me in this, that it is
by his own fault he is stript of the ornaments in which the Lord at
first attired him, and then let us unite in acknowledging that what he
now wants is a physician, and not a defender.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52"></span>19. There is nothing more frequent in
their mouths than the parable of the traveller who fell among thieves,
and was left half dead (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52.1"></span>[Luke
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p52.1"></span>). I am aware that it is a common idea with
almost all writers, that under the figure of the traveller is
represented the calamity of the human race. Hence our opponents argue
that man was not so mutilated by the robbery of sin and the devil as not
to preserve some remains of his former endowments; because it is said he
was left half dead. For where is the half living, unless some portion of
right will and reason remain? First, were I to deny that there is any
room for their allegory, what could they say? There can be no doubt that
the Fathers invented it contrary to the genuine sense of the parable.
Allegories ought to be carried no further than Scripture expressly
sanctions: so far are they from forming a sufficient basis to found
doctrines upon. And were I so disposed I might easily find the means of
tearing up this fiction by the roots. The Word of God leaves no half
life to man, but teaches, that, in regard to life and happiness, he has
utterly perished. Paul, when he speaks of our redemption, says not that
the half dead are cured (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52.2"></span>[Eph.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52.2"></span>;
5:14) but that those who were dead are raised up. He does not call upon
the half dead to receive the illumination of Christ, but upon those who
are asleep and buried. In the same way our Lord himself says, “The hour
is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God,” (<span id="iv.ii.vi-p52.3"></span>[John
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p52.3"></span>). How can they presume to set up a flimsy
allegory in opposition to so many clear statements? But be it that this
allegory is good evidence, what can they extort out of it? Man is half
dead, therefore there is some soundness in him. True! he has a mind
capable of understanding, though incapable of attaining to heavenly and
spiritual wisdom; he has some discernment of what is honourable; he has
some sense of the Divinity, though he cannot reach the true knowledge of
God. But to what do these amount? They certainly do not refute the
doctrine of Augustine—a doctrine confirmed by the common suffrages even
of the Schoolmen, that after the fall, the free gifts on which salvation
depends were withdrawn, and natural gifts corrupted and defiled
(*supra*, chap. 2 sec. 2). Let it stand, therefore, as an indubitable
truth, which no engines can shake, that the mind of man is so entirely
alienated from the righteousness of God that he cannot conceive, desire,
or design any thing but what is wicked, distorted, foul, impure, and
iniquitous; that his heart is so thoroughly envenomed by sin that it can
breathe out nothing but corruption and rottenness; that if some men
occasionally make a show of goodness, their mind is ever interwoven with
hypocrisy and deceit, their soul inwardly bound with the fetters of
wickedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](inst039.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p31"></span>80 180 The French is, “Mais c’est comme
si un capitaine assembloit force gens qui ne fussent nullement duits ˆ
la guerre pour espouvanter son ennemi. Avant que les mettre en œuvre, il
feroient grande monstre; mais s’il faloit venir en bataille et joindre
eontre son ennemi on les feroit fuir du premier coup.” But it is as if a
captain were to assemble a large body of people, in no wise trained to
war, to astonish the enemy. Before coming into action they would make a
great show; but if they were to go into battle, and come to close
quarters with the enemy, the first stroke would make them fly.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](inst039.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p34"></span>81 181 August. Enchir. ad Laurent. de
Gratia et Liber. Arbit. cap. 16. Homil 29, in Joann. <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p34.1"></span>Ep. 24<span id="iv.ii.vi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](inst039.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p36"></span>82 182 <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.1"></span>[Joel
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p36.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.vi-p36.2"></span>[Jer.
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.vi-p36.3"></span>[Deut.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.3"></span>; 30:6; <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.4"></span>[Ezek.
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.vi-p36.5"></span>[Jer.
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vi-p36.5"></span>. Vid. Calvin. adv. Pighium.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](inst039.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p38.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p39"></span>83 183 The French is, “Et de fait cette
raison a grande apparence humainement. Car on peut deduire gue ce seroit
une cruauté de Dieu,”&c.—And, in fact, humanly speaking, there is great
plausibility in this argument. For, it may be maintained, that it would
be cruelty in God, &c.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](inst039.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p40"></span>84 184 The French adds, “Veu qu’en cela
il fait le profit de ses serviteurs et rend les iniques plus damnables;”
seeing that by this he promotes the good of his servants, and renders
the wicked more deserving of condemnation.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](inst039.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p44"></span>85 185 The French is “Où est-ce que sera
cette facilité, veu que notre natute succombe en cet endroit, et n’y a
celui qui ne trebusche voulant marcher?” Where is this facility, seeing
that our nature here gives way, and there is not a man who in wishing to
walk does not tumble?

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](inst039.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p50"></span>86 186 Orig. Lig. 7 in Epist. ad
Rom.—Hieron. Dial. i in Pelagium.—For the passage in Augustine, see the
extract in Book 3. chap. 24 sec. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 6. - REDEMPTION FOR MAN LOST TO BE SOUGHT IN
CHRIST.](inst040.md)
