[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst053)  [Next](inst055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 1.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span>THE BENEFITS OF CHRIST MADE AVAILABLE TO
US BY THE SECRET OPERATION OF THE SPIRIT.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>The three divisions of this chapter
are,—I. The secret operation of the Holy Spirit, which seals our
salvation, should be considered first in Christ the Mediator as our
Head, sec. 1 and 2. II. The titles given to the Holy Spirit show that we
become members of Christ by his grace and energy, sec. 3. III. As the
special influence of the Holy Spirit is manifested in the gift of faith,
the former is a proper introduction to the latter, and thus prepares for
the second chapter, sec. 4.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>1. The Holy Spirit the bond which unites
us with Christ. This the result of faith produced by the secret
operation of the Holy Spirit. This obvious from Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>2. In Christ the Mediator the gifts of
the Holy Spirit are to be seen in all their fulness. To what end. Why
the Holy Spirit is called the Spirit of the Father and the Son.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>3. Titles of the Spirit,—1. The Spirit of
adoption. 2. An earnest and seal. 3. Water. 4. Life. 5. Oil and unction.
6. Fire. 7. A fountain. 8. The word of God. Use of these titles.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>4. Faith being the special work of the
Holy Spirit, the power and efficacy of the Holy Spirit usually ascribed
to it.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>1. We must now see in what way we become
possessed of the blessings which God has bestowed on his only-begotten
Son, not for private use, but to enrich the poor and needy. And the
first thing to be attended to is, that so long as we are without Christ
and separated from him, nothing which he suffered and did for the
salvation of the human race is of the least benefit to us. To
communicate to us the blessings which he received from the Father, he
must become ours and dwell in us. Accordingly, he is called our Head,
and the first-born among many brethren, while, on the other hand, we are
said to be ingrafted into him and clothed with him,27  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) all which he possesses being, as I
have said, nothing to us until we become one with him. And although it
is true that we obtain this by faith, yet since we see that all do not
indiscriminately embrace the offer of Christ which is made by the
gospel, the very nature of the case teaches us to ascend higher, and
inquire into the secret efficacy of the Spirit, to which it is owing
that we enjoy Christ and all his blessings. I have already treated of
the eternal essence and divinity of the Spirit (Book 1 chap. 13 sect.
14,15); let us at present attend to the special point, that Christ came
by water and blood, as the Spirit testifies concerning him, that we
might not lose the benefits of the salvation which he has purchased. For
as there are said to be three witnesses in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit, so there are also three on the earth, namely, water,
blood, and Spirit. It is not without cause that the testimony of the
Spirit is twice mentioned, a testimony which is engraven on our hearts
by way of seal, and thus seals the cleansing and sacrifice of Christ.
For which reason, also, Peter says, that believers are “elect” “through
sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood
of Jesus Christ,” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.4"></span>[1 Pet.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.4"></span>.md).
By these words he reminds us, that if the shedding of his sacred blood
is not to be in vain, our souls must be washed in it by the secret
cleansing of the Holy Spirit. For which reason, also, Paul, speaking of
cleansing and purification, says, “but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus and by
the Spirit of our God,” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.5"></span>[1 Cor.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p9.5"></span>). The whole comes to this that the Holy
Spirit is the bond by which Christ effectually binds us to himself. Here
we may refer to what was said in the last Book concerning his anointing.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>2. But in order to have a clearer view
of this most important subjects we must remember that Christ came
provided with the Holy Spirit after a peculiar manner, namely, that he
might separate us from the world, and unite us in the hope of an eternal
inheritance. Hence the Spirit is called the Spirit of sanctification,
because he quickens and cherishes us, not merely by the general energy
which is seen in the human race, as well as other animals, but because
he is the seed and root of heavenly life in us. Accordingly, one of the
highest commendations which the prophets give to the kingdom of Christ
is, that under it the Spirit would be poured out in richer abundance.
One of the most remarkable passages is that of Joel, “It shall come to
pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Joel
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>). For although the prophet seems to confine
the gifts of the Spirit to the office of prophesying, he yet intimates
under a figure, that God will, by the illumination of his Spirit,
provide himself with disciples who had previously been altogether
ignorant of heavenly doctrine. Moreover, as it is for the sake of his
Son that God bestows the Holy Spirit upon us, and yet has deposited him
in all his fulness with the Son, to be the minister and dispenser of his
liberality, he is called at one time the Spirit of the Father, at
another the Spirit of the Son: “Ye are not in the flesh but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.2"></span>[Rom.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.2"></span>); and hence he encourages us to hope for
complete renovation: “If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.3"></span>[Rom.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.3"></span>). There is no inconsistency in ascribing
the glory of those gifts to the Father, inasmuch as he is the author of
them, and, at the same time, ascribing them to Christ, with whom they
have been deposited, that he may bestow them on his people. Hence he
invites all the thirsty to come unto him and drink (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.4"></span>[John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.4"></span>). And Paul teaches, that “unto every one of
us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ,”
(<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10.5"></span>[Eph.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.5"></span>). And we must remember, that the Spirit is
called the Spirit of Christ, not only inasmuch as the eternal Word of
God is with the Father united with the Spirit, but also in respect of
his office of Mediator; because, had he not been endued with the energy
of the Spirit, he had come to us in vain. In this sense he is called the
“last Adam,” and said to have been sent from heaven “a quickening
Spirit,” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10.6"></span>[1 Cor.
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.6"></span>), where Paul contrasts the special life
which Christ breathes into his people, that they may be one with him
with the animal life which is common even to the reprobate. In like
manner, when he prays that believers may have “the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God,” he at the same time adds, “the
communion of the Holy Ghost,” without which no man shall ever taste the
paternal favor of God, or the benefits of Christ. Thus, also, in another
passage he says, “The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost, which is given unto us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.7"></span>[Rom.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p10.7"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span>3. Here it will be proper to point out
the titles which the Scripture bestows on the Spirit, when it treats of
the commencement and entire renewal of our salvation. First, he is
called the “Spirit of adoption,” because he is witness to us of the free
favor with which God the Father embraced us in his well-beloved and
only-begotten Son, so as to become our Fathers and give us boldness of
access to him; nays he dictates the very words, so that we can boldly
cry, “Abba, Father.” For the same reason, he is said to have “sealed us,
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts,” because, as pilgrims
in the world, and persons in a manner dead, he so quickens us from above
as to assure us that our salvation is safe in the keeping of a faithful
God. Hence, also, the Spirit is said to be “life because of
righteousness.” But since it is his secret irrigation that makes us bud
forth and produce the fruits of righteousness, he is repeatedly
described as *water*. Thus in Isaiah “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come
ye to the waters.” Again, “I will pour water upon him that is thirsty,
and floods upon the dry ground.” Corresponding to this are the words of
our Savior, to which I lately referred, “If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink.” Sometimes, indeed, he receives this name from his
energy in cleansing and purifying, as in Ezekiel, where the Lord
promises, “Then will I sprinkle you with clean water, and ye shall be
clean.” As those sprinkled with the Spirit are restored to the full
vigor of life, he hence obtains the names of “*Oil*” and “*Unction*.” On
the other hand, as he is constantly employed in subduing and destroying
the vices of our concupiscence, and inflaming our hearts with the love
of God and piety, he hence receives the name of *Fire*. In fine, he is
described to us as a *Fountain*, whence all heavenly riches flow to us;
or as the *Hand* by which God exerts his power, because by his divine
inspiration he so breathes divine life into us, that we are no longer
acted upon by ourselves, but ruled by his motion and agency, so that
everything good in us is the fruit of his grace, while our own
endowments without him are mere darkness of mind and perverseness of
heart. Already, indeed, it has been clearly shown, that until our minds
are intent on the Spirit, Christ is in a manner unemployed, because we
view him coldly without us, and so at a distance from us. Now we know
that he is of no avail save only to those to whom he is a head and the
first-born among the brethren, to those, in fine, who are clothed with
him.27  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md) To this union alone it
is owing that, in regard to us, the Savior has not come in vain. To this
is to be referred that sacred marriage, by which we become bone of his
bone, and flesh of his flesh, and so one with him (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.13"></span>[Eph.
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.13"></span>), for it is by the Spirit alone that he
unites himself to us. By the same grace and energy of the Spirit we
become his members, so that he keeps us under him, and we in our turn
possess him.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span>4. But as faith is his principal work,
all those passages which express his power and operations are, in a
great measure, referred to it, as it is, only by faith that he brings us
to the light of the Gospel, as John teaches, that to those who believe
in Christ is given the privilege “to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe in his name, which were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>[John
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>). Opposing *God* to *flesh and blood*, he
declares it to be a supernatural gift, that those who would otherwise
remain in unbelief, receive Christ by faith. Similar to this is our
Savior’s reply to Peter, “Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee,
but my Father which is in heaven,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.2"></span>[Matt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.2"></span>). These things I now briefly advert to, as
I have fully considered them elsewhere. To the same effect Paul says to
the Ephesians, “Ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.3"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.3"></span>); thus showing that he is the internal
teacher, by whose agency the promise of salvation, which would otherwise
only strike the air or our ears, penetrates into our minds. In like
manner, he says to the Thessalonians, “God has from the beginning chosen
you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth,” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13.4"></span>[2 Thess.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.4"></span>); by this passage briefly reminding us,
that faith itself is produced only by the Spirit. This John explains
more distinctly, “We know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he
has given us;” again, “Hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.5"></span>[1 John
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.5"></span>; 4:13). Accordingly to make his disciples
capable of heavenly wisdom, Christ promised them “the Spirit of truth,
whom the world cannot receive,” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13.6"></span>[John
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.6"></span>). And he assigns it to him, as his proper
office, to bring to remembrance the things which he had verbally taught;
for in vain were light offered to the blind, did not that Spirit of
understanding open the intellectual eye; so that he himself may be
properly termed the key by which the treasures of the heavenly kingdom
are unlocked, and his illumination, the eye of the mind by which we are
enabled to see: hence Paul so highly commends the ministry of the
Spirit27  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>), since teachers would cry aloud to no
purpose, did not Christ, the internal teacher, by means of his Spirit,
draw to himself those who are given him of the Father. Therefore, as we
have said that salvation is perfected in the person of Christ, so, in
order to make us partakers of it, he baptizes us “with the Holy Spirit
and with fire,” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14.2"></span>[Luke
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p14.2"></span>), enlightening us into the faith of his
Gospel, and so regenerating us to be new creatures. Thus cleansed from
all pollution, he dedicates us as holy temples to the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](inst054.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>76 276 <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Eph.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.2"></span>[Rom.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.2"></span>;
11:17; 8:29; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.3"></span>[Gal.
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](inst054.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>77 277 <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Rom.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.2"></span>[Gal.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.3"></span>[2 Cor.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.4"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.5"></span>[Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.5"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.6"></span>[Isa.
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.6"></span>; 44:3; <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.7"></span>[John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.7"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.8"></span>[Ezek.
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.8"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.9"></span>[John
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.9"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.10"></span>[1 John
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.10"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.11"></span>[Luke
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.11"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.ii-p12.12"></span>[Acts
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.12"></span>.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](inst054.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p13.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span>78 278 The French adds, “qui vaut autant
a dire comme la predication ayant avec soy vivacité spirituelle;”—that
is to say, preaching carrying spiritual quickening along with it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 2. - OF FAITH. THE DEFINITION OF IT. ITS PECULIAR
PROPERTIES.](inst055.md)
