[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst047)  [Next](inst049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xv"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 14.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p1"></span>HOW TWO NATURES CONSTITUTE THE PERSON OF
THE MEDIATOR.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p2"></span>This chapter contains two principal heads:
I. A brief exposition of the doctrine of Christ’s two natures in one
person, sec. 1–4. II. A refutation of the heresies of Servetus, which
destroy the distinction of natures in Christ, and the eternity of the
divine nature of the Son.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p4"></span>1. Proof of two natures in Christ—a human
and a divine. Illustrated by analogy, from the union of body and soul.
Illustration applied.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p5"></span>2. Proof from passages of Scripture which
distinguish between the two natures. Proof from the communication of
properties.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p6"></span>3. Proof from passages showing the union
of both natures. A rule to be observed in this discussion.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p7"></span>4. Utility and use of the doctrine
concerning the two natures. The Nestorians. The Eutychians. Both justly
condemned by the Church.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p8"></span>5. The heresies of Servetus refuted.
General answer or sum of the orthodox doctrine concerning Christ. What
meant by the hypostatic union. Objections of Servetus to the deity of
Christ. Answer.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p9"></span>6. Another objection and answer. A twofold
filiation of Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p10"></span>7. Other objections answered.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p11"></span>8. Conclusion of the former objections.
Other pestilential heresies of Servetus.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p12"></span>1. When it is said that the Word was made
flesh, we must not understand it as if he were either changed into
flesh, or confusedly intermingled with flesh, but that he made choice of
the Virgin’s womb as a temple in which he might dwell. He who was the
Son of God became the Son of man, not by confusion of substance, but by
unity of person. For we maintain, that the divinity was so conjoined and
united with the humanity, that the entire properties of each nature
remain entire, and yet the two natures constitute only one Christ. If,
in human affairs, any thing analogous to this great mystery can be
found, the most apposite similitude24  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) seems to be that of man, who obviously
consists of two substances, neither of which however is so intermingled
with the other as that both do not retain their own properties. For
neither is soul body, nor is body soul. Wherefore that is said
separately of the soul which cannot in any way apply to the body; and
that, on the other hand, of the body which is altogether inapplicable to
the soul; and that, again, of the whole man, which cannot be affirmed
without absurdity either of the body or of the soul separately. Lastly,
the properties of the soul are transferred to the body, and the
properties of the body to the soul, and yet these form only one man, not
more than one. Such modes of expression intimate both that there is in
man one person formed of two compounds, and that these two different
natures constitute one person. Thus the Scriptures speak of Christ. They
sometimes attribute to him qualities which should be referred specially
to his humanity and sometimes qualities applicable peculiarly to his
divinity, and sometimes qualities which embrace both natures, and do not
apply specially to either. This combination of a twofold nature in
Christ they express so carefully, that they sometimes communicate them
with each other, a figure of speech which the ancients termed
ijdiwmavtwn koinoniva (a communication of properties).

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p14"></span>2. Little dependence could be placed on
these statements, were it not proved by numerous passages throughout the
sacred volume that none of them is of man’s devising. What Christ said
of himself, “Before Abraham was I am,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p14.1"></span>[John
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p14.1"></span>), was very foreign to his humanity. I am not
unaware of the cavil by which erroneous spirits distort this
passage—viz. that he was before all ages, inasmuch as he was foreknown
as the Redeemer, as well in the counsel of the Father as in the minds of
believers. But seeing he plainly distinguishes the period of his
manifestation from his eternal existence, and professedly founds on his
ancient government, to prove his precedence to Abraham, he undoubtedly
claims for himself the peculiar attributes of divinity. Paul’s assertion
that he is “the first-born of every creature,” that “he is before all
things, and by him all things consist,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p14.2"></span>[Col. 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p14.2"></span>);
his own declaration, that he had glory with the Father before the world
was, and that he worketh together with the Father, are equally
inapplicable to man. These and similar properties must be specially
assigned to his divinity. Again, his being called the servant of the
Father, his being said to grow in stature, and wisdom, and favour with
God and man, not to seek his own glory, not to know the last day, not to
speak of himself, not to do his own will, his being seen and handled,24
 <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) apply entirely to his humanity;
since, as God, he cannot be in any respect said to grow, works always
for himself, knows every thing, does all things after the counsel of his
own will, and is incapable of being seen or handled. And yet he not
merely ascribes these things separately to his human nature, but applies
them to himself as suitable to his office of Mediator. There is a
communication of ijdiwvmata, or properties, when Paul says, that God
purchased the Church “with his own blood,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.7"></span>[Acts
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.7"></span>), and that the Jews crucified the Lord of
glory (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.8"></span>[1 Cor.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.8"></span>).
In like manner, John says, that the Word of God was “handled.” God
certainly has no blood, suffers not, cannot be touched with hands; but
since that Christ, who was true God and true man, shed his blood on the
cross for us, the acts which were performed in his human nature are
transferred improperly, but not ceaselessly, to his divinity. We have a
similar example in the passage where John says that God laid down his
life for us (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.9"></span>[1 John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.9"></span>). Here a property of his humanity is
communicated with his other nature. On the other hand, when Christ,
still living on the earth, said, “No man has ascended up to heaven but
he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man, which is in heaven,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.10"></span>[John
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.10"></span>), certainly regarded as man in the flesh
which he had put on, he was not then in heaven, but inasmuch as he was
both God and man, he, on account of the union of a twofold nature,
attributed to the one what properly belonged to the other.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p16"></span>3. But, above all, the true substance of
Christ is most clearly declared in those passages which comprehend both
natures at once. Numbers of these exist in the Gospel of John. What we
there read as to his having received power from the Father to forgive
sins; as to his quickening whom he will; as to his bestowing
righteousness, holiness, and salvation; as to his being appointed judge
both of the quick and the dead; as to his being honoured even as the
Father,24  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) are not peculiar
either to his Godhead or his humanity, but applicable to both. In the
same way he is called the Light of the world, the good Shepherd, the
only Door, the true Vine. With such prerogatives the Son of God was
invested on his manifestation in the flesh, and though he possessed the
same with the Father before the world was created, still it was not in
the same manner or respect; neither could they be attributed to one who
was a man and nothing more. In the same sense we ought to understand the
saying of Paul, that at the end Christ shall deliver up “the kingdom to
God, even the Father,” (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.2"></span>[1 Cor.
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p17.2"></span>). The kingdom of God assuredly had no
beginning, and will have no end: but because he was hid under a humble
clothing of flesh, and took upon himself the form of a servant, and
humbled himself (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.3"></span>[Phil.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.3"></span>),
and, laying aside the insignia of majesty, became obedient to the
Father; and after undergoing this subjection was at length crowned with
glory and honour (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.4"></span>[Heb.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.4"></span>),
and exalted to supreme authority, that at his name every knee should bow
(<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.5"></span>[Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p17.5"></span>); so at the end he will subject to the
Father both the name and the crown of glory, and whatever he received of
the Father, that God may be all in all (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p17.6"></span>[1 Cor.
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p17.6"></span>). For what end were that power and authority
given to him, save that the Father might govern us by his hand? In the
same sense, also, he is said to sit at the right hand of the Father. But
this is only for a time, until we enjoy the immediate presence of his
Godhead. And here we cannot excuse the error of some ancient writers,
who, by not attending to the office of Mediator, darken the genuine
meaning of almost the whole doctrine which we read in the Gospel of
John, and entangle themselves in many snares. Let us, therefore, regard
it as the key of true interpretation, that those things which refer to
the office of Mediator are not spoken of the divine or human nature
simply.25  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) Christ, therefore,
shall reign until he appear to judge the world, inasmuch as, according
to the measure of our feeble capacity, he now connects us with the
Father. But when, as partakers of the heavenly glory, we shall see God
as he is, then Christ, having accomplished the office of Mediator, shall
cease to be the vicegerent of the Father, and will be content with the
glory which he possessed before the world was. Nor is the name of Lord
specially applicable to the person of Christ in any other respect than
in so far as he holds a middle place between God and us. To this effect
are the words of Paul, “To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and we by him,” (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p18.1"></span>[1 Cor.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p18.1"></span>);
that is, to the latter a temporary authority has been committed by the
Father until his divine majesty shall be beheld face to face. His giving
up of the kingdom to the Father, so far from impairing his majesty, will
give a brighter manifestation of it. God will then cease to be the head
of Christ, and Christ’s own Godhead will then shine forth of itself,
whereas it is now in a manner veiled.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p19"></span>4. This observation, if the readers apply
it properly, will be of no small use in solving a vast number of
difficulties. For it is strange how the ignorant, nay, some who are not
altogether without learning, are perplexed by these modes of expression
which they see applied to Christ, without being properly adapted either
to his divinity or his humanity, not considering their accordance with
the character in which he was manifested as God and man, and with his
office of Mediator. It is very easy to see how beautifully they accord
with each other, provided they have a sober interpreter, one who
examines these great mysteries with the reverence which is meet. But
there is nothing which furious and frantic spirits cannot throw into
confusion.25  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) They fasten on the
attributes of humanity to destroy his divinity; and, on the other hand,
on those of his divinity to destroy his humanity: while those which,
spoken conjointly of the two natures, apply to neither, they employ to
destroy both. But what else is this than to contend that Christ is not
man because he is God, not God because he is man, and neither God nor
man because he is both at once. Christ, therefore, as God and man,
possessing natures which are united, but not confused, we conclude that
he is our Lord and the true Son of God, even according to his humanity,
though not by means of his humanity. For we must put far from us the
heresy of Nestorius, who, presuming to dissect rather than distinguish
between the two natures, devised a double Christ. But we see the
Scripture loudly protesting against this, when the name of the Son of
God is given to him who is born of a Virgin, and the Virgin herself is
called the mother of our Lord (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p20.1"></span>[Luke
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#043)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p20.1"></span>).
We must beware also of the insane fancy of Eutyches, lest, when we would
demonstrate the unity of person, we destroy the two natures. The many
passages we have already quoted, in which the divinity is distinguished
from the humanity, and the many other passages existing throughout
Scripture, may well stop the mouth of the most contentious. I will
shortly add a few observations, which will still better dispose of this
fiction. For the present, one passage will suffice—Christ would not have
called his body a temple (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p20.2"></span>[John
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p20.2"></span>), had not the Godhead distinctly dwelt in
it. Wherefore, as Nestorius had been justly condemned in the Council of
Ephesus, so afterwards was Eutyches in those of Constantinople and
Chalcedony, it being not more lawful to confound the two natures of
Christ than to divide them.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p21"></span>5. But in our age, also, has arisen a not
less fatal monster, Michael Servetus, who for the Son of God has
substituted a figment composed of the essence of God, spirit, flesh, and
three untreated elements. First, indeed, he denies that Christ is the
Son of God, for any other reason than because he was begotten in the
womb of the Virgin by the Holy Spirit. The tendency of this crafty
device is to make out, by destroying the distinction of the two natures,
that Christ is somewhat composed of God and man, and yet is not to be
deemed God and man. His aim throughout is to establish, that before
Christ was manifested in the flesh there were only shadowy figures in
God, the truth or effect of which existed for the first time, when the
Word who had been destined to that honour truly began to be the Son of
God. We indeed acknowledge that the Mediator who was born of the Virgin
is properly the Son of God. And how could the man Christ be a mirror of
the inestimable grace of God, had not the dignity been conferred upon
him both of being and of being called the only-begotten Son of God?
Meanwhile, however, the definition of the Church stands unmoved, that he
is accounted the Son of God, because the Word begotten by the Father
before all ages assumed human nature by hypostatic union,—a term used by
ancient writers to denote the union which of two natures constitutes one
person, and invented to refute the dream of Nestorius, who pretended
that the Son of God dwelt in the flesh in such a manner as not to be at
the same time man. Servetus calumniously charges us with making the Son
of God double, when we say that the eternal Word before he was clothed
with flesh was already the Son of God: as if we said anything more than
that he was manifested in the flesh. Although he was God before he
became man, he did not therefore begin to be a new God. Nor is there any
greater absurdity in holding that the Son of God, who by eternal
generation ever had the property of being a Son, appeared in the flesh.
This is intimated by the angel’s word to Mary: “That holy thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p21.1"></span>[Luke
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p21.1"></span>); as if he had said that the name of Son,
which was more obscure under the law, would become celebrated and
universally known. Corresponding to this is the passage of Paul, that
being now the sons of God by Christ, we “have received the Spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p21.2"></span>[Rom.
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p21.2"></span>). Were not also the holy patriarchs of old
reckoned among the sons of God? Yea, trusting to this privilege, they
invoked God as their Father. But because ever since the only-begotten
Son of God came forth into the world, his celestial paternity has been
more clearly manifested, Paul assigns this to the kingdom of Christ as
its distinguishing feature. We must, however, constantly hold, that God
never was a Father to angels and men save in respect of his
only-begotten Son: that men, especially, who by their iniquity were
rendered hateful to God, are sons by gratuitous adoption, because he is
a Son by nature. Nor is there anything in the assertion of Servetus,
that this depends on the filiation which God had decreed with himself.
Here we deal not with figures, as expiation by the blood of beasts was
shown to be; but since they could not be the sons of God in reality,
unless their adoption was founded in the head, it is against all reason
to deprive the head of that which is common to the members. I go
farther: since the Scripture gives the name of sons of God to the
angels, whose great dignity in this respect depended not on the future
redemption, Christ must in order take precedence of them that he may
reconcile the Father to them. I will again briefly repeat and add the
same thing concerning the human race. Since angels as well as men were
at first created on the condition that God should be the common Father
of both; if it is true, as Paul says, that Christ always was the head,
“the first-born of every creature—that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence,” (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p21.3"></span>[Col.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p21.3"></span>),
I think I may legitimately infer, that he existed as the Son of God
before the creation of the world.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p22"></span>6. But if his filiation (if I may so
express it) had a beginning at the time when he was manifested in the
flesh, it follows that he was a Son in respect of human nature also.
Servetus, and others similarly frenzied, hold that Christ who appeared
in the flesh is the Son of God, inasmuch as but for his incarnation he
could not have possessed this name. Let them now answer me, whether,
according to both natures, and in respect of both, he is a Son? So
indeed they prate; but Paul’s doctrine is very different. We
acknowledge, indeed, that Christ in human nature is called a Son, not
like believers by gratuitous adoption merely, but the true, natural,
and, therefore, only Son, this being the mark which distinguishes him
from all others. Those of us who are regenerated to a new life God
honours with the name of sons; the name of true and only-begotten Son he
bestows on Christ alone. But how is he an only Son in so great a
multitude of brethren, except that he possesses by nature what we
acquire by gift? This honour we extend to his whole character of
Mediator, so that He who was born of a Virgin, and on the cross offered
himself in sacrifice to the Father, is truly and properly the Son of
God; but still in respect of his Godhead: as Paul teaches when he says,
that he was “separated unto the gospel of God (which he had promised
afore by his prophets in the Holy Scriptures), concerning his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with power,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p22.1"></span>[Rom.
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p22.1"></span>). When distinctly calling him the Son of
David according to the flesh, why should he also say that he was
“declared to be the Son of God,” if he meant not to intimate, that this
depended on something else than his incarnation? For in the same sense
in which he elsewhere says, that “though he was crucified through
weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p22.2"></span>[2 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p22.2"></span>), so he now draws a distinction between the
two natures. They must certainly admit, that as on account of his mother
he is called the Son of David, so, on account of his Father, he is the
Son of God, and that in some respect differing from his human nature.
The Scripture gives him both names, calling him at one time the Son of
God, at another the Son of Man. As to the latter, there can be no
question that he is called a Son in accordance with the phraseology of
the Hebrew language, because he is of the offspring of Adam. On the
other hand, I maintain that he is called a Son on account of his Godhead
and eternal essence, because it is no less congruous to refer to his
divine nature his being called the Son of God, than to refer to his
human nature his being called the Son of Man. In fine, in the passage
which I have quoted, Paul does not mean, that he who according to the
flesh was begotten of the seed of David, was declared to be the Son of
God in any other sense than he elsewhere teaches that Christ, who
descended of the Jews according to the flesh, is “over all, God blessed
for ever,” (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p22.3"></span>[Rom.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p22.3"></span>).
But if in both passages the distinction of two natures is pointed out,
how can it be denied, that he who according to the flesh is the Son of
Man, is also in respect of his divine nature the Son of God?

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23"></span>7. They indeed find a blustering defence
of their heresy in its being said, that “God spared not his own Son,”
and in the communication of the angel, that He who was to be born of the
Virgin should be called the “Son of the Highest,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p23.1"></span>[Rom.
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23.2"></span>[Luke
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p23.2"></span>). But before pluming themselves on this
futile objection, let them for a little consider with us what weight
there is in their argument. If it is legitimately concluded, that at
conception he began to be the Son of God, because he who has been
conceived is called a Son, it will follow, that he began to be the Word
after his manifestation in the flesh, because John declares, that the
Word of life of which he spoke was that which “our hands have handled,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23.3"></span>[1 John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23.3"></span>).
In like manner we read in the prophet, “Thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though
thou be little among the thousands of Israel, yet out of thee shall he
come forth that is to be a ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been
from of old, from everlasting,” (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23.4"></span>[Mic.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p23.4"></span>).
How will they be forced to interpret if they will follow such a method
of arguing? I have declared that we by no means assent to Nestorius, who
imagined a twofold Christ, when we maintain that Christ, by means of
brotherly union, made us sons of God with himself, because in the flesh,
which he took from us, he is the only-begotten Son of God. And Augustine
wisely reminds us,25  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) that he is
a bright mirror of the wonderful and singular grace of God, because as
man he obtained honour which he could not merit. With this distinction,
therefore, according to the flesh, was Christ honoured even from the
womb—viz. to be the Son of God. Still, in the unity of person we are not
to imagine any intermixture which takes away from the Godhead what is
peculiar to it. Nor is it more absurd that the eternal Word of God and
Christ, uniting the two natures in one person, should in different ways
be called the Son of God, than that he should in various respects be
called at one time the Son of God, at another the Son of Man. Nor are we
more embarrassed by another cavil of Servetus—viz. that Christ, before
he appeared in the flesh, is nowhere called the Son of God, except under
a figure. For though the description of him was then more obscure, yet
it has already been clearly proved, that he was not otherwise the
eternal God, than as he was the Word begotten of the eternal Father. Nor
is the name applicable to the office of Mediator which he undertook,
except in that he was God manifest in the flesh. Nor would God have thus
from the beginning been called a Father, had there not been even then a
mutual relation to the Son, “of whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named,” (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p24.1"></span>[Eph.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p24.1"></span>). Hence it is easy to infer, that under the
Law and the Prophets he was the Son of God before this name was
celebrated in the Church. But if we are to dispute about the word
merely, Solomon, speaking of the incomprehensibility of God, affirms
that his Son is like himself, incomprehensible: “What is his name, and
what is his Son’s name, if thou canst tell?” (<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p24.2"></span>[Prov.
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p24.2"></span>). I am well aware that with the contentious
this passage will not have sufficient weight; nor do I found much upon
it, except as showing the malignant cavils of those who affirm that
Christ is the Son of God only in so far as he became man. We may add,
that all the most ancient writers, with one mouth and consent, testified
the same thing so plainly, that the effrontery is no less ridiculous
than detestable, which dares to oppose us with Irenaeus and Tertullian,
both of whom acknowledge that He who was afterwards visibly manifested
was the invisible Son of God.25  <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p26"></span>8. But although Servetus heaped together
a number of horrid dogmas, to which, perhaps, others would not
subscribe, you will find, that all who refuse to acknowledge the Son of
God except in the flesh, are obliged, when urged more closely, to admit
that he was a Son, for no other reason than because he was conceived in
the womb of the Virgin by the Holy Spirit; just like the absurdity of
the ancient Manichees, that the soul of man was derived by transfusion
from God, from its being said, that he breathed into Adam’s nostrils the
breath of life (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p26.1"></span>[Gen.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p26.1"></span>).
For they lay such stress on the name of Son that they leave no
distinction between the natures, but babblingly maintain that the man
Christ is the Son of God, because, according to his human nature, he was
begotten of God. Thus, the eternal generation of Wisdom, celebrated by
Solomon (<span id="iv.ii.xv-p26.2"></span>[Prov.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p26.2"></span>,
seq). is destroyed, and no kind of Godhead exists in the Mediator: or a
phantom is substituted instead of a man. The grosser delusions of
Servetus, by which he imposed upon himself and some others, it were
useful to refute, that pious readers might be warned by the example, to
confine themselves within the bounds of soberness and modesty: however,
I deem it superfluous here, as I have already done it in a special
treatise.25  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) The whole comes to
this, that the Son of God was from the beginning an idea, and was even
then a preordained man, who was to be the essential image of God. nor
does he acknowledge any other word of God except in external splendour.
The generation he interprets to mean, that from the beginning a purpose
of generating the Son was begotten in God, and that this purpose
extended itself by act to creation. Meanwhile, he confounds the Spirit
with the Word, saying that God arranged the invisible Word and Spirit
into flesh and soul. In short, in his view the typifying of Christ
occupies the place of generation; but he says, that he who was then in
appearance a shadowy Son, was at length begotten by the Word, to which
he attributes a generating power. From this it will follow, that dogs
and swine are not less sons of God, because created of the original seed
of the Divine Word. But although he compounds Christ of three untreated
elements, that he may be begotten of the essence of God, he pretends
that he is the first-born among the creatures, in such a sense that,
according to their degree, stones have the same essential divinity. But
lest he should seem to strip Christ of his Deity, he admits that his
flesh is oJmoouvsion, of the same substance with God, and that the Word
was made man, by the conversion of flesh into Deity. Thus, while he
cannot comprehend that Christ was the Son of God, until his flesh came
forth from the essence of God and was converted into Deity, he reduces
the eternal personality (*hypostasis*) of the Word to nothing, and robs
us of the Son of David, who was the promised Redeemer. It is true, he
repeatedly declares that the Son was begotten of God by knowledge and
predestination, but that he was at length made man out of that matter
which, from the beginning, shone with God in the three elements, and
afterwards appeared in the first light of the world, in the cloud and
pillar of fire. How shamefully inconsistent with himself he ever and
anon becomes, it were too tedious to relate. From this brief account
sound readers will gather, that by the subtle ambiguities of this
infatuated man, the hope of salvation was utterly extinguished. For if
the flesh were the Godhead itself, it would cease to be its temple. Now,
the only Redeemer we can have is He who being begotten of the seed of
Abraham and David according to the flesh, truly became man. But he
erroneously insists on the expression of John, “The Word was made
flesh.” As these words refute the heresy of Nestorius, so they give no
countenance to the impious fiction of which Eutyches was the inventor,
since all that the Evangelist intended was to assert a unity of person
in two natures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](inst048.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p13"></span>47 247 Augustine employs the same
similitude, Epist. 52.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](inst048.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15"></span>48 248 Isiah 41:1, &c.; <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.1"></span>[John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.2"></span>[Luke
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.3"></span>[John
8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.4"></span>[Mark
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xv-p15.5"></span>[John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.5"></span>; 6:38; <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.6"></span>[Luke
24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p15.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](inst048.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17"></span>49 249 <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p17.1"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p17.1"></span>;
5:21—23; 9:5; 10:9—11; 15:1.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](inst048.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p17.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p18"></span>50 250 VideCalv. Epist. ad Polonos
adversus Stancarum.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](inst048.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p20"></span>51 251 See August. in Enchir. ad Laurent.
c. 36.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](inst048.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p23.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p24"></span>52 252 See August. De Corruptione et
Gratia. cap. 11, et De Civitate Dei, lib. 10 cap 29, et alibi See also
cap. 17 s. 1.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](inst048.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p25"></span>53 253 See Irenæus, lib. 4 cap 14 et 37;
Tertullian adversus Praxeam. The above passages from The Proverbs is
quoted by Augustine, <span id="iv.ii.xv-p25.1"></span>Ep 49<span
id="iv.ii.xv-p25.1"></span>, Quæs. 5.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](inst048.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p27"></span>54 254 Vide Calv. Defensio Orthodoxæ
Fidei Sacræ Trinitatis adversus Prodigiosos Errores Michaelis Serveti
Hispani.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 15. - THREE THINGS BRIEFLY TO BE REGARDED IN CHRISTVIZ.
HIS OFFICES OF PROPHET, KING, AND PRIEST.](inst049)
