[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst085)  [Next](inst087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 6.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1"></span>OF THE PRIMACY OF THE ROMISH SEE.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are,—I.
Question stated, and an argument for the primacy of the Roman Pontiff
drawn from the Old Testament refuted, sec. 1, 2. II. Reply to various
arguments in support of the Papacy founded on the words, “Thou art
Peter,” &c., sec. 3-17.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p4"></span>1. Brief recapitulation. Why the subject
of primacy not yet mentioned. Represented by Papists as the bond of
ecclesiastical unity. Setting out with this axiom, they begin to debate
about their hierarchy.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5"></span>2. Question stated. An attempted proof
from the office of High Priest among the Jews. Two answers.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6"></span>3. Arguments for primacy from the New
Testament. Two answers.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7"></span>4. Another answer. The keys given to the
other apostles as well as to Peter. Other two arguments answered by
passages of Cyprian and Augustine.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>5. Another argument answered.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p9"></span>6. Answer to the argument that the Church
is founded on Peter, from its being said, “Upon this rock I will build
my Church.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p10"></span>7. Answer confirmed by passages of
Scripture.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p11"></span>8. Even allowing Peter’s superiority in
some respect, this is no proof of the primacy of the Roman Pontiff.
Other arguments answered.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p12"></span>9. Distinction between civil and
ecclesiastical government. Christ alone the Head of the Church. Argument
that there is still a ministerial head answered.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p13"></span>10. Paul, in giving a representation of
the Church, makes no mention of this ministerial head.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p14"></span>11. Even though Peter were ministerial
head, it does not follow that the Pope is so also. Argument founded on
Paul’s having lived and died at Rome.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p15"></span>12. On the hypothesis of the Papists,
the primacy belongs to the Church of Antioch.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p16"></span>13. Absurdity of the Popish hypothesis.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p17"></span>14. Peter was not the Bishop of Rome.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p18"></span>15. Same subject continued.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p19"></span>16. Argument that the unity of the
Church cannot be maintained without a supreme head on earth. Answer,
stating three reasons why great respect was paid in early times to the
See of Rome.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p20"></span>17. Opinion of early times on the
subject of the unity of the Church. No primacy attributed to the Church
of Rome. Christ alone regarded as the Head of the Universal Church.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p21"></span>1. Hitherto we have reviewed those
ecclesiastical orders which existed in the government of the primitive
Church; but afterwards corrupted by time, and thereafter more and more
vitiated, now only retain the name in the Papal Church, and are, in
fact, nothing but mere masks, so that the contrast will enable the pious
reader to judge what kind of Church that is, for revolting from which we
are charged with schism. But, on the head and crown of the whole matter,
I mean the primacy of the Roman See, from which they undertake to prove
that the Catholic Church is to be found only with them,54  <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552) we have not yet touched, because it
did not take its origin either in the institution of Christ, or the
practice of the early Church, as did those other parts, in regard to
which we have shown, that though they were ancient in their origin, they
in process of time altogether degenerated, nay, assumed an entirely new
form. And yet they endeavour to persuade the world that the chief and
only bond of ecclesiastical unity is to adhere to the Roman See, and
continue in subjection to it. I say, the prop on which they chiefly
lean, when they would deprive us of the Church, and arrogate it to
themselves, is, that they retain the head on which the unity of the
Church depends, and without which it must necessarily be rent and go to
pieces. For they regard the Church as a kind of mutilated trunk if it be
not subject to the Romish See as its head. Accordingly, when they debate
about their hierarchy they always set out with the axiom: The Roman
Pontiff (as the vicar of Christ, who is the Head of the Church) presides
in his stead over the universal Church, and the Church is not rightly
constituted unless that See hold the primacy over all others. The nature
of this claim must, therefore, be considered, that we may not omit
anything which pertains to the proper government of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p23"></span>2. The question, then, may be thus
stated, Is it necessary for the true order of the hierarchy (as they
term it), or of ecclesiastical order, that one See should surpass the
others in dignity and power, so as to be the head of the whole body? We
subject the Church to unjust laws if we lay this necessity upon her
without sanction from the word of God. Therefore, if our opponents would
prove what they maintain, it behoves them first of all to show that this
economy was instituted by Christ. For this purpose, they refer to the
office of high priest under the law, and the supreme jurisdiction which
God appointed at Jerusalem.55  <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553)
But the solution is easy, and it is manifold if one does not satisfy
them. First, no reason obliges us to extend what was useful in one
nation to the whole world; nay, the cases of one nation and of the whole
world are widely different. Because the Jews were hemmed in on every
side by idolaters, God fixed the seat of his worship in the central
region of the earth, that they might not be distracted by a variety of
religions; there he appointed one priest to whom they might all look up,
that they might be the better kept in unity. But now when the true
religion has been diffused over the whole globe, who sees not that it is
altogether absurd to give the government of East and West to one
individual? It is just as if one were to contend that the whole world
ought to be governed by one prefect, because one district has not
several prefects.55  <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554) But there
is still another reason why that institution ought not to be drawn into
a precedent. Every one knows that the high priest was a type of Christ;
now, the priesthood being transferred, that right must also be
transferred. To whom, then, was it transferred? certainly not to the
Pope, as he dares impudently to boast when he arrogates this title to
himself, but to Christ, who, as he alone holds the office without vicar
or successor, does not resign the honour to any other. For this
priesthood consists not in doctrine only, but in the propitiation which
Christ made by his death, and the intercession which he now makes with
the Father (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p25.1"></span>[Heb.
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p25.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p26"></span>3. That example, therefore, which is
seen to have been temporary, they have no right to bind upon us as by a
perpetual law. In the New Testament there is nothing which they can
produce in confirmation of their opinion, but its having been said to
one, “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church” (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.1"></span>[Mt.
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.1"></span>). Again, “Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou
me?” “Feed my lambs” (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p26.2"></span>[John
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.2"></span>). But to give strength to these proofs,
they must, in the first place, show, that to him who is ordered to feed
the flock of Christ power is given over all churches, and that to bind
and loose is nothing else than to preside over the whole world. But as
Peter had received a command from the Lord, so he exhorts all other
presbyters to feed the Church (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p26.3"></span>[1 Pet.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.3"></span>). Hence we are entitled to infer, that, by
that expression of Christ, nothing more was given to Peter than to the
others, or that the right which Peter had received he communicated
equally to others. But not to argue to no purpose, we elsewhere have,
from the lips of Christ himself, a clear exposition of what it is to
bind and loose. It is just to retain and remit sins (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.4"></span>[John
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.4"></span>). The mode of loosing and binding is
explained throughout Scripture: but especially in that passage in which
Paul declares that the ministers of the Gospel are commissioned to
reconcile men to God, and at the same time to exercise discipline over
those who reject the benefit (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p26.5"></span>[2 Cor.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p26.5"></span>; 10:16).

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p27"></span>4. How unbecomingly they wrest the
passages of binding and loosing I have elsewhere glanced at, and will in
a short time more fully explain. It may now be worth while merely to see
what they can extract from our Saviour’s celebrated answer to Peter. He
promised him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and said, that whatever
things he bound on earth should be bound in heaven (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p27.1"></span>[Mt.
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p27.1"></span>). The moment we are agreed as to the
meaning of the keys, and the mode of binding, all dispute will cease.
For the Pope will willingly omit that office assigned to the apostles,
which, full of labour and toil, would interfere with his luxuries
without giving any gain. Since heaven is opened to us by the doctrine of
the Gospel, it is by an elegant metaphor distinguished by the name of
*keys*. Again, the only mode in which men are bound and loosed is, in
the latter case, when they are reconciled to God by faith, and in the
former, more strictly bound by unbelief. Were this all that the Pope
arrogated to himself, I believe there would be none to envy him or stir
the question. But because this laborious and very far from lucrative
succession is by no means pleasing to the Pope, the dispute immediately
arises as to what it was that Christ promised to Peter. From the very
nature of the case, I infer that nothing more is denoted than the
dignity which cannot be separated from the burden of the apostolic
office. For, admitting the definition which I have given (and it cannot
without effrontery be rejected), nothing is here given to Peter that was
not common to him with his colleagues. On any other view, not only would
injustice be done to their persons, but the very majesty of the doctrine
would be impaired. They object; but what, pray, is gained by striking
against this stone? The utmost they can make out is, that as the
preaching of the same gospel was enjoined on all the apostles, so the
power of binding and loosing was bestowed upon them in common. Christ
(they say) constituted Peter prince of the whole Church when he promised
to give him the keys. But what he then promised to one he elsewhere
delivers, and as it were hands over, to all the rest. If the same right,
which was promised to one, is bestowed upon all, in what respect is that
one superior to his colleagues? He excels (they say) in this, that he
receives both in common, and by himself, what is given to the others in
common only. What if I should answer with Cyprian, and Augustine, that
Christ did not do this to prefer one to the other, but in order to
commend the unity of his Church? For Cyprian thus speaks: “In the person
of one man he gave the keys to all, that he might denote the unity of
all; the rest, therefore, were the same that Peter was, being admitted
to an equal participation of honour and power, but a beginning is made
from unity that the Church of Christ may be shown to be one” (Cyprian,
de Simplic. Prælat.). Augustine’s words are, “Had not the mystery of the
Church been in Peter, our Lord would not have said to him, I will give
thee the keys. For if this was said to Peter, the Church has them not;
but if the Church has them, then when Peter received the keys he
represented the whole Church” (August. Hom. in Joann. 50). Again, “All
were asked, but Peter alone answers, Thou art the Christ; and it is said
to him, I will give thee the keys; as if he alone had received the power
of loosing and binding; whereas he both spoke for all, and received in
common with all, being, as it were, the representative of unity. One
received for all, because there is unity in all” (Hom. 124).

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p28"></span>5. But we nowhere read of its being said
to any other, “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church”! (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p28.1"></span>[Mt.
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p28.1"></span>); as if Christ then affirmed anything else
of Peter, than Paul and Peter himself affirm of all Christians (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p28.2"></span>[Eph.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p28.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.vii-p28.3"></span>[1 Peter
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p28.3"></span>). The former describes Christ as the chief
corner-stone, on whom are built all who grow up into a holy temple in
the Lord; the latter describes us as living stones who are founded on
that elect and precious stone, and being so joined and compacted, are
united to our God, and to each other. Peter (they say) is above others,
because the name was specially given to him. I willingly concede to
Peter the honour of being placed among the first in the building of the
Church, or (if they prefer it) of being the first among the faithful;
but I will not allow them to infer from this that he has a primacy over
others. For what kind of inference is this? Peter surpasses others in
fervid zeal, in doctrine, in magnanimity; therefore, he has power over
them: as if we might not with greater plausibility infer, that Andrew is
prior to Peter in order, because he preceded him in time, and brought
him to Christ (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p28.4"></span>[John
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p28.4"></span>); but this I omit. Let Peter have the
preeminence, still there is a great difference between the honour of
rank and the possession of power. We see that the Apostles usually left
it to Peter to address the meeting, and in some measure take precedence
in relating, exhorting, admonishing, but we nowhere read anything at all
of power.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p29"></span>6. Though we are not yet come to that
part of the discussion, I would merely observe at present, how futilely
those argue who, out of the mere name of Peter, would rear up a
governing power over the whole Church. For the ancient quibble which
they at first used to give a colour—viz. The Church is founded upon
Peter, because it is said, “On this rock,” &c.—is undeserving of notice,
not to say of refutation. Some of the Fathers so expounded!55  <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555) But when the whole of Scripture is
repugnant to the exposition, why is their authority brought forward in
opposition to God? nay, why do we contend about the meaning of these
words, as if it were obscure or ambiguous, when nothing can be more
clear and certain? Peter had confessed in his own name, and that of his
brethren, that Christ was the Son of God (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p30.1"></span>[Mt.
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p30.1"></span>). On this rock Christ builds his Church,
because it is the only foundation; as Paul says, “Other foundation than
this can no man lay” (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p30.2"></span>[1 Cor.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p30.2"></span>). Therefore, I do not here repudiate the
authority of the Fathers, because I am destitute of passages from them
to prove what I say, were I disposed to quote them; but as I have
observed, I am unwilling to annoy my readers by debating so clear a
matter, especially since the subject has long ago been fully handled and
expounded by our writers.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p31"></span>7. And yet, in truth, none can solve
this question better than Scripture, if we compare all the passages in
which it shows what office and power Peter held among the apostles, how
he acted among them, how he was received by them (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.1"></span>[Acts
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.1"></span>). Run over all these passages, and the
utmost you will find is, that Peter was one of twelve, their equal and
colleague, not their master. He indeed brings the matter before the
council when anything is to be done, and advises as to what is
necessary, but he, at the same time, listens to the others, not only
conceding to them an opportunity of expressing their sentiments, but
allowing them to decide; and when they have decided, he follows and
obeys. When he writes to pastors, he does not command authoritatively as
a superior, but makes them his colleagues, and courteously advises as
equals are wont to do (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p31.2"></span>[1 Pet.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.2"></span>). When he is accused of having gone in to
the Gentiles, though the accusation is unfounded, he replies to it, and
clears himself (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p31.3"></span>[Acts
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.3"></span>). Being ordered by his colleagues to go
with John into Samaria, he declines not (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.4"></span>[Acts
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.4"></span>). The apostles, by sending him, declare
that they by no means regard him as a superior, while he, by obeying and
undertaking the embassy committed to him, confesses that he is
associated with them, and has no authority over them. But if none of
these facts existed, the one Epistle to the Galatians would easily
remove all doubt, there being almost two chapters in which the whole for
which Paul contends is, that in regard to the honour of the apostleship,
he is the equal of Peter (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p31.5"></span>[Gal.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.5"></span>; 2:8). Hence he states, that he went to
Peter, not to acknowledge subjection, but only to make their agreement
in doctrine manifest to all; that Peter himself asked no acknowledgment
of the kind, but gave him the right hand of fellowship, that they might
be common labourers in the vineyard; that not less grace was bestowed on
him among the Gentiles than on Peter among the Jews: in fine, that
Peter, when he was not acting with strict fidelity, was rebuked by him,
and submitted to the rebuke (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p31.6"></span>[Gal.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p31.6"></span>). All these things make it manifest, either
that there was an equality between Paul and Peter, or, at least, that
Peter had no more authority over the rest than they had over him. This
point, as I have said, Paul handles professedly, in order that no one
might give a preference over him, in respect of apostleship, to Peter or
John, who were colleagues, not masters.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p32"></span>8. But were I to concede to them what
they ask with regard to Peter—viz. that he was the chief of the
apostles, and surpassed the others in dignity—there is no ground for
making a universal rule out of a special example, or wresting a single
fact into a perpetual enactment, seeing that the two things are widely
different. One was chief among the apostles, just because they were few
in number. If one man presided over twelve, will it follow that one
ought to preside over a hundred thousand? That twelve had one among them
to direct all is nothing strange. Nature admits, the human mind
requires, that in every meeting, though all are equal in power, there
should be one as a kind of moderator to whom the others should look up.
There is no senate without a consul, no bench of judges without a
president or chancellor, no college without a provost, no company
without a master. Thus there would be no absurdity were we to confess
that the apostles had conferred such a primacy on Peter. But an
arrangement which is effectual among a few must not be forthwith
transferred to the whole world, which no one man is able to govern. But
(say they) it is observed that not less in nature as a whole, than in
each of its parts, there is one supreme head. Proof of this it pleases
them to derive from cranes and bees, which always place themselves under
the guidance of one, not of several. I admit the examples which they
produce; but do bees flock together from all parts of the world to
choose one queen? Each queen is contented with her own hive. So among
cranes, each flock has its own king. What can they prove from this,
except that each church ought to have its bishop? They refer us to the
examples of states, quoting from Homer, Οὐκ ἀγαθον πολυκοιρανιη, “a
many-headed rule is not good;” and other "passages to the same effect
from heathen writers in commendation of monarchy. The answer is easy.
Monarchy is not lauded by Homer’s Ulysses, or by others, as if one
individual ought to govern the whole world; but they mean to intimate
that one kingdom does not admit of two kings, and that empire, as one
expresses it (Lucan. Lib. 1), cannot bear a partner.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p33"></span>9. Be it, however, as they will have it
(though the thing is most absurd; be it), that it were good and useful
for the whole world to be under one monarchy, I will not, therefore,
admit that the same thing should take effect in the government of the
Church. Her only Head is Christ, under whose government we are all
united to each other, according to that order and form of policy which
he himself has prescribed. Wherefore they offer an egregious insult to
Christ, when under this pretext they would have one man to preside over
the whole Church, seeing the Church can never be without a head, “even
Christ, from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in
the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body” (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p33.1"></span>[Eph.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p33.1"></span>). See how all men, without exception, are
placed in the body, while the honour and name of Head is left to Christ
alone. See how to each member is assigned a certain measure, a finite
and limited function, while both the perfection of grace and the supreme
power of government reside only in Christ. I am not unaware of the
cavilling objection which they are wont to urge—viz. that Christ is
properly called the only Head, because he alone reigns by his own
authority and in his own name; but that there is nothing in this to
prevent what they call another *ministerial* head from being under him,
and acting as his substitute. But this cavil cannot avail them, until
they previously show that this office was ordained by Christ. For the
apostle teaches, that the whole subministration is diffused through the
members, while the power flows from one celestial Head;55  <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556) or, if they will have it more plainly,
since Scripture testifies that Christ is Head, and claims this honour
for himself alone, it ought not to be transferred to any other than him
whom Christ himself has made his vicegerent. But not only is there no
passage to this effect, but it can be amply refuted by many passages.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p35"></span>10. Paul sometimes depicts a living
image of the Church, but makes no mention of a single head. On the
contrary, we may infer from his description, that it is foreign to the
institution of Christ. Christ, by his ascension, took away his visible
presence from us, and yet he ascended that he might fill all things:
now, therefore, he is present in the Church, and always will be. When
Paul would show the mode in which he exhibits himself, he calls our
attention to the ministerial offices which he employs: “Unto every one
of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ;”
“And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists;
and some, pastors and teachers.”55  <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) Why does he not say, that one presided
over all to act as his substitute? The passage particularly required
this, and it ought not on any account to have been omitted if it had
been true. Christ, he says, is present with us. How? By the ministry of
men whom he appointed over the government of the Church. Why not rather
by a ministerial head whom he appointed his substitute? He speaks of
unity, but it is in God and in the faith of Christ. He attributes
nothing to men but a common ministry, and a special mode to each. Why,
when thus commending unity, does he not, after saying, “one body, one
Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one
faith, one baptism” (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p36.2"></span>[Eph.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p36.2"></span>), immediately add, one Supreme Pontiff to
keep the Church in unity? Nothing could have been said more aptly if the
case had really been so. Let that passage be diligently pondered, and
there will be no doubt that Paul there meant to give a complete
representation of that sacred and ecclesiastical government to which
posterity have given the name of hierarchy. Not only does he not place a
monarchy among ministers, but even intimates that there is none. There
can also be no doubt, that he meant to express the mode of connection by
which believers unite with Christ the Head. There he not only makes no
mention of a ministerial head, but attributes a particular operation to
each of the members, according to the measure of grace distributed to
each. Nor is there any ground for subtle philosophical comparisons
between the celestial and the earthly hierarchy. For it is not safe to
be wise above measure with regard to the former, and in constituting the
latter, the only type which it behoves us to follow is that which our
Lord himself has delineated in his own word.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p37"></span>11. I will now make them another
concession, which they will never obtain from men of sound mind—viz.
that the primacy of the Church was fixed in Peter, with the view of
remaining for ever by perpetual succession. Still how will they prove
that his See was so fixed at Rome, that whosoever becomes Bishop of that
city is to preside over the whole world? By what authority do they annex
this dignity to a particular place, when it was given without any
mention of place? Peter, they say, lived and died at Rome. What did
Christ himself do? Did he not discharge his episcopate while he lived,
and complete the office of the priesthood by dying at Jerusalem? The
Prince of pastors, the chief Shepherd, the Head of the Church, could not
procure honour for a place, and Peter, so far his inferior, could! Is
not this worse than childish trifling? Christ conferred the honour of
primacy on Peter. Peter had his See at Rome, therefore he fixed the seat
of the primacy there. In this way the Israelites of old must have placed
the seat of the primacy in the wilderness, where Moses, the chief
teacher and prince of prophets, discharged his ministry and died.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p38"></span>12. Let us see, however, how admirably
they reason. Peter, they say, had the first place among the apostles;
therefore, the church in which he sat ought to have the privilege. But
where did he first sit? At Antioch, they say. Therefore, the church of
Antioch justly claims the primacy. They acknowledge that she was once
the first, but that Peter, by removing from it, transferred the honour
which he had brought with him to Rome. For there is extant, under the
name of Pope Marcellus, a letter to the presbyters of Antioch, in which
he says, “The See of Peter, at the outset, was with you, and was
afterwards, by the order of the Lord, translated hither.” Thus the
church of Antioch, which was once the first, yielded to the See of Rome.
But by what oracle did that good man learn that the Lord had so ordered?
For if the question is to be determined in regular form, they must say
whether they hold the privilege to be personal, or real, or mixed. One
of the three it must be. If they say personal, then it has nothing to do
with place; if real, then when once given to a place it is not lost by
the death or departure of the person. It remains that they must hold it
to be mixed; then the mere consideration of place is not sufficient
unless the person also correspond. Let them choose which they will, I
will forthwith infer, and easily prove, that Rome has no ground to
arrogate the primacy.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p39"></span>13. However, be it so. Let the primacy
have been (as they vainly allege) transferred from Antioch to Rome. Why
did not Antioch retain the second place? For if Rome has the first,
simply because Peter had his See there at the end of his life, to which
place should the second be given sooner than to that where he first had
his See? How comes it, then, that Alexandria takes precedence of
Antioch? How can the church of a disciple be superior to the See of
Peter? If honour is due to a church according to the dignity of its
founder, what shall we say of other churches? Paul names three
individuals who seemed to be pillars—viz. James, Peter, and John (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p39.1"></span>[Gal.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p39.1"></span>). If, in honour of Peter, the first place
is given to the Roman See, do not the churches of Ephesus and Jerusalem,
where John and James were fixed, deserve the second and third places?
But in ancient times Jerusalem held the last place among the
Patriarchates, and Ephesus was not able to secure even the lowest
corner. Other churches too have passed away, churches which Paul
founded, and over which the apostles presided. The See of Mark, who was
only one of the disciples, has obtained honour. Let them either confess
that that arrangement was preposterous, or let them concede that it is
not always true that each church is entitled to the degree of honour
which its founder possessed.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p40"></span>14. But I do not see that any credit is
due to their allegation of Peter’s occupation of the Roman See.
Certainly it is, that the statement of Eusebius, that he presided over
it for twenty-five years, is easily refuted. For it appears from the
first and second chapters of Galatians, that he was at Jerusalem about
twenty years after the death of Christ, and afterwards came to Antioch.
 <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558) How long he remained here is
uncertain; Gregory counts seven, and Eusebius twenty-five years. But
from our Saviour’s death to the end of Nero’s reign (under which they
state that he was put to death), will be found only thirty-seven years.
 <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) For our Lord suffered in the
eighteenth year of the reign of Tiberius. If you cut off the twenty
years, during which, as Paul testifies, Peter dwelt at Jerusalem, there
will remain at most seventeen years; and these must be divided between
his two episcopates. If he dwelt long at Antioch, his See at Rome must
have been of short duration. This we may demonstrate still more clearly.
Paul wrote to the Romans while he was on his journey to Jerusalem, where
he was apprehended and conveyed to Rome (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p42.1"></span>[Rom.
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p42.1"></span>). It is therefore probable that this letter
was written four years before his arrival at Rome.  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) Still there is no mention of Peter, as
there certainly would have been if he had been ruling that church. Nay,
in the end of the Epistle, where he enumerates a long list of
individuals whom he orders to be saluted, and in which it may be
supposed he includes all who were known to him, he says nothing at all
of Peter. To men of sound judgment, there is no need here of a long and
subtle demonstration; the nature of the case itself, and the whole
subject of the Epistle, proclaim that he ought not to have passed over
Peter if he had been at Rome.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p44"></span>15. Paul is afterwards conveyed as a
prisoner to Rome. Luke relates that he was received by the brethren, but
says nothing of Peter. From Rome he writes to many churches. He even
sends salutations from certain individuals, but does not by a single
word intimate that Peter was then there. Who, pray, will believe that he
would have said nothing of him if he had been present? Nay, in the
Epistle to the Philippians, after saying that he had no one who cared
for the work of the Lord so faithfully as Timothy, he complains, that
“all seek their own” (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p44.1"></span>[Phil.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p44.1"></span>)  <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) .
And to Timothy he makes the more grievous complaint, that no man was
present at his first defence, that all men forsook him (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p45.3"></span>[2 Tim.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p45.3"></span>). Where then was Peter?  <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) If they say that he was at Rome, how
disgraceful the charge which Paul brings against him of being a deserter
of the Gospel! For he is speaking of believers, since he adds, “The Lord
lay it not to their charge.” At what time, therefore, and how long, did
Peter hold that See? The uniform opinion of authors is, that he governed
that church until his death. But these authors are not agreed as to who
was his successor. Some say Linus, others Clement. And they relate many
absurd fables concerning a discussion between him and Simon Magus. Nor
does Augustine, when treating of superstition, disguise the fact, that
owing to an opinion rashly entertained, it had become customary at Rome
to fast on the day on which Peter carried away the palm from Simon Magus
(August. ad Januar. <span id="iv.iv.vii-p46.3"></span>[Ep.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p46.3"></span>).
In short, the affairs of that period are so involved from the variety of
opinions, that credit is not to be given rashly to anything we read
concerning it. And yet, from this agreement of authors, I do not dispute
that he died there, but that he was bishop, particularly for a long
period, I cannot believe.  <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) I do
not, however, attach much importance to the point, since Paul testifies,
that the apostleship of Peter pertained especially to the Jews, but his
own specially to us. Therefore, in order that that compact which they
made between themselves, nay, that the arrangement of the Holy Spirit
may be firmly established among us, we ought to pay more regard to the
apostleship of Paul than to that of Peter, since the Holy Spirit, in
allotting them different provinces, destined Peter for the Jews and Paul
for us. Let the Romanists, therefore, seek their primacy somewhere else
than in the word of God, which gives not the least foundation for it.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p48"></span>16. Let us now come to the Primitive
Church, that it may also appear that our opponents plume themselves on
its support, not less falsely and unadvisedly than on the testimony of
the word of God. When they lay it down as an axiom, that the unity of
the Church cannot be maintained unless there be one supreme head on
earth whom all the members should obey; and that, accordingly, our Lord
gave the primacy to Peter, and thereafter, by right of succession, to
the See of Rome, there to remain even to the end, they assert that this
has always been observed from the beginning. But since they improperly
wrest many passages, I would first premise, that I deny not that the
early Christians uniformly give high honour to the Roman Church, and
speak of it with reverence. This, I think, is owing chiefly to three
causes. The opinion which had prevailed (I know not how), that that
Church was founded and constituted by the ministry of Peter, had great
effect in procuring influence and authority. Hence, in the East, it was,
as a mark of honour, designated the Apostolic See. Secondly, as the seat
of empire was there, and it was for this reason to be presumed, that the
most distinguished for learning, prudence, skill, and experience, were
there more than elsewhere, account was justly taken of the circumstance,
lest the celebrity of the city, and the much more excellent gifts of God
also, might seem to be despised. To these was added a third cause, that
when the churches of the East, of Greece and of Africa, were kept in a
constant turmoil by differences of opinion, the Church of Rome was
calmer and less troubled. To this it was owing, that pious and holy
bishops, when driven from their sees, often betook themselves to Rome as
an asylum or haven. For as the people of the West are of a less acute
and versatile turn of mind than those of Asia or Africa, so they are
less desirous of innovations. It therefore added very great authority to
the Roman Church, that in those dubious times it was not so much
unsettled as others, and adhered more firmly to the doctrine once
delivered, as shall immediately be better explained. For these three
causes, I say, she was held in no ordinary estimation, and received many
distinguished testimonies from ancient writers.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p49"></span>17. But since on this our opponents
would rear up a primacy and supreme authority over other churches, they,
as I have said, greatly err. That this may better appear, I will first
briefly show what the views of early writers are as to this unity which
they so strongly urge. Jerome, in writing to Nepotian, after enumerating
many examples of unity, descends at length to the ecclesiastical
hierarchy. He says, “Every bishop of a church, every archpresbyter,
every archdeacon, and the whole ecclesiastical order, depends on its own
rulers.” Here a Roman presbyter speaks and commends unity in
ecclesiastical order. Why does he not mention that all the churches are
bound together by one Head as a common bond? There was nothing more
appropriate to the point in hand, and it cannot be said that he omitted
it through forgetfulness; there was nothing he would more willingly have
mentioned had the fact permitted. He therefore undoubtedly owns, that
the true method of unity is that which Cyprian admirably describes in
these words: “The episcopate is one, part of which is held entire by
each bishop, and the Church is one, which, by the increase of fecundity,
extends more widely in numbers. As there are many rays of the sun and
one light, many branches of a tree and one trunk, upheld by its
tenacious root, and as very many streams flow from one fountain, and
though numbers seem diffused by the largeness of the overflowing supply,
yet unity is preserved entire in the source, so the Church, pervaded
with the light of the Lord, sends her rays over the whole globe, and yet
is one light, which is everywhere diffused without separating the unity
of the body, extends her branches over the whole globe, and sends forth
flowing streams; still the head is one, and the source one” (Cyprian, de
Simplie. Prælat.). Afterwards he says, “The spouse of Christ cannot be
an adulteress: she knows one house, and with chaste modesty keeps the
sanctity of one bed.” See how he makes the bishopric of Christ alone
universal, as comprehending under it the whole Church: See how he says
that part of it is held entire by all who discharge the episcopal office
under this head. Where is the primacy of the Roman See, if the entire
bishopric resides in Christ alone, and a part of it is held entire by
each? My object in these remarks is, to show the reader, in passing,
that that axiom of the unity of an earthly kind in the hierarchy, which
the Romanists assume as confessed and indubitable, was altogether
unknown to the ancient Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_552"></span>[553](inst086.htm#fr_552) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p22"></span>49 549 See Calv. Adversus Concilium
Tridentinum. Also Adversus Theologos Parisienses.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[554](inst086.htm#fr_553) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p24"></span>50 550 French, “Pour ce faire, ils
alleguent la pretrise souveraine qui etoit en la loy, et la jurisdiction
souveraine du grand sacrificateur, que Dieu avoit establie en
Jerusalem.”—For this purpose, they allege the sovereign priesthood which
was under the law, and the sovereign jurisdiction of the high priest
which God had established at Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[555](inst086.htm#fr_554) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p25"></span>51 551 “Car c’est tout ainsi comme si
quelcun debattoit que le monde doit etre gouverné par un baillie ou
seneschal parce que chacune province a le sien.”—For it is just as if
one were to maintain that the whole world ought to be governed by a
bailie or seneschal, because each province has its own.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[556](inst086.htm#fr_555) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p30"></span>52 552 French, “Ils ont Four leur
bouelier, qu’aucuns des Peres les ont ainsi exposees.”—They regard it as
their buckler, that some of the Fathers have so expounded them.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[557](inst086.htm#fr_556) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p34"></span>59 559 The French adds, “Vision receue
du Seigneur; Le Seigneur des armees l’a dit,”—A vision received from the
Lord; The Lord of hosts hath spoken it.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[558](inst086.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p36"></span>54 554 <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p36.1"></span>[Eph.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[559](inst086.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p41"></span>110 D110 Calvin apparently believed that
Paul’s conversion occurred about three years after the death of Christ;
that Paul visited Peter in Jerusalem three years later (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.1"></span>[Gal.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.vii-p41.2"></span>[Acts
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.2"></span>); that Paul saw Peter again at the
Jerusalem Council fourteen years later (<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.3"></span>[Gal. 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.3"></span>:9; <span id="iv.iv.vii-p41.4"></span>[Acts
15:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.4"></span>); and that these three numbers were meant
to be added together. He therefore locates Peter at Jerusalem about
twenty years after the death of Christ.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[560](inst086.htm#fr_559) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p41.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p42"></span>111 D111 Nero committed suicide in A.D.
68. A subtraction of thirty-seven years brings us back to A.D. 31 for
the date of Christ’s death. An addition of twenty years would place
Peter in Jerusalem until A.D. 51. And following this date, Peter went to
Antioch.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[561](inst086.htm#fr_560) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p43"></span>112 D112 Paul’s arrival in Rome as a
prisoner is put at A.D. 60. If his epistle to the Romans was written
four years before, then that book should be dated A.D. 56. In this
letter, there is no salutation of Peter (as would be expected if Peter
had been bishop of Rome). In fact, there is not even so much as a
mention of him! (although many other names, some of them obscure, appear
in the closing chapter). The implication that Peter was not in Rome at
this time (A.D. 56) seems difficult to avoid.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](inst086.htm#fr_561) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p45"></span>113 D113 During his first imprisonment
in Rome (from A.D. 60 to 62), Paul wrote his epistle to the Philippians.
No mention is made of Peter, but there is a strong commendation of
Timothy, who not only was with Paul in Rome, but also sought for the
things which are Christ’s (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p45.1"></span>[Phil.
2:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p45.1"></span>). In addition to Paul’s own epistle, Luke’s
account of Paul’s two-year imprisonment in Rome (in <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p45.2"></span>[Acts
28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p45.2"></span>)
says nothing whatever concerning Peter. It would appear that Peter was
not in Rome from A.D. 60 to 62.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](inst086.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p45.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p46"></span>114 D114 In Paul’s second epistle to
Timothy (the last of the Pauline epistles, dated A.D. 67), he states
that at his first defense no man stood with him, but that all forsook
him (<span id="iv.iv.vii-p46.1"></span>[2 Tim.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p46.1"></span>). Where then was Peter? A number of
theories might be advanced in reply to this question. Let us examine
for: (1) Peter was in Rome, but in hiding. This theory is not very
complimentary to Peter, who must in such a case have been among those
who forsook Paul, for whom Paul prayed that it might not be imputed to
them (implying wrongdoing on their part). (2) Peter, at the time of
writing of 2 Timothy (in A.D. 67), had not as yet arrived in Rome. This
theory would hold that Peter arrived later in A.D. 67, and was martyred
a short time after, perhaps in the spring of A.D. 68, with Paul. This
view suffers from the fact that 2 Peter, believed to have been written
by Peter at Rome, is dated A.D.66. (3) Peter had already been martyred,
and thus obviously could not stand with Paul at his first defense. This
theory would date Peter’s death in Rome at A.D. 64, during Nero’s
persecution of the Christians following the great fire in Rome. Once
again, this view conflicts with the date of the writing of 2 Peter, in
A.D. 66. Peter’s second epistle, obviously written by Peter, just as
obviously could not have been written by someone who had died two years
before he wrote it! (4) Peter was imprisoned in Rome at this time,
expecting shortly to be executed (note <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p46.2"></span>[2 Peter
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.vii-p46.2"></span>), and thus was simply unable to stand with
Paul. This theory, although it has certain problems, nevertheless has
one important feature in its favor. It can take into account a two-year
period of imprisonment (A.D. 66-68) ending in Peter’s execution (during
which period, in A.D. 67, he was unable to stand with Paul); and include
within that period Peter’s second epistle (dated A.D. 66).

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](inst086.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p46.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p47"></span>115 D115 Calvin in this one sentence
states his conclusions on three distinct questions: (a) Did Peter die in
Rome? (b) Was Peter bishop of Rome? (c) If Peter was bishop of Rome, did
he hold this office for a long period of time? With regard to the first
question, Calvin does not dispute the contention that Peter died in
Rome. Although there is no specific statement to this effect in
Scripture, yet Peter’s presence and martyrdom is attested by so many
early writers, including Clement of Rome, Ignatus, Papias, and Irenaeus,
that there appears to be no sound reason to reject a tradition about
which so many authors agree. However, in relation to the second and
third questions, Calvin does not feel that he can answer affirmatively.
His reasons are found in the argument which he has developed in this
section and the previous one. If Calvin’s development in these sections,
and the appended annotations are substantially correct, then it would
appear that at least three conclusions follow: (1) There is no evidence
that Peter founded the church at Rome. (2) There is no evidence that
Peter was in Rome for any considerable length of time. He may have been
there, at the most, for six years (if he came in A.D. 62 and died in
A.D. 68). He may have been there for five years (if he arrived in A.D.
66 and was executed in A.D. 68). (3) There is no evidence that Peter was
the (first) bishop of Rome; or that such an office, distinct from that
of elder, even existed at this early date. Such an office, clearly
extra-Biblical, appeared only later in the history of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 7. - OF THE BEGINNING AND RISE OF THE ROMISH PAPACY, TILL
IT ATTAINED A HEIGHT BY WHICH THE LIBERTY OF THE CHURCH WAS DESTROYED,
AND ALL TRUE RULE OVERTHROWN.](inst087)
