[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst092)  [Next](inst094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xiv"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 13.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span> OF VOWS. THE MISERABLE ENTANGLEMENTS
CAUSED BY VOWING RASHLY.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span>This chapter consists of two parts,—I. Of
vows in general, sec. 1-8. II. Of monastic vows, and specially of the
vow of celibacy, sec. 8-21.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span>1. Some general principles with regard to
the nature of vows. Superstitious errors not only of the heathen, but of
Christians, in regard to vows.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5"></span>2. Three points to be considered with
regard to vows. First, to whom the vow is made—viz. to God. Nothing to
be vowed to him but what he himself requires.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p6"></span>3. Second, Who we are that vow. We must
measure our strength, and have regard to our calling. Fearful errors of
the Popish clergy by not attending to this. Their vow of celibacy.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p7"></span>4. Third point to be attended to—viz. the
intention with which the vow is made. Four ends in vowing. Two of them
refer to the past, and two to the future. Examples and use of the former
class.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p8"></span>5. End of vows which refer to the future.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p9"></span>6. The doctrine of vows in general.
Common vow of Christians in Baptism, &c. This vow sacred and salutary.
Particular vows how to be tested.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p10"></span>7. Great prevalence of superstition with
regard to vows.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p11"></span>8. Vows of monks. Contrast between
ancient and modern monasticism.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p12"></span>9. Portraiture of the ancient monks by
Augustine.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p13"></span>10. Degeneracy of modern monks. 1.
Inconsiderate rigour. 2. Idleness. 3. False boast of perfection.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p14"></span>11. This idea of monastic perfection
refuted.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p15"></span>12. Arguments for monastic perfection.
First argument answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p16"></span>13. Second argument answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p17"></span>14. Absurdity of representing the
monastic profession as a second baptism.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p18"></span>15. Corrupt manners of monks.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p19"></span>16. Some defects in ancient monasticism.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p20"></span>17. General refutation of monastic vows.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p21"></span>18. Refutation continued.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p22"></span>19. Refutation continued.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p23"></span>20. Do such vows of celibacy bind the
conscience? This question answered.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p24"></span>21. Those who abandon the monastic
profession for an honest living, unjustly accused of breaking their
faith.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p25"></span>1. It is indeed deplorable that the
Church, whose freedom was purchased by the inestimable price of Christ’s
blood, should have been thus oppressed by a cruel tyranny, and almost
buried under a huge mass of traditions; but, at the same time, the
private infatuation of each individual shows, that not without just
cause has so much power been given from above to Satan and his
ministers. It was not enough to neglect the command of Christ, and bear
anyburdens which false teachers might please to impose, but each
individual behoved to have his own peculiar burdens, and thus sink
deeper by digging his own cavern. This has been the result when men set
about devising vows, by which a stronger and closer obligation might be
added to common ties. Having already shown that the worship of God was
vitiated by the audacity of those who, under the name of pastors,
domineered in the Church, when they ensnared miserable souls by their
iniquitous laws, it will not be out of place here to advert to a kindred
evil, to make it appear that the world, in accordance with its depraved
disposition, has always thrown every possible obstacle in the way of the
helps by which it ought to have been brought to God. Moreover, that the
very grievous mischief introduced by such vows may be more apparent, let
the reader attend to the principles formerly laid down. First, we showed
(Book 2 chap. 8 sec. 5) that everything requisite for the ordering of a
pious and holy life is comprehended in the law. Secondly, we showed that
the Lord, the better to dissuade us from devising new works, included
the whole of righteousness in simple obedience to his will. If these
positions are true, it is easy to see that all fictitious worship, which
we ourselves devise for the purpose of serving God, is not in the least
degree acceptable to him, how pleasing soever it may be to us. And,
unquestionably, in many passages the Lord not only openly rejects, but
grievously abhors such worship. Hence arises a doubt with regard to vows
which are made without any express authority from the word of God; in
what light are they to be viewed? can they be duly made by Christian
men, and to what extent are they binding? What is called a promise among
men is a vow when made to God. Now, we promise to men either things
which we think will be acceptable to them, or things which we in duty
owe them. Much more careful, therefore, ought we to be in vows which are
directed to God, with whom we ought to act with the greatest
seriousness. Here superstition has in all ages strangely prevailed; men
at once, without judgment and without choice, vowing to God whatever
came into their minds, or even rose to their lips. Hence the foolish
vows, nay, monstrous absurdities, by which the heathen insolently
sported with their gods. Would that Christians had not imitated them in
this their audacity! Nothing, indeed, could be less becoming; but it is
obvious that for some ages nothing has been more usual than this
misconduct—the whole body of the people everywhere despising the Law of
God,58  <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) and burning with an
insane zeal of vowing according to any dreaming notion which they had
formed. I have no wish to exaggerate invidiously, or particularise the
many grievous sins which have here been committed; but it seemed right
to advert to it in passing, that it may the better appear, that when we
treat of vows we are not by any means discussing a superfluous question.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p27"></span>2. If we would avoid error in deciding
what vows are legitimate, and what preposterous, three things must be
attended to—viz. who he is to whom the vow is made; who we are that make
it; and, lastly, with what intention we make it. In regard in the first,
we should consider that we have to do with God, whom our obedience so
delights, that he abominates all will-worship, how specious and splendid
soever it be in the eyes of men (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>[Col.
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>). If all will-worship, which we devise
without authority, is abomination to God, it follows that no worship can
be acceptable to him save that which is approved by his word. Therefore,
we must not arrogate such licence to ourselves as to presume to vow
anything to God without evidence of the estimation in which he holds it.
For the doctrine of Paul, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p27.2"></span>[Rom.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p27.2"></span>), while it extends to all actions of every
kind, certainly applies with peculiar force in the case where the
thought is immediately turned towards God. Nay, if in the minutest
matters (Paul was then speaking of the distinction of meats) we err or
fall, where the sure light of faith shines not before us, how much more
modesty ought we to use when we attempt a matter of the greatest weight?
For in nothing ought we to be more serious than in the duties of
religion. In vows, then, our first precaution must be, never to proceed
to make any vow without having previously determined in our conscience
to attempt nothing rashly. And we shall be safe from the danger of
rashness when we have God going before, and, as it were, dictating from
his word what is good, and what is useless.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p28"></span>3. In the second point which we have
mentioned as requiring consideration is implied, that we measure our
strength, that we attend to our vocation so as not to neglect the
blessing of liberty which God has conferred upon us. For he who vows
what is not within his means, or is at variance with his calling, is
rash, while he who contemns the beneficence of God in making him lord
of’ all things, is ungrateful. When I speak thus, I mean not that
anything is so placed in our hand, that, leaning on our own strength, we
may promise it to God. For in the Council of Arausica (cap. 11) it was
most truly decreed, that nothing is duly vowed to God save what we have
received from his hand, since all things which are offered to him are
merely his gifts. But seeing that some things are given to us by the
goodness of God, and others withheld by his justice, every man should
have respect to the measure of grace bestowed on him, as Paul enjoins
(<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.1"></span>[Rom.
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.2"></span>[1 Cor.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.2"></span>). All then I mean here is, that your vows
should be adapted to the measure which God by his gifts prescribes to
you, lest by attempting more than he permits, you arrogate too much to
yourself, and fall headlong. For example, when the assassins, of whom
mention is made in the Acts, vowed “that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had killed Paul” (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.3"></span>[Acts
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.3"></span>), though it had not been an impious
conspiracy, it would still have been intolerably presumptuous, as
subjecting the life and death of a man to their own power. Thus Jephthah
suffered for his folly, when with precipitate fervour he made a rash vow
(<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.4"></span>[Judges
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.4"></span>). Of this class, the first place of insane
audacity belongs to celibacy. Priests, monks, and nuns, forgetful of
their infirmity, are confident of their fitness for celibacy.58  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600.md) But by what oracle have they been
instructed, that the chastity which they vow to the end of life, they
will be able through life to maintain? They hear the voice of God
concerning the universal condition of mankind, “It is not good that the
man should be alone” (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p29.1"></span>[Gen.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p29.1"></span>). They understand, and I wish they did not
feel that the sin remaining in us is armed with the sharpest stings. How
can they presume to shake off the common feelings of their nature for a
whole lifetime, seeing the gift of continence is often granted for a
certain time as occasion requires? In such perverse conduct they must
not expect God to be their helper; let them rather remember the words,
“Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God” (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p29.2"></span>[Deut.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p29.2"></span>). But it is to tempt the Lord to strive
against the nature implanted by him, and to spurn his present gifts as
if they did not appertain to us. This they not only do, but marriage,
which God did not think it unbecoming his majesty to institute, which he
pronounced honourable in all, which Christ our Lord sanctified by his
presence, and which he deigned to honour with his first miracle, they
presume to stigmatise as pollution, so extravagant are the terms in
which they eulogise every kind of celibacy; as if in their own life they
did not furnish a clear proof that celibacy is one thing and chastity
another. This life, however, they most impudently style angelical,
thereby offering no slight insult to the angels of God, to whom they
compare whoremongers and adulterers, and something much worse and fouler
still.58  <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601.md) And, indeed, there is
here very little occasion for argument, since they are abundantly
refuted by fact. For we plainly see the fearful punishments with which
the Lord avenges this arrogance and contempt of his gifts from
overweening confidence. More hidden crimes I spare through shame; what
is known of them is too much. Beyond all controversy, we ought not to
vow anything which will hinder us in fulfilling our vocation; as if the
father of a family were to vow to leave his wife and children, and
undertake other burdens; or one who is fit for a public office should,
when elected to it, vow to live private. But the meaning of what we have
said as to not despising our liberty may occasion some difficulty if not
explained. Wherefore, understand it briefly thus: Since God has given us
dominion over all things, and so subjected them to us that we may use
them for our convenience, we cannot hope that our service will be
acceptable to God if we bring ourselves into bondage to external things,
which ought to be subservient to us. I say this, because some aspire to
the praise of humility, for entangling themselves in a variety of
observances from which God for good reason wished us to be entirely
free. Hence, if we would escape this danger, let us always remember that
we are by no means to withdraw from the economy which God has appointed
in the Christian Church.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p31"></span>4. I come now to my third position—viz
that if you would approve your vow to God, the mind in which you
undertake it is of great moment. For seeing that God looks not to the
outward appearance but to the heart, the consequence is, that according
to the purpose which the mind has in view, the same thing may at one
time please and be acceptable to him, and at another be most
displeasing. If you vow abstinence from wine, as if there were any
holiness in so doing, you are superstitious; but if you have some end in
view which is not perverse, no one can disapprove. Now, as far as I can
see, there are four ends to which our vows may be properly directed; two
of these, for the sake of order, I refer to the past, and two to the
future. To the past belong vows by which we either testify our gratitude
toward God for favours received, or in order to deprecate his wrath,
inflict punishment on ourselves for faults committed. The former, let us
if you please call acts of thanksgiving; the latter, acts of repentance.
Of the former class, we have an example in the tithes which Jacob vowed
(<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p31.1"></span>[Gen.
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p31.1"></span>), if the Lord would conduct him safely home
from exile; and also in the ancient peace-offerings which pious kings
and commanders, when about to engage in a just war, vowed that they
would give if they were victorious, or, at least, if the Lord would
deliver them when pressed by some greater difficulty. Thus are to be
understood all the passages in the Psalms which speak of vows (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p31.2"></span>[Ps.
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p31.2"></span>; 56:13; 116:14, 18). Similar vows may also
be used by us in the present day, whenever the Lord has rescued us from
some disaster or dangerous disease, or other peril. For it is not
abhorrent from the office of a pious man thus to consecrate a votive
offering to God as a formal symbol of acknowledgment that he may not
seem ungrateful for his kindness. The nature of the second class it will
be sufficient to illustrate merely by one familiar example. Should any
one, from gluttonous indulgence, have fallen into some iniquity, there
is nothing to prevent him, with the view of chastising his intemperance,
from renouncing all luxuries for a certain time, and in doing so, from
employing a vow for the purpose of binding himself more firmly. And yet
I do not lay down this as an invariable law to all who have similarly
offended; I merely show what may be lawfully done by those who think
that such a vow will be useful to them. Thus while I hold it lawful so
to vow, I at the same time leave it free.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p32"></span>5. The vows which have reference to the
future tend partly, as we have said, to render us more cautious, and
partly to act as a kind of stimulus to the discharge of duty. A man sees
that he is so prone to a certain vice, that in a thing which is
otherwise not bad he cannot restrain himself from forthwith falling into
evil: he will not act absurdly in cutting off the use of that thing for
some time by a vow. If, for instance, one should perceive that this or
that bodily ornament brings him into peril, and yet allured by cupidity
he eagerly longs for it, what can he do better than by throwing a curb
upon himself, that is, imposing the necessity of abstinence, free
himself from all doubt? In like manner, should one be oblivious or
sluggish in the necessary duties of piety, why should he not, by forming
a vow, both awaken his memory and shake off his sloth? In both, I
confess, there is a kind of tutelage, but inasmuch as they are helps to
infirmity, they are used not without advantage by the ignorant and
imperfect. Hence we hold that vows which have respect to one of these
ends, especially in external things, are lawful, provided they are
supported by the approbation of God, are suitable to our calling, and
are limited to the measure of grace bestowed upon us.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p33"></span>6. It is not now difficult to infer what
view on the whole ought to be taken of vows. There is one vow common to
all believers, which taken in baptism we confirm, and as it were
sanction, by our Catechism,58  <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md)
and partaking of the Lord’s Supper. For the sacraments are a kind of
mutual contracts by which the Lord conveys his mercy to us, and by it
eternal life, while we in our turn promise him obedience. The formula,
or at least substance, of the vow is, That renouncing Satan we bind
ourselves to the service of God, to obey his holy commands, and no
longer follow the depraved desires of our flesh. It cannot be doubted
that this vow, which is sanctioned by Scripture, nay, is exacted from
all the children of God, is holy and salutary. There is nothing against
this in the fact, that no man in this life yields that perfect obedience
to the law which God requires of us. This stipulation being included in
the covenant of grace, comprehending forgiveness of sins and the spirit
of holiness, the promise which we there make is combined both with
entreaty for pardon and petition for assistance. It is necessary, in
judging of particular vows, to keep the three former rules in
remembrance: from them any one will easily estimate the character of
each single vow. Do not suppose, however, that I so commend the vows
which I maintain to be holy that I would have them made every day. For
though I dare not give any precept as to time or number, yet if any one
will take my advice, he will not undertake any but what are sober and
temporary. If you are ever and anon launching out into numerous vows,
the whole solemnity will be lost by the frequency, and you will readily
fall into superstition. If you bind yourself by a perpetual vow, you
will have great trouble and annoyance in getting free, or, worn out by
length of time, you will at length make bold to break it.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p35"></span>7. It is now easy to see under how much
superstition the world has laboured in this respect for several ages.
One vowed that he would be abstemious, as if abstinence from wine were
in itself an acceptable service to God. Another bound himself to fast,
another to abstain from flesh on certain days, which he had vainly
imagined to be more holy than other days. Things much more boyish were
vowed though not by boys. For it was accounted great wisdom to undertake
votive pilgrimages to holy places, and sometimes to perform the journey
on foot, or with the body half naked, that the greater merit might be
acquired by the greater fatigue. These and similar things, for which the
world has long bustled with incredible zeal, if tried by the rules which
we formerly laid down, will be discovered to be not only empty and
nugatory, but full of manifest impiety. Be the judgment of the flesh
what it may, there is nothing which God more abhors than fictitious
worship. To these are added pernicious and damnable notions, hypocrites,
after performing such frivolities, thinking that they have acquired no
ordinary righteousness, placing the substance of piety in external
observances, and despising all others who appear less careful in regard
to them.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p36"></span>8. It is of no use to enumerate all the
separate forms. But as monastic vows are held in great veneration,
because they seem to be approved by the public judgment of the Church, I
will say a few words concerning them. And, first, lest any one defend
the monachism of the present day on the ground of the long prescription,
it is to be observed, that the ancient mode of living in monasteries was
very different. The persons who retired to them were those who wished to
train themselves to the greatest austerity and patience. The discipline
practiced by the monks then resembled that which the Lacedemonians are
said to have used under the laws of Lycurgus, and was even much more
rigorous. They slept on the ground, their drink was water, their food
bread, herbs, and roots, their chief luxuries oil and pulse. From more
delicate food and care of the body they abstained. These things might
seem hyperbolical were they not vouched by experienced eye witnesses, as
Gregory Nazianzen, Basil, and Chrysostom. By such rudimentary training
they prepared themselves for greater offices. For of the fact that
monastic colleges were then a kind of seminaries of the ecclesiastical
order, both those whom we lately named are very competent witnesses
(they were all brought up in monasteries, and thence called to the
episcopal office), as well as several other great and excellent men of
their age. Augustine also shows that in his time the monasteries were
wont to furnish the Church with clergy. For he thus addresses the monks
of the island of Caprae: “We exhort you, brethren in the Lord, to keep
your purpose, and persevere to the end; and if at any time our mother
Church requires your labour, you will neither undertake it with eager
elation, nor reject it from the blandishment of sloth, but with meek
hearts obey God. You will not prefer your own ease to the necessities of
the Church. Had no good men been willing to minister to her when in
travail, it would have been impossible for you to be born”58  <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md) (August. <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p37.1"></span>Ep. 82<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p37.1"></span>).
He is speaking of the ministry by which believers are spiritually born
again. In like manner, he says to Aurelius (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p37.2"></span>Ep. 76<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p37.2"></span>),
“It is both an occasion of lapse to them, and a most unbecoming injury
to the clerical order, if the deserters of monasteries are elected to
the clerical warfare, since from those who remain in the monastery our
custom is to appoint to the clerical office only the better and more
approved. Unless, perhaps, as the vulgar say, A bad chorister is a good
symphonist, so, in like manner, it will be jestingly said of us, A bad
monk is a good clergyman. There will be too much cause for grief if we
stir up monks to such ruinous pride, and deem the clergy deserving of so
grave an affront, seeing that sometimes a good monk scarcely makes a
good clerk; he may have sufficient continence, but be deficient in
necessary learning.” From these passages, it appears that pious men were
wont to prepare for the government of the Church by monastic discipline,
that thus they might be more apt and better trained to undertake the
important office: not that all attained to this object, or even aimed at
it, since the great majority of monks were illiterate men. Those who
were fit were selected.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p38"></span>9. Augustine, in two passages in
particular, gives a portraiture of the form of ancient monasticism. The
one is in his book, *De Moribus Ecclesiœ Catholicœ (On the Manners of
the Catholic Church)*, where he maintains the holiness of that
profession against the calumnies of the Manichees; the other in a
treatise, entitled, *De Opere Monachorum (On the Work of Monks)*, where
he inveighs against certain degenerate monks who had begun to corrupt
that institution. I will here give a summary of what he there delivers,
and, as far as I can, in his own words: “Despising the allurements of
this world, and congregated in common for a most chaste and most holy
life, they pass their lives together, spending their time in prayer,
reading, and discourse, not swollen with pride, not turbulent through
petulance, not livid with envy. No one possesses anything of his own: no
one is burdensome to any man. They labour with their hands in things by
which the body may be fed, and the mind not withdrawn from God. The
fruit of their labour they hand over to those whom they call deans.
Those deans, disposing of the whole with great care, render an account
to one whom they call father. These fathers, who are not only of the
purest morals, but most distinguished for divine learning, and noble in
all things, without any pride, consult those whom they call their sons,
though the former have full authority to command, and the latter a great
inclination to obey. At the close of the day they assemble each from his
cell, and without having broken their fast, to hear their father, and to
the number of three thousand at least (he is speaking of Egypt and the
East) they assemble under each father. Then the body is refreshed, so
far as suffices for safety and health, every one curbing his
concupiscence so as not to be profuse in the scanty and very mean diet
which is provided. Thus they not only abstain from flesh and wine for
the purpose of subduing lust, but from those things which provoke the
appetite of the stomach and gullet more readily, from seeming to some,
as it were, more refined. In this way the desire of exquisite dainties,
in which there is no flesh, is wont to be absurdly and shamefully
defended. Any surplus, after necessary food (and the surplus is very
great from the labour of their hands and the frugality of their meals),
is carefully distributed to the needy, the more carefully that it was
not procured by those who distribute. For they never act with the view
of having abundance for themselves, but always act with the view of
allowing no superfluity to remain with them” (August. De Mor. Eccl.
Cath. c. 31). Afterwards describing their austerity, of which he had
himself seen instances both at Milan and elsewhere, he says, “Meanwhile,
no one is urged to austerities which he is unable to bear: no one is
obliged to do what he declines, nor condemned by the others, whom he
acknowledges himself too weak to imitate. For they remember how greatly
charity is commended: they remember that to the pure all things are pure
(<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p38.1"></span>[Tit.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p38.1"></span>). Wherefore, all their vigilance is
employed, not in rejecting kinds of food as polluted, but in subduing
concupiscence, and maintaining brotherly love. They remember, ‘Meats for
the belly, and the belly for meats,’ &c. (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p38.2"></span>[1 Cor.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p38.2"></span>). Many, however strong, abstain because of
the weak. In many this is not the cause of action; they take pleasure in
sustaining themselves on the meanest and least expensive food. Hence the
very persons who in health restrain themselves, decline not in sickness
to use what their health requires. Many do not drink wine, and yet do
not think themselves polluted by it, for they most humanely cause it to
be given to the more sickly, and to those whose health requires it; and
some who foolishly refuse, they fraternally admonish, lest by vain
superstition they sooner become more weak than more holy. Thus they
sedulously practice piety, while they know that bodily exercise is only
for a short time. Charity especially is observed: their food is adapted
to charity, their speech to charity, their dress to charity, their looks
to charity. They go together, and breathe only charity: they deem it as
unlawful to offend charity as to offend God; if any one opposes it, he
is cast out and shunned; if any one offends it, he is not permitted to
remain one day” (August. De Moribus Eccl. Cath. c. 33). Since this holy
man appears in these words to have exhibited the monastic life of
ancient times as in a picture, I have thought it right to insert them
here, though somewhat long, because I perceive that I would be
considerably longer if I collected them from different writers, however
compendious I might study to be.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p39"></span>10. Here, however, I had no intention to
discuss the whole subject. I only wished to show, by the way, what kind
of monks the early Church had, and what the monastic profession then
was, that from the contrast sound readers might judge how great the
effrontery is of those who allege antiquity in support of present
monkism. Augustine, while tracing out a holy and legitimate monasticism,
would keep away all rigorous exaction of those things which the word of
the Lord has left free. But in the present day nothing is more
rigorously exacted. For they deem it an inexpiable crime if any one
deviates in the least degree from the prescribed form in colour or
species of dress, in the kind of food, or in other frivolous and frigid
ceremonies. Augustine strenuously contends that it is not lawful for
monks to live in idleness on other men’s means. (August. De Oper.
Monach.) He denies that any such example was to be found in his day in a
well-regulated monastery. Our monks place the principal part of their
holiness in idleness. For if you take away their idleness, where will
that contemplative life by which they glory that they excel all others,
and make a near approach to the angels? Augustine, in fine, requires a
monasticism which may be nothing else than a training and assistant to
the offices of piety which are recommended to all Christians. What? When
he makes charity its chief and almost its only rule, do we think he
praises that combination by which a few men, bound to each other, are
separated from the whole body of the Church? Nay, he wishes them to set
an example to others of preserving the unity of the Church. So different
is the nature of present monachism in both respects, that it would be
difficult to find anything so dissimilar, not to say contrary. For our
monks, not satisfied with that piety, on the study of which alone Christ
enjoins his followers to be intent, imagine some new kind of piety, by
aspiring to which they are more perfect than all other men.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p40"></span>11. If they deny this, I should like to
know why they honour their own order only with the title of perfection,
and deny it to all other divine callings.58  <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) I am not unaware of the sophistical
solution that their order is not so called because it contains
perfection in itself, but because it is the best of all for acquiring
perfection. When they would extol themselves to the people; when they
would lay a snare for rash and ignorant youth; when they would assert
their privileges and exalt their own dignity to the disparagement of
others, they boast that they are in a state of perfection. When they are
too closely pressed to be able to defend this vain arrogance, they
betake themselves to the subterfuge that they have not yet obtained
perfection, but that they are in a state in which they aspire to it more
than others; meanwhile, the people continue to admire as if the monastic
life alone were angelic, perfect, and purified from every vice. Under
this pretence they ply a most gainful traffic, while their moderation
lies buried in a few volumes.59  <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md)
Who sees not that this is intolerable trifling? But let us treat with
them as if they ascribed nothing more to their profession than to call
it a state for acquiring perfection. Surely by giving it this name, they
distinguish it by a special mark from other modes of life. And who will
allow such honour to be transferred to an institution of which not one
syllable is said in approbation, while all the other callings of God are
deemed unworthy of the same, though not only commanded by his sacred
lips, but adorned with distinguished titles? And how great the insult
offered to God, when some device of man is preferred to all the modes of
life which he has ordered, and by his testimony approved?

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p43"></span>12. But let them say I calumniated them
when I declared that they were not contented with the rule prescribed by
God. Still, though I were silent, they more than sufficiently accuse
themselves; for they plainly declare that they undertake a greater
burden than Christ has imposed on his followers, since they promise that
they will keep evangelical counsels regarding the love of enemies, the
suppression of vindictive feelings, and abstinence from swearing,
counsels to which Christians are not commonly astricted. In this what
antiquity can they pretend? None of the ancients ever thought of such a
thing: all with one voice proclaim that not one syllable proceeded from
Christ which it is not necessary to obey. And the very things which
these worthy expounders pretend that Christ only counselled they
uniformly declare, without any doubt, that he expressly enjoined. But as
we have shown above, that this is a most pestilential error, let it
suffice here to have briefly observed that monasticism, as it now
exists, founded on an idea which all pious men ought to execrate—namely,
the pretence that there is some more perfect rule of life than that
common rule which God has delivered to the whole Church. Whatever is
built on this foundation cannot but be abominable.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p44"></span>13. But they produce another argument
for their perfection, and deem it invincible. Our Lord said to the young
man who put a question to him concerning the perfection of
righteousness, “If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and
give to the poor” (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.1"></span>[Mt.
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.1"></span>). Whether they do so, I do not now dispute.
Let us grant for the present that they do. They boast, then, that they
have become perfect by abandoning their all. If the sum off perfection
consists in this, what is the meaning of Paul’s doctrine, that though a
man should give all his goods to feed the poor, and have not charity, he
is nothing? (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.2"></span>[1 Cor.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.2"></span>). What kind of perfection is that which, if
charity be wanting, is with the individual himself reduced to nothing?
Here they must of necessity answer that it is indeed the highest, but is
not the only work of perfection. But here again Paul interposes; and
hesitates not to declare that charity, without any renunciation of that
sort, is the “bond of perfectness” (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.3"></span>[Col.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.3"></span>). If it is certain that there is no
disagreement between the scholar and the master, and the latter clearly
denies that the perfection of a man consists in renouncing all his
goods, and on the other hand asserts that perfection may exist without
it, we must see in what sense we should understand the words of Christ,
“If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast.” Now, there wil1
not be the least obscurity in the meaning if we consider (this ought to
be attended to in all our Saviour’s discourses) to whom the words are
addressed (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.4"></span>[Luke
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.4"></span>). A young man asks by what works he shall
enter into eternal life. Christ, as he was asked concerning works,
refers him to the law. And justly; for, considered in itself, it is the
way of eternal life, and its inefficacy to give eternal life is owing to
our depravity. By this answer Christ declared that he did not deliver
any other rule of life than that which had formerly been delivered in
the law of the Lord. Thus he both bore testimony to the divine law, that
it was a doctrine of perfect righteousness, and at the same time met the
calumnious charge of seeming, by some new rule of life, to incite the
people to revolt from the law. The young man, who was not ill-disposed,
but was puffed up with vain confidence, answers that he had observed all
the precepts of the law from his youth. It is absolutely certain that he
was immeasurably distant from the goal which he boasted of having
reached. Had his boast been true, he would have wanted nothing of
absolute perfection. For it has been demonstrated above, that the law
contains in it a perfect righteousness. This is even obvious from the
fact, that the observance of it is called the way to eternal life. To
show him how little progress he had made in that righteousness which he
too boldly answered that he had fulfilled, it was right to bring before
him his besetting sin. Now, while he abounded in riches, he had his
heart set upon them. Therefore, because he did not feel this secret
wound, it is probed by Christ—“Go,” says he, “and sell that thou hast.”
Had he been as good a keeper of the law as he supposed, he would not
have gone away sorrowful on hearing these words. For he who loves God
with his whole heart, not only regards everything which wars with his
love as dross, but hates it as destruction (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.5"></span>[Phil.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.5"></span>). Therefore, when Christ orders a rich
miser to leave all that he has, it is the same as if he had ordered the
ambitious to renounce all his honours, the voluptuous all his luxuries,
the unchaste all the instruments of his lust. Thus consciences, which
are not reached by any general admonition, are to be recalled to a
particular feeling of their particular sin. In vain, therefore, do they
wrest that special case to a general interpretation, as if Christ had
decided that the perfection of man consists in the abandonment of his
goods, since he intended nothing more by the expression than to bring a
youth who was out of measure satisfied with himself to feel his sore,
and so understand that he was still at a great distance from that
perfect obedience of the law which he falsely ascribed to himself. I
admit that this passage was ill understood by some of the Fathers;59
 <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) and hence arose an affectation
of voluntary poverty, those only being thought blest who abandoned all
earthly goods, and in a state of destitution devoted themselves to
Christ. But I am confident that, after my exposition, no good and
reasonable man will have any dubiety here as to the mind of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p46"></span>14. Still there was nothing with the
Fathers less intended than to establish that kind of perfection which
was afterwards fabricated by cowled monks, in order to rear up a species
of double Christianity. For as yet the sacrilegious dogma was not
broached which compares the profession of monasticism to baptism, nay,
plainly asserts that it is the form of a second baptism. Who can doubt
that the Fathers with their whole hearts abhorred such blasphemy? Then
what need is there to demonstrate, by words, that the last quality which
Augustine mentions as belonging to the ancient monks—viz. that they in
all things accommodated themselves to charity—is most alien from this
new profession? The thing itself declares that all who retire into
monasteries withdraw from the Church. For how? Do they not separate
themselves from the legitimate society of the faithful, by acquiring for
themselves a special ministry and private administration of the
sacraments? What is meant by destroying the communion of the Church if
this is not? And to follow out the comparison with which I began, and at
once close the point, what resemblance have they in this respect to the
ancient monks? These, though they dwelt separately from others, had not
a separate Church; they partook of the sacraments with others, they
attended public meetings, and were then a part of the people. But what
have those men done in erecting a private altar for themselves but
broken the bond of unity? For they have excommunicated themselves from
the whole body of the Church, and contemned the ordinary ministry by
which the Lord has been pleased that peace and charity should be
preserved among his followers. Wherefore I hold that as many monasteries
as there are in the present day, so many conventicles are there of
schismatics, who have disturbed ecclesiastical order, and been cut off
from the legitimate society of the faithful. And that there might be no
doubt as to their separation, they have given themselves the various
names of factions. They have not been ashamed to glory in that which
Paul so execrates, that he is unable to express his detestation too
strongly. Unless, indeed, we suppose that Christ was not divided by the
Corinthians, when one teacher set himself above another (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p46.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p46.1"></span>;
3:4); and that now no injury is done to Christ when, instead of
Christians, we hear some called Benedictines, others Franciscans, others
Dominicans, and so called, that while they affect to be distinguished
from the common body of Christians, they proudly substitute these names
for a religious profession.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p47"></span>15. The differences which I have
hitherto pointed out between the ancient monks and those of our age are
not in manners, but in profession. Hence let my readers remember that I
have spoken of monachism rather than of monks; and marked, not the vices
which cleave to a few, but vices which are inseparable from the very
mode of life. In regard to manners, of what use is it to particularise
and show how great the difference? This much is certain,59  <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) that there is no order of men more
polluted by all kinds of vicious turpitude; nowhere do faction, hatred,
party-spirit, and intrigue, more prevail. In a few monasteries, indeed,
they live chastely, if we are to call it chastity, where lust is so far
repressed as not to be openly infamous; still you will scarcely find one
in ten which is not rather a brothel than a sacred abode of chastity.
But how frugally they live? Just like swine wallowing in their sties.
But lest they complain that I deal too unmercifully with them, I go no
farther; although any one who knows the case will admit, that in the few
things which I have said, I have not spoken in the spirit of an accuser.
Augustine though he testifies, that the monks excelled so much in
chastity, yet complains that there were many vagabonds, who, by wicked
arts and impostures, extracted money from the more simple, plying a
shameful traffic, by carrying about the relics of martyrs, and vending
any dead man’s bones for relics, bringing ignominy on their order by
many similar iniquities. As he declares that he had seen none better
than those who had profited in monasteries; so he laments that he had
seen none worse than those who had backslidden in monasteries. What
would he say were he, in the present day, to see now almost all
monasteries overflowing, and in a manner bursting, with numerous
deplorable vices? I say nothing but what is notorious to all; and yet
this charge does not apply to all without a single exception; for, as
the rule and discipline of holy living was never so well framed in
monasteries as that there were not always some drones very unlike the
others; so I hold that, in the present day, monks have not so completely
degenerated from that holy antiquity as not to have some good men among
them; but these few lie scattered up and down among a huge multitude of
wicked and dishonest men, and are not only despised, but even petulantly
assailed, sometimes even treated cruelly by the others, who, according
to the Milesian proverb, think they ought to have no good man among
them.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p49"></span>16. By this contrast between ancient and
modern monasticism, I trust I have gained my object, which was to show
that our cowled monks falsely pretend the example of the primitive
Church in defence of their profession; since they differ no less from
the monks of that period than apes do from men. Meanwhile I disguise not
that even in that ancient form which Augustine commends, there was
something which little pleases me. I admit that they were not
superstitious in the external exercises of a more rigorous discipline,
but I say that they were not without a degree of affectation and false
zeal. It was a fine thing to cast away their substance, and free
themselves from all worldly cares; but God sets more value on the pious
management of a household, when the head of it, discarding all avarice,
ambition, and other lusts of the flesh, makes it his purpose to serve
God in some particular vocation. It is fine to philosophise in
seclusion, far away from the intercourse of society; but it ill accords
with Christian meekness for any one, as if in hatred of the human race,
to fly to the wilderness and to solitude, and at the same time desert
the duties which the Lord has especially commanded. Were we to grant
that there was nothing worse in that profession, there is certainly no
small evil in its having introduced a useless and perilous example into
the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p50"></span>17. Now, then, let us see the nature of
the vows by which the monks of the present day are initiated into this
famous order. First, as their intention is to institute a new and
fictitious worship with a view to gain favour with God, I conclude from
what has been said above, that everything which they vow is abomination
to God. Secondly, I hold that as they frame their own mode of life at
pleasure, without any regard to the calling of God, or to his
approbation, the attempt is rash and unlawful; because their conscience
has no ground on which it can support itself before God; and “whatsoever
is not of faith is sin” (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.1"></span>[Rom.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.1"></span>). Moreover, I maintain that in astricting
themselves to many perverse and impious modes of worship, such as are
exhibited in modern monasticism, they consecrate themselves not to God
but to the devil. For why should the prophets have been permitted to say
that the Israelites sacrificed their sons to devils and not to God
(<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.2"></span>[Deut.
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.3"></span>[Ps.
106:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.3"></span>), merely because they had corrupted the
true worship of God by profane ceremonies; and we not be permitted to
say the same thing of monks who, along with the cowl, cover themselves
with the net of a thousand impious superstitions? Then what is their
species of vows? They offer God a promise of perpetual virginity, as if
they had previously made a compact with him to free them from the
necessity of marriage. They cannot allege that they make this vow
trusting entirely to the grace of God; for, seeing he declares this to
be a special gift not given to all (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.4"></span>[Mt.
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.4"></span>), no man has a right to assume that the
gift will be his. Let those who have it use it; and if at any time they
feel the infirmity of the flesh, let them have recourse to the aid of
him by whose power alone they can resist. If this avails not, let them
not despise the remedy which is offered to them. If the faculty of
continence is denied, the voice of God distinctly calls upon them to
marry. By continence I mean not merely that by which the body is kept
pure from fornication, but that by which the mind keeps its chastity
untainted. For Paul enjoins caution not only against external
lasciviousness, but also burning of mind (<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.5"></span>[1 Cor.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p50.5"></span>). It has been the practice (they say) from
the remotest period, for those who wished to devote themselves entirely
to God, to bind themselves by a vow of continence. I confess that the
custom is ancient, but I do not admit that the age when it commenced was
so free from every defect that all that was then done is to be regarded
as a rule. Moreover, the inexorable rigour of holding that after the vow
is conceived there is no room for repentance, crept in gradually. This
is clear from Cyprian. “If virgins have dedicated themselves to
Christian faith, let them live modestly and chastely, without pretence.
Thus strong and stable, let them wait for the reward of virginity. But
if they will not, or cannot persevere, it is better to marry, than by
their faults to fall into the fire.” In the present day, with what
invectives would they not lacerate any one who should seek to temper the
vow of continence by such an equitable course? Those, therefore, have
wandered far from the ancient custom who not only use no moderation, and
grant no pardon when any one proves unequal to the performance of his
vow, but shamelessly declare that it is a more heinous sin to cure the
intemperance of the flesh by marriage, than to defile body and soul by
whoredom.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p51"></span>18. But they still insist and attempt to
show that this vow was used in the days of the apostles, because Paul
says that widows who marry after having once undertaken a public office,
“cast off their first faith” (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p51.1"></span>[1 Tim.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p51.1"></span>). I by no means deny that widows who
dedicated themselves and their labours to the Church, at the same time
came under an obligation of perpetual celibacy, not because they
regarded it in the light of a religious duty, as afterwards began to be
the case, but because they could not perform their functions unless they
had their time at their own command, and were free from the nuptial tie.
But if, after giving their pledge, they began to look to a new marriage,
what else was this but to shake off the calling of God? It is not
strange, therefore, when Paul says that by such desires they grow wanton
against Christ. In further explanation he afterwards adds, that by not
performing their promises to the Church, they violate and nullify their
first faith given in baptism; one of the things contained in this first
faith being, that every one should correspond to his calling. Unless you
choose rather to interpret that, having lost their modesty, they
afterwards cast off all care of decency, prostituting themselves to all
kinds of lasciviousness and pertness, leading licentious and dissolute
lives, than which nothing can less become Christian women. I am much
pleased with this exposition. Our answer then is, that those widows who
were admitted to a public ministry came under an obligation of perpetual
celibacy, and hence we easily understand how, when they married, they
threw off all modesty, and became more insolent than became Christian
women that in this way they not only sinned by violating the faith given
to the Church, but revolted from the common rule of pious women. But,
first, I deny that they had any other reason for professing celibacy
than just because marriage was altogether inconsistent with the function
which they undertook. Hence they bound themselves to celibacy only in so
far as the nature of their function required. Secondly, I do not admit
that they were bound to celibacy in such a sense that it was not better
for them to marry than to suffer by the incitements of the flesh, and
fall into uncleanness. Thirdly, I hold that what Paul enjoined was in
the common case free from danger, because he orders the selection to be
made from those who, contented with one marriage, had already given
proof of continence. Our only reason for disapproving of the vow of
celibacy is, because it is improperly regarded as an act of worship, and
is rashly undertaken by persons who have not the power of keeping it.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p52"></span>19. But what ground can there be for
applying this passage to nuns? For deaconesses were appointed, not to
soothe God by chantings or unintelligible murmurs, and spend the rest of
their time in idleness; but to perform a public ministry of the Church
toward the poor, and to labour with all zeal, assiduity, and diligence,
in offices of charity. They did not vow celibacy, that they might
thereafter exhibit abstinence from marriage as a kind of worship
rendered to God, but only that they might be freer from encumbrance in
executing their office. In fine, they did not vow on attaining
adolescence, or in the bloom of life, and so afterwards learn, by too
late experience, over what a precipice they had plunged themselves, but
after they were thought to have surmounted all danger, they took a vow
not less safe than holy. But not to press the two former points, I say
that it was unlawful to allow women to take a vow of continence before
their sixtieth year, since the apostle admits such only, and enjoins the
younger to marry and beget children. Therefore, it is impossible, on any
ground, to excuse the deduction, first of twelve, then of twenty, and,
lastly, of thirty years. Still less possible is it to tolerate the case
of miserable girls, who, before they have reached an age at which they
can know themselves, or have any experience of their character, are not
only induced by fraud, but compelled by force and threats, to entangle
themselves in these accursed snares. I will not enter at length into a
refutation of the other two vows. This only I say, that besides
involving (as matters stand in the present day) not a few superstitions,
they seem to be purposely framed in such a manner, as to make those who
take them mock God and men. But lest we should seem, with too malignant
feeling, to attack every particular point, we will be contented with the
general refutation which has been given above.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p53"></span>20. The nature of the vows which are
legitimate and acceptable to God, I think I have sufficiently explained.
Yet, because some ill-informed and timid consciences, even when a vow
displeases, and is condemned, nevertheless hesitate as to the
obligation, and are grievously tormented, shuddering at the thought of
violating a pledge given to God, and, on the other hand, fearing to sin
more by keeping it,—we must here come to their aid, and enable them to
escape from this difficulty. And to take away all scruple at once, I say
that all vows not legitimate, and not duly conceived, as they are of no
account with God, should be regarded by us as null. (See Calv. ad
Concil. Trident.) For if, in human contracts, those promises only are
binding in which he with whom we contract wishes to have us bound, it is
absurd to say that we are bound to perform things which God does not at
all require of us, especially since our works can only be right when
they please God, and have the testimony of our consciences that they do
please him. For it always remains fixed, that “whatsoever is not of
faith is sin” (<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p53.1"></span>[Rom.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p53.1"></span>). By this Paul means, that any work
undertaken in doubt is vicious, because at the root of all good works
lies faith, which assures us that they are acceptable to God. Therefore,
if Christian men may not attempt anything without this assurance, why,
if they have undertaken anything rashly through ignorance, may they not
afterwards be freed, and desist from their error? Since vows rashly
undertaken are of this description, they not only oblige not, but must
necessarily be rescinded. What, then, when they are not only of no
estimation in the sight of God, but are even an abomination, as has
already been demonstrated? It is needless farther to discuss a point
which does not require it. To appease pious consciences, and free them
from all doubt, this one argument seems to me sufficient—viz. that all
works whatsoever which flow not from a pure fountain, and are not
directed to a proper end, are repudiated by God, and so repudiated, that
he no less forbids us to continue than to begin them. Hence it follows,
that vows dictated by error and superstition are of no weight with God,
and ought to be abandoned by us.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p54"></span>21. He who understands this solution is
furnished with the means of repelling the calumnies of the wicked
against those who withdraw from monasticism to some honest kind of
livelihood. They are grievously charged with having perjured themselves,
and broken their faith, because they have broken the bond (vulgarly
supposed to be indissoluble) by which they had bound themselves to God
and the Church. But I say, first, there is no bond when that which man
confirms God abrogates; and, secondly, even granting that they were
bound when they remained entangled in ignorance and error, now, since
they have been enlightened by the knowledge of the truth, I hold that
they are, at the same time, free by the grace of Christ. For if such is
the efficacy of the cross of Christ, that it frees us from the curse of
the divine law by which we were held bound, how much more must it rescue
us from extraneous chains, which are nothing but the wily nets of Satan?
There can be no doubt, therefore, that all on whom Christ shines with
the light of his Gospel, he frees from all the snares in which they had
entangled themselves through superstition. At the same time, they have
another defence if they were unfit for celibacy. For if an impossible
vow is certain destruction to the soul, which God wills to be saved and
not destroyed, it follows that it ought by no means to be adhered to.
Now, how impossible the vow of continence is to those who have not
received it by special gift, we have shown, and experience, even were I
silent, declares: while the great obscenity with which almost all
monasteries teem is a thing not unknown. If any seem more decent and
modest than others, they are not, however, chaste. The sin of unchastity
urges, and lurks within. Thus it is that God, by fearful examples,
punishes the audacity of men, when, unmindful of their infirmity, they,
against nature, affect that which has been denied to them, and despising
the remedies which the Lord has placed in their hands, are confident in
their ability to overcome the disease of incontinence by contumacious
obstinacy. For what other name can we give it, when a man, admonished of
his need of marriage, and of the remedy with which the Lord has thereby
furnished, not only despises it, but binds himself by an oath to despise
it?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](inst093.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p26"></span>84 584 See <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>[Ps.
119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>. “I have sworn, and I will perform it, that
I will keep thy righteous judgments.” Calvin observes on these words,
that the vow and oath to keep the law cannot be charged with rashness,
because it trusted to the promises of God concerning the forgiveness of
sins, and to the spirit of regeneration.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[601](inst093.htm#fr_600.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p28.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p29"></span>85 585 On the vow of celibacy. see Calv.
de Fugiend. Micit. sacris, Adv. Theolog. Paris. De Necessit. Reform.
Eccl.; Præfat. Antidoti ad Concil. Trident.; Vera Eccles. Reform. Ratio;
De Scandalis.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[602](inst093.htm#fr_601.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p30"></span>86 586 Bernard, de Convers. ad Clericos,
cap. 29, inveighing against the crimes of the clergy, says, “Would that
those who cannot contain would fear to take the vow of celibacy! For it
is a weighty saying, that all cannot receive it. Many are either unable
to conceal from the multitude, or seek not to do it. They abstain from
the remedy of marriage, and thereafter give themselves up to all
wickedness.”

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](inst093.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p34"></span>87 587 Latin, “Catechism.”—French, “En
faisant protestation de notre foy;”—in making profession of our faith.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](inst093.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p37"></span>88 588 At the same place, he admirably
says, “Dearly beloved, love ease, but with the view of restraining from
all worldly delight, and remember that there is no place where he who
dreads our return to God is not able to lay his snares.”

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](inst093.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p41"></span>89 589 Laurentius, defending his written
assertion, that the monks falsely imagined that by means of their
profession they merited more than others, admirably concludes, “There is
no safer, no better way than that taught by Christ, and in it no
profession is enjoined.”

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](inst093.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p42"></span>90 590 French, “,Par ce moyen ils
attirent farine au moulin et vendent leur sainteté tres cherement;
cependant cette glose est cachee et comme ensevelie en peu de
livres;”—by this means they bring grist to their mill, and sell their
holiness very dear; meanwhile, the gloss is concealed, and is, as it
were, buried in a few books.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](inst093.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p44.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p45"></span>91 591 Chrysostom, in his Homily on the
words of Paul, “Salute Prisca,” &c., says, “All who retire to
monasteries separate themselves from the Church, seeing they plainly
assert that their monasticism is the form of a second baptism.”

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](inst093.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p48"></span>92 592 See Bernard. ad Guliel. Abbat..
“I wonder why there is so much intemperance among monks. O vanity of
vanities! but not more vain than insane.” See also August. de Opere
Monach. in fin

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 14. - OF THE SACRAMENTS.](inst094.md)
