[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst054)  [Next](inst056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 2.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span>OF FAITH. THE DEFINITION OF IT. ITS
PECULIAR PROPERTIES.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>This chapter consists of three principal
parts.—I. A brief explanation of certain matters pertaining to the
doctrine of Faith, sec. 1-14. First, of the object of faith, sec. 1.
Second, of Implicit Faith, sec. 2-6. Third, Definition of Faith, sec. 7.
Fourth, the various meanings of the term Faith, sec. 8-13. II. A full
exposition of the definition given in the seventh section, sec. 14-40.
III. A brief confirmation of the definition by the authority of an
Apostle. The mutual relation between faith, hope, and charity, sec.
41-43.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>1. A brief recapitulation of the leading
points of the whole discussion. The scope of this chapter. The necessity
of the doctrine of faith. This doctrine obscured by the Schoolmen, who
make God the object of faith, without referring to Christ. The Schoolmen
refuted by various passages.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>2. The dogma of implicit faith refuted.
It destroys faith, which consists in a knowledge of the divine will.
What this will is, and how necessary the knowledge of it.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>3. Many things are and will continue to
be implicitly believed. Faith, however, consists in the knowledge of God
and Christ, not in a reverence for the Church. Another refutation from
the absurdities to which this dogma leads.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>4. In what sense our faith may be said
to be implicit. Examples in the Apostles, in the holy women, and in all
believers.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span>5. In some, faith is implicit, as being
a preparation for faith. This, however, widely different from the
implicit faith of the Schoolmen.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span>6. The word of God has a similar
relation to faith, the word being, as it were, the source and basis of
faith, and the mirror in which it beholds God. Confirmation from various
passages of Scripture. Without the knowledge of the word there can be no
faith. Sum of the discussion of the Scholastic doctrine of implicit
faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>7. What faith properly has respect to
in the word of God, namely, the promise of grace offered in Christ,
provided it be embraced with faith. Proper definition of faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>8. Scholastic distinction between faith
formed and unformed, refuted by a consideration of the nature of faith,
which, as the gift of the Spirit, cannot possibly be disjoined from
pious affection.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span>9. Objection from a passage of Paul.
Answer to it. Error of the Schoolmen in giving only one meaning to
faith, whereas it has many meanings. The testimony of faith improperly
ascribed to two classes of men.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span>10. View to be taken of this. Who those
are that believe for a time. The faith of hypocrites. With whom they may
be compared.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span>11. Why faith attributed to the
reprobate. Objection. Answer. What perception of grace in the reprobate.
How the elect are distinguished from the reprobate.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>12. Why faith is temporary in the
reprobate, firm and perpetual in the elect. Reason in the case of the
reprobate. Example. Why God is angry with his children. In what sense
many are said to fall from faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span>13. Various meanings of the term faith.
1. Taken for soundness in the faith. 2. Sometimes restricted to a
particular object. 3. Signifies the ministry or testimony by which we
are instructed in the faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span>14. Definition of faith explained under
six principal heads. 1. What meant by *Knowledge* in the definition.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span>15. Why this knowledge must be sure and
firm. Reason drawn from the consideration of our weakness. Another
reason from the certainty of the promises of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>16. The leading point in this
certainty. Its fruits. A description of the true believer.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>17. An objection to this certainty.
Answer. Confirmation of the answer from the example of David. This
enlarged upon from the opposite example of Ahab. Also from the uniform
experience and the prayers of believers.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span>18. For this reason the conflict
between the flesh and the Spirit in the soul of the believer described.
The issue of this conflict, the victory of faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>19. On the whole, the faith of the
elect certain and indubitable. Conformation from analogy.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>20. Another confirmation from the
testimony of an Apostle, making it apparent, that, though the faith of
the elect is as yet imperfect, it is nevertheless firm and sure.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>21. A fuller explanation of the nature
of faith. 1. When the believer is shaken with fear, he retakes himself
to the bosom of a merciful God. 2. He does not even shun God when angry,
but hopes in him. 3. He does not suffer unbelief to reign in his heart.
4. He opposes unbelief, and is never finally lost. 5. Faith, however
often assailed, at length comes off victorious.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>22. Another species of fear, arising
from a consideration of the judgment of God against the wicked. This
also faith overcomes. Examples of this description, placed before the
eyes of believers, repress presumption, and fix their faith in God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span>23. Nothing contrary to this in the
exhortation of the Apostle to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling. Fear and faith mutually connected. Confirmation from the
words of a Prophet.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span>24. This doctrine gives no countenance
to the error of those who dream of a confidence mingled with
incredulity. Refutation of this error, from a consideration of the
dignity of Christ dwelling in us. The argument retorted. Refutation
confirmed by the authority of an Apostle. What we ought to hold on this
question.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span>25. Confirmation of the preceding
conclusion by a passage from Bernard.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span>26. True fear caused in two ways—viz.
when we are required to reverence God as a Father, and also to fear him
as Lord.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span>27. Objection from a passage in the
Apostle John. Answer founded on the distinction between filial and
servile fear.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span>28. How faith is said to have respect
to the divine benevolence. What comprehended under this benevolence.
Confirmation from David and Paul.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span>29. Of the Free Promise which is the
foundation of Faith. Reason. Confirmation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span>30. Faith not divided in thus seeking a
Free Promise in the Gospel. Reason. Conclusion confirmed by another
reason.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span>31. The word of God the prop and root
of faith. The word attests the divine goodness and mercy. In what sense
faith has respect to the power of God. Various passages of Isaiah,
inviting the godly to behold the power of God, explained. Other passages
from David. We must beware of going beyond the limits prescribed by the
word, lest false zeal lead us astray, as it did Sarah, Rebekah, and
Isaac. In this way faith is obscured, though not extinguished. We must
not depart one iota from the word of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span>32. All the promises included in
Christ. Two objections answered. A third objection drawn from example.
Answer explaining the faith of Naaman, Cornelius, and the Eunuch.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36"></span>33. Faith revealed to our minds, and
sealed on our hearts, by the Holy Spirit. 1. The mind is purified so as
to have a relish for divine truth. 2. The mind is thus established in
the truth by the agency of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37"></span>34. Proof of the former. 1. By reason.
2. By Scripture. 3. By example. 4. By analogy.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38"></span>35. 5. By the excellent qualities of
faith. 6. By a celebrated passage from Augustine.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p39"></span>36. Proof of the latter by the argument
*a minore ad majus*. Why the Spirit is called a seal, an earnest, and
the Spirit of promise.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40"></span>37. Believers sometimes shaken, but not
so as to perish finally. They ultimately overcome their trials, and
remain steadfast. Proofs from Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p41"></span>38. Objection of the Schoolmen. Answer.
Attempt to support the objection by a passage in Ecclesiastes. Answer,
explaining the meaning of the passage.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p42"></span>39. Another objection, charging the
elect in Christ with rashness and presumption. Answer. Answer confirmed
by various passages from the Apostle Paul. Also from John and Isaiah.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p43"></span>40. A third objection, impugning the
final perseverance of the elect. Answer by an Apostle. Summary of the
refutation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p44"></span>41. The definition of faith accords
with that given by the Apostle in the Hebrews. Explanation of this
definition. Refutation of the scholastic error, that charity is prior to
faith and hope.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p45"></span>42. Hope the inseparable attendant of
true faith. Reason. Connection between faith and hope. Mutually support
each other. Obvious from the various forms of temptation, that the aid
of hope necessary to establish faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p46"></span>43. The terms faith and hope sometimes
confounded. Refutation of the Schoolmen, who attribute a twofold
foundation to hope—viz. the grace of God and the merit of works.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p47"></span>1. All these things will be easily
understood after we have given a clearer definition of faith, so as to
enable the readers to apprehend its nature and power. Here it is of
importance to call to mind what was formerly taught, first, That since
God by his Law prescribes what we ought to do, failure in any one
respect subjects us to the dreadful judgment of eternal death, which it
denounces. Secondly, Because it is not only difficult, but altogether
beyond our strength and ability, to fulfill the demands of the Law, if
we look only to ourselves and consider what is due to our merits, no
ground of hope remains, but we lie forsaken of God under eternal death.
Thirdly, That there is only one method of deliverance which can rescue
us from this miserable calamity—viz. when Christ the Redeemer appears,
by whose hand our heavenly Father, out of his infinite goodness and
mercy, has been pleased to succor us, if we with true faith embrace this
mercy, and with firm hope rest in it. It is now proper to consider the
nature of this faith, by means of which, those who are adopted into the
family of God obtain possession of the heavenly kingdom. For the
accomplishment of so great an end, it is obvious that no mere opinion or
persuasion is adequate. And the greater care and diligence is necessary
in discussing the true nature of faith, from the pernicious delusions
which many, in the present day, labour under with regard to it. Great
numbers, on hearing the term, think that nothing more is meant than a
certain common assent to the Gospel History; nay, when the subject of
faith is discussed in the Schools, by simply representing God as its
object, they by empty speculation, as we have elsewhere said (Book 2,
chap. 6, sec. 4), hurry wretched souls away from the right mark instead
of directing them to it. For seeing that God dwells in light that is
inaccessible, Christ must intervene. Hence he calls himself “the light
of the world;” and in another passage, “the way, the truth, and the
life.” None cometh to the Father (who is the fountain of life) except by
him; for “no man knoweth who the Father is but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reveal him.” For this reason, Paul declares, “I count all
things as loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord.” In the twentieth chapter of the Acts, he states that he preached
“faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ;” and in another passage, he
introduces Christ as thus addressing him: “I have appeared unto thee for
this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness;” “delivering thee
from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send
thee,”—“that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them which are sanctified through faith which is in me.” Paul further
declares, that in the person of Christ the glory of God is visibly
manifested to us, or, which is the same thing, we have “the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.”27  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) It is true, indeed, that faith has
respect to God only; but to this we should add, that it acknowledges
Jesus Christ whom he has sent. God would remain far off, concealed from
us, were we not irradiated by the brightness of Christ. All that the
Father had, he deposited with his only begotten Son, in order that he
might manifest himself in him, and thus by the communication of
blessings express the true image of his glory. Since, as has been said,
we must be led by the Spirit, and thus stimulated to seek Christ, so
must we also remember that the invisible Father is to be sought nowhere
but in this image. For which reason Augustine treating of the object of
faith (De Civitate Dei, lib. 11, ch. 2), elegantly says, “The thing to
be known is, whither we are to go, and by what way;” and immediately
after infers, that “the surest way to avoid all errors is to know him
who is both God and man. It is to God we tend, and it is by man we go,
and both of these are found only in Christ.”28  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) Paul, when he preaches faith towards
God, surely does not intend to overthrow what he so often
inculcates—viz. that faith has all its stability in Christ. Peter most
appropriately connects both, saying, that by him “we believe in God,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p50"></span>2. This evil, therefore, must, like
innumerable others, be attributed to the Schoolmen,28  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) who have in a manner drawn a veil over
Christ, to whom, if our eye is not directly turned, we must always
wander through many labyrinths. But besides impairing, and almost
annihilating, faith by their obscure definition, they have invented the
fiction of implicit faith, with which name decking the grossest
ignorance, they delude the wretched populace to their great
destruction.28  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) Nay, to state
the fact more truly and plainly, this fiction not only buries true
faith, but entirely destroys it. Is it faith to understand nothing, and
merely submit your convictions implicitly to the Church? Faith consists
not in ignorance, but in knowledge—knowledge not of God merely, but of
the divine will. We do not obtain salvation either because we are
prepared to embrace every dictate of the Church as true, or leave to the
Church the province of inquiring and determining; but when we recognize
God as a propitious Father through the reconciliation made by Christ,
and Christ as given to us for righteousness, sanctification, and life.
By this knowledge, I say, not by the submission of our understanding, we
obtain an entrance into the kingdom of heaven. For when the Apostle
says, “With the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>[Rom.
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>); he intimates, that it is not enough to
believe implicitly without understanding, or even inquiring. The thing
requisite is an explicit recognition of the divine goodness, in which
our righteousness consists.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p53"></span>3. I indeed deny not (so enveloped are
we in ignorance), that to us very many things now are and will continue
to be completely involved until we lay aside this weight of flesh, and
approach nearer to the presence of God. In such cases the fittest course
is to suspend our judgment, and resolve to maintain unity with the
Church. But under this pretext, to honor ignorance tempered with
humility with the name of faith, is most absurd. Faith consists in the
knowledge of God and Christ (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>[John
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>), not in reverence for the Church. And we
see what a labyrinth they have formed out of this implicit faith—every
thing, sometimes even the most monstrous errors, being received by the
ignorant as oracles without any discrimination, provided they are
prescribed to them under the name of the Church. This inconsiderate
facility, though the surest precipice to destruction, is, however,
excused on the ground that it believes nothing definitely, but only with
the appended condition, if such is the faith of the Church. Thus they
pretend to find truth in error, light in darkness, true knowledge in
ignorance. Not to dwell longer in refuting these views, we simply advise
the reader to compare them with ours. The clearness of truth will itself
furnish a sufficient refutation. For the question they raise is not,
whether there may be an implicit faith with many remains of ignorance,
but they maintain, that persons living and even indulging in a stupid
ignorance duly believe, provided, in regard to things unknown, they
assent to the authority and judgment of the Church: as if Scripture did
not uniformly teach, that with faith understanding is conjoined.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p54"></span>4. We grant, indeed, that so long as we
are pilgrims in the world faith is implicit, not only because as yet
many things are hidden from us, but because, involved in the mists of
error, we attain not to all. The highest wisdom, even of him who has
attained the greatest perfection, is to go forward, and endeavor in a
calm and teachable spirit to make further progress. Hence Paul exhorts
believers to wait for further illumination in any matter in which they
differ from each other, <span id="iv.iii.iii-p54.1"></span>[Phil.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p54.1"></span>).28  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) And certainly experience teaches, that
so long as we are in the flesh, our attainments are less than is to be
desired. In our daily reading we fall in with many obscure passages
which convict us of ignorance. With this curb God keeps us modest,
assigning to each a measure of faith, that every teacher, however
excellent, may still be disposed to learn. Striking examples of this
implicit faith may be observed in the disciples of Christ before they
were fully illuminated. We see with what difficulty they take in the
first rudiments, how they hesitate in the minutest matters, how, though
hanging on the lips of their Master, they make no great progress; nay,
even after running to the sepulchre on the report of the women, the
resurrection of their Master appears to them a dream. As Christ
previously bore testimony to their faith, we cannot say that they were
altogether devoid of it; nay, had they not been persuaded that Christ
would rise again, all their zeal would have been extinguished. Nor was
it superstition that led the women to prepare spices to embalm a dead
body of whose revival they had no expectation; but, although they gave
credit to the words of one whom they knew to be true, yet the ignorance
which still possessed their minds involved their faith in darkness, and
left them in amazement. Hence they are said to have believed only when,
by the reality, they perceive the truth of what Christ had spoken; not
that they then began to believe, but the seed of a hidden faith, which
lay as it were dead in their hearts, then burst forth in vigor. They
had, therefore, a true but implicit faith, having reverently embraced
Christ as the only teacher. Then, being taught by him, they felt assured
that he was the author of salvation: in fine, believed that he had come
from heaven to gather disciples, and take them thither through the grace
of the Father. There cannot be a more familiar proof of this, than that
in all men faith is always mingled with incredulity.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p56"></span>5. We may also call their faith
implicit, as being properly nothing else than a preparation for faith.
The Evangelists describe many as having believed, although they were
only roused to admiration by the miracles, and went no farther than to
believe that Christ was the promised Messiah, without being at all
imbued with Evangelical doctrine. The reverence which subdued them, and
made them willingly submit to Christ, is honored with the name of faith,
though it was nothing but the commencement of it. Thus the nobleman who
believed in the promised cure of his son, on returning home, is said by
the Evangelist (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>[John
4:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#053)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>) to have again believed; that is, he had
first received the words which fell from the lips of Christ as an
oracular response, and thereafter submitted to his authority and
received his doctrine. Although it is to be observed that he was docile
and disposed to learn, yet the word “*believed*” in the former passage
denotes a particular faith, and in the latter gives him a place among
those disciples who had devoted themselves to Christ. Not unlike this is
the example which John gives of the Samaritans who believed the women,
and eagerly hastened to Christ; but, after they had heard him, thus
express themselves, “Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we
have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p56.2"></span>[John
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#042)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p56.2"></span>). From these passages it is obvious, that
even those who are not yet imbued with the first principles, provided
they are disposed to obey, are called *believers*, not properly indeed,
but inasmuch as God is pleased in kindness so highly to honor their
pious feeling. But this docility, with a desire of further progress, is
widely different from the gross ignorance in which those sluggishly
indulge who are contented with the implicit faith of the Papists. If
Paul severely condemns those who are “ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth,” how much more sharply ought those
to be rebuked who avowedly affect to know nothing?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57"></span>6. The true knowledge of Christ
consists in receiving him as he is offered by the Father, namely, as
invested with his Gospel. For, as he is appointed as the end of our
faith, so we cannot directly tend towards him except under the guidance
of the Gospel. Therein are certainly unfolded to us treasures of grace.
Did these continue shut, Christ would profit us little. Hence Paul makes
faith the inseparable attendant of doctrine in these words, “Ye have not
so learned Christ; if so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught
by him, as the truth is in Jesus,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>[Eph.
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>). Still I do not confine faith to the
Gospel in such a sense as not to admit that enough was delivered to
Moses and the Prophets to form a foundation of faith; but as the Gospel
exhibits a fuller manifestation of Christ, Paul justly terms it the
doctrine of faith (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57.2"></span>[1 Tim.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.2"></span>). For which reason, also he elsewhere
says, that, by the coming of faith, the Law was abolished (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.3"></span>[Rom.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.3"></span>), including under the expression a new and
unwonted mode of teaching, by which Christ, from the period of his
appearance as the great Master, gave a fuller illustration of the
Father’s mercy, and testified more surely of our salvation. But an
easier and more appropriate method will be to descend from the general
to the particular. First, we must remember, that there is an inseparable
relation between faith and the word, and that these can no more be
disconnected from each other than rays of light from the sun. Hence in
Isaiah the Lord exclaims, “Hear, and your soul shall live,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.4"></span>[Is.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.4"></span>). And John points to this same fountain of
faith in the following words, “These are written that ye might believe,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57.5"></span>[John
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.5"></span>). The Psalmist also exhorting the people
to faith says, “To-day, if ye will hear his voice,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.6"></span>[Ps.
95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.6"></span>), to *hear* being uniformly taken for to
*believe*. In fine, in Isaiah the Lord distinguishes the members of the
Church from strangers by this mark, “All thy children shall be taught of
the Lord,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57.7"></span>[Is.
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.7"></span>); for if the benefit was indiscriminate,
why should he address his words only to a few? Corresponding with this,
the Evangelists uniformly employ the terms *believers* and *disciples*
as synonymous. This is done especially by Luke in several passages of
the Acts. He even applies the term *disciple* to a woman (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.8"></span>[Acts
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.8"></span>). Wherefore, if faith declines in the
least degree from the mark at which it ought to aim, it does not retain
its nature, but becomes uncertain credulity and vague wandering of mind.
The same word is the basis on which it rests and is sustained. Declining
from it, it falls. Take away the word, therefore, and no faith will
remain. We are not here discussing, whether, in order to propagate the
word of God by which faith is engendered, the ministry of man is
necessary (this will be considered elsewhere); but we say that the word
itself, whatever be the way in which it is conveyed to us, is a kind of
mirror in which faith beholds God. In this, therefore, whether God uses
the agency of man, or works immediately by his own power, it is always
by his word that he manifests himself to those whom he designs to draw
to himself. Hence Paul designates faith as the obedience which is given
to the Gospel (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57.9"></span>[Rom.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.9"></span>); and writing to the Philippians, he
commends them for the obedience of faith (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.10"></span>[Phil.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.10"></span>). For faith includes not merely the
knowledge that God is, but also, nay chiefly, a perception of his will
toward us. It concerns us to know not only what he is in himself, but
also in what character he is pleased to manifest himself to us. We now
see, therefore, that faith is the knowledge of the divine will in regard
to us, as ascertained from his word. And the foundation of it is a
previous persuasion of the truth of God. So long as your mind entertains
any misgivings as to the certainty of the word, its authority will be
weak and dubious, or rather it will have no authority at all. Nor is it
sufficient to believe that God is true, and cannot lie or deceive,
unless you feel firmly persuaded that every word which him is sacred,
inviolable truth.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p58"></span>7. But since the heart of man is not
brought to faith by every word of God, we must still consider what it is
that faith properly has respect to in the word. The declaration of God
to Adam was, “Thou shalt surely die,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.1"></span>[Gen.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.1"></span>); and to Cain, “The voice of thy brother’s
blood crieth unto me from the ground,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.2"></span>[Gen.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.2"></span>); but these, so far from being fitted to
establish faith, tend only to shake it. At the same time, we deny not
that it is the office of faith to assent to the truth of God whenever,
whatever, and in whatever way he speaks: we are only inquiring what
faith can find in the word of God to lean and rest upon. When conscience
sees only wrath and indignation, how can it but tremble and be afraid?
and how can it avoid shunning the God whom it thus dreads? But faith
ought to seek God, not shun him. It is evident, therefore, that we have
not yet obtained a full definition of faith, it being impossible to give
the name to every kind of knowledge of the divine will. Shall we, then,
for “*will*”, which is often the messenger of bad news and the herald of
terror, substitute the benevolence or mercy of God? In this way,
doubtless, we make a nearer approach to the nature of faith. For we are
allured to seek God when told that our safety is treasured up in him;
and we are confirmed in this when he declares that he studies and takes
an interest in our welfare. Hence there is need of the gracious promise,
in which he testifies that he is a propitious Father; since there is no
other way in which we can approach to him, the promise being the only
thing on which the heart of man can recline. For this reason, the two
things, mercy and truth, are uniformly conjoined in the Psalms as having
a mutual connection with each other. For it were of no avail to us to
know that God is true, did He not in mercy allure us to himself; nor
could we of ourselves embrace his mercy did not He expressly offer it.
“I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not
concealed thy loving-kindness and thy truth. Withhold not thy tender
mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving-kindness and thy truth
continually preserve me,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p58.3"></span>[Ps.
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.3"></span>). “Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens;
and thy faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.4"></span>[Ps.
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.4"></span>). “All the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.5"></span>[Ps.
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.5"></span>). “His merciful kindness is great toward
us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.6"></span>[Ps.
117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.6"></span>). “I will praise thy name for thy
loving-kindness and thy truth,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p58.7"></span>[Ps.
138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.7"></span>). I need not quote what is said in the
Prophets, to the effect that God is merciful and faithful in his
promises. It were presumptuous in us to hold that God is propitious to
us, had we not his own testimony, and did he not prevent us by his
invitation, which leaves no doubt or uncertainty as to his will. It has
already been seen that Christ is the only pledge of love, for without
him all things, both above and below speak of hatred and wrath. We have
also seen, that since the knowledge of the divine goodness cannot be of
much importance unless it leads us to confide in it, we must exclude a
knowledge mingled with doubt,—a knowledge which, so far from being firm,
is continually wavering. But the human mind, when blinded and darkened,
is very far from being able to rise to a proper knowledge of the divine
will; nor can the heart, fluctuating with perpetual doubt, rest secure
in such knowledge. Hence, in order that the word of God may gain full
credit, the mind must be enlightened, and the heart confirmed, from some
other quarter. We shall now have a full definition of faith28  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) if we say that it is a firm and sure
knowledge of the divine favor toward us, founded on the truth of a free
promise in Christ, and revealed to our minds, and sealed on our hearts,
by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p60"></span>8. But before I proceed farther, it
will be necessary to make some preliminary observations for the purpose
of removing difficulties which might otherwise obstruct the reader. And
first, I must refute the nugatory distinction of the Schoolmen as to
formed and unformed faith.28  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)
For they imagine that persons who have no fear of God, and no sense of
piety, may believe all that is necessary to be known for salvation; as
if the Holy Spirit were not the witness of our adoption by enlightening
our hearts unto faith. Still, however, though the whole Scripture is
against them, they dogmatically give the name of faith to a persuasion
devoid of the fear of God. It is unnecessary to go farther in refuting
their definition, than simply to state the nature of faith as declared
in the word of God. From this it will clearly appear how unskillfully
and absurdly they babble, rather than discourse, on this subject. I have
already done this in part, and will afterwards add the remainder in its
proper place. At present, I say that nothing can be imagined more absurd
than their fiction. They insist that faith is an assent with which any
despiser of God may receive what is delivered by Scripture. But we must
first see whether any one can by his own strength acquire faith, or
whether the Holy Spirit, by means of it, becomes the witness of
adoption. Hence it is childish trifling in them to inquire whether the
faith formed by the supervening quality of love be the same, or a
different and new faith. By talking in this style, they show plainly
that they have never thought of the special gift of the Spirit; since
one of the first elements of faith is reconciliation implied in man’s
drawing near to God. Did they duly ponder the saying of Paul, “With the
heart man believeth unto righteousness,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p61.1"></span>[Rom.
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p61.1"></span>), they would cease to dream of that frigid
quality. There is one consideration which ought at once to put an end to
the debate—viz. that assent itself (as I have already observed, and will
afterwards more fully illustrate) is more a matter of the heart than the
head, of the affection than the intellect. For this reason, it is termed
“the obedience of faith,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p61.2"></span>[Rom.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p61.2"></span>), which the Lord prefers to all other
service, and justly, since nothing is more precious to him than his
truth, which, as John Baptist declares, is in a manner signed and sealed
by believers (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p61.3"></span>[John
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p61.3"></span>). As there can be no doubt on the matter,
we in one word conclude, that they talk absurdly when they maintain that
faith is formed by the addition of pious affection as an accessory to
assent, since assent itself, such at least as the Scriptures describe,
consists in pious affection. But we are furnished with a still clearer
argument. Since faith embraces Christ as he is offered by the Father,
and he is offered not only for justification, for forgiveness of sins
and peace, but also for sanctification, as the fountain of living
waters, it is certain that no man will ever know him aright without at
the same time receiving the sanctification of the Spirit; or, to express
the matter more plainly, faith consists in the knowledge of Christ;
Christ cannot be known without the sanctification of his Spirit:
therefore faith cannot possibly be disjoined from pious affection.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p62"></span>9. In their attempt to mar faith by
divesting it of love, they are wont to insist on the words of Paul,
“Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
charity, I am nothing,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p62.1"></span>[1 Cor.
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.1"></span>). But they do not consider what the faith
is of which the Apostle there speaks. Having, in the previous chapter,
discoursed of the various gifts of the Spirit (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.2"></span>[1 Cor.
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.2"></span>), including diversity of tongues,
miracles, and prophecy, and exhorted the Corinthians to follow the
better gifts, in other words, those from which the whole body of the
Church would derive greater benefit, he adds, “Yet show I unto you a
more excellent way,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p62.3"></span>[1 Cor.
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.3"></span>). All other gifts, how excellent soever
they may be in themselves, are of no value unless they are subservient
to charity. They were given for the edification of the Church, and fail
of their purpose if not so applied. To prove this he adopts a division,
repeating the same gifts which he had mentioned before, but under
different names. Miracles and faith are used to denote the same
thing—viz. the power of working miracles. Seeing, then, that this
miraculous power or faith is the particular gift of God, which a wicked
man may possess and abuse, as the gift of tongues, prophecy, or other
gifts, it is not strange that he separates it from charity. Their whole
error lies in this, that while the term faith has a variety of meanings,
overlooking this variety, they argue as if its meaning were invariably
one and the same. The passage of James, by which they endeavor to defend
their error, will be elsewhere discussed (*infra*, chap. 17, sec. 11).
Although, in discoursing of faith, we admit that it has a variety of
forms; yet, when our object is to show what knowledge of God the wicked
possess, we hold and maintain, in accordance with Scripture, that the
pious only have faith. Multitudes undoubtedly believe that God is, and
admit the truth of the Gospel History, and the other parts of Scripture,
in the same way in which they believe the records of past events, or
events which they have actually witnessed. There are some who go even
farther: they regard the Word of God as an infallible oracle; they do
not altogether disregard its precepts, but are moved to some degree by
its threatening and promises. To such the testimony of faith is
attributed, but by *catachresis*; because they do not with open impiety
impugn, reject, or condemn, the Word of God, but rather exhibit some
semblance of obedience.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p63"></span>10. But as this shadow or image of
faith is of no moment, so it is unworthy of the name. How far it differs
from true faith will shortly be explained at length. Here, however, we
may just indicate it in passing. Simon Magus is said to have believed,
though he soon after gave proof of his unbelief (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p63.1"></span>[Acts
8:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p63.1"></span>). In regard to the faith attributed to
him, we do not understand with some, that he merely pretended a belief
which had no existence in his heart: we rather think that, overcome by
the majesty of the Gospel, he yielded some kind of assent, and so far
acknowledged Christ to be the author of life and salvation, as willingly
to assume his name. In like manner, in the Gospel of Luke, those in whom
the seed of the word is choked before it brings forth fruit, or in whom,
from having no depth of earth, it soon withereth away, are said to
believe for a time. Such, we doubt not, eagerly receive the word with a
kind of relish, and have some feeling of its divine power, so as not
only to impose upon men by a false semblance of faith, but even to
impose upon themselves. They imagine that the reverence which they give
to the word is genuine piety, because they have no idea of any impiety
but that which consists in open and avowed contempt. But whatever that
assent may be, it by no means penetrates to the heart, so as to have a
fixed seat there. Although it sometimes seems to have planted its roots,
these have no life in them. The human heart has so many recesses for
vanity, so many lurking places for falsehood, is so shrouded by fraud
and hypocrisy, that it often deceives itself. Let those who glory in
such semblances of faith know that, in this respect, they are not a whit
superior to devils. The one class, indeed, is inferior to them, inasmuch
as they are able without emotion to hear and understand things, the
knowledge of which makes devils tremble (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p63.2"></span>[James
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p63.2"></span>). The other class equals them in this,
that whatever be the impression made upon them, its only result is
terror and consternation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p64"></span>11. I am aware it seems unaccountable
to some how faith is attributed to the reprobate, seeing that it is
declared by Paul to be one of the fruits of election;28  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) and yet the difficulty is easily
solved: for though none are enlightened into faith, and truly feel the
efficacy of the Gospel, with the exception of those who are
fore-ordained to salvation, yet experience shows that the reprobate are
sometimes affected in a way so similar to the elect, that even in their
own judgment there is no difference between them. Hence it is not
strange, that by the Apostle a taste of heavenly gifts, and by Christ
himself a temporary faith, is ascribed to them. Not that they truly
perceive the power of spiritual grace and the sure light of faith; but
the Lord, the better to convict them, and leave them without excuse,
instills into their minds such a sense of his goodness as can be felt
without the Spirit of adoption. Should it be objected, that believers
have no stronger testimony to assure them of their adoption, I answer,
that though there is a great resemblance and affinity between the elect
of God and those who are impressed for a time with a fading faith, yet
the elect alone have that full assurance which is extolled by Paul, and
by which they are enabled to cry, Abba, Father. Therefore, as God
regenerates the elect only for ever by incorruptible seed, as the seed
of life once sown in their hearts never perishes, so he effectually
seals in them the grace of his adoption, that it may be sure and
steadfast. But in this there is nothing to prevent an inferior operation
of the Spirit from taking its course in the reprobate. Meanwhile,
believers are taught to examine themselves carefully and humbly, lest
carnal security creep in and take the place of assurance of faith. We
may add, that the reprobate never have any other than a confused sense
of grace, laying hold of the shadow rather than the substance, because
the Spirit properly seals the forgiveness of sins in the elect only,
applying it by special faith to their use. Still it is correctly said,
that the reprobate believe God to be propitious to them, inasmuch as
they accept the gift of reconciliation, though confusedly and without
due discernment; not that they are partakers of the same faith or
regeneration with the children of God; but because, under a covering of
hypocrisy, they seem to have a principle of faith in common with them.
Nor do I even deny that God illumines their minds to this extent, that
they recognize his grace; but that conviction he distinguishes from the
peculiar testimony which he gives to his elect in this respect, that the
reprobate never attain to the full result or to fruition. When he shows
himself propitious to them, it is not as if he had truly rescued them
from death, and taken them under his protection. He only gives them a
manifestation of his present mercy.28  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) In the elect alone he implants the
living root of faith, so that they persevere even to the end. Thus we
dispose of the objection, that if God truly displays his grace, it must
endure for ever. There is nothing inconsistent in this with the fact of
his enlightening some with a present sense of grace, which afterwards
proves evanescent.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p67"></span>12. Although faith is a knowledge of
the divine favor towards us, and a full persuasion of its truth, it is
not strange that the sense of the divine love, which though akin to
faith differs much from it, vanishes in those who are temporarily
impressed. The will of God is, I confess, immutable, and his truth is
always consistent with itself; but I deny that the reprobate ever
advance so far as to penetrate to that secret revelation which Scripture
reserves for the elect only. I therefore deny that they either
understand his will considered as immutable, or steadily embrace his
truth, inasmuch as they rest satisfied with an evanescent impression;
just as a tree not planted deep enough may take root, but will in
process of time wither away, though it may for several years not only
put forth leaves and flowers, but produce fruit. In short, as by the
revolt of the first man, the image of God could be effaced from his mind
and soul, so there is nothing strange in His shedding some rays of grace
on the reprobate, and afterwards allowing these to be extinguished.
There is nothing to prevent His giving some a slight knowledge of his
Gospel, and imbuing others thoroughly. Meanwhile, we must remember that
however feeble and slender the faith of the elect may be, yet as the
Spirit of God is to them a sure earnest and seal of their adoption, the
impression once engraven can never be effaced from their hearts, whereas
the light which glimmers in the reprobate is afterwards quenched.28
 <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) Nor can it be said that the
Spirit therefore deceives, because he does not quicken the seed which
lies in their hearts so as to make it ever remain incorruptible as in
the elect. I go farther: seeing it is evident, from the doctrine of
Scripture and from daily experience, that the reprobate are occasionally
impressed with a sense of divine grace, some desire of mutual love must
necessarily be excited in their hearts. Thus for a time a pious
affection prevailed in Saul, disposing him to love God. Knowing that he
was treated with paternal kindness, he was in some degree attracted by
it. But as the reprobate have no rooted conviction of the paternal love
of God, so they do not in return yield the love of sons, but are led by
a kind of mercenary affection. The Spirit of love was given to Christ
alone, for the express purpose of conferring this Spirit upon his
members; and there can be no doubt that the following words of Paul
apply to the elect only: “The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,
by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.1"></span>[Rom.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.1"></span>); namely, the love which begets that
confidence in prayer to which I have above adverted. On the other hand,
we see that God is mysteriously offended with his children, though he
ceases not to love them. He certainly hates them not, but he alarms them
with a sense of his anger, that he may humble the pride of the flesh,
arouse them from lethargy, and urge them to repentance. Hence they, at
the same instant, feel that he is angry with them or their sins, and
also propitious to their persons. It is not from fictitious dread that
they deprecate his anger, and yet they retake themselves to him with
tranquil confidence. It hence appears that the faith of some, though not
true faith, is not mere pretence. They are borne along by some sudden
impulse of zeal, and erroneously impose upon themselves, sloth
undoubtedly preventing them from examining their hearts with due care.
Such probably was the case of those whom John describes as believing on
Christ; but of whom he says, “Jesus did not commit himself unto them,
because he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man:
for he knew what was in man,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68.2"></span>[John
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.2"></span>). Were it not true that many fall away
from the common faith (I call it common, because there is a great
resemblance between temporary and living, everduring faith), Christ
would not have said to his disciples, “If ye continue in my word, then
are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68.3"></span>[John
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.3"></span>). He is addressing those who had embraced
his doctrine, and urging them to progress in the faith, lest by their
sluggishness they extinguish the light which they have received.
Accordingly, Paul claims faith as the peculiar privilege of the elect,
intimating that many, from not being properly rooted, fall away (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.4"></span>[Tit.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.4"></span>). In the same way, in Matthew, our Savior
says, “Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be
rooted up,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68.5"></span>[Mt.
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.5"></span>). Some who are not ashamed to insult God
and man are more grossly false. Against this class of men, who profane
the faith by impious and lying pretence, James inveighs (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.6"></span>[James
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.6"></span>). Nor would Paul require the faith of
believers to be unfeigned (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68.7"></span>[1 Tim.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.7"></span>), were there not many who presumptuously
arrogate to themselves what they have not, deceiving others, and
sometimes even themselves, with empty show. Hence he compares a good
conscience to the ark in which faith is preserved, because many, by
falling away, have in regard to it made shipwreck.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p69"></span>13. It is necessary to attend to the
ambiguous meaning of the term: for *faith* is often equivalent in
meaning to *sound doctrine*, as in the passage which we lately quoted,
and in the same epistle where Paul enjoins the deacons to hold “the
mystery of the faith in a pure conscience;” in like manner, when he
denounces the defection of certain from the faith. The meaning again is
the same, when he says that Timothy had been brought up in the faith;
and in like manner, when he says that profane babblings and oppositions
of science, falsely so called, lead many away from the faith. Such
persons he elsewhere calls reprobate as to the faith. On the other hand,
when he enjoins Titus, “Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in
the faith;”28  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) by soundness he
means purity of doctrine, which is easily corrupted, and degenerates
through the fickleness of men. And indeed, since in Christ, as possessed
by faith, are “hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.4"></span>[Col.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.4"></span>), the term *faith* is justly extended to
the whole sum of heavenly doctrine, from which it cannot be separated.
On the other hand, it is sometimes confined to a particular object, as
when Matthew says of those who let down the paralytic through the roof,
that Jesus saw their faith (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p70.5"></span>[Mt.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.5"></span>); and Jesus himself exclaims in regard to
the centurion, “I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p70.6"></span>[Mt.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.6"></span>). Now, it is probable that the centurion
was thinking only of the cure of his son, by whom his whole soul was
engrossed;29  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) but because he is
satisfied with the simple answer and assurance of Christ, and does not
request his bodily presence, this circumstance calls forth the eulogium
on his faith. And we have lately shown how Paul uses the term faith for
the gift of miracles—a gift possessed by persons who were neither
regenerated by the Spirit of God, nor sincerely reverenced him. In
another passage, he uses faith for the doctrine by which we are
instructed in the faith. For when he says, that “that which is in part
shall be done away,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p71.1"></span>[1 Cor.
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p71.1"></span>), there can be no doubt that reference is
made to the ministry of the Church, which is necessary in our present
imperfect state; in these forms of expression the analogy is obvious.
But when the name of faith is improperly transferred to a false
profession or lying assumption, the *catachresis* ought not to seem
harsher than when the fear of God is used for vicious and perverse
worship; as when it is repeatedly said in sacred history, that the
foreign nations which had been transported to Samaria and the
neighbouring districts, feared false gods and the God of Israel: in
other words, confounded heaven with earth. But we have now been
inquiring what the faith is, which distinguishes the children of God
from unbelievers, the faith by which we invoke God the Father, by which
we pass from death unto life, and by which Christ our eternal salvation
and life dwells in us. Its power and nature have, I trust, been briefly
and clearly explained.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p72"></span>14. Let us now again go over the parts
of the definition separately: I should think that, after a careful
examination of them, no doubt will remain. By knowledge we do not mean
comprehension, such as that which we have of things falling under human
sense. For that knowledge is so much superior, that the human mind must
far surpass and go beyond itself in order to reach it. Nor even when it
has reached it does it comprehend what it feels, but persuaded of what
it comprehends not, it understands more from mere certainty of
persuasion than it could discern of any human matter by its own
capacity. Hence it is elegantly described by Paul as ability “to
comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p72.1"></span>[Eph.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.1"></span>). His object was to intimate, that what
our mind embraces by faith is every way infinite, that this kind of
knowledge far surpasses all understanding. But because the “mystery
which has been hid from ages and from generations” is now “made manifest
to the saints,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p72.2"></span>[Col.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.2"></span>), faith is, for good reason, occasionally
termed in Scripture understanding (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.3"></span>[Col.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.3"></span>); and knowledge, as by John (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.4"></span>[1 John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.4"></span>), when he declares that believers know
themselves to be the sons of God. And certainly they do know, but rather
as confirmed by a belief of the divine veracity than taught by any
demonstration of reason. This is also indicated by Paul when he says,
that “whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord:
(For we walk by faith, not by sight),” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p72.5"></span>[2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p72.5"></span>)
thus showing, that what we understand by faith is yet distant from us
and escapes our view. Hence we conclude that the knowledge of faith
consists more of certainty than discernment.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p73"></span>15. We add, that it is sure and firm,
the better to express strength and constancy of persuasion. For as faith
is not contented with a dubious and fickle opinion, so neither is it
contented with an obscure and ill-defined conception. The certainty
which it requires must be full and decisive, as is usual in regard to
matters ascertained and proved. So deeply rooted in our hearts is
unbelief, so prone are we to it, that while all confess with the lips
that God is faithful, no man ever believes it without an arduous
struggle. Especially when brought to the test,29  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) we by our wavering betray the vice
which lurked within. Nor is it without cause that the Holy Spirit bears
such distinguished testimony to the authority of God, in order that it
may cure the disease of which I have spoken, and induce us to give full
credit to the divine promises: “The words of the Lord” (says David,
<span id="iv.iii.iii-p74.1"></span>[Ps.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.1"></span>) “are pure words, as silver tried in a
furnace of earth purified seven times:” “The word of the Lord is tried:
he is a buckler to all those that trust in him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.2"></span>[Ps.
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.2"></span>). And Solomon declares the same thing
almost in the same words, “Every word of God is pure,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.3"></span>[Prov.
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.3"></span>). But further quotation is superfluous, as
the 119th Psalm is almost wholly occupied with this subject. Certainly,
whenever God thus recommends his word, he indirectly rebukes our
unbelief, the purport of all that is said being to eradicate perverse
doubt from our hearts. There are very many also who form such an idea of
the divine mercy as yields them very little comfort. For they are
harassed by miserable anxiety while they doubt whether God will be
merciful to them. They think, indeed, that they are most fully persuaded
of the divine mercy, but they confine it within too narrow limits. The
idea they entertain is, that this mercy is great and abundant, is shed
upon many, is offered and ready to be bestowed upon all; but that it is
uncertain whether it will reach to them individually, or rather whether
they can reach to it. Thus their knowledge stopping short leaves them
only mid-way; not so much confirming and tranquilizing the mind as
harassing it with doubt and disquietude. Very different is that feeling
of full assurance (πλεροφορία) which the Scriptures uniformly attribute
to faith—an assurance which leaves no doubt that the goodness of God is
clearly offered to us. This assurance we cannot have without truly
perceiving its sweetness, and experiencing it in ourselves. Hence from
faith the Apostle deduces confidence, and from confidence boldness. His
words are, “In whom (Christ) we have boldness and access with confidence
by the faith of him,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p74.4"></span>[Eph.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.4"></span>) thus undoubtedly showing that our faith
is not true unless it enables us to appear calmly in the presence of
God. Such boldness springs only from confidence in the divine favor and
salvation. So true is this, that the term faith is often used as
equivalent to confidence.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p75"></span>16. The principal hinge on which faith
turns is this: We must not suppose that any promises of mercy which the
Lord offers are only true out of us, and not at all in us: we should
rather make them ours by inwardly embracing them. In this way only is
engendered that confidence which he elsewhere terms peace (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.1"></span>[Rom.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.1"></span>); though perhaps he rather means to make
peace follow from it. This is the security which quiets and calms the
conscience in the view of the judgment of God, and without which it is
necessarily vexed and almost torn with tumultuous dread, unless when it
happens to slumber for a moment, forgetful both of God and of itself.
And verily it is but for a moment. It never long enjoys that miserable
obliviousness, for the memory of the divine judgment, ever and anon
recurring, stings it to the quick. In one word, he only is a true
believer who, firmly persuaded that God is reconciled, and is a kind
Father to him, hopes everything from his kindness, who, trusting to the
promises of the divine favor, with undoubting confidence anticipates
salvation; as the Apostle shows in these words, “We are made partakers
of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the
end,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p75.2"></span>[Heb.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.2"></span>). He thus holds, that none hope well in
the Lord save those who confidently glory in being the heirs of the
heavenly kingdom. No man, I say, is a believer but he who, trusting to
the security of his salvation, confidently triumphs over the devil and
death, as we are taught by the noble exclamation of Paul, “I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.3"></span>[Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.3"></span>). In like manner, the same Apostle does
not consider that the eyes of our understanding are enlightened unless
we know what is the hope of the eternal inheritance to which we are
called (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p75.4"></span>[Eph.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.4"></span>). Thus he uniformly intimates throughout
his writings, that the goodness of God is not properly comprehended when
security does not follow as its fruit.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p76"></span>17. But it will be said that this
differs widely from the experience of believers, who, in recognizing the
grace of God toward them, not only feel disquietude (this often
happens), but sometimes tremble, overcome with terror,29  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) so violent are the temptations which
assail their minds. This scarcely seems consistent with certainty of
faith. It is necessary to solve this difficulty, in order to maintain
the doctrine above laid down. When we say that faith must be certain and
secure, we certainly speak not of an assurance which is never affected
by doubt, nor a security which anxiety never assails; we rather maintain
that believers have a perpetual struggle with their own distrust, and
are thus far from thinking that their consciences possess a placid
quiet, uninterrupted by perturbation. On the other hand, whatever be the
mode in which they are assailed, we deny that they fall off and abandon
that sure confidence which they have formed in the mercy of God.
Scripture does not set before us a brighter or more memorable example of
faith than in David, especially if regard be had to the constant tenor
of his life. And yet how far his mind was from being always at peace is
declared by innumerable complaints, of which it will be sufficient to
select a few. When he rebukes the turbulent movements of his soul, what
else is it but a censure of his unbelief? “Why art thou cast down, my
soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.1"></span>[Psalm
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.1"></span>). His alarm was undoubtedly a manifest
sign of distrust, as if he thought that the Lord had forsaken him. In
another passage we have a fuller confession: “I said in my haste, I am
cut off from before thine eyes,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.2"></span>[Psalm
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.2"></span>). In another passage, in anxious and
wretched perplexity, he debates with himself, nay, raises a question as
to the nature of God: “Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger
shut up his tender mercies?” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p77.3"></span>[Psalm
77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.3"></span>). What follows is still harsher: “I said
this is my infirmity; but I will remember the years of the right hand of
the Most High.”29  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) As if
desperate, he adjudges himself to destruction.29  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) He not only confesses that he is
agitated by doubt, but as if he had fallen in the contest, leaves
himself nothing in reserve,—God having deserted him, and made the hand
which was wont to help him the instrument of his destruction. Wherefore,
after having been tossed among tumultuous waves, it is not without
reason he exhorts his soul to return to her quiet rest (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.1"></span>[Psalm
116:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.1"></span>). And yet (what is strange) amid those
commotions, faith sustains the believer’s heart, and truly acts the part
of the palm tree, which supports any weights laid upon it, and rises
above them; thus David, when he seemed to be overwhelmed, ceased not by
urging himself forward to ascend to God. But he who anxiously contending
with his own infirmity has recourse to faith, is already in a great
measure victorious. This we may infer from the following passage, and
others similar to it: “Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he
shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.2"></span>[Psalm
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.2"></span>). He accuses himself of timidity, and
repeating the same thing twice, confesses that he is ever and anon
exposed to agitation. Still he is not only dissatisfied with himself for
so feeling, but earnestly labors to correct it. Were we to take a nearer
view of his case, and compare it with that of Ahaz, we should find a
great difference between them. Isaiah is sent to relieve the anxiety of
an impious and hypocritical king, and addresses him in these terms:
“Take heed, and be quiet; fear not,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.3"></span>[Isaiah
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.3"></span>). How did Ahab act? As has already been
said, his heart was shaken as a tree is shaken by the wind: though he
heard the promise, he ceased not to tremble. This, therefore, is the
proper hire and punishment of unbelief, so to tremble as in the day of
trial to turn away from God, who gives access to himself only by faith.
On the other hand, believers, though weighed down and almost overwhelmed
with the burden of temptation, constantly rise up, though not without
toil and difficulty; hence, feeling conscious of their own weakness,
they pray with the Prophet, “Take not the word of truth utterly out of
my mouths” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p79.4"></span>[Psalm
119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.4"></span>). By these words, we are taught that they
at times become dumb, as if their faith were overthrown, and yet that
they do not withdraw or turn their backs, but persevere in the contest,
and by prayer stimulate their sluggishness, so as not to fall into
stupor by giving way to it. (See Calv. in <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.5"></span>[Psalm
88:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p79.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p80"></span>18. To make this intelligible, we must
return to the distinction between flesh and spirit, to which we have
already adverted, and which here becomes most apparent. The believer
finds within himself two principles: the one filling him with delight in
recognizing the divine goodness, the other filling him with bitterness
under a sense of his fallen state; the one leading him to recline on the
promise of the Gospel, the other alarming him by the conviction of his
iniquity; the one making him exult with the anticipation of life, the
other making him tremble with the fear of death. This diversity is owing
to imperfection of faith, since we are never so well in the course of
the present life as to be entirely cured of the disease of distrust, and
completely replenished and engrossed by faith. Hence those conflicts:
the distrust cleaving to the remains of the flesh rising up to assail
the faith enlisting in our hearts. But if in the believer’s mind
certainty is mingled with doubt, must we not always be carried back to
the conclusion, that faith consists not of a sure and clear, but only of
an obscure and confused, understanding of the divine will in regard to
us? By no means. Though we are distracted by various thoughts, it does
not follow that we are immediately divested of faith. Though we are
agitated and carried to and fro by distrust, we are not immediately
plunged into the abyss; though we are shaken, we are not therefore
driven from our place. The invariable issue of the contest is, that
faith in the long run surmounts the difficulties by which it was beset
and seemed to be endangered.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p81"></span>19. The whole, then, comes to this: As
soon as the minutest particle of faith is instilled into our minds, we
begin to behold the face of God placid, serene, and propitious; far off,
indeed, but still so distinctly as to assure us that there is no
delusion in it. In proportion to the progress we afterwards make (and
the progress ought to be uninterrupted), we obtain a nearer and surer
view, the very continuance making it more familiar to us. Thus we see
that a mind illumined with the knowledge of God is at first involved in
much ignorance,—ignorance, however, which is gradually removed. Still
this partial ignorance or obscure discernment does not prevent that
clear knowledge of the divine favor which holds the first and principal
part in faith. For as one shut up in a prison, where from a narrow
opening he receives the rays of the sun indirectly and in a manner
divided, though deprived of a full view of the sun, has no doubt of the
source from which the light comes, and is benefited by it; so believers,
while bound with the fetters of an earthly body, though surrounded on
all sides with much obscurity, are so far illumined by any slender light
which beams upon them and displays the divine mercy as to feel secure.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p82"></span>20. The Apostle elegantly adverts to
both in different passages. When he says, “We know in part, and we
prophesy in part;” and “Now we see through a glass darkly,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p82.1"></span>[1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p82.1"></span>), he intimates how very minute a portion
of divine wisdom is given to us in the present life. For although those
expressions do not simply indicate that faith is imperfect so long as we
groan under a height of flesh, but that the necessity of being
constantly engaged in learning is owing to our imperfection, he at the
same time reminds us, that a subject which is of boundless extent cannot
be comprehended by our feeble and narrow capacities. This Paul affirms
of the whole Church, each individual being retarded and impeded by his
own ignorance from making so near an approach as were to be wished. But
that the foretaste which we obtain from any minute portion of faith is
certain, and by no means fallacious, he elsewhere shows, when he affirms
that “We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p82.2"></span>[2 Cor.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p82.2"></span>). In such degrees of ignorance much doubt
and trembling is necessarily implied, especially seeing that our heart
is by its own natural bias prone to unbelief. To this we must add the
temptations which, various in kind and infinite in number, are ever and
anon violently assailing us. In particular, conscience itself, burdened
with an incumbent load of sins, at one time complains and groans, at
another accuses itself; at one time murmurs in secret, at another openly
rebels. Therefore, whether adverse circumstances betoken the wrath of
God, or conscience finds the subject and matter within itself, unbelief
thence draws weapons and engines to put faith to flight, the aim of all
its efforts being to make us think that God is adverse and hostile to
us, and thus, instead of hoping for any assistance from him, to make us
dread him as a deadly foe.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p83"></span>21. To withstand these assaults, faith
arms and fortifies itself with the word of God. When the temptation
suggested is, that God is an enemy because he afflicts, faith replies,
that while he afflicts he is merciful, his chastening proceeding more
from love than anger. To the thought that God is the avenger of
wickedness, it opposes the pardon ready to be bestowed on all offences
whenever the sinner retakes himself to the divine mercy. Thus the pious
mind, how much soever it may be agitated and torn, at length rises
superior to all difficulties, and allows not its confidence in the
divine mercy to be destroyed. Nay, rather, the disputes which exercise
and disturb it tend to establish this confidence. A proof of this is,
that the saints, when the hand of God lies heaviest upon them, still
lodge their complaints with him, and continue to invoke him, when to all
appearance he is least disposed to hear. But of what use were it to
lament before him if they had no hope of solace? They never would invoke
him did they not believe that he is ready to assist them. Thus the
disciples, while reprimanded by their Master for the weakness of their
faith in crying out that they were perishing, still implored his aid
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p83.1"></span>[Mt.
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.1"></span>). And he, in rebuking them for their want
of faith, does not disown them or class them with unbelievers, but urges
them to shake off the vice. Therefore, as we have already said, we again
maintain, that faith remaining fixed in the believer’s breast never can
be eradicated from it. However it may seem shaken and bent in this
direction or in that, its flame is never so completely quenched as not
at least to lurk under the embers. In this way, it appears that the
word, which is an incorruptible seed, produces fruit similar to itself.
Its germ never withers away utterly and perishes. The saints cannot have
a stronger ground for despair than to feel, that, according to present
appearances, the hand of God is armed for their destruction; and yet Job
thus declares the strength of his confidence: “Though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him.” The truth is, that unbelief reigns not in the
hearts of believers, but only assails them from without; does not wound
them mortally with its darts, but annoys them, or, at the utmost, gives
them a wound which can be healed. Faith, as Paul (declares (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.2"></span>[Eph.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.2"></span>), is our shield, which receiving these
darts, either wards them off entirely, or at least breaks their force,
and prevents them from reaching the vitals. Hence when faith is shaken,
it is just as when, by the violent blow of a javelin, a soldier standing
firm is forced to step back and yield a little; and again when faith is
wounded, it is as if the shield were pierced, but not perforated by the
blow. The pious mind will always rise, and be able to say with David,
“Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil: for thou art with me,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.3"></span>[Psalm
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.3"></span>). Doubtless it is a terrific thing to walk
in the darkness of death, and it is impossible for believers, however
great their strength may be, not to shudder at it; but since the
prevailing thought is that God is present and providing for their
safety, the feeling of security overcomes that of fear. As Augustine
says,—whatever be the engines which the devil erects against us, as he
cannot gain the heart where faith dwells, he is cast out. Thus, if we
may judge by the event, not only do believers come off safe from every
contest so as to be ready, after a short repose, to descend again into
the arena, but the saying of John, in his Epistle, is fulfilled, “This
is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.4"></span>[1 John
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p83.4"></span>). It is not said that it will be
victorious in a single fight, or a few, or some one assault, but that it
will be victorious over the whole world, though it should be a thousand
times assailed.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p84"></span>22. There is another species of fear
and trembling, which, so far from impairing the security of faith, tends
rather to establish it; namely, when believers, reflecting that the
examples of the divine vengeance on the ungodly are a kind of beacons
warning them not to provoke the wrath of God by similar wickedness keep
anxious watch, or, taking a view of their own inherent wretchedness,
learn their entire dependence on God, without whom they feel themselves
to be fleeting and evanescent as the wind. For when the Apostle sets
before the Corinthians the scourges which the Lord in ancient times
inflicted on the people of Israel, that they might be afraid of
subjecting themselves to similar calamities, he does not in any degree
destroy the ground of their confidence; he only shakes off their carnal
torpor which suppresses faith, but does not strengthen it. Nor when he
takes occasion from the case of the Israelites to exhort, “Let him that
thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p84.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p84.1"></span>), he does not bid us waver, as if we had
no security for our steadfastness: he only removes arrogance and rash
confidence in our strength, telling the Gentiles not to presume because
the Jews had been cast off, and they had been admitted to their place
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p84.2"></span>[Rom.
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p84.2"></span>). In that passage, indeed, he is not
addressing believers only, but also comprehends hypocrites, who gloried
merely in external appearance; nor is he addressing individuals, but
contrasting the Jews and Gentiles, he first shows that the rejection of
the former was a just punishment of their ingratitude and unbelief, and
then exhorts the latter to beware lest pride and presumption deprive
them of the grace of adoption which had lately been transferred to them.
For as in that rejection of the Jews there still remained some who were
not excluded from the covenant of adoptions so there might be some among
the Gentiles who, possessing no true faith, were only puffed up with
vain carnal confidence, and so abused the goodness of God to their own
destruction. But though you should hold that the words were addressed to
elect believers, no inconsistency will follow. It is one thing, in order
to prevent believers from indulging vain confidence, to repress the
temerity which, from the remains of the flesh, sometimes gains upon
them, and it is another thing to strike terror into their consciences,
and prevent them from feeling secure in the mercy of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p85"></span>23. Then, when he bids us work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, all he requires is, that we accustom
ourselves to think very meanly of our own strength, and confide in the
strength of the Lord. For nothing stimulates us so strongly to place all
our confidence and assurance on the Lord as self diffidence, and the
anxiety produced by a consciousness of our calamitous condition. In this
sense are we to understand the words of the Psalmist: “I will come into
thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy holy temples” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p85.1"></span>[Ps.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p85.1"></span>). Here he appropriately unites confident
faith leaning on the divine mercy with religious fear, which of
necessity we must feel whenever coming into the presence of the divine
majesty we are made aware by its splendor of the extent of our own
impurity. Truly also does Solomon declare: “Happy is the man that
feareth alway; but he that hardeneth his heart falleth into mischief,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p85.2"></span>[Prov.
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p85.2"></span>). The fear he speaks of is that which
renders us more cautious, not that which produces despondency, the fear
which is felt when the mind confounded in itself resumes its equanimity
in God, downcast in itself, takes courage in God, distrusting itself,
breathes confidence in God. Hence there is nothing inconsistent in
believers being afraid, and at the same time possessing secure
consolation as they alternately behold their own vanity, and direct
their thoughts to the truth of God. How, it will be asked, can fear and
faith dwell in the same mind? Just in the same way as sluggishness and
anxiety can so dwell. The ungodly court a state of lethargy that the
fear of God may not annoy them; and yet the judgment of God so urges
that they cannot gain their desire. In the same way God can train his
people to humility, and curb them by the bridle of modesty, while yet
fighting bravely. And it is plain, from the context, that this was the
Apostle’s meaning, since he states, as the ground of fear and trembling,
that it is God who worketh in us to will and to do of his good pleasure.
In the same sense must we understand the words of the Prophet, “The
children of Israel” “shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter
days,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p85.3"></span>[Hos.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p85.3"></span>). For not only does piety beget reverence
to God, but the sweet attractiveness of grace inspires a man, though
desponding of himself, at once with fear and admiration, making him feel
his dependence on God, and submit humbly to his power.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p86"></span>24. Here, however, we give no
countenance to that most pestilential philosophy which some semi-papists
are at present beginning to broach in corners. Unable to defend the
gross doubt inculcated by the Schoolmen, they have recourse to another
fiction, that they may compound a mixture of faith and unbelief. They
admit, that whenever we look to Christ we are furnished with full ground
for hope; but as we are ever unworthy of all the blessings which are
offered us in Christ, they will have us to fluctuate and hesitate in the
view of our unworthiness. In short, they give conscience a position
between hope and fear, making it alternate, by successive turns, to the
one and the other. Hope and fear, again, they place in complete
contrast,—the one falling as the other rises, and rising as the other
falls. Thus Satan, finding the devices by which he was wont to destroy
the certainty of faith too manifest to be now of any avail, is
endeavoring, by indirect methods, to undermine it.29  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) But what kind of confidence is that
which is ever and anon supplanted by despair? They tell you, if you look
to Christ salvation is certain; if you return to yourself damnation is
certain. Therefore, your mind must be alternately ruled by diffidence
and hope; as if we were to imagine Christ standing at a distance, and
not rather dwelling in us. We expect salvation from him—not because he
stands aloof from us, but because ingrafting us into his body he not
only makes us partakers of all his benefits, but also of himself.
Therefore, I thus retort the argument, If you look to yourself damnation
is certain: but since Christ has been communicated to you with all his
benefits, so that all which is his is made yours, you become a member of
him, and hence one with him. His righteousness covers your sins—his
salvation extinguishes your condemnation; he interposes with his
worthiness, and so prevents your unworthiness from coming into the view
of God. Thus it truly is. It will never do to separate Christ from us,
nor us from him; but we must, with both hands, keep firm hold of that
alliance by which he has riveted us to himself. This the Apostle teaches
us: “The body is dead because of sin; but the spirit is life because of
righteousness,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p87.1"></span>[Rom.
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p87.1"></span>). According to the frivolous trifling of
these objectors, he ought to have said, Christ indeed has life in
himself, but you, as you are sinners, remain liable to death and
condemnation. Very different is his language. He tells us that the
condemnation which we of ourselves deserve is annihilated by the
salvation of Christ; and to confirm this he employs the argument to
which I have referred—viz. that Christ is not external to us, but dwells
in us; and not only unites us to himself by an undivided bond of
fellowship, but by a wondrous communion brings us daily into closer
connection, until he becomes altogether one with us. And yet I deny not,
as I lately said, that faith occasionally suffers certain interruptions
when, by violent assault, its weakness is made to bend in this direction
or in that; and its light is buried in the thick darkness of temptation.
Still happen what may, faith ceases not to long after God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p88"></span>25. The same doctrine is taught by
Bernard when he treats professedly on this subject in his Fifth Homily
on the Dedication of the Temple: “By the blessing of God, sometimes
meditating on the soul, methinks, I find in it as it were two
contraries. When I look at it as it is in itself and of itself, the
truest thing I can say of it is, that it has been reduced to nothing.
What need is there to enumerate each of its miseries? how burdened with
sin, obscured with darkness, ensnared by allurements, teeming with
lusts, ruled by passion, filled with delusions, ever prone to evil,
inclined to every vice; lastly, full of ignominy and confusion. If all
its righteousnesses, when examined by the light of truth, are but as
filthy rags (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p88.1"></span>[Is.
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p88.1"></span>), what must we suppose its unrighteousness
to be? ‘If, therefore, the light that is in thee be darkness, how great
is that darkness?’ (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p88.2"></span>[Mt.
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p88.2"></span>). What then? man doubtless has been made
subject to vanity—man here been reduced to nothing—man is nothing. And
yet how is he whom God exalts utterly nothing? How is he nothing to whom
a divine heart has been given? Let us breathe again, brethren. Although
we are nothing in our hearts, perhaps something of us may lurk in the
heart of God. O Father of mercies! O Father of the miserable! how
plantest thou thy heart in us? Where thy heart is, there is thy treasure
also. But how are we thy treasure if we are nothing? All nations before
thee are as nothing. Observe, *before* thee; not *within* thee. Such are
they in the judgment of thy truth, but not such in regard to thy
affection. Thou callest the things which be not as though they were; and
they are not, because thou callest them ‘things that be not:’ and yet
they are because thou callest them. For though they are not as to
themselves, yet they are with thee according to the declaration of Paul:
‘Not of works, but of him that calleth,’ ” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p88.3"></span>[Rom.
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p88.3"></span>). He then goes on to say that the
connection is wonderful in both points of view. Certainly things which
are connected together do not mutually destroy each other. This he
explains more clearly in his conclusion in the following terms: “If, in
both views, we diligently consider what we are,—in the one view our
nothingness, in the other our greatness,—I presume our glorying will
seem restrained; but perhaps it is rather increased and confirmed,
because we glory not in ourselves, but in the Lord. Our thought is, if
he determined to save us we shall be delivered; and here we begin again
to breathe. But, ascending to a loftier height, let us seek the city of
God, let us seek the temple, let us seek our home, let us seek our
spouse. I have not forgotten myself when, with fear and reverence, I
say, We are,—are in the heart of God. We are, by his dignifying, not by
our own dignity.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p89"></span>26. Moreover, the fear of the Lord,
which is uniformly attributed to all the saints, and which, in one
passage, is called “the beginning of wisdom,” in another *wisdom*
itself, although it is one, proceeds from a twofold cause. God is
entitled to the reverence of a Father and a Lord. Hence he who desires
duly to worship him, will study to act the part both of an obedient son
and a faithful servant. The obedience paid to God as a Father he by his
prophet terms *honor*; the service performed to him as a master he terms
*fear*. “A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master. If then I
be a father, where is mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my
fear?”29  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) But while he thus
distinguishes between the two, it is obvious that he at the same time
confounds them. The fear of the Lord, therefore, may be defined
reverence mingled with honor and fear. It is not strange that the same
mind can entertain both feelings; for he who considers with himself what
kind of a father God is to us, will see sufficient reason, even were
there no hell, why the thought of offending him should seem more
dreadful than any death. But so prone is our carnal nature to indulgence
in sin, that, in order to curb it in every way, we must also give place
to the thought that all iniquity is abomination to the Master under whom
we live; that those who, by wicked lives, provoke his anger, will not
escape his vengeance.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p91"></span>27. There is nothing repugnant to this
in the observation of John: “There is no fear in love; but perfect love
casteth out fear: because fear has torment,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p91.1"></span>[1 John
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p91.1"></span>). For he is speaking of the fear of
unbelief, between which and the fear of believers there is a wide
difference. The wicked do not fear God from any unwillingness to offend
him, provided they could do so with impunity; but knowing that he is
armed with power for vengeance, they tremble in dismay on hearing of his
anger. And they thus dread his anger, because they think it is impending
over them, and they every moment expect it to fall upon their heads. But
believers, as has been said, dread the offense even more than the
punishment. They are not alarmed by the fear of punishment, as if it
were impending over them,29  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) but
are rendered the more cautious of doing anything to provoke it. Thus the
Apostle addressing believers says, “Let no man deceive you with vain
words; for because of these things, the wrath of God cometh upon the
children of disobedience,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p92.1"></span>[Eph.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p92.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p92.2"></span>[Col.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p92.2"></span>). He does not threaten that wrath will
descend upon them; but he admonishes them, while they think how the
wrath of God is prepared for the wicked, on account of the crimes which
he had enumerated, not to run the risk of provoking it. It seldom
happens that mere threatening have the effect of arousing the reprobate;
nay, becoming more callous and hardened when God thunders verbally from
heaven, they obstinately persist in their rebellion. It is only when
actually smitten by his hand that they are forced, whether they will or
not, to fear. This fear the sacred writers term *servile*, and oppose to
the free and voluntary fear which becomes sons. Some, by a subtle
distinction, have introduced an intermediate species, holding that that
forced and servile fear sometimes subdues the mind, and leads
spontaneously to proper fear.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p93"></span>28. The divine favor to which faith is
said to have respect, we understand to include in it the possession of
salvation and eternal life. For if, when God is propitious, no good
thing can be wanting to us, we have ample security for our salvation
when assured of his love. “Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to
shine,” says the Prophet, “and we shall be saved,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.1"></span>[Ps.
80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.1"></span>). Hence the Scriptures make the sum of our
salvation to consist in the removal of all enmity, and our admission
into favor; thus intimating, that when God is reconciled all danger is
past, and every thing good will befall us. Wherefore, faith apprehending
the love of God has the promise both of the present and the future life,
and ample security for all blessings (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.2"></span>[Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.2"></span>). The nature of this must be ascertained
from the word. Faith does not promise us length of days, riches and
honors (the Lord not having been pleased that any of these should be
appointed us); but is contented with the assurance, that however poor we
may be in regard to present comforts, God will never fail us. The chief
security lies in the expectation of future life, which is placed beyond
doubt by the word of God. Whatever be the miseries and calamities which
await the children of God in this world, they cannot make his favor
cease to be complete happiness. Hence, when we were desirous to express
the sum of blessedness, we designated it by the favor of God, from
which, as their source, all kinds of blessings flow. And we may observe
throughout the Scriptures, that they refer us to the love of God, not
only when they treat of our eternal salvation, but of any blessing
whatever. For which reason David sings, that the loving-kindness of God
experienced by the pious heart is sweeter and more to be desired than
life itself (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p93.3"></span>[Ps.
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.3"></span>). In short, if we have every earthly
comfort to a wish, but are uncertain whether we have the love or the
hatred of God, our felicity will be cursed, and therefore miserable. But
if God lift on us the light of his fatherly countenance, our very
miseries will be blessed, inasmuch as they will become helps to our
salvation. Thus Paul, after bringing together all kinds of adversity,
boasts that they cannot separate us from the love of God: and in his
prayers he uniformly begins with the grace of God as the source of all
prosperity. In like manner, to all the terrors which assail us, David
opposes merely the favor of God,—“Yea, though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p93.4"></span>[Ps.
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.4"></span>). And we feel that our minds always waver
until, contented with the grace of God, we in it seek peace, and feel
thoroughly persuaded of what is said in the psalm, “Blessed is the
nation whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has chosen for his
own inheritance,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p93.5"></span>[Ps.
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p94"></span>29. Free promise we make the foundation
of faith, because in it faith properly consists. For though it holds
that God is always true, whether in ordering or forbidding, promising or
threatening; though it obediently receive his commands, observe his
prohibitions, and give heed to his threatening; yet it properly begins
with promise, continues with it, and ends with it. It seeks life in God,
life which is not found in commands or the denunciations of punishment,
but in the promise of mercy. And this promise must be gratuitous; for a
conditional promise, which throws us back upon our works, promises life
only in so far as we find it existing in ourselves. Therefore, if we
would not have faith to waver and tremble, we must support it with the
promise of salvation, which is offered by the Lord spontaneously and
freely, from a regard to our misery rather than our worth. Hence the
Apostle bears this testimony to the Gospel, that it is the word of faith
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p94.1"></span>[Rom.
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p94.1"></span>). This he concedes not either to the
precepts or the promises of the Law, since there is nothing which can
establish our faith, but that free embassy by which God reconciles the
world to himself. Hence he often uses faith and the Gospel as
correlative terms, as when he says, that the ministry of the Gospel was
committed to him for “obedience to the faith;” that “it is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believeth;” that “therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p94.2"></span>[Rom.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p94.2"></span>). No wonder: for seeing that the Gospel is
“the ministry of reconciliation,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p94.3"></span>[2
Cor. 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p94.3"></span>), there is no other sufficient evidence of
the divine favor, such as faith requires to know. Therefore, when we
say, that faith must rest on a free promise, we deny not that believers
accept and embrace the word of God in all its parts, but we point to the
promise of mercy as its special object. Believers, indeed, ought to
recognize God as the judge and avenger of wickedness; and yet mercy is
the object to which they properly look, since he is exhibited to their
contemplation as “good and ready to forgive,” “plenteous in mercy,”
“slow to anger,” “good to all,” and shedding “his tender mercies over
all his works”. <span id="iv.iii.iii-p94.4"></span>[Ps.
86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p94.4"></span>; 103:8; 145:8, 9).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p95"></span>30. I stay not to consider the rabid
objections of Pighius, and others like-minded, who inveigh against this
restriction, as rending faith, and laying hold of one of its fragments.
I admit, as I have already said, that the general object of faith (as
they express it) is the truth of God, whether he threatens or gives hope
of his favor. Accordingly, the Apostle attributes it to faith in Noah,
that he feared the destruction of the world, when as yet it was not seen
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p95.1"></span>[Heb.
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p95.1"></span>). If fear of impending punishment was a
work of faith, threatening ought not to be excluded in defining it. This
is indeed true; but we are unjustly and calumniously charged with
denying that faith has respect to the whole word of God. We only mean to
maintain these two points,—that faith is never decided until it attain
to a free promise; and that the only way in which faith reconciles us to
God is by uniting us with Christ. Both are deserving of notice. We are
inquiring after a faith which separates the children of God from the
reprobate, believers from unbelievers. Shall every man, then, who
believes that God is just in what he commands, and true in what he
threatens, be on that account classed with believers? Very far from it.
Faith, then, has no firm footing until it stand in the mercy of God.
Then what end have we in view in discoursing of faith? Is it not that we
may understand the way of salvation? But how can faith be saving, unless
in so far as it in grafts us into the body of Christ? There is no
absurdity, therefore, when, in defining it, we thus press its special
object, and, by way of distinction, add to the generic character the
particular mark which distinguishes the believer from the unbeliever. In
short, the malicious have nothing to carp at in this doctrine, unless
they are to bring the same censure against the Apostle Paul, who
specially designates the Gospel as “the word of faith,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p95.2"></span>[Rom.
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p95.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p96"></span>31. Hence again we infer, as has
already been explained, that faith has no less need of the word than the
fruit of a tree has of a living root; because, as David testifies, none
can hope in God but those who know his name (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.1"></span>[Ps.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.1"></span>). This knowledge, however, is not left to
every man’s imagination, but depends on the testimony which God himself
gives to his goodness. This the same Psalmist confirms in another
passage, “Thy salvation according to thy word,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.2"></span>[Ps.
119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.2"></span>). Again, “Save me,” “I hoped in thy word,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p96.3"></span>[Ps.
119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146),
[147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.3"></span>). Here we must attend to the relation of
faith to the word, and to salvation as its consequence. Still, however,
we exclude not the power of God. If faith cannot support itself in the
view of this power, it never will give Him the honor which is due. Paul
seems to relate a trivial or very ordinary circumstance with regard to
Abraham, when he says, that he believed that God, who had given him the
promise of a blessed seed, was able also to perform it (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.4"></span>[Rom.
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.4"></span>). And in like manner, in another passage,
he says of himself, “I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that
day,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p96.5"></span>[2 Tim.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.5"></span>). But let any one consider with himself,
how he is ever and anon assailed with doubts in regard to the power of
God, and he will readily perceive, that those who duly magnify it have
made no small progress in faith. We all acknowledge that God can do
whatsoever he pleases; but while every temptation, even the most
trivial, fills us with fear and dread, it is plain that we derogate from
the power of God, by attaching less importance to his promises than to
Satan’s threatenings against them.29  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p98"></span>This is the reason why Isaiah, when he
would impress on the hearts of the people the certainty of faith,
discourses so magnificently of the boundless power of God. He often
seems, after beginning to speak of the hope of pardon and
reconciliation, to digress, and unnecessarily take a long circuitous
course, describing how wonderfully God rules the fabric of heaven and
earth, with the whole course of nature; and yet he introduces nothing
which is not appropriate to the occasion; because unless the power of
God, to which all things are possible is presented to our eye, our ears
malignantly refuse admission to the word, or set no just value upon it.
We may add, that an effectual power is here meant; for piety, as it has
elsewhere been seen, always makes a practical application of the power
of God; in particular, keeps those works in view in which he has
declared himself to be a Father. Hence the frequent mention in Scripture
of redemption; from which the Israelites might learn, that he who had
once been the author of salvation would be its perpetual guardian. By
his own example, also, David reminds us, that the benefits which God has
bestowed privately on any individual, tend to confirm his faith for the
time to come; nay, that when God seems to have forsaken us, we ought to
extend our view farther, and take courage from his former favors, as is
said in another psalm, “I remember the days of old: I meditate on all
thy works,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p98.1"></span>[Ps.
143:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p98.1"></span>). Again “I will remember the works of the
Lord; surely I will remember thy wonders of old” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p98.2"></span>[Ps.
77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p98.2"></span>). But because all our conceptions of the
power and works of God are evanescent without the word, we are not rash
in maintaining, that there is no faith until God present us with clear
evidence of his grace.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p99"></span>Here, however, a question might be
raised as to the view to be taken of Sarah and Rebekah, both of whom,
impelled as it would seem by zeal for the faith, went beyond the limits
of the word. Sarah, in her eager desire for the promised seed, gave her
maid to her husband. That she sinned in many respects is not to be
denied; but the only fault to which I now refer is her being carried
away by zeal, and not confining herself within the limits prescribed by
the Word. It is certain, however, that her desire proceeded from faith.
Rebekah, again, divinely informed of the election of her son Jacob,
procures the blessing for him by a wicked stratagem; deceives her
husband, who was a witness and minister of divine grace; forces her son
to lie; by various frauds and impostures corrupts divine truth; in fine,
by exposing his promise to scorn, does what in her lies to make it of no
effect. And yet this conduct, however vicious and reprehensible, was not
devoid of faith. She must have overcome many obstacles before she
obtained so strong a desire of that which, without any hope of earthly
advantage, was full of difficulty and danger. In the same way, we cannot
say that the holy patriarch Isaac was altogether void of faith, in that,
after he had been similarly informed of the honor transferred to the
younger son, he still continues his predilection in favor of his
first-born, Esau. These examples certainly show that error is often
mingled with faith; and yet that when faith is real, it always obtains
the preeminence. For as the particular error of Rebekah did not render
the blessing of no effect, neither did it nullify the faith which
generally ruled in her mind, and was the principle and cause of that
action. In this, nevertheless, Rebekah showed how prone the human mind
is to turn aside whenever it gives itself the least indulgence. But
though defect and infirmity obscure faith, they do not extinguish it.
Still they admonish us how carefully we ought to cling to the word of
God, and at the same time confirm what we have taught—viz. that faith
gives way when not supported by the word, just as the minds of Sarah,
Isaac, and Rebekah, would have lost themselves in devious paths, had not
the secret restraint of Providence kept them obedient to the word.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p100"></span>32. On the other hand, we have good
ground for comprehending all the promises in Christ, since the Apostle
comprehends the whole Gospel under the knowledge of Christ, and declares
that all the promises of God are in him yea, and amen.29  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) The reason for this is obvious. Every
promise which God makes is evidence of his good will. This is invariably
true, and is not inconsistent with the fact, that the large benefits
which the divine liberality is constantly bestowing on the wicked are
preparing them for heavier judgment. As they neither think that these
proceed from the hand of the Lord, nor acknowledge them as his, or if
they do so acknowledge them, never regard them as proofs of his favor,
they are in no respect more instructed thereby in his mercy than brute
beasts, which, according to their condition, enjoy the same liberality,
and yet never look beyond it. Still it is true, that by rejecting the
promises generally offered to them, they subject themselves to severer
punishment. For though it is only when the promises are received in
faith that their efficacy is manifested, still their reality and power
are never extinguished by our infidelity or ingratitude. Therefore, when
the Lord by his promises invites us not only to enjoy the fruits of his
kindness, but also to meditate upon them, he at the same time declares
his love. Thus we are brought back to our statement, that every promise
is a manifestation of the divine favor toward us. Now, without
controversy, God loves no man out of Christ. He is the beloved Son, in
whom the love of the Father dwells, and from whom it afterwards extends
to us. Thus Paul says “In whom he has made us accepted in the Beloved,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p101.4"></span>[Eph.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.4"></span>). It is by his intervention, therefore,
that love is diffused so as to reach us. Accordingly, in another
passage, the Apostle calls Christ “our peace,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.5"></span>[Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.5"></span>), and also represents him as the bond by
which the Father is united to us in paternal affection (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.6"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.6"></span>). It follows, that whenever any promise
is made to us, we must turn our eyes toward Christ. Hence, with good
reasons Paul declares that in him all the promises of God are confirmed
and completed (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p101.7"></span>[Rom.
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.7"></span>). Some examples are brought forward as
repugnant to this view. When Naaman the Syrian made inquiry at the
prophet as to the true mode of worshipping God, we cannot (it is said)
suppose that he was informed of the Mediator, and yet he is commended
for his piety (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p101.8"></span>[2 Kings
5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.8"></span>). Nor could Cornelius, a Roman heathen,
be acquainted with what was not known to all the Jews, and at best known
obscurely. And yet his alms and prayers were acceptable to God (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.9"></span>[Acts
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.9"></span>), while the prophet by his answer
approved of the sacrifices of Naaman. In both, this must have been the
result of faith. In like manner, the eunuch to whom Philip was sent, had
he not been endued with some degree of faith, never would have incurred
the fatigue and expense of a long and difficult journey to obtain an
opportunity of worship (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p101.10"></span>[Acts
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.10"></span>); and yet we see how, when interrogated
by Philip, he betrays his ignorance of the Mediator. I admit that, in
some respect, their faith was not explicit either as to the person of
Christ, or the power and office assigned him by the Father. Still it is
certain that they were imbued with principles which might give some,
though a slender, foretaste of Christ. This should not be thought
strange; for the eunuch would not have hastened from a distant country
to Jerusalem to an unknown God; nor could Cornelius, after having once
embraced the Jewish religion, have lived so long in Judea without
becoming acquainted with the rudiments of sound doctrine. In regard to
Naaman, it is absurd to suppose that Elisha, while he gave him many
minute precepts, said nothing of the principal matter. Therefore,
although their knowledge of Christ may have been obscure, we cannot
suppose that they had no such knowledge at all. They used the sacrifices
of the Law, and must have distinguished them from the spurious
sacrifices of the Gentiles, by the end to which they referred—viz.
Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p102"></span>33. A simple external manifestation of
the word ought to be amply sufficient to produce faith, did not our
blindness and perverseness prevent. But such is the proneness of our
mind to vanity, that it can never adhere to the truth of God, and such
its dullness, that it is always blind even in his light. Hence without
the illumination of the Spirit the word has no effect; and hence also it
is obvious that faith is something higher than human understanding. Nor
were it sufficient for the mind to be illumined by the Spirit of God
unless the heart also were strengthened and supported by his power. Here
the Schoolmen go completely astray, dwelling entirely in their
consideration of faith, on the bare simple assent of the understanding,
and altogether overlooking confidence and security of heart. Faith is
the special gift of God in both ways,—in purifying the mind so as to
give it a relish for divine truth, and afterwards in establishing it
therein. For the Spirit does not merely originate faith, but gradually
increases it, until by its means he conducts us into the heavenly
kingdom. “That good thing which was committed unto thee,” says Paul,
“keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p102.1"></span>[2 Tim.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p102.1"></span>). In what sense Paul says (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p102.2"></span>[Gal.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p102.2"></span>), that the Spirit is given by the hearing
of faith, may be easily explained. If there were only a single gift of
the Spirit, he who is the author and cause of faith could not without
absurdity be said to be its effect; but after celebrating the gifts with
which God adorns his church, and by successive additions of faith leads
it to perfection, there is nothing strange in his ascribing to faith the
very gifts which faith prepares us for receiving. It seems to some
paradoxical, when it is said that none can believe Christ save those to
whom it is given; but this is partly because they do not observe how
recondite and sublime heavenly wisdom is, or how dull the mind of man in
discerning divine mysteries, and partly because they pay no regard to
that firm and stable constancy of heart which is the chief part of
faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p103"></span>34.30  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) But as Paul argues, “What man knoweth
the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the
things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.1"></span>[1 Cor.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.1"></span>). If in regard to divine truth we
hesitate even as to those things which we see with the bodily eye, how
can we be firm and steadfast in regard to those divine promises which
neither the eye sees nor the mind comprehends? Here human discernment is
so defective and lost, that the first step of advancement in the school
of Christ is to renounce it (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104.2"></span>[Mt.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.2"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.3"></span>[Luke
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.3"></span>). Like a veil interposed, it prevents us
from beholding divine masteries, which are revealed only to babes.
“Flesh and blood” does not reveal them (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.4"></span>[Mt.
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.4"></span>). “The natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.5"></span>[I Cor.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.5"></span>). The supplies of the Holy Spirit are
therefore necessary, or rather his agency is here the only strength.
“For who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his counselor?”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104.6"></span>[Rom.
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.6"></span>); but “The Spirit searcheth all things,
yea, the deep things of God,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104.7"></span>[1
Cor. 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.7"></span>). Thus it is that we attain to the mind
of Christ: “No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me
draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.” “Every man therefore
that has heard, and learned of the Father, cometh unto me. Not that any
man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the
Father,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104.8"></span>[John
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.8"></span>). Therefore, as we cannot possibly come
to Christ unless drawn by the Spirit, so when we are drawn we are both
in mind and spirit exalted far above our own understanding. For the
soul, when illumined by him, receives as it were a new eye, enabling it
to contemplate heavenly mysteries, by the splendor of which it was
previously dazzled. And thus, indeed, it is only when the human
intellect is irradiated by the light of the Holy Spirit that it begins
to have a taste of those things which pertain to the kingdom of God;
previously it was too stupid and senseless to have any relish for them.
Hence our Savior, when clearly declaring the mysteries of the kingdom to
the two disciples, makes no impression till he opens their minds to
understand the Scriptures (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104.9"></span>[Luke
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p104.9"></span>). Hence also, though he had taught the
Apostles with his own divine lips, it was still necessary to send the
Spirit of truth to instill into their minds the same doctrine which they
had heard with their ears. The word is, in regard to those to whom it is
preached, like the sun which shines upon all, but is of no use to the
blind. In this matter we are all naturally blind; and hence the word
cannot penetrate our mind unless the Spirit, that internal teacher, by
his enlightening power make an entrance for it.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p105"></span>35. Having elsewhere shown more fully,
when treating of the corruption of our nature, how little able men are
to believe (Book 2, c. 2, 3), I will not fatigue the reader by again
repeating it. Let it suffice to observe, that the spirit of faith is
used by Paul as synonymous with the very faith which we receive from the
Spirit, but which we have not naturally (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.1"></span>[2 Cor.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.1"></span>). Accordingly, he prays for the
Thessalonians, “that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p105.2"></span>[2 Thess.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.2"></span>). Here, by designating faith the work of
God, and distinguishing it by way of epithet, appropriately calling it
his *good pleasure*, he declares that it is not of man’s own nature; and
not contented with this, he adds, that it is an illustration of divine
power. In addressing the Corinthians, when he tells them that faith
stands not “in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.3"></span>[1 Cor.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.3"></span>), he is no doubt speaking of external
miracles; but as the reprobate are blinded when they behold them, he
also includes that internal seal of which he elsewhere makes mention.
And the better to display his liberality in this most excellent gift,
God does not bestow it upon all promiscuously, but, by special
privilege, imparts it to whom he will. To this effect we have already
quoted passages of Scripture, as to which Augustine, their faithful
expositor, exclaims (De Verbo Apost. Serm. 2) “Our Savior, to teach that
faith in him is a gift, not a merit, says, ‘No man can come to me,
except the Father, which has sent me, draw him,’ (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.4"></span>[John
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.4"></span>). It is strange when two persons hear,
the one despises, the other ascends. Let him who despises impute it to
himself; let him who ascends not arrogate it to himself” In another
passage he asks, “Wherefore is it given to the one, and not to the
other? I am not ashamed to say, This is one of the deep things of the
cross. From some unknown depth of the judgments of God, which we cannot
scrutinize, all our ability proceeds. I see that I am able; but how I am
able I see not:—this far only I see, that it is of God. But why the one,
and not the other? This is too great for me: it is an abyss a depth of
the cross. I can cry out with wonder; not discuss and demonstrate.” The
whole comes to this, that Christ, when he produces faith in us by the
agency of his Spirit, at the same time ingrafts us into his body, that
we may become partakers of all blessings.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p106"></span>36. The next thing necessary is, that
what the mind has imbibed be transferred into the heart. The word is not
received in faith when it merely flutters in the brain, but when it has
taken deep root in the heart, and become an invincible bulwark to
withstand and repel all the assaults of temptation. But if the
illumination of the Spirit is the true source of understanding in the
intellect, much more manifest is his agency in the confirmation of the
heart; inasmuch as there is more distrust in the heart than blindness in
the mind; and it is more difficult to inspire the soul with security
than to imbue it with knowledge. Hence the Spirit performs the part of a
seal, sealing upon our hearts the very promises, the certainty of which
was previously impressed upon our minds. It also serves as an earnest in
establishing and confirming these promises. Thus the Apostle says, “In
whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.1"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.1"></span>). You see how he teaches that the hearts
of believers are stamped with the Spirit as with a seal, and calls it
the Spirit of promise, because it ratifies the gospel to us. In like
manner he says to the Corinthians, “God has also sealed us, and given
the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.2"></span>[2 Cor.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.2"></span>). And again, when speaking of a full and
confident hope, he founds it on the “earnest of the Spirit,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.3"></span>[2 Cor.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p107"></span>37. I am not forgetting what I
formerly said, and experience brings daily to remembrance—viz. that
faith is subject to various doubts,30  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) so that the minds of believers are
seldom at rest, or at least are not always tranquil. Still, whatever be
the engines by which they are shaken, they either escape from the
whirlpool of temptation, or remain steadfast in their place. Faith finds
security and protection in the words of the Psalm, “God is our refuge
and strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will not we
fear, though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p108.1"></span>[Ps.
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.1"></span>). This delightful tranquillity is
elsewhere described: “I laid me down and slept; I awaked, for the Lord
sustained me,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p108.2"></span>[Ps.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.2"></span>). Not that David was uniformly in this
joyful frame; but in so far as the measure of his faith made him
sensible of the divine favor, he glories in intrepidly despising every
thing that could disturb his peace of mind. Hence the Scripture, when it
exhorts us to faith, bids us be at peace. In Isaiah it is said, “In
quietness and in confidence shall be your strength,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.3"></span>[Is.
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.3"></span>); and in the psalm, “Rest in the Lord,
and wait patiently for him.” Corresponding to this is the passage in the
Hebrews, “Ye have need of patience,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.4"></span>[Heb.
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p109"></span>38. Hence we may judge how pernicious
is the scholastic dogma,30  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) that
we can have no stronger evidence of the divine favor toward us than
moral conjecture, according as each individual deems himself not
unworthy of it. Doubtless, if we are to determine by our works in what
way the Lord stands affected towards us, I admit that we cannot even get
the length of a feeble conjecture: but since faith should accord with
the free and simple promise, there is no room left for ambiguity. With
what kind of confidence, pray, shall we be armed if we reason in this
way—God is propitious to us, provided we deserve it by the purity of our
lives? But since we have reserved this subject for discussion in its
proper place, we shall not prosecute it farther at present, especially
seeing it is already plain that nothing is more adverse to faith than
conjecture, or any other feeling akin to doubt. Nothing can be worse
than their perversion of the passage of Ecclesiastes, which is ever in
their mouths: “No man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is
before them,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p110.1"></span>[Eccl.
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p110.1"></span>).30  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) For without insisting that the passage
is erroneously rendered in the common version—even a child cannot fail
to perceive what Solomon’s meaning is—viz. that any one who would
ascertain, from the present state of things, who are in the favor or
under the displeasure of God, labors in vain, and torments himself to no
useful purpose, since “All things come alike to all;” “to him that
sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not:” and hence God does not
always declare his love to those on whom he bestows uninterrupted
prosperity, nor his hatred against those whom he afflicts. And it tends
to prove the vanity of the human intellect, that it is so completely in
the dark as to matters which it is of the highest importance to know.
Thus Solomon had said a little before, “That which befalleth the sons of
men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth,
so dieth the other,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p111.1"></span>[Eccl.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p111.1"></span>). Were any one thence to infer that we
hold the immortality of the soul by conjecture merely, would he not
justly be deemed insane? Are those then sane who cannot obtain any
certainty of the divine favor, because the carnal eye is now unable to
discern it from the present appearance of the world?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p112"></span>39. But, they say, it is rash and
presumptuous to pretend to an undoubted knowledge of the divine will. I
would grant this, did we hold that we were able to subject the
incomprehensible counsel of God to our feeble intellect. But when we
simply say with Paul, “We have received not the spirit of the world, but
the Spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p112.1"></span>[1 Cor.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p112.1"></span>), what can they oppose to this, without
offering insult to the Spirit of God? But if it is Sacrilege to charge
the revelation which he has given us with falsehood, or uncertainty, or
ambiguity, how can we be wrong in maintaining its certainty? But they
still exclaim, that there is great temerity in our presuming to glory in
possessing the Spirit of God.30  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)
Who could believe that these men, who desire to be thought the masters
of the world, could be so stupid as to err thus grossly in the very
first principles of religion? To me, indeed, it would be incredible, did
not their own writings make it manifest. Paul declares that those only
are the sons of God who are led by his Spirit (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.1"></span>[Rom.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.1"></span>); these men would have those who are the
sons of God to be led by their own, and void of the divine Spirit. He
tells us that we call God our Father in terms dictated by the Spirit,
who alone bears witness with our spirit that we are the sons of God
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p113.2"></span>[Rom.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.2"></span>); they, though they forbid us not to
invoke God, withdraw the Spirit, by whose guidance he is duly invoked.
He declares that those only are the servants of Christ who are led by
the Spirit of Christ (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p113.3"></span>[Rom.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.3"></span>); they imagine a Christianity which has
no need of the Spirit of Christ. He holds out the hope of a blessed
resurrection to those only who feel His Spirit dwelling in them (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.4"></span>[Rom.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.4"></span>); they imagine hope when there is no such
feeling. But perhaps they will say, that they deny not the necessity of
being endued with the Spirit, but only hold it to be the part of modesty
and humility not to recognize it. What, then, does Paul mean, when he
says to the Corinthians, “Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith:
prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be reprobates?” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.5"></span>[2 Cor.
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.5"></span>). John, moreover, says, “Hereby we know
that he abideth in us by the Spirit which he has given us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.6"></span>[1 John
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.6"></span>). And what else is it than to bring the
promises of Christ into doubt, when we would be deemed servants of
Christ without having his Spirit, whom he declared that he would pour
out on all his people? (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p113.7"></span>[Isa.
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.7"></span>). What! do we not insult the Holy Spirit,
when we separate faith, which is his peculiar work, from himself? These
being the first rudiments of religion, it is the most wretched blindness
to charge Christians with arrogance, for presuming to glory in the
presence of the Holy Spirit; a glorying without which Christianity
itself does not exist. The example of these men illustrates the truth of
our Savior’s declaration, that his Spirit “the world cannot receive,
because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him, for he
dwelleth with you, and shall be in you,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.8"></span>[John
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.8"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p114"></span>40. That they may not attempt to
undermine the certainty of faith in one direction only, they attack it
in another—viz. that though it be lawful for the believer, from his
actual state of righteousness, to form a judgment as to the favor of
God, the knowledge of final perseverance still remains in suspense. An
admirable security, indeed, is left us, if, for the present moment only,
we can judge from moral conjecture that we are in grace, but know not
how we are to be to-morrow! Very different is the language of the
Apostle, “I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p114.1"></span>[Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p114.1"></span>). They endeavor to evade the force of
this by frivolously pretending that the Apostle had this assurance by
special revelation. They are too well caught thus to escape; for in that
passage he is treating not of his individual experience, but of the
blessings which all believers in common derive from faith. But then Paul
in another passage alarms us by the mention of our weakness and
inconstancy, “Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p114.2"></span>[1 Cor.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p114.2"></span>). True; but this he says not to inspire
us with terror, but that we may learn to humble ourselves under the
mighty hand of God, as Peter explains (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p114.3"></span>[1 Pet.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p114.3"></span>). Then how preposterous is it to limit
the certainty of faith to a point of time; seeing it is the property of
faith to pass beyond the whole course of this life, and stretch forward
to a future immortality? Therefore since believers owe it to the favor
of God, that, enlightened by his Spirit, they, through faith, enjoy the
prospect of heavenly life; there is so far from an approach to arrogance
in each glorying, that any one ashamed to confess it, instead of
testifying modesty or submission, rather betrays extreme ingratitude, by
maliciously suppressing the divine goodness.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p115"></span>41. Since the nature of faith could
not be better or more clearly evinced than by the substance of the
promise on which it leans as its proper foundation, and without which it
immediately falls or rather vanishes away, we have derived our
definition from it—a definition, however, not at all at variance with
that definition, or rather description, which the Apostle accommodates
to his discourse, when he says that faith is “the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p115.1"></span>[Heb.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p115.1"></span>). For by the term substance (ὑπόστασις),
he means a kind of prop on which the pious mind rests and leans. As if
he had said, that faith is a kind of certain and secure possession of
those things which are promised to us by God; unless we prefer taking
ὑπόστασις for *confidence*. I have no objection to this, though I am
more inclined to adopt the other interpretation, which is more generally
received. Again, to intimate that until the last day, when the books
will be opened (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p115.2"></span>[Dan.
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p115.2"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p115.3"></span>[Rev.
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p115.3"></span>), the things pertaining to our salvation
are too lofty to be perceived by our sense, seen by our eyes, or handled
by our hands, and that in the meantime there is no possible way in which
these can be possessed by us, unless we can transcend the reach of our
own intellect, and raise our eye above all worldly objects; in short,
surpass ourselves, he adds that this certainty of possession relates to
things which are only hoped for, and therefore not seen. For as Paul
says (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p115.4"></span>[Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p115.4"></span>), “A hope that is seen is not hope,” that
we “hope for that we see not.” When he calls it the evidence or proof,
or, as Augustine repeatedly renders it (see *Hom. in Joann*. 79 and 95),
the conviction of things not present, the Greek term being ἔλενγχος, it
is the same as if he had called it the appearance of things not
apparent, the sight of things not seen, the clearness of things obscure,
the presence of things absent, the manifestation of things hid. For the
mysteries of God (and to this class belong the things which pertain to
our salvation) cannot be discerned in themselves, or, as it is
expressed, in their own nature; but we behold them only in his word, of
the truth of which we ought to be as firmly persuaded as if we held that
every thing which it says were done and completed. But how can the mind
rise to such a perception and foretaste of the divine goodness, without
being at the same time wholly inflamed with love to God? The abundance
of joy which God has treasured up for those who fear him cannot be truly
known without making a most powerful impression. He who is thus once
affected is raised and carried entirely towards him. Hence it is not
strange that no sinister perverse heart ever experiences this feeling,
by which, transported to heaven itself, we are admitted to the most
hidden treasures of God, and the holiest recesses of his kingdom, which
must not be profaned by the entrance of a heart that is impure. For what
the Schoolmen say as to the priority of love to faith and hope is a mere
dream (see Sent. Lib. 3 Dist. 25, &c.) since it is faith alone that
first engenders love. How much better is Bernard, “The testimony of
conscience, which Paul calls ‘the rejoicing’ of believers, I believe to
consist in three things. It is necessary, first of all, to believe that
you cannot have remission of sins except by the indulgence of God;
secondly, that you cannot have any good work at all unless he also give
it; lastly, that you cannot by any works merit eternal life unless it
also be freely given,” (Bernard, Serm. 1 in Annuntiatione). Shortly
after he adds, “These things are not sufficient, but are a kind of
commencement of faith; for while believing that your sins can only be
forgiven by God, you must also hold that they are not forgiven until
persuaded by the testimony of the Holy Spirit that salvation is
treasured up for us; that as God pardons sins, and gives merits, and
after merits rewards, you cannot halt at that beginning.” But these and
other topics will be considered in their own place; let it suffice at
present to understand what faith is.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p116"></span>42. Wherever this living faith exists,
it must have the hope of eternal life as its inseparable companion, or
rather must of itself beget and manifest it; where it is wanting,
however clearly and elegantly we may discourse of faith, it is certain
we have it not. For if faith is (as has been said) a firm persuasion of
the truth of God—a persuasion that it can never be false, never deceive,
never be in vain, those who have received this assurance must at the
same time expect that God will perform his promises, which in their
conviction are absolutely true; so that in one word hope is nothing more
than the expectation of those things which faith previously believes to
have been truly promised by God. Thus, faith believes that God is true;
hope expects that in due season he will manifest his truth. Faith
believes that he is our Father; hope expects that he will always act the
part of a Father towards us. Faith believes that eternal life has been
given to us; hope expects that it will one day be revealed. Faith is the
foundation on which hope rests; hope nourishes and sustains faith. For
as no man can expect any thing from God without previously believing his
promises, so, on the other hand, the weakness of our faith, which might
grow weary and fall away, must be supported and cherished by patient
hope and expectation. For this reason Paul justly says, “We are saved by
hope,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p116.1"></span>[Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.1"></span>). For while hope silently waits for the
Lord, it restrains faith from hastening on with too much precipitation,
confirms it when it might waver in regard to the promises of God or
begin to doubt of their truth, refreshes it when it might be fatigued,
extends its view to the final goal, so as not to allow it to give up in
the middle of the course, or at the very outset. In short, by constantly
renovating and reviving, it is ever and anon furnishing more vigor for
perseverance. On the whole, how necessary the reinforcements of hope are
to establish faith will better appear if we reflect on the numerous
forms of temptation by which those who have embraced the word of God are
assailed and shaken. First, the Lord often keeps us in suspense, by
delaying the fulfillment of his promises much longer than we could wish.
Here the office of hope is to perform what the prophet enjoins, “Though
it tarry, wait for it,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p116.2"></span>[Hab.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.2"></span>). Sometimes he not only permits faith to
grow languid, but even openly manifests his displeasure. Here there is
still greater necessity for the aid of hope, that we may be able to say
with another prophet, “I will wait upon the Lord that hideth his face
from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.3"></span>[Isaiah
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.3"></span>). Scoffers also rise up, as Peter tells
us, and ask, “Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers
fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the
creation,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p116.4"></span>[2 Pet.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.4"></span>). Nay, the world and the flesh insinuate
the same thing. Here faith must be supported by the patience of hope,
and fixed on the contemplation of eternity, consider that “one day is
with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day,”
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p116.5"></span>[2 Pet.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.5"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p116.6"></span>[Ps.
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.6"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p117"></span>43. On account of this connection and
affinity Scripture sometimes confounds the two terms faith and hope. For
when Peter says that we are “kept by the power of God through faith
until salvation, ready to be revealed in the last times” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.1"></span>), he attributes to faith what more
properly belongs to hope. And not without cause, since we have already
shown that hope is nothing else than the food and strength of faith.
Sometimes the two are joined together, as in the same Epistles “That
your faith and hope might be in God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.2"></span>[1 Pet.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.2"></span>). Paul, again, in the Epistle to the
Philippians, from hope deduces expectation (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.3"></span>[Phil.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.3"></span>), because in hoping patiently we suspend
our wishes until God manifest his own time. The whole of this subject
may be better understood from the tenth chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, to which I have already adverted. Paul, in another passage,
though not in strict propriety of speech, expresses the same thing in
these words, “For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith,” (<span id="iv.iii.iii-p117.4"></span>[Gal.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.4"></span>); that is, after embracing the testimony
of the Gospel as to free love, we wait till God openly manifest what is
now only an object of hope. It is now obvious how absurdly Peter Lombard
lays down a double foundation of hope—viz. the grace of God and the
merit of works (Sent. Lib. 3, Dist. 26). Hope cannot have any other
object than faith has. But we have already shown clearly that the only
object of faith is the mercy of God, to which, to use the common
expression, it must look with both eyes. But it is worth while to listen
to the strange reason which he adduces. If you presume, says he, to hope
for any thing without merit, it should be called not hope, but
presumption. Who, dear reader, does not execrate the gross stupidity30
 <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) which calls it rashness, and
presumption to confide in the truth of God? The Lord desires us to
expect every thing from his goodness and yet these men tell us, it is
presumption to rest in it. O teacher, worthy of the pupils, whom you
found in these insane raving schools! Seeing that, by the oracles of
God, sinners are enjoined to entertain the hope of salvation, let us
willingly presume so far on his truth as to cast away all confidence in
our works, and trusting in his mercy, venture to hope. He who has said,
“According to your faith be it unto you,” (<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p118.1"></span>[Mt.
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p118.1"></span>), will never deceive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](inst055.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p48"></span>79 279 <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>[1 Tim.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p48.2"></span>[John
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.2"></span>; 14:6; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.3"></span>[Luke
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p48.4"></span>[1
Cor. 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p48.5"></span>[Acts
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.5"></span>; 26:17, 18; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.6"></span>[2 Cor.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](inst055.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49"></span>80 280 The French is“Car nous tendons a
Dieu, et par l’humanité de Jesus Christ, nous y sommes conduits;”—For we
tend to God, and by the humanity of Christ are conducted to him.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](inst055.htm#fr_274) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p51"></span>81 281 French, “Theologiens
Sorboniques;”—Theologians of Sorbonne.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](inst055.htm#fr_275) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p52"></span>82 282 In opposition to this ignorance,
see Chrysostom in Joann. Homil. 16.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](inst055.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p55"></span>83 283 See Augustin. <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p55.1"></span>Ep. 102<span id="iv.iii.iii-p55.1"></span>,
“Si propter eos solos Christus mortuus est, qui certa intelligentia
possunt ista discernera, pæne frustra in ecclesia laboramus,”&c;—If
Christ died for those only who are able to discern these things with
true understanding, our labour in the Church is almost in vain.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](inst055.htm#fr_277) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p58.8"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p59"></span>84 284 This definition is explained,
sections 14, 15, 28, 29, 32, 33, 31 of this chapter.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](inst055.htm#fr_278) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p61"></span>85 285 See Lombard, Lib. 3 Dist. 23.
See the refutation in the middle of sections 41, 42, 43, where it is
shown that faith produces, and is inseparable from, hope and love.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](inst055.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p65"></span>86 286 Thess. 1:3, 4; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p65.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p65.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p65.2"></span>[Tit.
1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p65.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](inst055.htm#fr_280) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p66"></span>87 287 The French adds, “Comme par une
bouffee,”—as by fits and starts.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](inst055.htm#fr_281) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68"></span>88 288 See section 13, where it is said
that this impression, sometimes existing in the reprobate, is called
faith, but improperly.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](inst055.htm#fr_282) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p70"></span>89 289 <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.1"></span>; 4:1, 6; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.2"></span>[2 Tim.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.2"></span>; 3:18; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.3"></span>[Tit.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.3"></span>; 2:2.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](inst055.htm#fr_283) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p71"></span>90 290 The French adds, “Comme il
montre par ses propos quel souci il en avoit;”—as he shows by his
urgency what anxiety he felt.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](inst055.htm#fr_284) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p74"></span>91 291 Latin“Præsentim ubi ad rem
ventum est.”—French, “Principalament quand les tentations nous
pressent;”—especially when temptations press us.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](inst055.htm#fr_285) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p77"></span>92 292 As to the imperfection,
strengthening, and increase of faith, see Book 4. chap. 4 sec. 7, 8.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](inst055.htm#fr_286) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p78"></span>93 293 Calvin’s Latin translation of
the passage is, “Atque dixi, occidere meum est; mutationes dexteræ
excelsi.”—The French is, “J’ay dit, Il me faut mourir. Voicy un
changement de la main de Dieu;”—I said I must die. Behold a change in
the hand of God.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](inst055.htm#fr_287) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p79"></span>94 294 See Calv adv. Pighiium, near the
commencement.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](inst055.htm#fr_288) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p87"></span>95 295 The French is, “Voila comme
Satan, quand il voit que par mensonge clair et ouvert il ne peust plus
destruire la certitude de la foy, s’efforce en cachette et comme par
dessous terre la ruiner.”—Behold how Satan, when he sees that by clear
and open falsehood he can no longer destroy the certainty of faith, is
striving in secret, and as it were below ground, to ruin it.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](inst055.htm#fr_289) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p90"></span>96 296 <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p90.1"></span>[Ps.
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p90.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p90.2"></span>[Prov.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p90.2"></span>:10, 15:24; <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p90.3"></span>[Job
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p90.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p90.4"></span>[Mal.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p90.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](inst055.htm#fr_290) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p92"></span>97 297 Latin, “acsi cervicibus suis
impenderet.”—French, “comme si l’enfer leur etoit desia present pour les
englouter;”—as if hell were already present to engulfthem.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](inst055.htm#fr_291) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p96.6"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p97"></span>98 298 The French adds, “Combien que
nous ayons les promesses de Dieu pour nous munir à l’encontre;”—although
we have the promise of God to strengthen us for the encounter.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](inst055.htm#fr_292) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p101"></span>99 299 <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.1"></span>[Rom.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p101.2"></span>[1
Cor. 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iii-p101.3"></span>[2
Cor. 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](inst055.htm#fr_293) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104"></span>00 300 The French thus begins the
section: “Lequel erreur est facile a convaincre;”—This error is easily
refuted

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](inst055.htm#fr_294) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p108"></span>01 301 French, “Doutes, solicitudes,
et detresses;”—doubts, anxieties, and distresses.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](inst055.htm#fr_295) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p110"></span>02 302 French, “La doctrine des
theologiens sophistes;”—the doctrine of sophistical theologians.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](inst055.htm#fr_296) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p110.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p111"></span>03 303 See Bernard, Serm. 2 in Die
Ascensionis, and Serm. 2 in Octava Paschæ

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](inst055.htm#fr_297) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p113"></span>04 304 The French adds, “En quoy ils
demonstrent grandement leur betisc;”—In this they give a great
demonstration of their stupidity.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](inst055.htm#fr_298) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p117.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p118"></span>05 305 Latin “Quis non merito, amice
lector, tales bestias execretur?” French, “Je vous prie, mes amis, qui
se tiendra de maudire telles bestes?”—I pray you, my friends, who can
refrain from execrating such beasts?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 3. - REGENERATION BY FAITH. OF REPENTANCE.](inst056)
