[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](inst007)  [Next](inst009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

## <span id="ii.vii-p0.1"></span>SUBJECT OF THE PRESENT WORK

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span>\[prefixed to the french edition, published
at geneva in 1545.\]

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span>In order that my Readers may be the better
able to profit by the present work, I am desirous briefly to point out
the advantage which they may derive from it. For by so doing I will show
them the end at which they ought to aim, and to which they ought to give
their attention in reading it.

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span>Although the Holy Scriptures contain a
perfect doctrine, to which nothing can be added—our Lord having been
pleased therein to unfold the infinite treasures of his wisdom—still
every person, not intimately acquainted with them, stands in need of
some guidance and direction, as to what he ought to look for in them,
that he may not wander up and down, but pursue a certain path, and so
attain the end to which the Holy Spirit invites him.

<span id="ii.vii-p4"></span>Hence it is the duty of those who have
received from God more light than others to assist the simple in this
matter, and, as it were, lend them their hand to guide and assist them
in finding the sum of what God has been pleased to teach us in his word.
Now, this cannot be better done in writing than by treating in
succession of the principal matters which are comprised in Christian
philosophy. For he who understands these will be prepared to make more
progress in the school of God in one day than any other person in three
months, inasmuch as he, in a great measure, knows to what he should
refer each sentence, and has a rule by which to test whatever is
presented to him.

<span id="ii.vii-p5"></span>Seeing, then, how necessary it was in this
manner to aid those who desire to be instructed in the doctrine of
salvation, I have endeavoured, according to the ability which God has
given me, to employ myself in so doing, and with this view have composed
the present book. And first I wrote it in Latin, that it might be
serviceable to all studious persons, of what nation soever they might
be; afterwards, desiring to communicate any fruit which might be in it
to my French countrymen, I translated it into our own tongue. I dare not
bear too strong a testimony in its favour, and declare how profitable
the reading of it will be, lest I should seem to prize my own work too
highly. However I may promise this much, that it will be a kind of key
opening up to all the children of God a right and ready access to the
understanding of the sacred volume. Wherefore, should our Lord give me
henceforth means and opportunity of composing some Commentaries, I will
use the greatest possible brevity, as there will be no occasion to make
long digressions, seeing that I have in a manner deduced at length all
the articles which pertain to Christianity.

<span id="ii.vii-p6"></span>And since we are bound to acknowledge that
all truth and sound doctrine proceed from God, I will venture boldly to
declare what I think of this work, acknowledging it to be God’s work
rather than mine. To him, indeed, the praise due to it must be ascribed.
My opinion of the work then is this: I exhort all, who reverence the
word of the Lord, to read it, and diligently imprint it on their memory,
if they would, in the first place, have a summary of Christian doctrine,
and, in the second place, an introduction to the profitable reading both
of the Old and New Testament. When they shall have done so, they will
know by experience that I have not wished to impose upon them with
words. Should any one be unable to comprehend all that is contained in
it, he must not, however, give it up in despair; but continue always to
read on, hoping that one passage will give him a more familiar
exposition of another. Above all things, I would recommend that recourse
be had to Scripture in considering the proofs which I adduce from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EPISTLE TO THE READER.](inst009.md)
