[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst080)  [Next](inst082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.ii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 1.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span>OF THE TRUE CHURCH. DUTY OF CULTIVATING
UNITY WITH HER, AS THE MOTHER OF ALL THE GODLY.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>The three divisions of this chapter
are,—I. The article of the Creed concerning the Holy Catholic Church and
the Communion of Saints briefly expounded. The grounds on which the
Church claims our reverence, sec. 1-6. II. Of the marks of the Church,
sec. 7-9. III. The necessity of cleaving to the Holy Catholic Church and
the Communion of Saints. Refutation of the errors of the Novatians,
Anabaptists, and other schismatics, in regard to this matter, sec.
10-29.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>1. The church now to be considered. With
her God has deposited whatever is necessary to faith and good order. A
summary of what is contained in this Book. Why it begins with the
Church.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>2. In what sense the article of the Creed
concerning the Church is to be understood. Why we should say, “I believe
the Church,” not “I believe in the Church.” The purport of this article.
Why the Church is called Catholic or Universal.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span>3. What meant by the Communion of Saints.
Whether it is inconsistent with various gifts in the saints, or with
civil order. Uses of this article concerning the Church and the
Communion of Saints. Must the Church be visible in order to our
maintaining unity with her?

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>4. The name of Mother given to the Church
shows how necessary it is to know her. No salvation out of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span>5. The Church is our mother, inasmuch as
God has committed to her the kind office of bringing us up in the faith
until we attain full age. This method of education not to be despised.
Useful to us in two ways. This utility destroyed by those who despise
the pastors and teachers of the Church. The petulance of such despisers
repressed by reason and Scripture. For this education of the Church her
children enjoined to meet in the sanctuary. The abuse of churches both
before and since the advent of Christ. Their proper use.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>6. Her ministry effectual, but not without
the Spirit of God. Passages in proof of this.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>7. Second part of the Chapter. Concerning
the marks of the Church. In what respect the Church is invisible. In
what respect she is visible.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>8. God alone knoweth them that are his.
Still he has given marks to discern his children.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span>9. These marks are the ministry of the
word, and administration of the sacraments instituted by Christ. The
same rule not to be followed in judging of individuals and of churches.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span>10. We must on no account forsake the
Church distinguished by such marks. Those who act otherwise are
apostates, deserters of the truth and of the household of God, deniers
of God and Christ, violators of the mystical marriage.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14"></span>11. These marks to be the more carefully
observed, because Satan strives to efface them, or to make us revolt
from the Church. The twofold error of despising the true, and submitting
to a false Church.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15"></span>12. Though the common profession should
contain some corruption, this is not a sufficient reason for forsaking
the visible Church. Some of these corruptions specified. Caution
necessary. The duty of the members.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p16"></span>13. The immoral lives of certain
professors no ground for abandoning the Church. Error on this head of
the ancient and modern Cathari. Their first objection. Answer to it from
three of our Saviour’s parables.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p17"></span>14. Second objection. Answer from a
consideration of the state of the Corinthian Church, and the Churches of
Galatia.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18"></span>15. Third objection and answer.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19"></span>16. The origin of these objections. A
description of Schismatics. Their portraiture by Augustine. A pious
counsel respecting these scandals, and a safe remedy against them.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p20"></span>17. Fourth objection and answer. Answer
confirmed by the divine promises.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21"></span>18. Another confirmation from the example
of Christ and of the faithful servants of God. The appearance of the
Church in the days of the prophets.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22"></span>19. Appearance of the Church in the days
of Christ and the apostles, and their immediate followers.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p23"></span>20. Fifth objection. Answer to the
ancient and modern Cathari, and to the Novatians, concerning the
forgiveness of sins

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24"></span>21. Answer to the fifth objection
continued. By the forgiveness of sins believers are enabled to remain
perpetually in the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25"></span>22. The keys of the Church given for the
express purpose of securing this benefit. A summary of the answer to the
fifth objection.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p26"></span>23. Sixth objection, formerly advanced by
the Novatians, and renewed by the Anabaptists. This error confuted by
the Lord’s Prayer.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p27"></span>24. A second answer, founded on some
examples under the Old Testament.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p28"></span>25. A third answer, confirmed by passages
from Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Solomon. A fourth answer, derived from
sacrifices.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29"></span>26. A fifth answer, from the New
Testament. Some special examples.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30"></span>27. General examples. A celebrated
passage. The arrangement of the Creed.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31"></span>28 Objection, that voluntary
transgression excludes from the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p32"></span>29. Last objection of the Novatians,
founded on the solemn renewal of repentance required by the Church for
more heinous offences. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p33"></span>1. In the last Book, it has been shown,
that by the faith of the gospel Christ becomes ours, and we are made
partakers of the salvation and eternal blessedness procured by him. But
as our ignorance and sloth (I may add, the vanity of our mind) stand in
need of external helps, by which faith may be begotten in us, and may
increase and make progress until its consummation, God, in accommodation
to our infirmity, has added such helps, and secured the effectual
preaching of the gospel, by depositing this treasure with the Church. He
has appointed pastors and teachers, by whose lips he might edify his
people (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>[Eph.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p33.1"></span>); he has invested them with authority, and,
in short, omitted nothing that might conduce to holy consent in the
faith, and to right order. In particular, he has instituted sacraments,
which we feel by experience to be most useful helps in fostering and
confirming our faith. For seeing we are shut up in the prison of the
body, and have not yet attained to the rank of angels, God, in
accommodation to our capacity, has in his admirable providence provided
a method by which, though widely separated, we might still draw near to
him. Wherefore, due order requires that we first treat of the Church, of
its Government, Orders, and Power; next, of the Sacraments; and, lastly,
of Civil Government;—at the same time guarding pious readers against the
corruptions of the Papacy, by which Satan has adulterated all that God
had appointed for our salvation. I will begin with the Church, into
whose bosom God is pleased to collect his children, not only that by her
aid and ministry they may be nourished so long as they are babes and
children, but may also be guided by her maternal care until they grow up
to manhood, and, finally, attain to the perfection of faith. What God
has thus joined, let not man put asunder (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p33.2"></span>[Mark
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p33.2"></span>): to those to whom he is a Father, the
Church must also be a mother. This was true not merely under the Law,
but even now after the advent of Christ; since Paul declares that we are
the children of a new, even a heavenly Jerusalem (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p33.3"></span>[Gal.
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p33.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p34"></span>2. When in the Creed we profess to
believe the Church, reference is made not only to the visible Church of
which we are now treating, but also to all the elect of God, including
in the number even those who have departed this life. And, accordingly,
the word used is “believe,” because oftentimes no difference can be
observed between the children of God and the profane, between his proper
flock and the untamed herd. The particle *in* is often interpolated, but
without any probable ground. I confess, indeed, that it is the more
usual form, and is not unsupported by antiquity, since the Nicene Creed,
as quoted in Ecclesiastical History, adds the preposition. At the same
time, we may perceive from early writers, that the expression received
without controversy in ancient times was to believe “the Church,” and
not “in the Church.” This is not only the expression used by Augustine,
and that ancient writer, whoever he may have been, whose treatise, *De
Symboli Expositione*, is extant under the name of Cyprian, but they
distinctly remark that the addition of the preposition would make the
expression improper, and they give good grounds for so thinking. We
declare that we believe in God, both because our mind reclines upon him
as true, and our confidence is fully satisfied in him. This cannot be
said of the Church, just as it cannot be said of the forgiveness of
sins, or the resurrection of the body. Wherefore, although I am
unwilling to dispute about words, yet I would rather keep to the proper
form, as better fitted to express the thing that is meant, than affect
terms by which the meaning is causelessly obscured. The object of the
expression is to teach us, that though the devil leaves no stone
unturned in order to destroy the grace of Christ, and the enemies of God
rush with insane violence in the same direction, it cannot be
extinguished,—the blood of Christ cannot be rendered barren, and
prevented from producing fruit. Hence, regard must be had both to the
secret election and to the internal calling of God, because he alone
“knoweth them that are his” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>[2 Tim.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p34.1"></span>); and as Paul expresses it, holds them as it
were enclosed under his seal, although, at the same time, they wear his
insignia, and are thus distinguished from the reprobate. But as they are
a small and despised number, concealed in an immense crowd, like a few
grains of wheat buried among a heap of chaff, to God alone must be left
the knowledge of his Church, of which his secret election forms the
foundation.  <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) Nor is it enough to
embrace the number of the elect in thought and intention merely. By the
unity of the Church we must understand a unity into which we feel
persuaded that we are truly ingrafted. For unless we are united with all
the other members under Christ our head, no hope of the future
inheritance awaits us. Hence the Church is called Catholic or Universal
(August. <span id="iv.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>Ep. 48<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p35.1"></span>), for two or three cannot be invented
without dividing Christ; and this is impossible. All the elect of God
are so joined together in Christ, that as they depend on one head, so
they are as it were compacted into one body, being knit together like
its different members; made truly one by living together under the same
Spirit of God in one faith, hope, and charity, called not only to the
same inheritance of eternal life, but to participation in one God and
Christ. For although the sad devastation which everywhere meets our view
may proclaim that no Church remains, let us know that the death of
Christ produces fruit, and that God wondrously preserves his Church,
while placing it as it were in concealment. Thus it was said to Elijah,
“Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p35.2"></span>[1 Kings
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p35.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36"></span>3. Moreover, this article of the Creed
relates in some measure to the external Church, that every one of us
must maintain brotherly concord with all the children of God, give due
authority to the Church, and, in short, conduct ourselves as sheep of
the flock. And hence the additional expression, the “communion of
saints;” for this clause, though usually omitted by ancient writers,
must not be overlooked, as it admirably expresses the quality of the
Church; just as if it had been said, that saints are united in the
fellowship of Christ on this condition, that all the blessings which God
bestows upon them are mutually communicated to each other. This,
however, is not incompatible with a diversity of graces, for we know
that the gifts of the Spirit are variously distributed; nor is it
incompatible with civil order, by which each is permitted privately to
possess his own means, it being necessary for the preservation of peace
among men that distinct rights of property should exist among them.
Still a community is asserted, such as Luke describes when he says, “The
multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>[Acts
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p36.1"></span>); and Paul, when he reminds the Ephesians,
“There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of
your calling” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36.2"></span>[Eph.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36.2"></span>).
For if they are truly persuaded that God is the common Father of them
all, and Christ their common head, they cannot but be united together in
brotherly love, and mutually impart their blessings to each other. Then
it is of the highest importance for us to know what benefit thence
redounds to us. For when we believe the Church, it is in order that we
may be firmly persuaded that we are its members. In this way our
salvation rests on a foundation so firm and sure, that though the whole
fabric of the world were to give way, it could not be destroyed. First,
it stands with the election of God, and cannot change or fail, any more
than his eternal providence. Next, it is in a manner united with the
stability of Christ, who will no more allow his faithful followers to be
dissevered from him, than he would allow his own members to be torn to
pieces. We may add, that so long as we continue in the bosom of the
Church, we are sure that the truth will remain with us. Lastly, we feel
that we have an interest in such promises as these, “In Mount Zion and
in Jerusalem shall be deliverance” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p36.3"></span>[Joel
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36.4"></span>[Obad.
17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p36.4"></span>);
“God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p36.5"></span>[Ps.
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p36.5"></span>). So available is communion with the Church
to keep us in the fellowship of God. In the very term communion there is
great consolation; because, while we are assured that everything which
God bestows on his members belongs to us, all the blessings conferred
upon them confirm our hope. But in order to embrace the unity of the
Church in this manner, it is not necessary, as I have observed, to see
it with our eyes, or feel it with our hands. Nay, rather from its being
placed in faith, we are reminded that our thoughts are to dwell upon it,
as much when it escapes our perception as when it openly appears. Nor is
our faith the worse for apprehending what is unknown, since we are not
enjoined here to distinguish between the elect and the reprobate (this
belongs not to us, but to God only), but to feel firmly assured in our
minds, that all those who, by the mercy of God the Father, through the
efficacy of the Holy Spirit, have become partakers with Christ, are set
apart as the proper and peculiar possession of God, and that as we are
of the number, we are also partakers of this great grace.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p37"></span>4. But as it is now our purpose to
discourse of the visible Church,  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) let us learn, from her single title of
Mother, how useful, nay, how necessary the knowledge of her is, since
there is no other means of entering into life unless she conceive us in
the womb and give us birth, unless she nourish us at her breasts, and,
in short, keep us under her charge and government, until, divested of
mortal flesh, we become like the angels (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p38.1"></span>[Mt.
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p38.1"></span>). For our weakness does not permit us to
leave the school until we have spent our whole lives as scholars.
Moreover, beyond the pale of the Church no forgiveness of sins, no
salvation, can be hoped for, as Isaiah and Joel testify (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p38.2"></span>[Isa.
37:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p38.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.ii-p38.3"></span>[Joel
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p38.3"></span>). To their testimony Ezekiel subscribes,
when he declares, “They shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38.4"></span>[Ezek.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38.4"></span>);
as, on the other hand, those who turn to the cultivation of true piety
are said to inscribe their names among the citizens of Jerusalem. For
which reason it is said in the psalm, “Remember me, O Lord, with the
favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation;
that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the
gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p38.5"></span>[Ps. 106:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38.5"></span>).
By these words the paternal favour of God and the special evidence of
spiritual life are confined to his peculiar people, and hence the
abandonment of the Church is always fatal.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39"></span>5. But let us proceed to a full
exposition of this view. Paul says that our Saviour “ascended far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things. And he gave some, apostles;
and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and
teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>[Eph.
4:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.1"></span>). We see that God, who might perfect his
people in a moment, chooses not to bring them to manhood in any other
way than by the education of the Church. We see the mode of doing it
expressed; the preaching of celestial doctrine is committed to pastors.
We see that all without exception are brought into the same order, that
they may with meek and docile spirit allow themselves to be governed by
teachers appointed for this purpose. Isaiah had long before given this
as the characteristic of the kingdom of Christ, “My Spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.2"></span>[Isa.
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.2"></span>). Hence it follows, that all who reject the
spiritual food of the soul divinely offered to them by the hands of the
Church, deserve to perish of hunger and famine. God inspires us with
faith, but it is by the instrumentality of his gospel, as Paul reminds
us, “Faith cometh by hearing” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39.3"></span>[Rom.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.3"></span>). God reserves to himself the power of
maintaining it, but it is by the preaching of the gospel, as Paul also
declares, that he brings it forth and unfolds it. With this view, it
pleased him in ancient times that sacred meetings should be held in the
sanctuary, that consent in faith might be nourished by doctrine
proceeding from the lips of the priest. Those magnificent titles, as
when the temple is called God’s rest, his sanctuary, his habitation, and
when he is said to dwell between the cherubims (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.4"></span>[Ps. 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39.4"></span>;
80:1), are used for no other purpose than to procure respect, love,
reverence, and dignity to the ministry of heavenly doctrine, to which
otherwise the appearance of an insignificant human being might be in no
slight degree derogatory. Therefore, to teach us that the treasure
offered to us in earthen vessels is of inestimable value (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p39.5"></span>[2 Cor.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39.5"></span>),
God himself appears and, as the author of this ordinance, requires his
presence to be recognised in his own institution. Accordingly, after
forbidding his people to give heed to familiar spirits, wizards, and
other superstitions (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39.6"></span>[Lev.
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p39.6"></span>),
he adds, that he will give what ought to be sufficient for all—namely,
that he will never leave them without prophets. For, as he did not
commit his ancient people to angels, but raised up teachers on the earth
to perform a truly angelical office, so he is pleased to instruct us in
the present day by human means. But as anciently he did not confine
himself to the law merely, but added priests as interpreters, from whose
lips the people might inquire after his true meaning, so in the present
day he would not only have us to be attentive to reading, but has
appointed masters to give us their assistance. In this there is a
twofold advantage. For, on the one hand, he by an admirable test proves
our obedience when we listen to his ministers just as we would to
himself; while, on the other hand, he consults our weakness in being
pleased to address us after the manner of men by means of interpreters,
that he may thus allure us to himself, instead of driving us away by his
thunder. How well this familiar mode of teaching is suited to us all the
godly are aware, from the dread with which the divine majesty justly
inspires them.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40"></span>Those who think that the authority of the
doctrine is impaired by the insignificance of the men who are called to
teach, betray their ingratitude; for among the many noble endowments
with which God has adorned the human race, one of the most remarkable
is, that he deigns to consecrate the mouths and tongues of men to his
service, making his own voice to be heard in them. Wherefore, let us not
on our part decline obediently to embrace the doctrine of salvation,
delivered by his command and mouth; because, although the power of God
is not confined to external means, he has, however, confined us to his
ordinary method of teaching, which method, when fanatics refuse to
observe, they entangle themselves in many fatal snares. Pride, or
fastidiousness, or emulation, induces many to persuade themselves that
they can profit sufficiently by reading and meditating in private, and
thus to despise public meetings, and deem preaching superfluous. But
since as much as in them lies they loose or burst the sacred bond of
unity, none of them escapes the just punishment of this impious divorce,
but become fascinated with pestiferous errors, and the foulest
delusions. Wherefore, in order that the pure simplicity of the faith may
flourish among us, let us not decline to use this exercise of piety,
which God by his institution of it has shown to be necessary, and which
he so highly recommends. None, even among the most petulant of men,
would venture to say, that we are to shut our ears against God, but in
all ages prophets and pious teachers have had a difficult contest to
maintain with the ungodly, whose perverseness cannot submit to the yoke
of being taught by the lips and ministry of men. This is just the same
as if they were to destroy the impress of God as exhibited to us in
doctrine. For no other reason were believers anciently enjoined to seek
the face of God in the sanctuary (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>[Ps.
105:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.1"></span>) (an injunction so often repeated in the
Law), than because the doctrine of the Law, and the exhortations of the
prophets, were to them a living image of God. Thus Paul declares, that
in his preaching the glory of God shone in the face of Jesus Christ
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.2"></span>[2 Cor.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.2"></span>).
The more detestable are the apostates who delight in producing schisms
in churches, just as if they wished to drive the sheep from the fold,
and throw them into the jaws of wolves. Let us hold, agreeably to the
passage we quoted from Paul, that the Church can only be edified by
external preaching, and that there is no other bond by which the saints
can be kept together than by uniting with one consent to observe the
order which God has appointed in his Church for learning and making
progress. For this end, especially, as I have observed, believers were
anciently enjoined under the Law to flock together to the sanctuary; for
when Moses speaks of the habitation of God, he at the same time calls it
the place of the name of God, the place where he will record his name
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.3"></span>[Exod.
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.3"></span>); thus plainly teaching that no use could be
made of it without the doctrine of godliness. And there can be no doubt
that, for the same reason, David complains with great bitterness of
soul, that by the tyrannical cruelty of his enemies he was prevented
from entering the tabernacle (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.4"></span>[Ps.
84](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p40.4"></span>).
To many the complaint seems childish, as if no great loss were
sustained, not much pleasure lost, by exclusion from the temple,
provided other amusements were enjoyed. David, however, laments this one
deprivation, as filling him with anxiety and sadness, tormenting, and
almost destroying him. This he does because there is nothing on which
believers set a higher value than on this aid, by which God gradually
raises his people to heaven. For it is to be observed, that he always
exhibited himself to the holy patriarchs in the mirror of his doctrine
in such a way as to make their knowledge spiritual. Whence the temple is
not only styled his face, but also, for the purpose of removing all
superstition, is termed his footstool (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.5"></span>[Ps.
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.5"></span>; 99:5). Herein is the unity of the faith
happily realised, when all, from the highest to the lowest, aspire to
the head. All the temples which the Gentiles built to God with a
different intention were a mere profanation of his worship,—a
profanation into which the Jews also fell, though not with equal
grossness. With this Stephen upbraids them in the words of Isaiah when
he says, “Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands;
as saith the Prophet, Heaven is my throne,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.6"></span>[Acts
7:48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p40.6"></span>). For God only consecrates temples to their
legitimate use by his word. And when we rashly attempt anything without
his order, immediately setting out from a bad principle, we introduce
adventitious fictions, by which evil is propagated without measure. It
was inconsiderate in Xerxes when, by the advice of the magians, he burnt
or pulled down all the temples of Greece, because he thought it absurd
that God, to whom all things ought to be free and open, should be
enclosed by walls and roofs, as if it were not in the power of God in a
manner to descend to us, that he may be near to us, and yet neither
change his place nor affect us by earthly means, but rather, by a kind
of vehicles, raise us aloft to his own heavenly glory, which, with its
immensity, fills all things, and in height is above the heavens.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41"></span>6. Moreover, as at this time there is a
great dispute as to the efficacy of the ministry, some extravagantly
overrating its dignity, and others erroneously maintaining, that what is
peculiar to the Spirit of God is transferred to mortal man, when we
suppose that ministers and teachers penetrate to the mind and heart, so
as to correct the blindness of the one, and the hardness of the other;
it is necessary to place this controversy on its proper footing. The
arguments on both sides will be disposed of without trouble, by
distinctly attending to the passages in which God, the author of
preaching, connects his Spirit with it, and then promises a beneficial
result; or, on the other hand, to the passages in which God, separating
himself from external means, claims for himself alone both the
commencement and the whole course of faith. The office of the second
Elias was, as Malachi declares, to “turn the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.1"></span>[Mal.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.1"></span>).
Christ declares that he sent the Apostles to produce fruit from his
labours (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.2"></span>[John
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.2"></span>). What this fruit is Peter briefly defines,
when he says that we are begotten again of incorruptible seed (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.3"></span>[1 Pet.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.3"></span>). Hence Paul glories, that by means of the
Gospel he had begotten the Corinthians, who were the seals of his
apostleship (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.4"></span>[1 Cor.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.4"></span>); moreover, that his was not a ministry of
the letter, which only sounded in the ear, but that the effectual agency
of the Spirit was given to him, in order that his doctrine might not be
in vain (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.5"></span>[1 Cor.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.6"></span>[2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.6"></span>).
In this sense he elsewhere declares that his Gospel was not in word, but
in power (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.7"></span>[1 Thess.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.7"></span>).
He also affirms that the Galatians received the Spirit by the hearing of
faith (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.8"></span>[Gal.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.8"></span>).
In short, in several passages he not only makes himself a fellow-worker
with God, but attributes to himself the province of bestowing salvation
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.9"></span>[1 Cor.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.9"></span>).
All these things he certainly never uttered with the view of attributing
to himself one iota apart from God, as he elsewhere briefly explains.
“For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye
received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the
word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually
worketh also in you that believe” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.10"></span>[1
Thess. 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.10"></span>). Again, in another place, “He that wrought
effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same
was mighty in me toward the Gentiles” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.11"></span>[Gal.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.11"></span>). And that he allows no more to ministers
is obvious from other passages. “So then neither is he that planteth
anything, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p41.12"></span>[1 Cor.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.12"></span>). Again, “I laboured more abundantly than
they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.13"></span>[1 Cor.
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p41.13"></span>). And it is indeed necessary to keep these
sentences in view, since God, in ascribing to himself the illumination
of the mind and renewal of the heart, reminds us that it is sacrilege
for man to claim any part of either to himself. Still every one who
listens with docility to the ministers whom God appoints, will know by
the beneficial result, that for good reason God is pleased with this
method of teaching, and for good reason has laid believers under this
modest yoke.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p42"></span>7. The judgment which ought to be formed
concerning the visible Church which comes under our observation, must, I
think, be sufficiently clear from what has been said. I have observed
that the Scriptures speak of the Church in two ways. Sometimes when they
speak of the Church they mean the Church as it really is before God—the
Church into which none are admitted but those who by the gift of
adoption are sons of God, and by the sanctification of the Spirit true
members of Christ. In this case it not only comprehends the saints who
dwell on the earth, but all the elect who have existed from the
beginning of the world. Often, too, by the name of Church is designated
the whole body of mankind scattered throughout the world, who profess to
worship one God and Christ, who by baptism are initiated into the faith;
by partaking of the Lord’s Supper profess unity in true doctrine and
charity, agree in holding the word of the Lord, and observe the ministry
which Christ has appointed for the preaching of it. In this Church there
is a very large mixture of hypocrites, who have nothing of Christ but
the name and outward appearance: of ambitious, avaricious, envious,
evil-speaking men, some also of impurer lives, who are tolerated for a
time, either because their guilt cannot be legally established, or
because due strictness of discipline is not always observed. Hence, as
it is necessary to believe the invisible Church,  <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) which is manifest to the eye of God
only, so we are also enjoined to regard this Church which is so called
with reference to man, and to cultivate its communion.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p44"></span>8. Accordingly, inasmuch as it was of
importance to us to recognise it, the Lord has distinguished it by
certain marks, and as it were symbols. It is, indeed, the special
prerogative of God to know those who are his, as Paul declares in the
passage already quoted (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p44.1"></span>[2 Tim.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p44.1"></span>). And doubtless it has been so provided as a
check on human rashness, the experience of every day reminding us how
far his secret judgments surpass our apprehension. For even those who
seemed most abandoned, and who had been completely despaired of, are by
his goodness recalled to life, while those who seemed most stable often
fall. Hence, as Augustine says, “In regard to the secret predestination
of God, there are very many sheep without, and very many wolves within”
(August. Hom. in Joan. 45). For he knows, and has his mark on those who
know neither him nor themselves. Of those again who openly bear his
badge, his eyes alone see who of them are unfeignedly holy, and will
persevere even to the end, which alone is the completion of salvation.
On the other hand, foreseeing that it was in some degree expedient for
us to know who are to be regarded by us as his sons, he has in this
matter accommodated himself to our capacity. But as here full certainty
was not necessary, he has in its place substituted the judgment of
charity, by which we acknowledge all as members of the Church who by
confession of faith, regularity of conduct, and participation in the
sacraments, unite with us in acknowledging the same God and Christ.
 <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) The knowledge of his body,
inasmuch as he knew it to be more necessary for our salvation, he has
made known to us by surer marks.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p46"></span>9. Hence the form of the Church appears
and stands forth conspicuous to our view. Wherever we see the word of
God sincerely preached and heard, wherever we see the sacraments
administered according to the institution of Christ, there we cannot
have any doubt that the Church of God has some existence, since his
promise cannot fail, “Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p46.1"></span>[Mt.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p46.1"></span>). But that we may have a clear summary of
this subject, we must proceed by the following steps:—The Church
universal is the multitude collected out of all nations, who, though
dispersed and far distant from each other, agree in one truth of divine
doctrine, and are bound together by the tie of a common religion. In
this way it comprehends single churches, which exist in different towns
and villages, according to the wants of human society, so that each of
them justly obtains the name and authority of the Church; and also
comprehends single individuals, who by a religious profession are
accounted to belong to such churches, although they are in fact aliens
from the Church, but have not been cut off by a public decision. There
is, however, a slight difference in the mode of judging of individuals
and of churches. For it may happen in practice that those whom we deem
not altogether worthy of the fellowship of believers, we yet ought to
treat as brethren, and regard as believers, on account of the common
consent of the Church in tolerating and bearing with them in the body of
Christ. Such persons we do not approve by our suffrage as members of the
Church, but we leave them the place which they hold among the people of
God, until they are legitimately deprived of it. With regard to the
general body we must feel differently; if they have the ministry of the
word, and honour the administration of the sacraments, they are
undoubtedly entitled to be ranked with the Church, because it is certain
that these things are not without a beneficial result. Thus we both
maintain the Church universal in its unity, which malignant minds have
always been eager to dissever, and deny not due authority to lawful
assemblies distributed as circumstances require.  <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p48"></span>10. We have said that the symbols by
which the Church is discerned are the preaching of the word and the
observance of the sacraments, for these cannot anywhere exist without
producing fruit and prospering by the blessing of God. I say not that
wherever the word is preached fruit immediately appears; but that in
every place where it is received, and has a fixed abode, it uniformly
displays its efficacy. Be this as it may, when the preaching of the
gospel is reverently heard, and the sacraments are not neglected, there
for the time the face of the Church appears without deception or
ambiguity and no man may with impunity spurn her authority, or reject
her admonitions, or resist her counsels, or make sport of her censures,
far less revolt from her, and violate her unity (see Chap. 2 sec. 1, 10,
and Chap. 8 sec. 12). For such is the value which the Lord sets on the
communion of his Church, that all who contumaciously alienate themselves
from any Christian society, in which the true ministry of his word and
sacraments is maintained, he regards as deserters of religion. So highly
does he recommend her authority, that when it is violated he considers
that his own authority is impaired. For there is no small weight in the
designation given to her, “the house of God,” “the pillar and ground of
the truth” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p48.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p48.1"></span>). By these words Paul intimates, that to
prevent the truth from perishing in the world. the Church is its
faithful guardian, because God has been pleased to preserve the pure
preaching of his word by her instrumentality, and to exhibit himself to
us as a parent while he feeds us with spiritual nourishment, and
provides whatever is conducive to our salvation. Moreover, no mean
praise is conferred on the Church when she is said to have been chosen
and set apart by Christ as his spouse, “not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p48.2"></span>[Eph.
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p48.2"></span>), as “his body, the fulness of him that
filleth all in all” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p48.3"></span>[Eph.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p48.3"></span>). Whence it follows, that revolt from the
Church is denial of God and Christ. Wherefore there is the more
necessity to beware of a dissent so iniquitous; for seeing by it we aim
as far as in us lies at the destruction of God’s truth, we deserve to be
crushed by the full thunder of his anger. No crime can be imagined more
atrocious than that of sacrilegiously and perfidiously violating the
sacred marriage which the only begotten Son of God has condescended to
contract with us.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p49"></span>11. Wherefore let these marks be
carefully impressed upon our minds, and let us estimate them as in the
sight of the Lord. There is nothing on which Satan is more intent than
to destroy and efface one or both of them—at one time to delete and
abolish these marks, and thereby destroy the true and genuine
distinction of the Church; at another, to bring them into contempt, and
so hurry us into open revolt from the Church. To his wiles it was owing
that for several ages the pure preaching of the word disappeared, and
now, with the same dishonest aim, he labours to overthrow the ministry,
which, however, Christ has so ordered in his Church, that if it is
removed the whole edifice must fall. How perilous, then, nay, how fatal
the temptation, when we even entertain a thought of separating ourselves
from that assembly in which are beheld the signs and badges which the
Lord has deemed sufficient to characterise his Church! We see how great
caution should be employed in both respects. That we may not be imposed
upon by the name of Church, every congregation which claims the name
must be brought to that test as to a Lydian stone. If it holds the order
instituted by the Lord in word and sacraments there will be no
deception; we may safely pay it the honour due to a church: on the other
hand, if it exhibit itself without word and sacraments, we must in this
case be no less careful to avoid the imposture than we were to shun
pride and presumption in the other.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p50"></span>12. When we say that the pure ministry of
the word and pure celebration of the sacraments is a fit pledge and
earnest, so that we may safely recognise a church in every society in
which both exist, our meaning is, that we are never to discard it so
long as these remain, though it may otherwise teem with numerous faults.
Nay, even in the administration of word and sacraments defects may creep
in which ought not to alienate us from its communion. For all the heads
of true doctrine are not in the same position. Some are so necessary to
be known, that all must hold them to be fixed and undoubted as the
proper essentials of religion: for instance, that God is one, that
Christ is God, and the Son of God, that our salvation depends on the
mercy of God, and the like. Others, again, which are the subject of
controversy among the churches, do not destroy the unity of the faith;
for why should it be regarded as a ground of dissension between
churches, if one, without any spirit of contention or perverseness in
dogmatising, hold that the soul on quitting the body flies to heaven,
and another, without venturing to speak positively as to the abode,
holds it for certain that it lives with the Lord?51  <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) The words of the Apostle are, “Let us
therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p51.1"></span>[Phil.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p51.1"></span>). Does he not sufficiently intimate that a
difference of opinion as to these matters which are not absolutely
necessary, ought not to be a ground of dissension among Christians? The
best thing, indeed, is to be perfectly agreed, but seeing there is no
man who is not involved in some mist of ignorance, we must either have
no church at all, or pardon delusion in those things of which one may be
ignorant, without violating the substance of religion and forfeiting
salvation. Here, however, I have no wish to patronise even the minutest
errors, as if I thought it right to foster them by flattery or
connivance; what I say is, that we are not on account of every minute
difference to abandon a church, provided it retain sound and unimpaired
that doctrine in which the safety of piety consists,51  <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) and keep the use of the sacraments
instituted by the Lord. Meanwhile, if we strive to reform what is
offensive, we act in the discharge of duty. To this effect are the words
of Paul, “If anything be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the
first hold his peace” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p52.1"></span>[1 Cor.
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p52.1"></span>). From this it is evident that to each
member of the Church, according to his measure of grace, the study of
public edification has been assigned, provided it be done decently and
in order. In other words, we must neither renounce the communion of the
Church, nor, continuing in it, disturb peace and discipline when duly
arranged.51  <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p54"></span>13. Our indulgence ought to extend much
farther in tolerating imperfection of conduct. Here there is great
danger of falling, and Satan employs all his machinations to ensnare us.
For there always have been persons who, imbued with a false persuasion
of absolute holiness, as if they had already become a kind of aërial
spirits,51  <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) spurn the society of
all in whom they see that something human still remains. Such of old
were the Cathari and the Donatists, who were similarly infatuated. Such
in the present day are some of the Anabaptists, who would be thought to
have made superior progress. Others, again, sin in this respect, not so
much from that insane pride as from inconsiderate zeal. Seeing that
among those to whom the gospel is preached, the fruit produced is not in
accordance with the doctrine, they forthwith conclude that there no
church exists. The offence is indeed well founded, and it is one to
which in this most unhappy age we give far too much occasion. It is
impossible to excuse our accursed sluggishness, which the Lord will not
leave unpunished, as he is already beginning sharply to chastise us. Woe
then to us who, by our dissolute licence of wickedness, cause weak
consciences to be wounded! Still those of whom we have spoken sin in
their turn, by not knowing how to set bounds to their offence. For where
the Lord requires mercy they omit it, and give themselves up to
immoderate severity. Thinking there is no church where there is not
complete purity and integrity of conduct, they, through hatred of
wickedness, withdraw from a genuine church, while they think they are
shunning the company of the ungodly. They allege that the Church of God
is holy. But that they may at the same time understand that it contains
a mixture of good and bad, let them hear from the lips of our Saviour
that parable in which he compares the Church to a net in which all kinds
of fishes are taken, but not separated until they are brought ashore.
Let them hear it compared to a field which, planted with good seed, is
by the fraud of an enemy mingled with tares, and is not freed of them
until the harvest is brought into the barn. Let them hear, in fine, that
it is a thrashing-floor in which the collected wheat lies concealed
under the chaff, until, cleansed by the fanners and the sieve, it is at
length laid up in the granary. If the Lord declares that the Church will
labour under the defect of being burdened with a multitude of wicked
until the day of judgment, it is in vain to look for a church altogether
free from blemish (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p55.1"></span>[Mt.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p55.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p56"></span>14. They exclaim that it is impossible to
tolerate the vice which everywhere stalks abroad like a pestilence. What
if the apostle’s sentiment applies here also? Among the Corinthians it
was not a few that erred, but almost the whole body had become tainted;
there was not one species of sin merely, but a multitude, and those not
trivial errors, but some of them execrable crimes. There was not only
corruption in manners, but also in doctrine. What course was taken by
the holy apostle, in other words, by the organ of the heavenly Spirit,
by whose testimony the Church stands and falls? Does he seek separation
from them? Does he discard them from the kingdom of Christ? Does he
strike them with the thunder of a final anathema? He not only does none
of these things, but he acknowledges and heralds them as a Church of
Christ, and a society of saints. If the Church remains among the
Corinthians, where envyings, divisions, and contentions rage; where
quarrels, lawsuits, and avarice prevail; where a crime, which even the
Gentiles would execrate, is openly approved; where the name of Paul,
whom they ought to have honoured as a father, is petulantly assailed;
where some hold the resurrection of the dead in derision, though with it
the whole gospel must fall; where the gifts of God are made subservient
to ambition, not to charity; where many things are done neither decently
nor in order:52  <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) If there the
Church still remains, simply because the ministration of word and
sacrament is not rejected, who will presume to deny the title of church
to those to whom a tenth part of these crimes cannot be imputed? How, I
ask, would those who act so morosely against present churches have acted
to the Galatians, who had done all but abandon the gospel (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p57.1"></span>[Gal.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p57.1"></span>),
and yet among them the same apostle found churches?52  <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p59"></span>15. They also object, that Paul sharply
rebukes the Corinthians for permitting an heinous offender in their
communion, and then lays down a general sentence, by which he declares
it unlawful even to eat bread with a man of impure life (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p59.1"></span>[1 Cor.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p59.1"></span>).
Here they exclaim, If it is not lawful to eat ordinary bread, how can it
be lawful to eat the Lord’s bread? I admit, that it is a great disgrace
if dogs and swine are admitted among the children of God; much more, if
the sacred body of Christ is prostituted to them. And, indeed, when
churches are well regulated, they will not bear the wicked in their
bosom, nor will they admit the worthy and unworthy indiscriminately to
that sacred feast. But because pastors are not always sedulously
vigilant, are sometimes also more indulgent than they ought, or are
prevented from acting so strictly as they could wish; the consequence
is, that even the openly wicked are not always excluded from the
fellowship of the saints. This I admit to be a vice, and I have no wish
to extenuate it, seeing that Paul sharply rebukes it in the Corinthians.
But although the Church fail in her duty, it does not therefore follow
that every private individual is to decide the question of separation
for himself. I deny not that it is the duty of a pious man to withdraw
from all private intercourse with the wicked, and not entangle himself
with them by any voluntary tie; but it is one thing to shun the society
of the wicked, and another to renounce the communion of the Church
through hatred of them. Those who think it sacrilege to partake the
Lord’s bread with the wicked, are in this more rigid than Paul.52  <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) For when he exhorts us to pure and
holy communion, he does not require that we should examine others, or
that every one should examine the whole church, but that each should
examine himself (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p60.1"></span>[1 Cor.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p60.1"></span>).
If it were unlawful to communicate with the unworthy, Paul would
certainly have ordered us to take heed that there were no individual in
the whole body by whose impurity we might be defiled, but now that he
only requires each to examine himself, he shows that it does no harm to
us though some who are unworthy present themselves along with us. To the
same effect he afterwards adds, “He that eateth and drinketh unworthily,
eateth and drinketh damnation to himself.” He says not *to others*, but
*to himself*. And justly; for the right of admitting or excluding ought
not to be left to the decision of individuals. Cognisance of this point,
which cannot be exercised without due order, as shall afterwards be more
fully shown, belongs to the whole church. It would therefore be unjust
to hold any private individual as polluted by the unworthiness of
another, whom he neither can nor ought to keep back from communion.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p61"></span> 16. Still, however, even the good are
sometimes affected by this inconsiderate zeal for righteousness, though
we shall find that this excessive moroseness is more the result of pride
and a false idea of sanctity, than genuine sanctity itself, and true
zeal for it. Accordingly, those who are the most forward, and, as it
were, leaders in producing revolt from the Church, have, for the most
part, no other motive than to display their own superiority by despising
all other men. Well and wisely, therefore, does Augustine say, “Seeing
that pious reason and the mode of ecclesiastical discipline ought
specially to regard the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, which
the Apostle enjoins us to keep, by bearing with one another (for if we
keep it not, the application of medicine is not only superfluous, but
pernicious, and therefore proves to be no medicine); those bad sons who,
not from hatred of other men’s iniquities, but zeal for their own
contentions, attempt altogether to draw away, or at least to divide,
weak brethren ensnared by the glare of their name, while swollen with
pride, stuffed with petulance, insidiously calumnious, and turbulently
seditious, use the cloak of a rigorous severity, that they may not seem
devoid of the light of truth, and pervert to sacrilegious schism, and
purposes of excision, those things which are enjoined in the Holy
Scriptures (due regard being had to sincere love, and the unity of
peace), to correct a brother’s faults by the appliance of a moderate
cure” (August. Cont. Parmen. cap. 1). To the pious and placid his advice
is, mercifully to correct what they can, and to bear patiently with what
they cannot correct, in love lamenting and mourning until God either
reform or correct, or at the harvest root up the tares, and scatter the
chaff (Ibid. cap. 2). Let all the godly study to provide themselves with
these weapons, lest, while they deem themselves strenuous and ardent
defenders of righteousness, they revolt from the kingdom of heaven,
which is the only kingdom of righteousness. For as God has been pleased
that the communion of his Church shall be maintained in this external
society, any one who, from hatred of the ungodly, violates the bond of
this society, enters on a downward course, in which he incurs great
danger of cutting himself off from the communion of saints. Let them
reflect, that in a numerous body there are several who may escape their
notice, and yet are truly righteous and innocent in the eyes of the
Lord. Let them reflect, that of those who seem diseased, there are many
who are far from taking pleasure or flattering themselves in their
faults, and who, ever and anon aroused by a serious fear of the Lord,
aspire to greater integrity. Let them reflect, that they have no right
to pass judgment on a man for one act, since the holiest sometimes make
the most grievous fall. Let them reflect, that in the ministry of the
word and participation of the sacraments, the power to collect the
Church is too great to be deprived of all its efficacy, by the fault of
some ungodly men. Lastly, let them reflect, that in estimating the
Church, divine is of more force than human judgment.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p62"></span>17. Since they also argue that there is
good reason for the Church being called holy, it is necessary to
consider what the holiness is in which it excels, lest by refusing to
acknowledge any church, save one that is completely perfect, we leave no
church at all. It is true, indeed, as Paul says, that Christ “loved the
church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to
himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such
thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p62.1"></span>[Eph.
5:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p62.1"></span>). Nevertheless, it is true, that the Lord is
daily smoothing its wrinkles, and wiping away its spots. Hence it
follows, that its holiness is not yet perfect. Such, then, is the
holiness of the Church: it makes daily progress, but is not yet perfect;
it daily advances, but as yet has not reached the goal, as will
elsewhere be more fully explained. Therefore, when the Prophets foretel,
“Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through
her any more;”—“It shall be called, The way of holiness; the unclean
shall not pass over it” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p62.2"></span>[Joel
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p62.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.ii-p62.3"></span>[Isa.
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p62.3"></span>), let us not understand it as if no blemish
remained in the members of the Church: but only that with there whole
heart they aspire after holiness and perfect purity: and hence, that
purity which they have not yet fully attained is, by the kindness of
God, attributed to them. And though the indications of such a kind of
holiness existing among men are too rare, we must understand, that at no
period since the world began has the Lord been without his Church, nor
ever shall be till the final consummation of all things.  <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) For although, at the very outset, the
whole human race was vitiated and corrupted by the sin of Adam, yet of
this kind of polluted mass he always sanctifies some vessels to honour,
that no age may be left without experience of his mercy. This he has
declared by sure promises, such as the following: “I have made a
covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant, Thy seed
will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p63.1"></span>[Ps.
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p63.1"></span>).
“The Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. This
is my rest for ever; here will I dwell” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p63.2"></span>[Ps.
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p63.2"></span>).
“Thus saith the Lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day, and the
ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, which
divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The Lord of hosts is his
name: If those ordinances depart from before me, saith the Lord, then
the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for
ever” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p63.3"></span>[Jer.
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p63.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p64"></span>18. On this head, Christ himself, his
apostles, and almost all the prophets, have furnished us with examples.
Fearful are the descriptions in which Isaiah, Jeremiah, Joel, Habakkuk,
and others, deplore the diseases of the Church of Jerusalem. In the
people, the rulers, and the priests, corruption prevailed to such a
degree, that Isaiah hesitates not to liken Jerusalem to Sodom and
Gomorrah (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p64.1"></span>[Isa.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p64.1"></span>). Religion was partly despised, partly
adulterated, while in regard to morals, we everywhere meet with accounts
of theft, robbery, perfidy, murder, and similar crimes. The prophets,
however, did not therefore either form new churches for themselves, or
erect new altars on which they might have separate sacrifices, but
whatever their countrymen might be, reflecting that the Lord had
deposited his word with them, and instituted the ceremonies by which he
was then worshipped, they stretched out pure hands to him, though amid
the company of the ungodly. Certainly, had they thought that they
thereby contracted any pollution, they would have died a hundred deaths
sooner than suffered themselves to be dragged thither. Nothing,
therefore, prevented them from separating themselves, but a desire of
preserving unity. But if the holy prophets felt no obligation to
withdraw from the Church on account of the very numerous and heinous
crimes, not of one or two individuals, but almost of the whole people,
we arrogate too much to ourselves, if we presume forthwith to withdraw
from the communion of the Church, because the lives of all accord not
with our judgment, or even with the Christian profession.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p65"></span>19. Then what kind of age was that of
Christ and the apostles? Yet neither could the desperate impiety of the
Pharisees, nor the dissolute licentiousness of manners which everywhere
prevailed, prevent them from using the same sacred rites with the
people, and meeting in one common temple for the public exercises of
religion. And why so, but just because they knew that those who joined
in these sacred rites with a pure conscience were not at all polluted by
the society of the wicked? If any one is little moved by prophets and
apostles, let him at least defer to the authority of Christ. Well,
therefore, does Cyprian say, “Although tares or unclean vessels are seen
in the Church, that is no reason why we ourselves should withdraw from
the Church; we must only labour that we may be able to be wheat; we must
give our endeavour, and strive as far as we can, to be vessels of gold
or silver. But to break the earthen vessels belongs to the Lord alone,
to whom a rod of iron has been given: let no one arrogate to himself
what is peculiar to the Son alone, and think himself sufficient to
winnow the floor and cleanse the chaff, and separate all the tares by
human judgment. What depraved zeal thus assumes to itself is proud
obstinacy and sacrilegious presumption” (Cyprian, Lib. 3 Ep. 5). Let
both points, therefore, be regarded as fixed; *first*, that there is no
excuse for him who spontaneously abandons the external communion of a
church in which the word of God is preached and the sacraments are
administered; *secondly*, that notwithstanding of the faults of a few or
of many, there is nothing to prevent us from there duly professing our
faith in the ordinances instituted by God, because a pious conscience is
not injured by the unworthiness of another, whether he be a pastor or a
private individual; and sacred rites are not less pure and salutary to a
man who is holy and upright, from being at the same time handled by the
impure.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p66"></span>20. Their moroseness and pride proceed
even to greater lengths. Refusing to acknowledge any church that is not
pure from the minutest blemish, they take offence at sound teachers for
exhorting believers to make progress, and so teaching them to groan
during their whole lives under the burden of sin, and flee for pardon.
For they preten  <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) that in this
way believers are led away from perfection. I admit that we are not to
labour feebly or coldly in urging perfection, far less to desist from
urging it; but I hold that it is a device of the devil to fill our minds
with a confident belief of it while we are still in our course.
Accordingly, in the Creed forgiveness of sins is appropriately subjoined
to belief as to the Church, because none obtain forgiveness but those
who are citizens, and of the household of the Church, as we read in the
Prophet (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p67.1"></span>[Is.
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p67.1"></span>). The first place, therefore, should be
given to the building of the heavenly Jerusalem, in which God afterwards
is pleased to wipe away the iniquity of all who betake themselves to it.
I say, however, that the Church must first be built; not that there can
be any church without forgiveness of sins, but because the Lord has not
promised his mercy save in the communion of saints. Therefore, our first
entrance into the Church and the kingdom of God is by forgiveness of
sins, without which we have no covenant nor union with God. For thus he
speaks by the Prophet, “In that day will I make a covenant for them with
the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the
creeping things of the ground: and I will break the bow, and the sword,
and the battle, out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.
And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto
me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving-kindness, and in
mercies” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p67.2"></span>[Hos.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p67.2"></span>).
We see in what way the Lord reconciles us to himself by his mercy. So in
another passage, where he foretells that the people whom he had
scattered in anger will again be gathered together, “I will cleanse them
from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p67.3"></span>[Jer.
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p67.3"></span>). Wherefore, our initiation into the
fellowship of the Church is, by the symbol of ablution, to teach us that
we have no admission into the family of God, unless by his goodness our
impurities are previously washed away.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p68"></span>21. Nor by remission of sins does the
Lord only once for all elect and admit us into the Church, but by the
same means he preserves and defends us in it. For what would it avail us
to receive a pardon of which we were afterwards to have no use? That the
mercy of the Lord would be vain and delusive if only granted once, all
the godly can bear witness; for there is none who is not conscious,
during his whole life, of many infirmities which stand in need of divine
mercy. And truly it is not without cause that the Lord promises this
gift specially to his own household, nor in vain that he orders the same
message of reconciliation to be daily delivered to them. Wherefore, as
during our whole lives we carry about with us the remains of sin, we
could not continue in the Church one single moment were we not sustained
by the uninterrupted grace of God in forgiving our sins. On the other
hand, the Lord has called his people to eternal salvation, and therefore
they ought to consider that pardon for their sins is always ready. Hence
let us surely hold that if we are admitted and ingrafted into the body
of the Church, the forgiveness of sins has been bestowed, and is daily
bestowed on us, in divine liberality, through the intervention of
Christ’s merits, and the sanctification of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p69"></span>22. To impart this blessing to us, the
keys have been given to the Church (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p69.1"></span>[Mt.
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p69.1"></span>; 18:18). For when Christ gave the command to
the apostles, and conferred the power of forgiving sins, he not merely
intended that they should loose the sins of those who should be
converted from impiety to the faith of Christ;52  <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) but, moreover, that they should
perpetually perform this office among believers. This Paul teaches, when
he says that the embassy of reconciliation has been committed to the
ministers of the Church, that they may ever and anon in the name of
Christ exhort the people to be reconciled to God (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p70.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p70.1"></span>). Therefore, in the communion of saints our
sins are constantly forgiven by the ministry of the Church, when
presbyters or bishops, to whom the office has been committed, confirm
pious consciences, in the hope of pardon and forgiveness by the promises
of the gospel, and that as well in public as in private, as the case
requires. For there are many who, from their infirmity, stand in need of
special pacification, and Paul declares that he testified of the grace
of Christ not only in the public assembly, but from house to house,
reminding each individually of the doctrine of salvation (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p70.2"></span>[Acts
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#021)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p70.2"></span>).
Three things are here to be observed. First, Whatever be the holiness
which the children of God possess, it is always under the condition,
that so long as they dwell in a mortal body, they cannot stand before
God without forgiveness of sins. Secondly, This benefit is so peculiar
to the Church, that we cannot enjoy it unless we continue in the
communion of the Church. Thirdly, It is dispensed to us by the ministers
and pastors of the Church, either in the preaching of the Gospel or the
administration of the Sacraments, and herein is especially manifested
the power of the keys, which the Lord has bestowed on the company of the
faithful. Accordingly, let each of us consider it to be his duty to seek
forgiveness of sins only where the Lord has placed it. Of the public
reconciliation which relates to discipline, we shall speak at the proper
place.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p71"></span>23. But since those frantic spirits of
whom I have spoken attempt to rob the Church of this the only anchor of
salvation, consciences must be more firmly strengthened against this
pestilential opinion. The Novatians, in ancient times, agitated the
Churches with this dogma, but in our day, not unlike the Novatians are
some of the Anabaptists, who have fallen into the same delirious dreams.
For they pretend that in baptism, the people of God are regenerated to a
pure and angelical life, which is not polluted by any carnal
defilements. But if a man sin after baptism, they leave him nothing
except the inexorable judgment of God. In short, to the sinner who has
lapsed after receiving grace they give no hope of pardon, because they
admit no other forgiveness of sins save that by which we are first
regenerated. But although no falsehood is more clearly refuted by
Scripture, yet as these men find means of imposition (as Novatus also of
old had very many followers), let us briefly show how much they rave, to
the destruction both of themselves and others. In the first place, since
by the command of our Lord the saints daily repeat this prayer, “Forgive
us our debts” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p71.1"></span>[Mt.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p71.1"></span>), they confess that they are debtors. Nor do
they ask in vain; for the Lord has only enjoined them to ask what he
will give. Nay, while he has declared that the whole prayer will be
heard by his Father, he has sealed this absolution with a peculiar
promise. What more do we wish? The Lord requires of his saints
confession of sins during their whole lives, and that without ceasing,
and promises pardon. How presumptuous, then, to exempt them from sin, or
when they have stumbled, to exclude them altogether from grace? Then
whom does he enjoin us to pardon seventy and seven times? Is it not our
brethren? (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p71.2"></span>[Mt.
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p71.2"></span>) And why has he so enjoined but that we may
imitate his clemency? He therefore pardons not once or twice only, but
as often as, under a sense of our faults, we feel alarmed, and sighing
call upon him.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p72"></span>24. And to begin almost with the very
first commencement of the Church: the Patriarchs had been circumcised,
admitted to a participation in the covenant, and doubtless instructed by
their father’s care in righteousness and integrity, when they conspired
to commit fratricide. The crime was one which the most abandoned robbers
would have abominated.52  <span id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527) At
length, softened by the remonstrances of Judah, they sold him; this also
was intolerable cruelty. Simeon and Levi took a nefarious revenge on the
sons of Sychem, one, too, condemned by the judgment of their father.
Reuben, with execrable lust, defiled his father’s bed. Judah, when
seeking to commit whoredom, sinned against the law of nature with his
daughter-in-law. But so far are they from being expunged from the chosen
people, that they are rather raised to be its heads. What, moreover, of
David? when on the throne of righteousness, with what iniquity did he
make way for blind lust, by the shedding of innocent blood? He had
already been regenerated, and, as one of the regenerated, received
distinguished approbation from the Lord. But he perpetrated a crime at
which even the Gentiles would have been horrified, and yet obtained
pardon. And not to dwell on special examples, all the promises of divine
mercy extant in the Law and the Prophets are so many proofs that the
Lord is ready to forgive the offences of his people. For why does Moses
promise a future period, when the people who had fallen into rebellion
should return to the Lord? “Then the Lord thy God will turn thy
captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather
thee from all the nations whither the Lord thy God hath scattered thee”
(<span id="iv.iv.ii-p73.3"></span>[Deut.
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p73.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p74"></span>25. But I am unwilling to begin an
enumeration which never could be finished. The prophetical books are
filled with similar promises, offering mercy to a people covered with
innumerable transgressions. What crime is more heinous than rebellion?
It is styled divorce between God and the Church, and yet, by his
goodness, it is surmounted. They say, “If a man put away his wife, and
she go from him, and become another man’s, shall he return unto her
again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? But thou hast played the
harlot with many lovers; yet return again unto me, saith the Lord.”
“Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause
mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I
will not keep anger for ever” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p74.1"></span>[Jer.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p74.1"></span>).
And surely he could not have a different feeling who declares, “I have
no pleasure in the death of him that dieth;” “Wherefore turn yourselves,
and live ye” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p74.2"></span>[Ezek.
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p74.2"></span>).
Accordingly, when Solomon dedicated the temple, one of the uses for
which it was destined was, that prayers offered up for the pardon of
sins might there be heard. “If they sin against thee (for there is no
man that sinneth not), and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to
the enemy, so that they carry them away captive unto the land of the
enemy, far or near; yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land
whither they were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication
unto thee in the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We
have sinned, and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness; and
so return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in
the land of their enemies which led them away captive, and pray unto
thee towards their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city
which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name:
then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy
dwelling-place, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people that
have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have
transgressed against thee” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p74.3"></span>[1 Kings
8:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p74.3"></span>). Nor in vain in the Law did God ordain a
daily sacrifice for sins. Had he not foreseen that his people were
constantly to labour under the disease of sin, he never would have
appointed these remedies.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p75"></span>26. Did the advent of Christ, by which
the fulness of grace was displayed, deprive believers of this privilege
of supplicating for the pardon of their sins? If they offended against
the Lord, were they not to obtain any mercy? What were it but to say
that Christ came not for the salvation, but for the destruction of his
people, if the divine indulgence in pardoning sin, which was constantly
provided for the saints under the Old Testament, is now declared to have
been taken away? But if we give credit to the Scriptures, when
distinctly proclaiming that in Christ alone the grace and
loving-kindness of the Lord have fully appeared, the riches of his mercy
been poured out, reconciliation between God and man accomplished (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p75.1"></span>[Tit.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p75.1"></span>;
3:4; <span id="iv.iv.ii-p75.2"></span>[2 Tim.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p75.2"></span>),
let us not doubt that the clemency of our heavenly Father, instead of
being cut off or curtailed, is in much greater exuberance. Nor are
proofs of this wanting. Peter, who had heard our Saviour declare that he
who did not confess his name before men would be denied before the
angels of God, denied him thrice in one night, and not without
execration; yet he is not denied pardon (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p75.3"></span>[Mark
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p75.3"></span>). Those who lived disorderly among the
Thessalonians, though chastised, are still invited to repentance (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p75.4"></span>[2 Thess.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p75.4"></span>).
Not even is Simon Magus thrown into despair. He is rather told to hope,
since Peter invites him to have recourse to prayer (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p75.5"></span>[Acts
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p75.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p76"></span>27. What shall we say to the fact, that
occasionally whole churches have been implicated in the grossest sins,
and yet Paul, instead of giving them over to destruction, rather
mercifully extricated them? The defection of the Galatians was no
trivial fault; the Corinthians were still less excusable, the iniquities
prevailing among them being more numerous and not less heinous, yet
neither are excluded from the mercy of the Lord. Nay, the very persons
who had sinned above others in uncleanness and fornication are expressly
invited to repentance. The covenant of the Lord remains, and ever will
remain, inviolable, that covenant which he solemnly ratified with Christ
the true Solomon, and his members, in these words: “If his children
forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my statutes,
and keep not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression with
the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless, my
loving-kindness will I not utterly take from him” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p76.1"></span>[Ps.
89:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p76.1"></span>). In short, by the very arrangement of the
Creed, we are reminded that forgiveness of sins always resides in the
Church of Christ, for after the Church is as it were constituted,
forgiveness of sins is subjoined.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p77"></span>28. Some persons who have somewhat more
discernment, seeing that the dogma of Novatus is so clearly refuted in
Scripture, do not make every fault unpardonable, but that voluntary
transgression of the Law into which a man falls knowingly and willingly.
Those who speak thus allow pardon to those sins only that have been
committed through ignorance. But since the Lord has in the Law ordered
some sacrifices to be offered in expiation of the voluntary sins of
believers, and others to redeem sins of ignorance (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p77.1"></span>[Lev.
4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p77.1"></span>),
how perverse is it to concede no expiation to a voluntary sin? I hold
nothing to be more plain, than that the one sacrifice of Christ avails
to remit the voluntary sins of believers, the Lord having attested this
by carnal sacrifices as emblems. Then how is David, who was so well
instructed in the Law, to be excused by ignorance? Did David, who was
daily punishing it in others, not know how heinous a crime murder and
adultery was? Did the patriarchs deem fratricide a lawful act? Had the
Corinthians made so little proficiency as to imagine that God was
pleased with lasciviousness, impurity, whoredom, hatred, and strife? Was
Peter, after being so carefully warned, ignorant how heinous it was to
forswear his Master? Therefore, let us not by our malice shut the door
against the divine mercy, when so benignly manifested.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p78"></span>29. I am not unaware, that by the sins
which are daily forgiven to believers, ancient writers have understood
the lighter errors which creep in through the infirmity of the flesh,
while they thought that the formal repentance which was then exacted for
more heinous crimes was no more to be repeated than Baptism. This
opinion is not to be viewed as if they wished to plunge those into
despair who had fallen from their first repentance, or to extenuate
those errors as if they were of no account before God. For they knew
that the saints often stumble through unbelief, that superfluous oaths
occasionally escape them, that they sometimes boil with anger, nay,
break out into open invectives, and labour, besides, under other evils,
which are in no slight degree offensive to the Lord; but they so called
them to distinguish them from public crimes, which came under the
cognisance of the Church, and produced much scandal.52  <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) The great difficulty they had in
pardoning those who had done something that called for ecclesiastical
animadversion, was not because they thought it difficult to obtain
pardon from the Lord, but by this severity they wished to deter others
from rushing precipitately into crimes, which, by their demerit, would
alienate them from the communion of the Church. Still the word of the
Lord, which here ought to be our only rule, certainly prescribes greater
moderation, since it teaches that the rigour of discipline must not be
stretched so far as to overwhelm with grief the individual for whose
benefit it should specially be designed (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p79.1"></span>[2 Cor.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p79.1"></span>),
as we have above discoursed at greater length.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_512"></span>[513](inst081.htm#fr_512) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p35"></span>103 D103 Here Calvin provides a basis for
the concept, “the invisible Church.” The term “invisible” refers to the
fact that a knowledge of those who are truly members of Christ’s body is
known to God alone and cannot with certainty be ascertained by men
(except for themselves, through their effectual calling). (see also
section 7)

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](inst081.htm#fr_513) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p38"></span>104 D104 Here Calvin employs the term,
“the visible Church.” (He also calls it “the external Church” in the
first sentence of section 3). The expression, “visible Church” refers to
the Church as it is seen by the eyes of fallible men. From this
standpoint, since only the Lord “knows them that are His,” it is
possible to have (and sometimes discover) deceived persons and
hypocrites in the church—those who are not truly members of Christ’s
body. This mixed state of affairs forms part of the warrant for Church
discipline. (see also section 7)

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](inst081.htm#fr_514) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p43"></span>105 D105 In this section (7), Calvin
specifically distinguishes between the invisible and the visible Church
(note first line for term “visible”). The invisible Church is the Church
as it really is before God; the visible Church is the Church as it
appears to man.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](inst081.htm#fr_515) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p45"></span>106 D106 Here Calvin enumerates the
criteria by which we are to judge who are to be acknowledged as members
of the visible Church. The presence of these criteria does not, of
course, give us full certainty as to who are members of Christ’s body,
the invisible church (such certainty rests with God alone); but the
absence of them leaves us with no bases upon which to judge who are to
be regarded as members of the visible Church.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](inst081.htm#fr_516) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p47"></span>107 D107 Here Calvin distinguishes
between the Church universal (the visible church throughout the world),
and local churches and individuals (the visible Church manifested in
particular places).

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](inst081.htm#fr_517) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p51"></span>16 516 French, “Pour donner exemple, s’il
advenoit qu’une Eglise tint que les ames etant separées des corps
fussent transferés au ciel incontinent: une autre, sans oser determiner
du lieu pens’t semplement qu’elles vivent en Dieu: et que telle
diversité fut sans contention et sans opiniatreté pourquoy se
diviseroient elles d’ensemble?”—To give an example, should one church
happen to hold that the soul when separated from the body is forthwith
transported to heaven, and should another, without venturing to
determine the place, simply think that it lives in God, and should such
diversity be without contention and obstinacy, why should they be
divided?

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](inst081.htm#fr_518) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p52"></span>17 517 French, “La doctrine principale de
nostre salut;”—the fundamental doctrine of our salvation.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](inst081.htm#fr_519) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p53"></span>18 518 French, “Et aussi que demeurant en
icelle nous ne troublions point la police ni la discipline;”—and also
that, remaining in it, we disturb not its order and discipline.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](inst081.htm#fr_520) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p55"></span>19 519 French. “Comme s’ils eussent ete
quelques anges de Paradis;”—as if they had bean some angels of Paradise.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](inst081.htm#fr_521) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p57"></span>20 520 l Cor. 1:11; 3:3; 5:l; 6:7; 9:l;
15:12.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](inst081.htm#fr_522) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p58"></span>21 521 French, “Toutesfois Sainct Paul
recognoissoit entre eux quelque Eglise;”—yet St Paul recognised some
church among them.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](inst081.htm#fr_523) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p60"></span>22 522 See Calvin, Lib. de Cœna Domini;
item, Instructio adv. Anabapt.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](inst081.htm#fr_524) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p62.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p63"></span>108 D108 Calvin here asserts that, in all
ages, there has been a Church, and that this Church will continue until
the final consummation of all things. This emphasis, of course, does not
agree with the view that God dealt with the nation of Israel in the Old
Testament, but now deals with the Church; nor does it comport with the
view that Old Testament believers cannot be said to have been in the
Church, since the Church began at Pentecost. Calvin views believers of
all ages and dispensations as members of Christ’s Church.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](inst081.htm#fr_525) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p67"></span>23 523 Latin, “Jactant.”—French, “Ces
grands correcteurs leur reprochent;”—those great reformers upbraid them.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](inst081.htm#fr_526) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p70"></span>24 524 French, “Ce n’a pas eté seulement
afin qu’ils deliassent ceux qui si convertiroient alla foy Christienne,
et qu’ils fissent cela pour une fois.”—It was not only that they might
loose those who should be converted to the Christian faith, and that
they should do so once for all

<span id="fn_527"></span>[528](inst081.htm#fr_527) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p73"></span>25 525 <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p73.1"></span>[Gen.
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p73.1"></span>;
34:25; 35:22; 38:16; <span id="iv.iv.ii-p73.2"></span>[2 Sam.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#004),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p73.2"></span>;
xii 13.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[529](inst081.htm#fr_528) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p79"></span>26 526 French, “Ils usoient de cette
maniere de parler afin de mettre difference autre les fautes privees, et
les crimes publiques qui emportoient grands scandales en l’Eglise.”—They
used this manner of speech, in order to make a difference between
private faults and the public crimes which brought great scandals into
the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 2. - COMPARISON BETWEEN THE FALSE CHURCH AND THE
TRUE.](inst082)
