[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fab004)  [Next](fab006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

# CHAPTER III.

### SOURCES OF THE EARLY HISTORY OF WALES.

IN order to discriminate between what is true and what is fabulous in
the early history of Wales as presented to us in the historic literature
subsequent to the twelfth century, and to disentangle the fragments of
real history contained in them, so as to enable us to form something
like a true conception of its leading features, it is necessary to test
it by comparing it with the statements in contemporary authorities of
other countries, and by referring to such earlier native documents as
have come down to us. Of the latter class there are only three, and it
is requisite that we should form a right conception of their authority.
The first are the works of Gildas, who wrote in Latin. They are usually
considered as consisting of two pieces, the *Historia* and the
*Epistola*, but they may be viewed as forming one treatise. Questions
have been raised upon the lives of Gildas, as to whether there was one
or two persons of the name--an earlier and a later; but, viewing the
question in its literary aspect, it is of little consequence, for the
treatise is evidently the work of one man, and there is evidence in the
work itself of his date. The writer states that he was

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

born in the year in which the battle of Badon was, fought, and that he
wrote forty-four years after. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)
According to the oldest Welsh annals, the battle of Badon was fought in
the year 516, which would place the composition of the treatise in the
year 560; and the Irish annals record the death of Gildas in 570, ten
years after.

Only three MSS. of Gildas are known to have existed, and the oldest of
these has since perished. It was in the Cottonian. Library (Vit. A.
vi.), but fortunately the text of Josseline's edition of Gildas in 1568
was printed from it, and, according to Mr. Petrie, so correctly that it
may be taken as representing it. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) The
other two MSS. are in the public library at Cambridge (Dd, i. 17 and Ff,
i. 27)--the one of the end of the fourteenth or beginning of fifteenth
centuries, and the other of the thirteenth century. The first is said to
have belonged to the monks of Glastonbury, and the second to the monks
of Durham. This latter MS. inserts various passages which are not to be
found in the other MSS. Thus the other MSS. mention that the Saxons were
invited "superbo tyranno," and the Durham MS. inserts the words,
"Gurthrigerno Britannorum duce." Again, where the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

other MSS. mention the "Obsessio Badonici montis," the Durham MS.
inserts "qui prope Sabrinum ostium habetur." The work of Gildas had
early found its way to the Northumbrian monks, as Bede evidently uses it
in his history, and they are probably answerable for the additions
contained in this MS. It has been remarked that the account given by
Gildas of the departure of the Romans from Britain, and the events which
followed, are inconsistent with the statements of contemporary Greek and
Roman authors; but this appears to me to arise solely from Gildas having
misplaced the only document directly quoted by him, which has forced
upon his narrative a chronology inconsistent with the true sequence of
events, and which, unfortunately, has likewise influenced Bede's
history. Gildas narrates two devastations by the Picts and Scots, after
each of which they were driven back by the Roman troops; then he states
the final departure of the Roman army, followed by the occupation of the
territory between the walls by the enemy. When he quotes this document,
which purports to be a letter by the Britons, addressed "Actio ter
consuli," imploring assistance against the "*Barbari*, who drive them to
the sea, while the sea throws them back on the Barbari." He understands
by these "Barbari" the Picts and Scots, and places after this latter the
invitation to the Saxons, who first drive back the Picts and then unite
with them to subjugate the Britons. Now the exact date when this letter
must have been written can be at once ascertained, for Aetius was consul
for the third time in

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 446, and the dates of the other events have been
fixed in accordance with this; but while this postdates these events
when compared with the other authorities, the sequence is the same, with
the single exception of the place occupied by this letter. We know from
Zosimus that the Roman army really left finally in 409. We see, from
Constantius' *Life of St. Germanius* that the Saxons had already, in
alliance with the Picts, attacked the Britons in 429; and Prosper, a
contemporary authority, tells us that in 441 "Britanniæ usque ad hoc
tempus variis cladibus evenitibusque latæ, in ditionem Saxonum
rediguntur." It is impossible to mistake this language. The Saxons must
have completed their conquest six years before the letter was written,
and it follows that the "Barbari" to which it refers must have meant the
Saxons, and that it was an appeal to the Romans to assist them against
the Saxon invaders. The language of the letter, too, which seems
exaggerated and inapplicable to the incursions of the Picts and Scots
from the north, is much more natural if directed against the steady and
permanent encroachment of the Saxons from the east. Take the letter from
its present place, and place it after the narrative of the Saxons
turning against the Britons and attacking them, and the order of events
at once harmonises with the other authorities, while the necessity for
postdating them in Gildas no longer exists. It was no doubt his
misapprehending the meaning of this document, and misplacing it, which
led to the arrival of the Saxons being supposed to have

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

taken place after it, and to the date of 447, the succeeding year, being
affixed to it by Bede.

The second document is the work usually termed Nennius' *History of the
Britons*, and it is very necessary that we should form a right
conception of this work, and a correct estimate of its authority. The
*Origines*, of Isidorus of Seville, who died in 636, and which must have
been compiled some considerable time earlier, soon became widely known,
and led to works being written in many countries upon their early
history, in which the traditions of the people were engrafted upon it.
Either in the same century, or the beginning of the next, a work was
compiled in Britain, termed *Historia Britonum*. The author of it is
unknown, but the original work appears to have been written in Welsh and
translated into Latin. It seems to have acquired popularity at once, and
become the basis upon which numerous additions were made from time to
time. The original work appears to have belonged more to the North than
to Wales, or at least the latter part of it, as the events of that part
are mainly connected with the North, and it terminates with the
foundation of the Anglic kingdom of Northumbria by Ida. Soon after was
added what is termed the *Genealogia*, being the descent of the Saxon
kings of the different small kingdoms; but here too Northumbria
predominates, and most of the events mentioned in it are connected with
its history. It must have been compiled shortly after 738, as that is
the latest date to which the history of any of the Saxon

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

kingdoms is brought down; and it too bears the marks of being a
translation into Latin from Welsh. An edition of the *Historia* seems to
have been made in 823, the fourth year of Mervyn Frych, king of Wales,
by Marc the Anchorite, when that part at least of the text which
contains portions of the life of Germanus, and probably the legend of
St. Patrick, must have been inserted. Another edition in 858 bears the
name of Nennius. The original work was very early attributed to Gildas,
but latterly the whole work bore the name of Nennius.

The oldest MSS. are of the tenth century, and are three in number. They
represent two different editions of the work. The Vatican MS. bears the
name of Marc the Anchorite, and contains the date of 946, and the fifth
year of King Edmund. It is remarkable enough that this was the year in
which that king conquered Cambria, and made it over to Malcolm, king of
Scots. It would seem as if this conquest had brought it first under the
notice of the Saxons, and this conjecture is further strengthened by the
fact that the Paris MS. exactly corresponds with this, and that this MS.
alone, of all the numerous MSS. which have come down to us, has the
names, of the Saxon kings in the Saxon and not in the Welsh form.

The MS. which represents the other edition is one in the British Museum
(Harl. 3856). It contains in it the date of 796, but there are additions
to it not found in any other MS., which must have been compiled in the
year 977. These, are, *first*, a later chronicle of Welsh

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

events, from the year 444, and though the last event recorded is in 954,
the "anni" have been written down to 977; the second is a collection of
Welsh genealogies, commencing with that of Owen, son of Howel dda, king
of South Wales, who reigned from 946 to 985,--both in the paternal and
maternal line,--from which we may infer that the writer was connected
with South Wales. The Chronicle was made the basis of two much later
chronicles, in which the events are brought down to 1286 and 1288, and
the whole have been edited under the name of *Annales Cambriæ*, but the
two later chronicles have in reality no claim to be incorporated with
it, as the differences are not various readings of one text, but later
additions. The great value of this Chronicle arises from the fact that
it was compiled a century and a half before the Bruts were written, and
it detracts from that value to add to it later additions taken from
chronicles compiled as many years after the Bruts, and which are
obviously derived from them. It is also the source from which many of
the entries in the Welsh *Brut y Saeson* and *Brut y Tywysogion* have
been translated. It is obvious that both the Chronicle and the Welsh
genealogies were additions intended to illustrate the *Genealogia*
attached to the *Historia Britonum*, and to bring the Welsh history down
to the date of the compiler. The Chronicle inserts the events in the
*Genealogia* in the very words of the latter; and when the *Genealogia*
enumerates four Welsh kings as fighting against one of the kings of
Bernicia, the Welsh genealogies give the pedigree of these four kings,
in the same order.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

The *Historia Britonum* was translated into Irish by *Giollacaomhan*, an
Irish Sennachy, who died in 1072, and various Irish and Pictish
additions were incorporated in the translation.

The work, therefore, as it existed prior to the twelfth century, may be
said to consist of six parts: *First*, The original nucleus of the work
termed *Historia Britonum*; *second*, The *Genealogia*, added soon after
738; *third*, The *Memorabilia*; *fourth*, The Legends of St. Germanus
and of St. Patrick, added by Mare in 823, the latter being merely
attached to his edition, and incorporated in that of Nennius; *fifth*,
The Chronicle and the Welsh genealogies, added in 977; and, *sixth*, The
Irish and Pictish additions, by Giollacaomhan. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) The MSS. of Nennius amount to twenty-eight
in number; and of the later MSS. several seem to have been connected
with Durham. To the monks of Durham many interpolations may be traced
very similar to those in Gildas: in some MSS. they are written on the
margin, and in others incorporated into the text. Thus, when the Mare
Fresicum is mentioned, the Durham commentator adds, "quod inter nos
Scotosque est." The result of my study of this work is to place its
authority higher than is usually done; and, used with care and with due
regard to the alterations made from

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

time to time, I believe it to contain a valuable summary of early
tradition, as well as fragments of real history, which are not to be
found elsewhere.

The third native authority prior to the twelfth century is *The Ancient
Laws and Institutes of Wales*. They were published by the Record
Commission of England in 1841, and the oldest of them, the Laws of Howel
dda, are of the tenth century.

Such are the native materials upon which, along with the old Roman and
Saxon authorities, any attempt to grasp the leading features of the
early history of Wales must be based.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[34:1](fab005.htm#fr_3) Bede understood this
well-known passage as implying that the battle of Badon was fought
forty-four years after the arrival of the Saxons; but it is now
generally admitted that this is a mistaken construction of the passage,
and that the true import is as above, to which I also give my adhesion.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[34:2](fab005.htm#fr_4) Josseline says it had
belonged to Christ Church, Canterbury, and was 600 years old.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[40:1](fab005.htm#fr_5) The original work will be
quoted under the title of the *Historia Britonum*, the second portion
under that of the *Genealogia*, or both generally as Nennius, and the
fifth as the Chronicle and Genealogies of 977. The Irish Annals will be
quoted from the *Chronicles of the Picts and Scots*, recently published,
being the first of the series of Scottish Record publications.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. State of the Country in the Sixth Century, and its
History Prior To A.D. 560](fab006)
