[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fab010)  [Next](fab012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

# CHAPTER IX.

### THE CELTIC TOPOGRAPHY OF SCOTLAND, AND THE DIALECTIC DIFFERENCES INDICATED BY IT.

THE etymology of the names of places in a country is either a very
important element in fixing the ethnology of its inhabitants, or it is a
snare and a delusion, just according as the subject is treated. When
such names are analysed according to fixed laws, based upon sound
philological principles and a comprehensive observation of facts, they
afford results both important and trustworthy; but if treated
empirically, and founded upon resemblance of sounds alone, they become a
mere field for wild conjectures and fanciful etymologies, leading to no
certain results. The latter is the ordinary process to which they are
subjected. The natural tendency of the. human mind is to a mere phonetic
etymology of names, both of persons and of places, in which the sounds
of the name of the place appear to resemble the sounds in certain words
of a certain language, the language from which the etymology is derived
being selected upon no sound philological grounds, but from arbitrary
considerations merely.

Unhappily, an etymology founded upon mere resemblance of sounds has
hitherto characterised all

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

systematic attempts to analyse the topography of Scotland, and to deduce
ethnologic results from it. Prior to the publication of the *Statistical
Account of Scotland* in 1792, it may be said, that no general attempt
had been made to explain the meaning of the names of places in Scotland,
or to indicate the language from which they were derived. We find
occasionally, in old lives of the saints and in charters connected with
church lands, that names of places occurring in them are explained; and
these interpretations are very valuable, as indicating what may be
termed the common tradition of their meaning and derivation at an early
period. Of very different value are a few similar derivations in the
fabulous histories of Boece, Buchanan, and John Major, which are usually
mere fanciful conjectures of pedantry.

The first impetus to anything like a general etymologising of Scottish
topography was given when Sir John Sinclair projected the *Statistical
Account of Scotland*. In the schedule of questions which he issued in
1790 to the clergy of the Church of Scotland, the first two questions
were as, follows:--

1\. What is the ancient and modern. name of the parish?

2\. What is the origin and etymology of the name?

This set every minister thinking what was the meaning of the name of his
parish. The publication of the *Poems of Ossian*; and the controversy
which followed, had tended greatly to identify national feeling and the
history of the country with

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

literature and language, and, with few exceptions, the etymology was
sought for in that language. The usual formula of reply was, "The name
of this parish is derived from the Gaelic," and then followed a Gaelic
sentence resembling in sound the name of the parish, and supposed
admirably to express its characteristics, though the unfortunate
minister is often obliged to confess that the parish is remarkably free
from the characteristics expressed by the Gaelic derivation of its name.
These etymologies are usually suggested irrespective entirely of any
known facts as to the history or population of the parish, and are
purely phonetic.

After the publication of the Statistical Account, Gaelic was in the
ascendant as the source of all Scottish etymologies, till the
publication of Chalmers' *Caledonia* in 1807. John Pinkerton had indeed
tried to direct the current of popular etymology into a Teutonic
channel, but his attempts to find a meaning in Gothic dialects for words
plainly Celtic were so unsuccessful that he failed even to gain a
hearing. Chalmers was more fortunate. His theory was that a large
proportion of the names of places in Scotland are to be derived from the
Welsh, and indicate an original Cymric population. And this he has
worked out with much labour and pains. In doing so, he was the first to
attempt to show evidence of the dialectic difference between Welsh and
Gaelic pervading the names of places, and to discriminate between them;
but for almost all the names of places in the Lowlands of

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Scotland he furnishes a Welsh etymology, which,
like his predecessors the Scottish clergy, he supposes to be expressive
of the characteristics of the locality. His theory has, in the main,
commanded the assent of subsequent writers, and is usually assumed to
be, on the whole, a correct representation of the state of the fact. Yet
his system was as purely one of a phonetic etymology, founded upon mere
resemblance of sounds, is those of his predecessors. The MSS. left by
George Chalmers show how he set about preparing his etymologies, and we
now know the process he went through. He had himself no knowledge of
either branch of the Celtic language, but he sent his list of names to
Dr. Owen Pughe; and that most ingenious of all Welsh lexicographers, who
was capable of reducing every word in every known language in the world
to a Welsh original, sent him a list of Welsh renderings of each word,
varying from twelve to eighteen in number, out of which Chalmers
selected the one which seemed to him most promising. His other
etymologies, are equally founded on a mere resemblance of sounds between
the modern form of the word and the modern Welsh, as those of the clergy
in the Statistical Account were between the modern form of the word and
the modern Gaelic.

That system of interpreting the names of places, which I have called
phonetic etymology, is, however, utterly unsound. It can lead only to
fanciful renderings, and is incapable of yielding any results that are
either certain or important. Names of places are, in

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

fact, sentences or combinations of words originally expressive of the
characteristics of the place named, and applied to it by the people who
then occupied the country, in the language spoken by them at the time,
and are necessarily subject to the same philological laws which governed
that spoken language. The same rules must be applied in interpreting a
local name as in rendering a sentence of the language. That system,
therefore, of phonetic etymology which seeks for the interpretation of a
name in mere resemblance of sound to words in an existing language,
overlooks entirely the fact that such names were fixed to certain
localities at a much earlier period, when the language spoken by those
who applied the name must have differed greatly from any spoken language
of the present day.

Since the local names were deposited in the country, the language itself
from which they were derived has gone through a process of change,
corruption, and decay. Words have altered their forms--sounds have
varied--forms have become obsolete, and new forms have arisen, and the
language in its present state no longer represents that form of it which
existed when the local nomenclature was formed. The topographical
expressions, too, go through a process of change and corruption, till
they diverge still further from the spoken form of the language as it
now exists. This process of change and corruption in the local names
varies according to the change in the population. When the population
has remained unchanged, and

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

the language in which the names were applied is still the spoken
language of the district, the names either remain in their original
shape, in which case they represent an older form of the same language,
or else they undergo a change analogous to that of the spoken language.
Obsolete names disappear as obsolete words drop out of the language, and
are replaced by more modern vocables. Where there has been a change in
the population, and the older race are replaced by a people speaking a
kindred dialect, the names of places are subjected to the dialectic
change which characterises the language. There are some striking
instances of this where a British form has been superseded by a Gaelic
form, as, for instance, Kirkintulloch, the old name of which, Nennius
informs us, was Caerpentalloch, *kin* being the Gaelic equivalent of the
Welsh *pen*; Penicuik, the old name of which was Peniacop; Kincaid, the
old name of which was Pencoed.

When, however, the new language introduced by the change of population
is one of a different family entirely, then the old name is stereotyped
in the shape in which it was when the one language superseded the other,
becomes unintelligible to the people, and undergoes a process of change
and corruption of a purely phonetic character, which often entirely
alters the aspect of the name. In the former cases it is chiefly
necessary to apply the philologic laws of the language to its analysis.
In the latter, which is the case with the Celtic topology of the low
country, it is necessary,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

before attempting to analyse the name, to ascertain its most ancient
form, which often differs greatly from its more modern aspect.

It is with this class of names we have mainly to do, as presenting the
phenomena I am anxious to investigate.

When the topography of a country is examined, its local names will be
found, as a general rule, to consist of what may be called generic terms
and specific terms. What I mean by generic terms are those parts of the
name which are common to a large number of them, and are descriptive of
the general character of the place named; and by specific terms, those
other parts of the name which have been added to distinguish one place
from another. The generic terms are usually general words for river,
mountain, valley, plain, etc.; the specific terms, those words added to
distinguish one river or mountain from another. Thus, in the Gaelic name
Glenmore, *glen* is the generic term, and is found in a numerous class
of words; *more*, great, the specific, a distinguished term, to
distinguish it from another called Glenbeg. In the Saxon term Oakfield,
field is the generic term, and oak the specific, to distinguish it from
Broomfield, etc.

When the names of places are applied to purely natural objects, such as
rivers, mountains, etc., which remain unchanged by the hand of man, the
names applied by the original inhabitants are usually adopted by their
successors, though speaking a different language;

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

but the generic term frequently undergoes a phonetic corruption, as in
the Lowlands, where Aber has in many cases become Ar, as in Arbroath,
Arbuthnot; Ballin has become Ban, as in Bandoch; Pettin has become Pen,
as in Pendriech; Pol has become Pow; and Traver has become Tar and Tra,
as in Tranent.

On the other hand, where the districts have been occupied by different
branches of the same race, speaking different dialects, the generic
terms exhibit the dialectic differences when the sounds of the word are
such as to require the dialectic change; thus in Welsh and Gaelic:--

Pen and Ceann--a head,

Gwynn and Fionn--white,

show the phonetic difference between these dialects.

The comparison of the generic terms which pervade the topography of a
country affords a very important means of indicating the race of its
early inhabitants, and discriminating between the different branches of
the race, to which the respective portions of it belong. It was early
observed that there existed in the Celtic generic terms a difference
which seemed to indicate dialectic distinction. Even in the Old
Statistical Account, the minister of the parish of Kirkcaldy remarks--

"To the Gaelic language, a great proportion of the names of places in
the neighbourhood, and indeed through the whole, of Fife, may
unquestionably be traced. All names of places beginning with Bal, Col or
Cul, Dal, Drum, Dun, Inch, Inver, Auchter, Kil, Kin, Glen, Mon, and
Strath, are of Gaelic origin. Those beginning with Aber and Pit are
supposed to be Pictish,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

names, and do not occur beyond the territory which the Picts are thought
to have inhabited,"

Chalmers states it still more broadly and minutely. He says--

"Of those words which form the chief compounds in many of the Celtic
names of places in the Lowlands, some are exclusively British, as Aber,
Llan, Caer, Pen, Cors, and others; some are common to both British and
Irish, as Carn, Craig, Crom, Bre, Dal, Eaglis, Glas, Inis, Rinn, Ros,
Strath, Tor, Tom, Glen; and many more are significant only in the
Scoto-Irish or Gaelic, as Ach, Ald, Ard, Aird, Auchter, Bar, Blair, Ben,
Bog, Clach, Corry, Cul, Dun, Drum, Fin, Glac, Inver, Kin, Kil, Knoc,
Larg, Lurg, Lag, Logie, Lead, Letter, Lon, Loch, Meal, Pit, Pol, Stron,
Tullach, Tullie, and others."

This attempt at classification is, however, exceedingly inaccurate. Two
of the words in the first class, Llan and Caer, are common to both
British and Irish; and a large, portion of the third class are
significant in pure Irish, as well as in the Scoto-Irish or Gaelic. No
attempt is made to show, by the geographical distribution of these
words, in what parts of the country the respective elements prevail.

The most popular view of the subject, and that which has recently been
most insisted. in, is the line of demarcation between a Cymric and a
Gaelic population, supposed to be indicated by the occurrence of the
words Aber and Inver. This view has been urged with great force by
Kemble, in his *Anglo-Saxons*; but I may quote the recent work of Mr.
Isaac Taylor, on words and places, as containing a fair statement of the
popular view of the subject:--

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

"To establish the point that the Picts, or the nation, whatever was its
name, that held central Scotland, was Cymric, not Gaelic, we may refer
to the distinction already mentioned between *Ben* and *Pen*. *Ben* is
confined to the west and north; *Pen* to the east and south. *Inver* and
*Aber* are also useful test-words in discriminating between the two
branches of the Celts. The difference between the two words is dialectic
only; the etymology and the meaning is the same--a confluence of waters,
either of two rivers or of a river with the sea. Aber occurs repeatedly
in Brittany, and is found in about fifty Welsh names, as Aberdare,
Abergavenny, Abergele, Aberystwith, and Barmouth, a corruption of
Abermaw. In England we find *Aber*ford in Yorkshire, and *Ber*wick in
Northumberland and Sussex; and it has been thought that the name of the
Humber is a corruption of the same root. *Inver*, the Erse and Gaelic
forms, is common in Ireland, where *Aber* is unknown. Thus, we find
places called Inver in Antrim, Donegal, Mayo, and Invermore in Galway
and in Mayo. In Scotland the *Invers* and *Abers* are distributed in a
curious and instructive manner. If we draw a line across the map from a
point a little south of Inveraray to one a little north of Aberdeen, we
shall find that (with very few exceptions) the *Invers* lie to the north
of the line and the *Abers* to the south of it. This line nearly
coincides with the present southern limit of the Gaelic tongue, and
probably also with the ancient division between the Picts and the
Scots."

Nothing can be more inaccurate than this statement. *Ben* is by no means
confined to the west and north; and as examples of *Pen* he refers,
among others, to the Pentland Hills, Pentland being a Saxon word, and
corrupted from Pectland; and to Pendriech in Perthshire, which is a
corruption from Pittendriech. So far from Inver being common in Ireland,
it is very rare. The *Index locorum* of the *Annals of the Four Masters*
shows only six instances. On the other hand, Aber is not unknown in
Ireland. It certainly

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

existed formerly to some extent in the north of Ireland; and Dr. Reeves
produces four instances near Ballyshannon.

The statement with regard to the distribution of Aber and Inver in
Scotland here is, that there is a line of demarcation which separates
the two words--that, with few exceptions, there is nothing but Invers on
one side of this line, nothing but Abers on the other; and that this
line extends from a point a little south of Inveraray to a point a
little north of Aberdeen. This is the mode in which the distribution of
these two words is usually represented, but nothing can be more
perfectly at variance with the real state of the case. South of this
line there are as many Invers as Abers. In Perthshire, south of the
Highland line, there are nine Abers and eight Invers; in Fifeshire, four
Abers and nine Invers; in Forfar, eight Abers and eight Invers; in
Aberdeenshire, thirteen Abers and twenty six Invers. Again, on the north
side of this supposed line of demarcation, where it is said that Invers
alone should be found, there are twelve Abers, extending across to the
west coast, till they terminate with Abercrossan, now Applecross, in
Ross-shire. In Argyllshire alone there are no Abers. The true picture of
the distribution of these two words is--in. Argyllshire, Invers alone;
in Inverness and Ross shires, Invers and Abers in the proportion of
three to one and two to one; and on the south side of this supposed
line, Abers and Invers in about equal proportions.

Again he, says, quoting Chalmers, "The process of

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

change is shown by an old charter, in which King David grants to the
monks of May 'Inverin qui fuit Aberin.' So Abernethy became Invernethy,
although the old name is now restored." In order to produce the
antithesis of Inverin and Aberin, one letter in this charter has been
altered. The charter is a grant of "Petneweme et Inverin quæ fuit
Averin;" and I have the authority of the first charter antiquary in
Scotland for saying that this construction is impossible: "quæ fuit"
does not, in charter Latin, mean "which was," but "which belonged to,"
and Averin was the name of the previous proprietor of the lands.
Abernethy and Invernethy are not the same place, and the former never
lost its name. Invernethy is at the junction of the Nethy with the Earn,
and Abernethy is a mile further up the river.

When we examine these Abers and Invers more closely, we find, 1*st*,
that in some parts of the country they appear to alternate, is in
Fife--Inverkeithing, Aberdour, Inveryne, Inverlevin, and so forth; 2*d*,
That some of the Invers and Abers have the same specific terms attached
to them, as Abernethy and Invernethy, Aberuchill and Inveruchill,
Abercrumbye and Invercrumbye, Abergeldie and Invergeldie; and 3*d*, That
the Invers are always at the mouth of the river, close to its junction
with another river, or with the sea; and the Abers usually a little
distance up the river where there is a ford. Thus Invernethy is at the
mouth of the Nethy; Abernethy a mile or two above. These and other facts
lead to the conclusion that they

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

are part of the same nomenclature, and belong to the same period and to
the same people.

When we look to the south of the Forth, however, we find this remarkable
circumstance that in Ayrshire, Renfrew, and Lanarkshire, which formed
the possessions of the Strathclyde Britons, and were occupied by a
British people till as late a period as the more northern districts were
occupied by the Picts, there are no Abers at all. What we have,
therefore, is the Scots of Argyll with nothing but Invers, the Picts
with Abers and Invers together, and the Strathclyde Britons with no
Abers.

As a mark of discrimination between races this criterion plainly breaks
down, and the words themselves contain no sounds which, from the
different phonetic laws of the languages, could afford an indication of
a dialectic difference. The truth is, that there were three words
expressive of the junction of one stream with another, and all formed
from an old Celtic word, *Ber*, signifying water. These were *Aber*,
*Inver*, and *Conber* (pronounced in Welsh *cummer*, in Gaelic
*cumber*). These three words were originally common to both branches of
the Celtic as derivations from one common word. In old Welsh poems we
find not only Aber as a living word in Welsh, but Ynver likewise. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) and Dr. Reeves notices an Irish document
in which Applecross or Appurcrossan is called Conber Crossan. Ynver,
however, became obsolete in Welsh, just as Cummer or Cumber and Aber
became obsolete in Irish

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

but we have no reason to know that it did so in Pictish. In the Pictish
districts, therefore, the Abers and Invers were deposited when both were
living words in the language. When the Scots settled in Argyll, Aber had
become obsolete in their language, and Inver was alone deposited, and in
Strathclyde both words seem to have gone into desuetude.

In the same manner *Dwfr* or *Dwr*, is quoted as a word for water,
peculiar to the Welsh form of Celtic, and an invariable mark of the
presence of a British people, but, the old form of this word in Scotland
was *Doboir*, as appears from the Book of Deer, where Aberdour is
written *Abber-doboir*, and in Cormac's Glossary of the old Irish,
*Doboir* is given as an old Irish word for water. In another old Irish
glossary we have this couplet:--

"Bior and An and Dobar,  
The three names of the water of the world."

These words, therefore, form no criterion of difference of race, and to
judge by them is to fall into the mistake of the phonetic
etymologists--viz. to apply to old names, as the key, the present spoken
language, which does not contain words which yet existed in it in its
older form.

In order to make generic terms a test of dialect, they must be words
which contain sounds affected differently by the different phonetic laws
of such dialects--such as *Pen*, *Gwynn*, *Gwern*, and *Gwydd* which all
enter copiously into Welsh topography, and the equivalents of which in
the Gaelic dialects

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

are *Ceann*, *Fionn*, *Fearn*, and *Fiodh*. Such generic terms afford a
test by which we can at once determine whether the Celtic topography of
a country partakes most of the Cymric or the Gaelic character. The
earliest collection of names in North Britain is to be found in
Ptolemy's Geography in the second century, but we know too little of the
origin of his names, whether they were native terms, or names applied by
the invaders, to obtain from them any certain result. After Ptolemy, the
largest collection of names in Great Britain is in the work of the
anonymous geographer of Ravenna, a work of the seventh century. The
exact localities are not given, but the names are grouped according to
the part of Britain to which they belong. Those which commence the
topography of Scotland are placed under this title: "Iterum sunt
civitates in ipsa Britannia quæ recto tramite de una parte in alia, id
est, de oceano in oceano existunt, ac dividunt in tertia portione ipsam
Britanniam." They commence with the stations on the Roman wall between
the Tyne and the, Solway, and then proceed northwards. Among these we
find two names together, Tadoriton and Maporiton, and as *Tad* and *Map*
are Cymric forms for father and son, we have no doubt that here we are
on the traces of a Cymric population. The next group is arranged under
this head:--"Iterum sunt civitates in ipsa Britannia recto tramite una
alteri conexæ, ubi et ipsa Britannia plus angustissima, de oceano in
oceano esse dinoscitur." This part of Britain, which is *plus
angustissima*, is the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

isthmus between the Forth and the Clyde, and in proceeding with the
names northwards we come to one called Cindocellum. The Ocelli Montes
were the Ochills, and here the Gaelic form of Kin is equally
unmistakable. When we apply to the present topography the testing words
Pen, Gwynn, Gwern, and Gwydd, the Gaelic equivalents of which are Kin,
Fionn, Fearn, and Fiodh, we find that, with one exception, Pen, though
frequent south of the Forth, where there was a British population, does
not occur north of the Forth, while it is full of Kins, and Gwynn,
Gwern, and Gwydd occur only in their Gaelic equivalents.

Such then being the aspect in which the question really presents itself,
it becomes important, with a view to ethnological results, to ascertain
more closely the geographical distribution of the generic terms over
Scotland, and in order to show this I have prepared a table of such
distribution. The generic terms are taken from the index to the Scottish
Record of Retours; and as this record relates to properties, and not to
mere natural objects, the generic terms they contain are to a great
extent confined to names of places connected with their possession by
man, and more readily affected by changes in the population. For the
purposes of comparison, I have framed a list of generic terms contained
in Irish topography from the index to the *Annals of the Four Masters*,
and of those in Welsh topography from a list in the *Cambrian Register*.
I have divided Scotland into thirteen districts, so as to show the local
character of the topography of each

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

part of Scotland, and opposite each generic term in Scotch topography is
marked--1*st*, if it occurs in Ireland, and how often; 2*d*, if it
occurs in Wales; and 3*d*, I have marked the number of times it occur in
each district of Scotland from the Index of Retours.

On examining this table, it will be seen that there are five terms
peculiar to the districts occupied by the Picts. These are Auchter, Pit,
Pitten, For, and Fin. Now none of these five terms are to be found in
Welsh topography at all, and For and Fin are obviously Gaelic forms.

It is necessary, however, in examining these terms, which may be called
Pictish, to ascertain their old form. Auchter appears to be the Gaelic
*Uachter*, upper; and as such we have it in Ireland, and in the same
form, as in Scotland Ochtertire, in Ireland Uachtertire. It does not
occur in Wales.

The old form of Pit and Pitten, as appears from the Book of Deer, is
*Pette*, and it seems to mean a portion of land, as it is conjoined with
proper names, as Pette MacGarnait, Pette Malduib. But it also appears
connected with Gaelic specific terms, as *Pette an Mulenn*, the Pette of
the Mill, and in a charter of the Chartulary of St. Andrews, of the
church of Migvie, the *terra ecclesiæ* is said to be vocatus
Pettentaggart--"an taggart" being the Gaelic form of the expression "of
the priest."

The old forms of For and Fin are Fothuir and Fothen. The old form of
Forteviot is Fothuirtabaicht, and of Finhaven is Fothen-evin. The first

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of these words, however, discloses a very remarkable dialectic
difference. Fothuir becomes For, as Fothuir-tabacht is Forteviot;
Fothuir-duin is Fordun; but Fothuir likewise passes into Fetter, as
Fothuiresach becomes Fetteresso; and these two forms are found side by
side, Fordun and Fetteresso being adjacent parishes. The form of For
extends, from the Forth to the Moray Firth--that of Fetter from the Esk,
which separates Forfar and Kincardine, to the Moray Firth.

An examination of some other generic terms will disclose a perfectly
analogous process of change. The name for a river is Amhuin. The word is
the same as the Latin Amnis. The old Gaelic form is Amuin, and the *m*
by aspiration, becomes *mh*, whence Amhuin, pronounced Avon. In the
oldest forms of the language the consonants are not aspirated, but we
have these two forms, both the old unaspirated form and the more recent
aspirated form, in our topography, lying side by side in the two
parallel rivers which bound Linlithgowshire--the Amond and the Avon.
There is also the Amond in Perthshire. We know from the Pictish
Chronicle that, the old name was Aman, and the Avon, with its aspirated
*m*, is mentioned in the Saxon Chronicle. It is a further proof that
Inver is as old as Aber in the eastern districts, that we find Aman in
its old form conjoined with Inver in the Pictish Chronicle in the name
"Inveraman."

In Dumbartonshire we find the names Lomond and Leven together. We have
Loch Lomond and Ben

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lomond, with the river Leven flowing out of the
loch through Strathleven; but we have the same names in connection in
Fifeshire, where we have Loch Leven with the two Lomonds on the side of
it, and the river Leven flowing from it through Strathleven. This
recurrence of the same words in connection would be unaccountable, were
it not in example of the same thing. Leven comes from the Gaelic
*Leamhan*, signifying an elm-tree, but the old form is Leoman, and the
*m* becomes aspirated in a latter stage of the language and forms
*Leamhan*, pronounced Leven. Here the old form adheres to the mountain,
while the river adopts the more modern.

A curious illustration of two different terms lying side by side, which
are derived from the same word undergoing different changes, will be
found in Forfarshire, where the term Llan for a church appears, as in
Lantrethin. It is a phonetic law between Latin and Celtic, that words
beginning in the former with *pl* are in the latter *ll*. The word
Planum, in Latin signifying any cultivated spot, in contradistinction
from a desert spot, and which, according to Ducange, came to signify
Cimiterium, becomes in Celtic Llan, the old meaning of which was a
fertile spot, as well as a church. In the inquisition, in the reign of
David I., into the possessions of the See of Glasgow, we find the word
in its oldest form in the name Planmichael, now Carmichael; and as we
find Ballin corrupted into Ban, and Ballindoch becomes Bandoch, so Plan
becomes corrupted into Pan, and we find it in this form likewise

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

in Forfarshire, Panmure and Panbride. In the Lothians and the Merse this
word has become Long, as in Longnewton and Longniddrie.

The Celtic topography of Scotland thus resembles a palimpsest, in which
an older form is found behind the more modern writing. I shall not
lengthen this chapter by going through other examples. The existence of
the phenomenon is sufficiently indicated by those I have brought
forward, and I shall conclude by stating shortly the results of this
investigation.

1*st*, In order to draw a correct inference from the names of places as
to the ethnological character of the people who imposed them, it is
necessary to obtain the old form of the name before it became corrupted,
and to analyse it according to the philological laws of the language to
which it belongs.

2*d*, A comparison of the generic terms affords the best test for
discriminating between the different dialects to which they belong, and
for this comparison it is necessary to have a correct table of their
geographical distribution.

3*d*, Difference between the generic terms in different parts of the
country may arise from their belonging to a different stage of the same
language, or from a capricious selection of different synonyms by
separate tribes of the same race.

4*th*, In order to afford a test for discriminating between dialects,
the generic terms must contain within them those sounds which are
differently affected by the phonetic laws of each dialect.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

5*th*, Applying this test, the generic terms do not show the existence
of a Cymric language north of the Forth.

6*th*, We find in the topography of the north-east of Scotland traces of
an older and of a more recent form of Gaelic--the one preferring labials
and dentals, and the other gutturals; the one hardening the-consonants
into tenues--the other softening them by aspiration; the one having
Abers and Invers--and the other having Invers alone; the one a low
Gaelic dialect--the other a high Gaelic dialect; the one I conceive the
language of the Picts--the other that of the Scots. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Key to table headings:

|            |           |                                                      |
|------------|-----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| A. IRELAND |           |                                                      |
| B: WALES.  |           |                                                      |
| SCOTLAND.  | Angli.    | C: Berwick, Roxburgh, Haddington.                    |
|            |           | D: Mid-Lothian, Linlithgow.                          |
|            | Britones. | E: Selkirk, Peebles.                                 |
|            |           | F: Dumfries.                                         |
|            |           | G: Ayr, Renfrew, Lanark.                             |
|            |           | H: Stirling, Dumbarton.                              |
|            | Picti.    | I: Perth.                                            |
|            |           | J: Fife, Kinross.                                    |
|            |           | K: Forfar.                                           |
|            |           | L: Kincardine, Aberdeen, Banff                       |
|            |           | M: Elgin and Nairn, Inverness, Ross, and Sutherland. |
|            |           | N: Kirkcudbright, Wigton.                            |
|            | Scoti.    | O: Argyll, Bute.                                     |

 

 

|                                   |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |      |     |     |
|-----------------------------------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|------|-----|-----|
| GENERIC TERMS                     | A   | B   | C   | D   | E   | F   | G   | H   | I   | J   | K   | L   | M    | N   | O   |
| Aber                              | ... | W   | 3   | 3   | ... | 4   | ... | ... | 12  | 4   | 7   | 18  | 6    | ... | ... |
| Ard                               | 66  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 16  | 34  | 6   | 14  | 66  | 51   | 5   | 93  |
| Arn                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 4   | 15  | 5   | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Ar                                | ... | W   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 15  | ... |
| Auch                              | 25  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 25  | ... | 24  | 6   | 27  | 162 | 153  | 12  | 107 |
| Auchin                            | ... | ... | ... | 4   | ... | 23  | 88  | 34  | 30  | ... | ... | 22  | 8    | 25  | ... |
| Auchter                           | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 6   | 10  | 6   | 12  | 4    | ... | ... |
| Auld                              | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 33  | 9    | ... | ... |
| Bal                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 36  | 63  | 90  | 88  | 127 | 67  | 59   | 56  | 39  |
| Balna                             | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 10  | ...  | ... | ... |
| Ballie                            | 104 | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... |     |
| Ballin                            | ... | ... | 3   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 3   | ...  | ... | ... |
| Belloch                           | 36  | W   | ... | ... | ... | ... | 9   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Bellie                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | 14  |
| Ban                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 16  | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Bar                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 27  | 66  | 6   | ... | ... | 11  | ... | ...  | 90  | 19  |
| Barn                              | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 6   | ... |
| Blair                             | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 16  | 51  | 29  | 8   | ... | 11  | 8    | ... | ... |
| Bo                                | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 5   | ... | ... | ... | 10   | ... | ... |
| Carn                              | 28  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 11  | ... | 13  | 8   | 8   | 54  | 15   | 4   | ... |
| <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> | A   | B   | C   | D   | E   | F   | G   | H   | I   | J   | K   | L   | M    | N   | O   |
| Car                               | ... | W   | 8   | 6   | ... | 12  | 36  | 12  | 7   | 18  | 10  | 18  | 5    | 15  | ... |
| Col                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 7   | ... | ... | 17  | ...  | ... | ... |
| Corrie                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 9   | ... | ... | ... | ...8 | ... | ... |
| Cambus                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 12  | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Clon                              | 93  | ... | ... | ... | ... | 8   | 13  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 7   | ... |
| Craig                             | 16  | W   | ... | 19  | ... | 21  | 42  | 21  | 43  | 25  | 12  | 46  | 8    | 31  | 19  |
| Cors                              | ... | W   | ... | ... | ... | 14  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 9    | ... |     |
| Cul                               | 39  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 47  | ... | 25  | 11  | ... | 22  | 22   | 7   | ... |
| Cumber                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 6   | ... | 4   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Cult                              | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 10  | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Dal                               | 10  | W   | ... | ... | ... | 20  | 82  | 8   | 52  | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 24  | ... |
| Drum                              | 64  | ... | ... | 4   | ... | 30  | 50  | 26  | 51  | 33  | 25  | 56  | 36   | 57  | 25  |
| Dun                               | 95  | ... | 3   | 6   | ... | 14  | 16  | 17  | 26  | 11  | 17  | ... | 20   | ... | 14  |
| Fetter                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 4   | ...  | ... | ... |
| For                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 13  | 9   | 11  | 22  | ...  | ... |     |
| Fin                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 14  | 6   | 4   | ... | 3    | ... | ... |
| Glen                              | 35  | W   | 5   | ... | 17  | 42  | 44  | ... | 56  | ... | 23  | 52  | 54   | 61  | 52  |
| Gar                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 34  | ... | ... | ... | ... | 17  | ...  | 23  | ... |
| Garth                             | ... | W   | ... | ... | ... | ... | 10  | 23  | 13  | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | 10  |
| Inch                              | 90  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 18  | 30  | 25  | 10  | 17  | 31   | ... | ... |
| Iron                              | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 15  | ... |
| Inver                             | 6   | ... | ... | 2   | ... | ... | ... | 5   | 32  | 10  | 16  | 37  | 69   | ... | 24  |
| Kin                               | 30  | ... | ... | 3   | ... | ... | ... | 6   | 43  | 34  | 52  | 88  | 57   | ... | 7   |
| Knock                             | 29  | ... | ... | ... | ... | 5   | 64  | ... | 6   | ... | ... | 32  | 30   | 37  | 31  |
| Larg                              | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 13  | ... |
| Lin                               | ... | W   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 5   | 8   | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Lan                               | 3   | W   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 6   | ... | ... | ...  | ... | 6   |
| Lath                              | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 9   | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Loch                              | 100 | ... | ... | 7   | ... | 14  | 34  | 16  | 30  | 18  | ... | 15  | 19   | 26  | ... |
| Locher                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 5   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Led                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 6   | 6   | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> | A   | B   | C   | D   | E   | F   | G   | H   | I   | J   | K   | L   | M    | N   | O   |
| Mon                               | 14  | ... | ... | ... | ... | 7   | ... | ... | 11  | 13  | 13  | 31  | ...  | ... | ... |
| Mul                               | 15  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 8    | ... | ... |
| Pen                               | ... | W   | 9   | 3   | ... | 5   | 7   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 2   | ... |
| Penny                             | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 7   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | 11  |
| Pet                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 30  | 5    | ... | ... |
| Pit                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 75  | 52  | 38  | 69  | 30   | ... | ... |
| Pitten                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 7   | 9   | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Pol                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 13  | 7   | 6   | 9   | ... | ... | ... | 17   | 9   | ... |
| Port                              | 22  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 3   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 8   | ... |
| Ra                                | 63  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 17  | 6   | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Strath                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 19  | 13  | ... | 27  | 35   | ... | 13  |
| Stron                             | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | 17  |
| Stuck                             | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 8   | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | 6   |
| Tar                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 14  | ...  | ... | ... |
| Tra                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | 5   | ... |
| Tom                               | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 11  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ...  | ... | ... |
| Tor                               | ... | ... | ... | 11  | ... | 11  | ... | ... | ... | 9   | ... | 21  | 22   | 10  | 19  |
| Tullie                            | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 38  | ...  | ... | ... |
| Tulli                             | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 7   | 25  | ... | 11  | 42  | 7    | ... | ... |
| Tulloch                           | 17  | ... | ... | ... | ... | ... | 5   | ... | ... | ... | 10  | ... | ...  | ... |     |

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[153:1](fab011.htm#fr_21) *Ynver* occurs twice
in the Book of Taliessin.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[161:1](fab011.htm#fr_22) The substance of these
three chapters has already appeared in a different shape in the
*Archæologia Cambrensis*, and the last in the *Transactions of the Royal
Society*. They were written with a view to this work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Cumbria and the Men of the North](fab012)
