[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fab008)  [Next](fab010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

### THE RACES OF BRITAIN AND THE PLACE OF THE PICTS AMONG THEM.

SUCH being the aspect in which the leading features of the history of
the Celtic population of Britain is presented to us, on a careful
analysis of the authorities, it remains to inquire what they tell us of
the mutual relation of the races of which it was composed, and of the
true place of the Picts among them.

In human beings the recollections of infancy are the most vivid and
tenacious, and every change of circumstance or of place in early years
impresses itself with an indelible mark, on the memory, so that, while
the recollections of middle life become faint and dim with advancing
years, those of the nursery still stand out in the background with a
clear and distinct light, and can be produced in all their original
vividness. In like manner with races of men in an early stage of their
social condition, the events of the infancy of the race, its migrations
and settlements, seem to be indelibly impressed on the national memory,
are the subject of songs and ballads, and become interwoven into such
oral literature as they possess, while their history, after they become
a settled people, may become to them a dreary blank, till the progress
of civilisation

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

and society creates something like national annals among them.

Such ethnological traditions, however, in time lose the form of simple
narrative, and assume a mythic and symbolic shape, which, though bearing
the outward semblance of fable, still preserve the recollection of real
ethnological fact. This mythic and symbolic form of the early
ethnological traditions of the various tribes which form the population
of the country, usually presents itself in two different aspects,
according as the one idea or the other prevailed. According to the one,
these tribes were a series of colonies arriving in the country at
different times, and succeeding each other as occupants of the land, and
their migrations from some distant land, in which some fancied
resemblance in name or customs had fixed their origin, are minutely
detailed. According to the other, each race is represented by an
*eponymus*, or supposed common ancestor, bearing a name derived from
that of the people, and the several *eponymi* representing the
population of the country are connected in an ethnological genealogy, in
which they appear as fathers, brothers, or cousins, according to their
supposed relation to each other. We have a classical instance of this in
the Greek traditions, where Hellen, the *eponymus* of the Hellenes, is
father of Æolus Dorus, and Xuthus, and the latter of Achæus and Ionus,
while the Æolians and Dorians appear in other traditions as successively
overrunning the country. In Britain we have the same twofold myth;
Brutus,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the *eponymus* of the Britons, being, in the Bruts, father of Camber
Locrinus and Albanactus, while, in the Triads, the Kymri, the Lloegri,
and the Brython, are successive colonies which entered the country from
different lands. It does not follow that, in the one case, the
relationship was other than a geographical one, or, in the other, that
the tribes were really of different origin, or inhabited the country at
different times. These are but the adventitious, mythic, or symbolic
forms, in which real ethnological relations had clothed themselves,
under the operation of definite laws.

The earliest record of such ethnological traditions. connected with the
British Isles is probably to be found in the *Historia Britonum*. In it
the ethnological traditions are given in both shapes. In that in which
they were symbolised by a genealogy, and which is certainly part of the
original tract, the author states as his source "veteres libri veterum
nostrorum," and concludes the chapter by stating, "Hanc peritiam inveni
ex traditione veterum, qui incolæ in primo fuerunt Britanniæ." In this
genealogy he says, "Hessitio autem habuit filios quatuor, hi sunt,
Francus, Romanus, *Britto*, *Albanus*. . . . Ab Hesitione autem ortæ
sunt quatuor gentes, Franci, Latini, *Albani*, et *Britti*."

In the Albanic Duan, which seems to have belonged to some collection of
additions to Nennius, and which contains the oldest record of the
ethnological traditions of Scotland, the brothers Brittus and Albanus
appear as the *eponymi* of the two Celtic races inhabiting respectively
Britain and Alban, or Scotland. Thus--

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

"O, all ye learned of Alban,  
Ye well-skilled host of yellow hair,  
What was the first invasion? Is it known to you?  
Which took the land of Alban?  
*Albanus* possessed it; numerous his hosts.  
He was the illustrious son of Isacon.  
He and *Briutus* were brothers without deceit.  
From him Alban of ships has its name.  
Briutus banished his active brother  
Across the stormy sea of Icht.  
Briutus possessed the noble Alban  
As far as the conspicuous promontory of Fothudain." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

Here the two brothers, Brittus and Albanus, appear, and the latter is
the *eponymus* of the inhabitants of Alban or Scotland, while the
tradition of the retreat of the race of the one before that of the other
seems to be preserved.

What races, then, were typified by the brothers Brittus and Albanus? A
passage in one of the old poems preserved in the Book of Taliessin
indicates this very clearly. The *Historia* had given us three of the
sons of Hessitio-Romanus, Brittus, and Albanus; the brotherhood in such
a genealogy implying no more than their mutual presence in the same
country; and in the poem referred to there, is an obvious reference to
the same tradition--

Three races, wrathful, of right qualities:  
Gwyddyl and Brython and Romani,  
Create war and tumult."

 

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

Here the *Romani* and *Brython* represent Romanus and Brittus, and
*Gwyddyl* comes in place of Albanus.

This term *Gwyddyl*, though latterly used by the Welsh as synonymous
with Irish, was formerly applied to the whole Gaelic race as
distinguished from the Cymric. This is apparent from another poem in the
Book of Taliessin, where the Celtic inhabitants of the British Isles are
thus enumerated:--

"Let us make great rejoicing after exhaustion,  
And the reconciliation of the Cymry and men of Dublin,  
The Gwyddyl of Iwerdon, Mon, and Prydyn,  
The Cornishmen and the Clydemen."

\[paragraph continues\] Here the Cymry of Wales and the Britons of
Cornwall and Strathclyde are contrasted with the Gwyddyl of Ireland,
Anglesea, and Scotland; in short, the Gaelic race in its full extension
at that period, including Prydyn, or North Britain, and Mona, or
Anglesea, as well as Ireland. To which of these two races then did the
Picts belong, and was their language identical either with the Cymric or
the Gaelic, or, if it was a different dialect, to which did it approach
nearest?

Among the additions made to the *Historia Britonum*, some Pictish
traditions seem to have been attached to it as early as the year 796;
and these are preserved partly in the Irish translation of Nennius, and
partly in the first part of the old chronicle in the Colbertine MS.
usually called the *Pictish Chronicle*, and which bears evident marks of
having been formed from such additions to the *Historia*. This chronicle
contains a very important addition to the statement in the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Historia*. The *Historia* had said that Brittus
and Albanus were brothers, and sons of Hessitio, and that from them
proceeded the nations of the Britti and the Albani. The *Pictish
Chronicle* adds, after quoting a passage from *Isidorus* giving the
etymology of the name Albani. "*de quibus originem duxerunt Scoti et
Picti*;" <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) that is, that both Scots
and Picts belonged to the race of which Albanus was the *eponymus*.

Now the testimony of the entire literature of Wales is to the fact that
the Picts belonged to the race of the Gwyddyl, and not to the Cymric
race. To take, first, the perhaps doubtful authority of the *Triads*, in
which the ethnology of the inhabitants of Britain is conveyed under the
form of successive colonies, or invasions, they are thus represented:
"Three social tribes of the Isle of Britain--the nation (*cenedl*) of
the Kymry, the race (*al*) of the Lloegrwys and the Brython--and these
are said to be descended from the original nation of the Cymry, and to
be of the same language and speech. Three refuge-seeking tribes that
came to the Isle of Britain--the tribe of Celyddon *yn y Gogled*, the
race (*al*) of the Gwyddyl that are in Alban, and the men of Galedin.
Three invading tribes that came to the Isle of Britain--the, Coraniaid,
the Gwyddyl Ffichti who came to Alban by the sea of Llychlyn, and the
Saeson;" and it is added that the Gwyddyl Ffichti "are in Alban, on the
shore of the sea of Llyddyn." "Three treacherous invasions of the Isle
of Britain--the Gwyddyl *Coch* 

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

o'r Iwerddon, who came into Alban; the men of Llychlyn, and the
Saesons." Here it will be observed that three tribes only are brought to
Alban, and all three are said to have remained in it, and all are said
to be. Gwyddyl or Gael. These are, *first*, the race of the Gwyddyl
generally; *secondly*, the red Gwyddyl from Ireland; and *thirdly*, the
Ffichti Gwyddyl. The red Gwyddyl are obviously the Gaelic Scots, who
came from Ireland in the year 503, and settled in Dalriada or Argyll.
The Gwyddyl Ffichti have been usually translated the Irish Picts, from
the word Gwyddyl having been latterly used as synonymous with Irishman;
and a very disingenuous use of this has been made by Mr. Herbert in his
notes to the Irish Nennius; but the translation is erroneous, for the
word Gwyddyl was at that time a name of race, and not a geographical
term, and was applied to the whole Gaelic race; and, moreover, it is not
an adjective, but a substantive; Gwyddyl Ffichti meaning the Ffichti or
Pictish Gwyddyl, just as Gwyddyl Coch means the red Gwyddyl. That by
these Ffichti Gwyddyl, the Picts of the Pictish kingdom in Scotland are
meant, and not Irish Picts (in the sense of Picts dwelling in or
emigrating from Ireland), is plain; for in the *Triad* they are said to
have crossed the sea of Llychlyn, or German Ocean, to Alban or Scotland,
and to dwell in Alban along the shore of the German Ocean. That it was
applied to the Picts forming the great Pictish kingdom of Scotland, is
also clear from the *Bruts* compared with each other and with the Irish
annalist

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tighernac. In the year 750 a great battle was
fought between the Britons of Strathclyde and the Picts of Scotland, at
a place called by the Welsh chronicles Magedaue or Maescdauc, now
Mugdoch, in Dumbartonshire, the ancient seat of the Earls of Lennox,
which is thus described by Tighernac: "A battle between the Pictones and
the Britones--viz. Talorgan, the son of Fergus, and his brother, and the
slaughter of the Piccardach with him." In the *Brut y Tywysogion* it is
thus given:--"The action of Mygedawc, in which the Britons conquered the
*Gwydyl Ffichti* after a bloody battle." Talorgan, who commanded them,
was brother of Angus Mac Fergus, king of Fortren, or the Picts of
Scotland, and they are here termed Gwyddyl Ffichti. Although the
authority of the *Triads* is not unexceptionable, it is confirmed by the
more authentic Triads of Arthur and his warriors, where "three tribes
came into this island and did not again go out of it," and the second is
"the tribe of the Gwyddyl Ffichti."

The statement here given of that form of the tradition which represents
the ethnology of the inhabitants of North Britain under the form of
successive colonies, so exactly accords with what we find in other
statements of it as to leave little doubt that it is a faithful
representation of this form of the tradition; and its harmony with the
older statement of the other form of it in the *Historia Britonum*, is
apparent. In the one we have Albanus, the *eponymus* of the Gwyddyl,
called the brother of Brittus, and progenitor of the Albani

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

from whom the Picti and Scoti took their origin. In the other we have
the race of the Gwyddyl in Alban, and the successive colonies in Alban
after them, the Gwyddyl Ffichti from Llychlyn, and the Gwyddyl Coch from
Iwerdon or Ireland; the former being, as shown by the *Brut y
Tywysogion*, the Picts of Scotland, and the latter the Scots of
Dalriada.

The legend of the origin of the Picts, as contained in the *Bruts*, is
that they came from Scythia and settled in Alban; that they asked wives
of the Britons and were refused, and then married wives of the Gwyddyl.
The text of the *Brut* in the Red Book of Hergest adds, "And their
children and offspring increased, and the people multiplied. This people
are the *Gwyddyl Ffichti*, and it is thus they came and were first
continued in this island, and to this day have remained without going
from it." Another text in one of the Hengwrt MSS. adds, "And thus arose
this people; and this people were called *Gwyddyl Ffichtieit*, and this
is the reason that they were called *Gwyddyl Ffichtieit*; and they are
still a tribe among the Britons." <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)
The tale that they were refused wives of the Britons and married wives
of the Gwyddyl certainly implies that the Welsh considered that they did
not speak a Cymric but a Gaelic dialect, for the legend is based upon
the idea that the spoken language of a people was derived from their
mothers, and is conveyed in the popular expression, the mother-tongue;
and it is so understood in Layamon's *Brut*:--

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

"Through the same woman,  
Who there long dwelt,  
The folk 'gan to speak  
Ireland's speech."

And in one of the poems in the Book of Taliessin, where the Picts are
symbolised by the expression, "y Cath Vreith," there is this line: "The
Cat Vreith of *a strange language* (anghyfieithon) is troubled from the
ford of Taradyr to Port Wygyr in Mona." There is no doubt that the
allusion here is to the Picts.

The name of Gwyddyl Ffichti, as applied to the Picts, thus rests on
better authority than that of the *Triads*. In the old poems, though the
Picts are usually termed the Brithwyr, yet this. name of Gwyddyl Ffichti
is also applied to them, as in a curious old poem in the Book of
Taliessin: "Five chiefs there shall be of the Gwyddyl Ffichti." The
Picts are thus clearly assigned by the Welsh authorities to the race of
the Gwyddyl; and if they were really, according to the prevailing modern
theory, a Cymric people speaking a Cymric dialect, it is hardly
conceivable that the Cymri themselves should have thus so invariably
classed them with the Gwyddyl, and attached that word to their name.

The whole testimony of the Britons themselves, and the inferences to be
drawn from tradition, thus clearly range the Picts as a people with the
Gwyddyl, or Gaelic division of the great Celtic, race, and not with the
Cymric or British, and point to their race and language both being
Gaelic; but though this may

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

be true of the core or central body of the people, there are yet
indications that the more outlying or frontier portions were extensively
mixed with other people, and especially with the three races of the
Saxons, the, Scots of Ireland, and the Britons.

And first of the Saxons. It is somewhat remarkable that when Ammianus
Marcellinus narrates the first great outburst of the barbarian, or
ex-provincial tribes, against the Romans in 360, he enumerates them as
consisting of the "gentes Scotorum Pictorumque." In the second invasion,
in 364, they were joined by two other nations, and consisted of the
"Picti Saxonesque, et Scotti et Attacotti;" and in the third invasion,
in 368, of the "Picti in duas gentes divisi Dicaledones et Vecturiones,
itidemque Atticotti bellicosa hominum natio, et Scotti per diversa
vagantes." It is hardly possible to avoid the suspicion that the
epithets applied here to each people point to characteristics connected
with their name. In Cormac's glossary the old form of the name Scot is
given as "Scuit." "Scuite" signifies wanderers; and the epithet
"vagantes" is attached to the Scots. "Cath" (war) seems to enter into
the name Atti*cotti*, and they are "bellicosa natio." So the peculiarity
of the Picti was, that they were "in duas gentes divisi." This seems to
imply that the "duæ gentes" were of different race. Now it is remarkable
that while the Picti and the Saxones are connected together in the
second invasion, the Saxones are omitted from the third; and the Picti
then, for the first time, appear as composed of two "gentes;" while
Claudian, in writing of the same

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

invasion, expressly mentions the Saxones along with the Picts as forming
part of the ravagers, and names the Orkneys as their seat.

"------- Maduerunt *Saxone* fuso  
Orcades, incaluit *Pictorum* sanguine Thule  
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne."

I have elsewhere shown <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) that the
tradition given by Nennius, that Octa and Æbussa, the son and nephew of
Hengist, led a body of Saxons past the Orkneys, and took possession of a
part of Scotland, "usque ad confinia Pictorum," indicated a real
settlement of Saxons on the east coast of Scotland as early as the year
374; and it is not impossible that they may have allied with the Picts
proper so closely as to form one of the two *gentes*, and that the
Vecturiones included them, a conjecture perhaps strengthened by the
appearance of the Picts and Saxons in close union in 429 in Constantius'
*Life of St. German*, by the fact that the ancestor of the Jutes, who
were Octa's people, was Vecta, the son of Odin, and that another part of
the same people were termed by Bede, Vectuarii. Be this as it may, there
scent undoubtedly to have been settlements of Saxons at a very early
period along the east coast of Scotland among that part of the Picts.

But if there were Saxon settlements among the Picts on the east coast,
the Scots made a settlement in their western district, in part of
Argyllshire, which they called Dalriada. Bede gives the best indication

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

of the nature of this settlement. He says of the Firth of Clyde that it
was a "sinus maris permaximus, qui antiquitus gentem Brittonum a Pictis
secernebat," that "Britannia post Brittones et Pictos tertiam Scottorum
nationem *in parte Pictorum recepit*," and that they settled "ad cujus
videlicet sinus partem septentrionalem." We know that this mythic colony
of the Scots represented an actual settlement of them in Dalriada, which
took place in the year 503, if not earlier, and that they too settled
among the Picts.

On their southern frontier they seem to have become mixed with the
Britons. The indication afforded by the Albanic Duan of an early
encroachment of the tribes represented by the name Britus upon those
represented by Albanus, as far as Fifeness, has already been noticed. In
several of the old poems contained in the Book of Taliessin, allusion is
made to a combination between the Brython and the Gwyddyl, and the name
of *Brithwyr*, which means mixed men as well as painted men, seems to
have been applied to this mixed part of the Pictish nation. Higden, in
his *Polychronicon*, in giving the fable of Carausius settling a body of
Picts in Albania, adds, "*ubi permixti cum Britonibus* per subsequens
ævum premanserunt," which implies that such a mixture of the two people
had been known as a fact, and one of the Pictish legends preserved in
the Irish Nennius indicates this also. One version of it bears that
Cruthnechan mac Inge, the *eponymus* of the Picts,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

was sent from Ireland "to assist the Britons of Fortrenn to war against
the Saxons, and they made their children and their swordland--*i.e.*
Cruthentuaith--subject to them." Another versions bears, "And when they
(the Picts) had cleared their swordland yonder among the Britons--viz.
Magh Fortreinn *primo*, and Magh Girgin *postea*." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) Now Fortren or Magh Fortren was the
district lying between the river Forth and the river Tay, and is here
said to have, been peopled by Britons, but afterwards obtained by the
Picts who dwelt among them; and Magh Girgin is a district on the east
coast, now called Mearns, which the Picts won when warring against the
Saxons, and where they subjected their children. The presence,
therefore, both of Britons and Saxons as part of the population of the
districts which, under the name of Cruthentuaith, was the territory of
the Pictish kingdom, is here indicated.

So far as race is concerned, therefore, the Pictish nation presents
itself to us in the following aspect. The main body and centre of the
nation, pure Albanic or old Gwyddyl, with the outlying parts mixed with
other races--Saxons on the east coast, Scots in Argyll, and Britons
south of the Tay--each having occasionally seen a king of their own race
on the throne, and the Scots succeeding in converting the accession of
one of their race to the throne, in right of his Pictish blood through
his female descent, into their permanent supremacy over the Pictish
population of the country--people and

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

language gradually merging and disappearing under the general term of
Scottish.

In endeavouring to determine the ethnological position of any people
who, like the Picts, once existed as a distinctive element in the
population of the country, but who have left no living representative to
bear witness to their characteristics, there are other sources of
information to which we may resort besides the evidence of writers
contemporaneous with their existence as a known and distinct people, as
to the particular race among the inhabitants of the country to which
they belonged, or as to the existence among them of a living tradition
of their origin. There is the evidence afforded by an analysis of such
remains of their language as may have come down to us, indicating its
philological relation to the languages spoken by the other races in the
country; and there is likewise the inference to be derived from the
topography of the districts which they are known to have occupied.

The evidence afforded by these three sources of information does not
always correspond; and it is necessary carefully to discriminate between
them in their bearing upon each other, and upon the problem to be
solved.

Where a people remains unmixed in race, and has retained the spoken
language originally peculiar to them, unmodified by foreign influences,
and where that people has always formed the sole inhabitants of the
districts occupied by them, the evidence afforded

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

by each of these sources of information may be expected exactly to
reflect the conclusions of the others. The traditions of the people, and
the statements of contemporary writers, will refer them to a race
speaking a language similar to their own; and the vocables which enter
into the topography of the districts occupied by them will manifestly
belong to the same original language. But where such a people forms
merely one element in the population of a country made up of different
races, and is not protected from foreign influences by any peculiar
combination of physical, social, and political obstacles, this is rarely
found to be the case, and the original harmony of race, language, and
topography, soon ceases to be preserved in its integrity. Amid the clash
of contending races, and the struggle for supremacy on the one hand, or
for existence on the other, this condition suffers great modification.
The race may remain pure and unmixed, and yet the language may suffer
great modification from the influence of others. A part of the people
may retain the old language; another part may have adopted the language
of a people who have subjugated them; and the language of a third part
may have become mixed with, or assimilated to, that of a neighbouring
people speaking a kindred though not an identic dialect, through contact
with them, or from the gradual spread of the one race into the
territories of the other.

On the other hand, the people may have ceased to be a homogeneous race,
from other races being intermingled

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

with them; or a common name may have been applied to a combination of
tribes originally distinct, but politically connected; and yet the
language of one of these tribes may have spread over the whole nation,
or a form of the spoken language may have been adopted as the medium of
official intercourse, or selected for the purpose of conveying the
knowledge of Christianity, and become the vehicle of instruction and
civilisation; and the remains of the language which have come down to
us, and with which we have to deal, may represent this form, or the
written speech, only.

The topography, too, of the districts occupied by them may have retained
unmixed the vocables of the language spoken by its earliest inhabitants;
or it may have received the impress of foreign invading or immigrating
races who may have, from time to time, occupied a part of the country,
or have permanently succeeded the race in question; or it may have
retained names which belong to the language of a still older and more
primitive people who may have preceded them.

It is necessary, therefore, in endeavouring to ascertain the
ethnological position of a people long since passed away, to look
separately at these three sources of information, and to weigh well
their bearing upon each other, and upon the race to which the people
belonged. The Picts unquestionably existed as a known people, and as an
independent nation possessing a political organisation and a known

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

till the middle of the ninth century. From that date till the
[twelfth](errata.htm#0) century the name of the Picts is known as the
denomination of one element in a population formed of two different
races, but combined into one monarchy, and had no independent existence.
After the twelfth century the name disappears as applied to, or borne
by, any portion of the population of Scotland. Bede, who wrote prior to
the ninth century, and during the first period, has the following
passage: "Hæc (i.e. Britannia) in præsenti juxta numerum librorum quibus
lex divina scripta est quinque gentium linguis unam eandemque summæ
veritatis et verræ sublimitatis scientiam scrutatur et confitetur
Anglorum, videlicet, Brittonum, Scottorum, Pictorum, et Latinorum quæ
meditatione Scripturarum cæteris omnibus est facta communis." In another
place he says of Oswald, king of Northumbria:--"Denique omnes nationes
et provincias Britanniæ quæ in quatuor linguas, id est, Brittonum,
Pictorum, Scottorum, et Anglorum divisæ sunt, in ditione accepit;" and
afterwards, in narrating the letter written by Ceolfrid, abbot of Jarrow
in Northumberland, to Naiton:--"Rex Pictorum qui septentrionales
Britanniæ plagas inhabitant" in the year 710, that is, during his own
lifetime; he says, "Hæc epistola cum præsente rege Naitono multisque
viris doctoribus esset lecta ac diligenter ab his qui intelligere
poterant in linguam ejus propriam interpretata." Henry of Huntingdon,
who wrote about 1135, and therefore in the second period, repeats the
statement of Bede:--"Quinque

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

autem linguis utitur Britannia, Brittonum, videlicet, Anglorum,
Scottorum, Pictorum, et Latinorum quæ doctrina Scripturarum cæteris
omnibus est facta communis," but adds this qualification:--"quamvis
Picti jam videantur deleti et lingua eorum ita omnino destructa ut jam
fabula videatur quod in veterum scriptis eorum mentio invenitur."

Bede, therefore, knew of the Picts as an existing people, and of a
language termed the Pictish, and, in his own day, tells of a letter
translated into it as the language of the kingdom of Naiton or Nectan;
and when Henry of Huntingdon wrote, the people and their language had
apparently so entirely passed away that it appeared like a fable that
any kingdom of the Picts, and any such language, had ever existed.

It seems strange that Henry of Huntingdon should have made this
statement almost in the very year in which the Picts, as a body, formed
an entire division of the Scottish army at the Battle of the Standard,
and when Reginald of Durham, in the same century, refers to their
language as then spoken at Kirkcudbright in Galloway; but the truth is,
that, notwithstanding the language of Henry of Huntingdon, neither the
people nor their language may, in point of fact, have ceased to exist in
Scotland, the one as an element in the conglomerate of different races
which composed the population of the monarchy, and the other as the
*patois* of a district; nor does it follow, from the language of Bede,
that the Picts must of necessity have been a different race, and their
language a different language

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

from any of the other peoples and languages enumerated in the same
passage.

What, then, did Bede and Henry of Huntingdon mean when the former
enumerated the Pictish as a separate and distinct language, and the
latter said that this people and language were destroyed, while it is
evident that large bodies of the people remained, and that a language
called the Pictish was still spoken by some portion of the inhabitants
of the country.

If the language referred to by Bede was the spoken language of a people
of unmixed race, possessing but one common form of speech, then these
statements certainly imply that it was something distinct as a language
from that of the Angles, Scots, or Britains, and that in Henry's time
the people called the Picts had been either entirely extirpated, or so
completely subjugated that all distinctive character had been lost, and
that they now spoke the language of their conquerors. If, however, the
Picts were a people consisting of various tribes, politically combined
into one nation, and the language referred to was that form of language
adopted as the medium through which they had been instructed in
knowledge, and in which all public affairs were carried on, then this by
no means follows. Such a language might have perished when the kingdom
was destroyed. It may have been merely a different form of a language
analogous either to that of the Angles or Scots or Britains, and the
spoken language of the Pictish tribes, or of some of them, may have
remained as the vernacular dialect of those who

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

survived the revolution which destroyed their independence.

The language referred to by Bede and Henry of Huntingdon, was a
cultivated or literary language, which had been brought under the
trammels of written forms. It was a language in which the word of God
was studied, and we know how the dialect selected for the teaching of
the Christian Church becomes elevated above the spoken dialects into a
fixed standard for the whole nation. It was a language into which
Ceolfrid's letter was translated by the "Viri doctores" of the court,
and it was this same language which is stated to have ceased to exist in
Henry's time. Its position, in this respect, is analogous to the German
literary language, technically called New High German. Like the Celtic,
the German spoken dialects fall into two classes, which are usually
called High German and Low German. The differences between them are not
so broad or so vital is those between the two types of the Celtic, the
Gaelic, and the Cymric dialects, and they are more of a geographical
than of a philological character. Grimm remarks this when he says that
language is susceptible of a physical as well as an intellectual
influence, and, though its principal elements remain the same, is, by
long residence in mountains, woods, plains, or sea-coast, differently
toned, so as to form separate subordinate dialects. "All experience
shows, " says he, "that the mountain-air makes the sounds sharp and
rough; the plain, soft and smooth. On the Alps the tendency is to
diphthongs and aspirates;

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

on the plain to narrow and thin vowels, and to *mediæ* and *tenues*
among the consonants." The former represents the High German dialects;
the latter the Low. The written language, however, or the literary
German, is not identic with any one spoken dialect; it approaches more
nearly to the High than to the Low German, but it is, in fact, an
independent form of the language, the creation, in a sense, of Martin
Luther, who, with the view of making his translation of the Bible
adapted to all Germany, adopted as his medium a form of the language
based upon the Upper Saxon and the official language of the German
Empire, and this form of the language, stamped with the impress of his
vigorous intellect, and popularised through the first Protestant version
of the Bible, was adopted as the language of the literature of Germany,
and, subjected to the cultivation it necessarily produced, became the
language of the educated classes. The language of Holland or the Dutch
is a Low German dialect, and is more nearly allied to the Low than the
latter is to the High German; but it is an independent language, and has
its own cultivation and literature, and its own translation of the
Bible.

Now, a historian might well say that the word of God was studied in the
five languages of the English, the French, the Dutch, the German, and
the Latin, and yet one of them---the Dutch--would be closely allied to
one form of the German. Again, if we could suppose Germany conquered by
the Dutch, the German written and language would be.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

superseded by the Dutch equally written and cultivated language; the Low
German dialects would be as closely assimilated to the literary Dutch as
the High German dialects now are to the literary German, and the latter
would occupy the same position in which the Low German now is. In such a
case we could well understand a writer, three centuries after the event,
saying that the Germans had disappeared, and the German language was so
completely destroyed that the mention of it and its literature in former
writers appeared like fables. And yet the people and the spoken dialects
of Germany would have remained unchanged and been there just as they
always had been.

Substitute Scot for Dutch and Pict for German, and this is exactly the
state of matters producing the phenomena noted by Bede and Henry of
Huntingdon, and it is perfectly possible that the Picts may have been
very nearly allied, both in race and language, with either the Britons
or the Scots, who conquered them; and that the may have remained as in
element in the population, and their language as the *patois* of a
district, long after the days of Henry of Huntingdon, in a country in
which both Scot and Briton entered so largely into its population. I
have thought it necessary to enter at some length into the consideration
of the meaning and import of these passages of Bede and Henry of
Huntingdon, as a right understanding of them has a most material
bearing, upon the question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[100:1](fab009.htm#fr_14) *Chron. Picts and
Scots*, p. 57. The Irish *f* is the *digamma* placed before an initial
vowel; and the word *F*othudain seems to express Ptolemy's Ottadeni, who
extended to the river Eden in Fife. The promontory of Fife, called
Fifeness, is probably the promontory meant.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[102:1](fab009.htm#fr_15) *Chron. Picts and
Scots*, p. 393.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[105:1](fab009.htm#fr_16) *Chron. Picts and
Scots*, p. 123.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[10:1](fab009.htm#fr_17) The Early Frisian
settlements in Scotland.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[110:1](fab009.htm#fr_18) *Chron. Picts and
Scots*, pp. 319, 329.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Celtic Dialects and the Probable Character of
the Pictish Language](fab010)
