<span id="TOP"></span>Albert Einstein on:

**Religion and Science**

**In this file:**

-   **[Religion and Science](#TIMES)**, *New York Times Magazine*,
    November 9, 1930
-   **[Science and Religion I](#SCIENCE)**, Address: Princeton
    Theological Seminary, May 19, 1939
-   **[Science and Religion II](#TWO)**, *Science, Philosophy and
    Religion, A Symposium*, 1941
-   **[Religion and Science: Irreconcilable?](#RELIGION)** *The
    Christian Register*, June, 1948

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="TIMES"></span>Religion and Science

-   Return to **[Top](#TOP)**

*The following article by Albert Einstein appeared in the **New York
Times Magazine** on November 9, 1930 pp 1-4. It has been reprinted in
**Ideas and Opinions**, Crown Publishers, Inc. 1954, pp 36 - 40. It also
appears in Einstein's book **The World as I See It**, Philosophical
Library, New York, 1949, pp. 24 - 28.*

Everything that the human race has done and thought is concerned with
the satisfaction of deeply felt needs and the assuagement of pain. One
has to keep this constantly in mind if one wishes to understand
spiritual movements and their development. Feeling and longing are the
motive force behind all human endeavor and human creation, in however
exalted a guise the latter may present themselves to us. Now what are
the feelings and needs that have led men to religious thought and belief
in the widest sense of the words? A little consideration will suffice to
show us that the most varying emotions preside over the birth of
religious thought and experience. With primitive man it is above all
fear that evokes religious notions - fear of hunger, wild beasts,
sickness, death. Since at this stage of existence understanding of
causal connections is usually poorly developed, the human mind creates
illusory beings more or less analogous to itself on whose wills and
actions these fearful happenings depend. Thus one tries to secure the
favor of these beings by carrying out actions and offering sacrifices
which, according to the tradition handed down from generation to
generation, propitiate them or make them well disposed toward a mortal.
In this sense I am speaking of a religion of fear. This, though not
created, is in an important degree stabilized by the formation of a
special priestly caste which sets itself up as a mediator between the
people and the beings they fear, and erects a hegemony on this basis. In
many cases a leader or ruler or a privileged class whose position rests
on other factors combines priestly functions with its secular authority
in order to make the latter more secure; or the political rulers and the
priestly caste make common cause in their own interests.

The social impulses are another source of the crystallization of
religion. Fathers and mothers and the leaders of larger human
communities are mortal and fallible. The desire for guidance, love, and
support prompts men to form the social or moral conception of God. This
is the God of Providence, who protects, disposes, rewards, and punishes;
the God who, according to the limits of the believer's outlook, loves
and cherishes the life of the tribe or of the human race, or even or
life itself; the comforter in sorrow and unsatisfied longing; he who
preserves the souls of the dead. This is the social or moral conception
of God.

The Jewish scriptures admirably illustrate the development from the
religion of fear to moral religion, a development continued in the New
Testament. The religions of all civilized peoples, especially the
peoples of the Orient, are primarily moral religions. The development
from a religion of fear to moral religion is a great step in peoples'
lives. And yet, that primitive religions are based entirely on fear and
the religions of civilized peoples purely on morality is a prejudice
against which we must be on our guard. The truth is that all religions
are a varying blend of both types, with this differentiation: that on
the higher levels of social life the religion of morality predominates.

Common to all these types is the anthropomorphic character of their
conception of God. In general, only individuals of exceptional
endowments, and exceptionally high-minded communities, rise to any
considerable extent above this level. But there is a third stage of
religious experience which belongs to all of them, even though it is
rarely found in a pure form: I shall call it cosmic religious feeling.
It is very difficult to elucidate this feeling to anyone who is entirely
without it, especially as there is no anthropomorphic conception of God
corresponding to it.

The individual feels the futility of human desires and aims and the
sublimity and marvelous order which reveal themselves both in nature and
in the world of thought. Individual existence impresses him as a sort of
prison and he wants to experience the universe as a single significant
whole. The beginnings of cosmic religious feeling already appear at an
early stage of development, e.g., in many of the Psalms of David and in
some of the Prophets. Buddhism, as we have learned especially from the
wonderful writings of Schopenhauer, contains a much stronger element of
this.

The religious geniuses of all ages have been distinguished by this kind
of religious feeling, which knows no dogma and no God conceived in man's
image; so that there can be no church whose central teachings are based
on it. Hence it is precisely among the heretics of every age that we
find men who were filled with this highest kind of religious feeling and
were in many cases regarded by their contemporaries as atheists,
sometimes also as saints. Looked at in this light, men like Democritus,
Francis of Assisi, and Spinoza are closely akin to one another.

How can cosmic religious feeling be communicated from one person to
another, if it can give rise to no definite notion of a God and no
theology? In my view, it is the most important function of art and
science to awaken this feeling and keep it alive in those who are
receptive to it.

We thus arrive at a conception of the relation of science to religion
very different from the usual one. When one views the matter
historically, one is inclined to look upon science and religion as
irreconcilable antagonists, and for a very obvious reason. The man who
is thoroughly convinced of the universal operation of the law of
causation cannot for a moment entertain the idea of a being who
interferes in the course of events - provided, of course, that he takes
the hypothesis of causality really seriously. He has no use for the
religion of fear and equally little for social or moral religion. A God
who rewards and punishes is inconceivable to him for the simple reason
that a man's actions are determined by necessity, external and internal,
so that in God's eyes he cannot be responsible, any more than an
inanimate object is responsible for the motions it undergoes. Science
has therefore been charged with undermining morality, but the charge is
unjust. A man's ethical behavior should be based effectually on
sympathy, education, and social ties and needs; no religious basis is
necessary. Man would indeed be in a poor way if he had to be restrained
by fear of punishment and hopes of reward after death.

It is therefore easy to see why the churches have always fought science
and persecuted its devotees.On the other hand, I maintain that the
cosmic religious feeling is the strongest and noblest motive for
scientific research. Only those who realize the immense efforts and,
above all, the devotion without which pioneer work in theoretical
science cannot be achieved are able to grasp the strength of the emotion
out of which alone such work, remote as it is from the immediate
realities of life, can issue. What a deep conviction of the rationality
of the universe and what a yearning to understand, were it but a feeble
reflection of the mind revealed in this world, Kepler and Newton must
have had to enable them to spend years of solitary labor in
disentangling the principles of celestial mechanics! Those whose
acquaintance with scientific research is derived chiefly from its
practical results easily develop a completely false notion of the
mentality of the men who, surrounded by a skeptical world, have shown
the way to kindred spirits scattered wide through the world and through
the centuries. Only one who has devoted his life to similar ends can
have a vivid realization of what has inspired these men and given them
the strength to remain true to their purpose in spite of countless
failures. It is cosmic religious feeling that gives a man such strength.
A contemporary has said, not unjustly, that in this materialistic age of
ours the serious scientific workers are the only profoundly religious
people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="SCIENCE"></span>Science and Religion

-   Return to **[Top](#TOP)**

*This article appears in Einstein's* Ideas and Opinions*, pp.41 - 49.
The first section is taken from an address at Princeton Theological
Seminary, May 19, 1939. It was published in* Out of My Later Years*, New
York: Philosophical Library, 1950. The second section is from* Science,
Philosophy and Religion, A Symposium, *published by the Conference on
Science, Philosophy and Religion in Their Relation to the Democratic Way
of Life, Inc., New York, 1941.*

<span id="ONE"></span>1.

During the last century, and part of the one before, it was widely held
that there was an unreconcilable conflict between knowledge and belief.
The opinion prevailed among advanced minds that it was time that belief
should be replaced increasingly by knowledge; belief that did not itself
rest on knowledge was superstition, and as such had to be opposed.
According to this conception, the sole function of education was to open
the way to thinking and knowing, and the school, as the outstanding
organ for the people's education, must serve that end exclusively.

One will probably find but rarely, if at all, the rationalistic
standpoint expressed in such crass form; for any sensible man would see
at once how one-sided is such a statement of the position. But it is
just as well to state a thesis starkly and nakedly, if one wants to
clear up one's mind as to its nature.

It is true that convictions can best be supported with experience and
clear thinking. On this point one must agree unreservedly with the
extreme rationalist. The weak point of his conception is, however, this,
that those convictions which are necessary and determinant for our
conduct and judgments cannot be found solely along this solid scientific
way.

For the scientific method can teach us nothing else beyond how facts are
related to, and conditioned by, each other. The aspiration toward such
objective knowledge belongs to the highest of which man is capabIe, and
you will certainly not suspect me of wishing to belittle the
achievements and the heroic efforts of man in this sphere. Yet it is
equally clear that knowledge of what is does not open the door directly
to what should be. One can have the clearest and most complete knowledge
of what is, and yet not be able to deduct from that what should be the
goal of our human aspirations. Objective knowledge provides us with
powerful instruments for the achievements of certain ends, but the
ultimate goal itself and the longing to reach it must come from another
source. And it is hardly necessary to argue for the view that our
existence and our activity acquire meaning only by the setting up of
such a goal and of corresponding values. The knowledge of truth as such
is wonderful, but it is so little capable of acting as a guide that it
cannot prove even the justification and the value of the aspiration
toward that very knowledge of truth. Here we face, therefore, the limits
of the purely rational conception of our existence.

But it must not be assumed that intelligent thinking can play no part in
the formation of the goal and of ethical judgments. When someone
realizes that for the achievement of an end certain means would be
useful, the means itself becomes thereby an end. Intelligence makes
clear to us the interrelation of means and ends. But mere thinking
cannot give us a sense of the ultimate and fundamental ends. To make
clear these fundamental ends and valuations, and to set them fast in the
emotional life of the individual, seems to me precisely the most
important function which religion has to perform in the social life of
man. And if one asks whence derives the authority of such fundamental
ends, since they cannot be stated and justified merely by reason, one
can only answer: they exist in a healthy society as powerful traditions,
which act upon the conduct and aspirations and judgments of the
individuals; they are there, that is, as something living, without its
being necessary to find justification for their existence. They come
into being not through demonstration but through revelation, through the
medium of powerful personalities. One must not attempt to justify them,
but rather to sense their nature simply and clearly.

The highest principles for our aspirations and judgments are given to us
in the Jewish-Christian religious tradition. It is a very high goal
which, with our weak powers, we can reach only very inadequately, but
which gives a sure foundation to our aspirations and valuations. If one
were to take that goal out of its religious form and look merely at its
purely human side, one might state it perhaps thus: free and responsible
development of the individual, so that he may place his powers freely
and gladly in the service of all mankind.

There is no room in this for the divinization of a nation, of a class,
let alone of an individual. Are we not all children of one father, as it
is said in religious language? Indeed, even the divinization of
humanity, as an abstract totality, would not be in the spirit of that
ideal. It is only to the individual that a soul is given. And the high
destiny of the individual is to serve rather than to rule, or to impose
himself in any other way.

If one looks at the substance rather than at the form, then one can take
these words as expressing also the fundamental democratic position. The
true democrat can worship his nation as little as can the man who is
religious, in our sense of the term.

What, then, in all this, is the function of education and of the school?
They should help the young person to grow up in such a spirit that these
fundamental principles should be to him as the air which he breathes.
Teaching alone cannot do that.

If one holds these high principles clearly before one's eyes, and
compares them with the life and spirit of our times, then it appears
glaringly that civilized mankind finds itself at present in grave
danger, In the totalitarian states it is the rulers themselves who
strive actually to destroy that spirit of humanity. In less threatened
parts it is nationalism and intolerance, as well as the oppression of
the individuals by economic means, which threaten to choke these most
precious traditions.

A realization of how great is the danger is spreading, however, among
thinking people, and there is much search for means with which to meet
the danger--means in the field of national and international politics,
of legislation, or organization in general. Such efforts are, no doubt,
greatly needed. Yet the ancients knew something- which we seem to have
forgotten. All means prove but a blunt instrument, if they have not
behind them a living spirit. But if the longing for the achievement of
the goal is powerfully alive within us, then shall we not lack the
strength to find the means for reaching the goal and for translating it
into deeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="TWO"></span>II.

-   Return to **[Top](#TOP)**

It would not be difficult to come to an agreement as to what we
understand by science. Science is the century-old endeavor to bring
together by means of systematic thought the perceptible phenomena of
this world into as thoroughgoing an association as possible. To put it
boldly, it is the attempt at the posterior reconstruction of existence
by the process of conceptualization. But when asking myself what
religion is I cannot think of the answer so easily. And even after
finding an answer which may satisfy me at this particular moment, I
still remain convinced that I can never under any circumstances bring
together, even to a slight extent, the thoughts of all those who have
given this question serious consideration.

At first, then, instead of asking what religion is I should prefer to
ask what characterizes the aspirations of a person who gives me the
impression of being religious: a person who is religiously enlightened
appears to me to be one who has, to the best of his ability, liberated
himself from the fetters of his selfish desires and is preoccupied with
thoughts, feelings, and aspirations to which he clings because of their
superpersonalvalue. It seems to me that what is important is the force
of this superpersonal content and the depth of the conviction concerning
its overpowering meaningfulness, regardless of whether any attempt is
made to unite this content with a divine Being, for otherwise it would
not be possible to count Buddha and Spinoza as religious personalities.
Accordingly, a religious person is devout in the sense that he has no
doubt of the significance and loftiness of those superpersonal objects
and goals which neither require nor are capable of rational foundation.
They exist with the same necessity and matter-of-factness as he himself.
In this sense religion is the age-old endeavor of mankind to become
clearly and completely conscious of these values and goals and
constantly to strengthen and extend their effect. If one conceives of
religion and science according to these definitions then a conflict
between them appears impossible. For science can only ascertain what is,
but not what should be, and outside of its domain value judgments of all
kinds remain necessary. Religion, on the other hand, deals only with
evaluations of human thought and action: it cannot justifiably speak of
facts and relationships between facts. According to this interpretation
the well-known conflicts between religion and science in the past must
all be ascribed to a misapprehension of the situation which has been
described.

For example, a conflict arises when a religious community insists on the
absolute truthfulness of all statements recorded in the Bible. This
means an intervention on the part of religion into the sphere of
science; this is where the struggle of the Church against the doctrines
of Galileo and Darwin belongs. On the other hand, representatives of
science have often made an attempt to arrive at fundamental judgments
with respect to values and ends on the basis of scientific method, and
in this way have set themselves in opposition to religion. These
conflicts have all sprung from fatal errors.

Now, even though the realms of religion and science in themselves are
clearly marked off from each other, nevertheless there exist between the
two strong reciprocal relationships and dependencies. Though religion
may be that which determines the goal, it has, nevertheless, learned
from science, in the broadest sense, what means will contribute to the
attainment of the goals it has set up. But science can only be created
by those who are thoroughly imbued with the aspiration toward truth and
understanding. This source of feeling, however, springs from the sphere
of religion. To this there also belongs the faith in the possibility
that the regulations valid for the world of existence are rational, that
is, comprehensible to reason. I cannot conceive of a genuine scientist
without that profound faith. The situation may be expressed by an image:
science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind.

Though I have asserted above that in truth a legitimate conflict between
religion and science cannot exist, I must nevertheless qualify this
assertion once again on an essential point, with reference to the actual
content of historical religions. This qualification has to do with the
concept of God. During the youthful period of mankind's spiritual
evolution human fantasy created gods in man's own image, who, by the
operations of their will were supposed to determine, or at any rate to
influence, the phenomenal world. Man sought to alter the disposition of
these gods in his own favor by means of magic and prayer. The idea of
God in the religions taught at present is a sublimation of that old
concept of the gods. Its anthropomorphic character is shown, for
instance, by the fact that men appeal to the Divine Being in prayers and
plead for the fulfillment of their wishes.

Nobody, certainly, will deny that the idea of the existence of an
omnipotent, just, and omnibeneficent personal God is able to accord man
solace, help, and guidance; also, by virtue of its simplicity it is
accessible to the most undeveloped mind. But, on the other hand, there
are decisive weaknesses attached to this idea in itself, which have been
painfully felt since the beginning of history. That is, if this being is
omnipotent, then every occurrence, including every human action, every
human thought, and every human feeling and aspiration is also His work;
how is it possible to think of holding men responsible for their deeds
and thoughts before such an almighty Being? In giving out punishment and
rewards He would to a certain extent be passing judgment on Himself. How
can this be combined with the goodness and righteousness ascribed to
Him?

The main source of the present-day conflicts between the spheres of
religion and of science lies in this concept of a personal God. It is
the aim of science to establish general rules which determine the
reciprocal connection of objects and events in time and space. For these
rules, or laws of nature, absolutely general validity is required--not
proven. It is mainly a program, and faith in the possibility of its
accomplishment in principle is only founded on partial successes. But
hardly anyone could be found who would deny these partial successes and
ascribe them to human self-deception. The fact that on the basis of such
laws we are able to predict the temporal behavior of phenomena in
certain domains with great precision and certainty is deeply embedded in
the consciousness of the modern man, even though he may have grasped
very little of the contents of those laws. He need only consider that
planetary courses within the solar system may be calculated in advance
with great exactitude on the basis of a limited number of simple laws.
In a similar way, though not with the same precision, it is possible to
calculate in advance the mode of operation of an electric motor, a
transmission system, or of a wireless apparatus, even when dealing with
a novel development.

To be sure, when the number of factors coming into play in a
phenomenological complex is too large, scientific method in most cases
fails us. One need only think of the weather, in which case prediction
even for a few days ahead is impossible. Nevertheless no one doubts that
we are confronted with a causal connection whose causal components are
in the main known to us. Occurrences in this domain are beyond the reach
of exact prediction because of the variety of factors in operation, not
because of any lack of order in nature.

We have penetrated far less deeply into the regularities obtaining
within the realm of living things, but deeply enough nevertheless to
sense at least the rule of fixed necessity. One need only think of the
systematic order in heredity, and in the effect of poisons, as for
instance alcohol, on the behavior of organic beings. What is still
lacking here is a grasp of connections of profound generality, but not a
knowledge of order in itself.

The more a man is imbued with the ordered regularity of all events the
firmer becomes his conviction that there is no room left by the side of
this ordered regularity for causes of a different nature. For him
neither the rule of human nor the rule of divine will exists as an
independent cause of natural events. To be sure, the doctrine of a
personal God interfering with natural events could never be refuted, in
the real sense, by science, for this doctrine can always take refuge in
those domains in which scientific knowledge has not yet been able to set
foot.

But I am persuaded that such behavior on the part of the representatives
of religion would not only be unworthy but also fatal. For a doctrine
which is able to maintain itself not in clear light but only in the
dark, will of necessity lose its effect on mankind, with incalculable
harm to human progress. In their struggle for the ethical good, teachers
of religion must have the stature to give up the doctrine of a personal
God, that is, give up that source of fear and hope which in the past
placed such vast power in the hands of priests. In their labors they
will have to avail themselves of those forces which are capable of
cultivating the Good, the True, and the Beautiful in humanity itself.
This is, to be sure, a more difficult but an incomparably more worthy
task. (This thought is convincingly presented in Herbert Samuel's book,
*Belief and Action*.) After religious teachers accomplish the refining
process indicated they will surely recognize with joy that true religion
has been ennobled and made more profound by scientific knowledge.

If it is one of the goals of religion to liberate mankind as far as
possible from the bondage of egocentric cravings, desires, and fears,
scientific reasoning can aid religion in yet another sense. Although it
is true that it is the goal of science to discover rules which permit
the association and foretelling of facts, this is not its only aim. It
also seeks to reduce the connections discovered to the smallest possible
number of mutually independent conceptual elements. It is in this
striving after the rational unification of the manifold that it
encounters its greatest successes, even though it is precisely this
attempt which causes it to run the greatest risk of falling a prey to
illusions. But whoever has undergone the intense experience of
successful advances made in this domain is moved by profound reverence
for the rationality made manifest in existence. By way of the
understanding he achieves a far-reaching emancipation from the shackles
of personal hopes and desires, and thereby attains that humble attitude
of mind toward the grandeur of reason incarnate in existence, and which,
in its profoundest depths, is inaccessible to man. This attitude,
however, appears to me to be religious, in the highest sense of the
word. And so it seems to me that science not only purifies the religious
impulse of the dross of its anthropomorphism but also contributes to a
religious spiritualization of our understanding of life.

The further the spiritual evolution of mankind advances, the more
certain it seems to me that the path to genuine religiosity does not lie
through the fear of life, and the fear of death, and blind faith, but
through striving after rational knowledge. In this sense I believe that
the priest must become a teacher if he wishes to do justice to his lofty
educational mission.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="RELIGION"></span>Religion and Science: Irreconcilable?

-   Return to **[Top](#TOP)**

*A response to a greeting sent by the Liberal Ministers' Club of New
York City. Published in* The Christian Register*, June, 1948. Published
in* Ideas and Opinions, *Crown Publishers, Inc., New York, 1954.*

Does there truly exist an insuperable contradiction between religion and
science? Can religion be superseded by science? The answers to these
questions have, for centuries, given rise to considerable dispute and,
indeed, bitter fighting. Yet, in my own mind there can be no doubt that
in both cases a dispassionate consideration can only lead to a negative
answer. What complicates the solution, however, is the fact that while
most people readily agree on what is meant by "science," they are likely
to differ on the meaning of "religion."

As to science, we may well define it for our purpose as "methodical
thinking directed toward finding regulative connections between our
sensual experiences." Science, in the immediate, produces knowledge and,
indirectly, means of action. It leads to methodical action if definite
goals are set up in advance. For the function of setting up goals and
passing statements of value transcends its domain. While it is true that
science, to the extent of its grasp of causative connections, may reach
important conclusions as to the compatibility and incompatibility of
goals and evaluations, the independent and fundamental definitions
regarding goals and values remain beyond science's reach.

As regards religion, on the other hand, one is generally agreed that it
deals with goals and evaluations and, in general, with the emotional
foundation of human thinking and acting, as far as these are not
predetermined by the inalterable hereditary disposition of the human
species. Religion is concerned with man's attitude toward nature at
large, with the establishing of ideals for the individual and communal
life, and with mutual human relationship. These ideals religion attempts
to attain by exerting an educational influence on tradition and through
the development and promulgation of certain easily accessible thoughts
and narratives (epics and myths) which are apt to influence evaluation
and action along the lines of the accepted ideals.

It is this mythical, or rather this symbolic, content of the religious
traditions which is likely to come into conflict with science. This
occurs whenever this religious stock of ideas contains dogmatically
fixed statements on subjects which belong in the domain of science.
Thus, it is of vital importance for the preservation of true religion
that such conflicts be avoided when they arise from subjects which, in
fact, are not really essential for the pursuance of the religious aims.

When we consider the various existing religions as to their essential
substance, that is, divested of their myths, they do not seem to me to
differ as basically from each other as the proponents of the
"relativistic" or conventional theory wish us to believe. And this is by
no means surprising. For the moral attitudes of a people that is
supported by religion need always aim at preserving and promoting the
sanity and vitality of the community and its individuals, since
otherwise this community is bound to perish. A people that were to honor
falsehood, defamation, fraud, and murder would be unable, indeed, to
subsist for very long.

When confronted with a specific case, however, it is no easy task to
determine clearly what is desirable and what should be eschewed, just as
we find it difficult to decide what exactly it is that makes good
painting or good music. It is something that may be felt intuitively
more easily than rationally comprehended. Likewise, the great moral
teachers of humanity were, in a way, artistic geniuses in the art of
living. In addition to the most elementary precepts directly motivated
by the preservation of life and the sparing of unnecessary suffering,
there are others to which, although they are apparently not quite
commensurable to the basic precepts, we nevertheless attach considerable
imporcance. Should truth, for instance, be sought unconditionally even
where its attainment and its accessibility to all would entail heavy
sacrifices in toil and happiness? There are many such questions which,
from a rational vantage point, cannot easily be answered or cannot be
answered at all. Yet, I do not think that the so-called "relativistic"
viewpoint is correct, not even when dealing with the more subtle moral
decisions.

When considering the actual living conditions of presentday civilized
humanity from the standpoint of even the most elementary religious
commands, one is bound to experience a feeling of deep and painful
disappointment at what one sees. For while religion prescribes brotherly
love in the relations among the individuals and groups, the actual
spectacle more resembles a battlefield than an orchestra. Everywhere, in
economic as well as in political life, the guiding principle is one of
ruthless striving for success at the expense of one's fellow. men. This
competitive spirit prevails even in school and, destroying all feelings
of human fraternity and cooperation, conceives of achievement not as
derived from the love for productive and thoughtful work, but as
springing from personal ambition and fear of rejection.

There are pessimists who hold that such a state of affairs is
necessarily inherent in human nature; it is those who propound such
views that are the enemies of true religion, for they imply thereby that
religious teachings are utopian ideals and unsuited to afford guidance
in human affairs. The study of the social patterns in certain so-called
primitive cultures, however, seems to have made it sufficiently evident
that such a defeatist view is wholly unwarranted. Whoever is concerned
with this problem, a crucial one in the study of religion as such, is
advised to read the description of the Pueblo Indians in Ruth Benedict's
book, *Patterns of Culture*. Under the hardest living conditions, this
tribe has apparently accomplished the difficult task of delivering its
people from the scourge of competitive spirit and of fostering in it a
temperate, cooperative conduct of life, free of external pressure and
without any curtailment of happiness.

The interpretation of religion, as here advanced, implies a dependence
of science on the religious attitude, a relation which, in our
predominantly materialistic age, is only too easily overlooked. While it
is true that scientific results are entirely independent from religious
or moral considerations, those individuals to whom we owe the great
creative achievements of science were all of them imbued with the truly
religious conviction that this universe of ours is something perfect and
susceptible to the rational striving for knowledge. If this conviction
had not been a strongly emotional one and if those searching for
knowledge had not been inspired by Spinoza's *Amor Dei Intellectualis*,
they wouid hardly have been capable of that untiring devotion which
alone enables man to attain his greatest achievements.
