[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](alp85) 
[Next](alp87) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Armenian Legends and Poems* \[1916\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Armenia had ceased to be an independent state, its literature
became more religious, as the clergy were anxious to foster devotion.
Christianity introduced a new kind of poetry, namely, Church hymns and
chants. These were called, in Armenian, *sharakans*. They were not only
written in metre, but they were composed with a view to being sung. The
word *sharakan* means a "row of gems." Historians of the Middle Ages say
that the *sharakans* were mainly written by the "translators," i.e., by
writers of the fourth and fifth centuries. As a matter of fact, very few
*sharakans* were written after the thirteenth century. Since then, no
prayers or hymns have been introduced into the Armenian Church.

It is said by writers of the Middle Ages that St. Sahak arranged the
*sharakans* for ten voices and St. Stephanos for twenty-six voices,
corresponding to created things--elements, plants, birds, and animals.
There were also women *sharakan* writers. One of these was Sahakadukht,
who lived in the eighth century. She not only wrote, but also composed
music, and taught singing. Out of modesty, she used to hide behind a
curtain, whence she gave instruction to both sexes. An historian of the
time, Ghevond Eretz, says of her *sharakans:* "They were angelic songs
on earth." Singing was considered a great art in Armenia, and musicians
were called "philosophers." Several of such "philosophers" were
canonised and had the word "philosopher" prefixed to their names. The
fame of some of these musicians spread to foreign lands. This explains
the fact that, when Catholicos Petros Getadardz went to Constantinople,
he took with him a company of musicians, whom he presented, as a gift,
for the service of the Byzantine court.

There was a revival of *sharakan*-writing in the thirteenth century,
which was a flourishing

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

literary period. It was during this time that Bishop Khachatour
Tarinetzi invented distinctively Armenian musical notes, which are quite
unrelated to European ones, so that the Armenians had now, not only an
alphabet of their own, but also their own musical notation, and their
hymns could be set to music. This notation was improved in the
eighteenth century.

Armenian hymns are written in a style which is not only picturesque, but
which also has a charm of its own; its colours are very rich; the
pictures it conjures up are vivid. When one remembers that many of them
were written when national life and death were hanging in the balance,
because of foreign oppression, at a time when they had no one to turn to
but the Creator, we understand how it is that so much tenderness, hope,
and devotion are embodied in these "rows of gems," nor can one help
thinking that Armenian is the natural language for religious poems. A
vein of mysticism runs through many of these hymns, especially through
those written by Gregory of Narek (951-1009), one example of which--"The
Christ-Child"--appears on page [113](alp73.htm#page_113) of this volume.
But this mysticism is not obscure; on the contrary, it is to the hymn
what light and shade are to a picture serving to bring it into touch
with nature.

Hymns have always been popular among the Armenians. Even peasants know
them by heart and sing them. The hymn tunes are unique, being entirely
independent of those of other Christian nations. Their somewhat strange
rhythm recalls the chorus of singers round the altars of the pagan gods.
No doubt some pagan melodies have found their way into the Christian
hymn tunes of Armenia.

The Armenians are rich in folksongs. The music to which these songs are
set possesses great charm. In it, also, the rhythm is most important. An
Armenian composer, speaking of these folksongs, says:--

"By means of those ethereal and heavenly waves of melody one sees
enchanting mermaids who, after dancing on the banks of large and small
lakes and poising themselves on the waters, allure towards themselves
the pagan Armenians, offering love kisses to all minstrels."

In later years Armenian music and poetry were affected by European
influence, but in her hymns and folksongs she has musical treasures that
are all her own.

Side by side with the written literature of this period, the unwritten
literature continued to grow. The latter consists mainly of folktales,
fables, and proverbs.

It is easy to distinguish a Christian folktale from a pagan one by the
different ideals embodied in it. Some of the folktales of this period
have arisen out of historical events.

In the folktales, it is the youngest child that is the hero or heroine.
These stories express

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

the people's outlook on life and are the product of their experiences,
which have been handed down from generation to generation.

There is a great deal of folklore current in Armenia, some of which has
been collected and published.

Grigor Magistros says that, in his time, unwritten fables in rhyme were
very popular.

There are also many Armenian proverbs. It seems to have been a custom in
ancient times --and the usage is still retained in some places--for a
man to go and meet the girl he wishes to marry on the banks of a stream
or in a forest and to ask her a riddle. If she gives the correct answer
to the riddle, he marries her.

Here are a few of the riddles used on these occasions:--

"What paper is it that you cannot write on? and what sort of pen can
write on this paper?"

A maiden who desires to marry the man should answer:--

"The heart is the paper on which no pen can write; language is the pen
that writes on the heart."

"What rose is it that opens in the winter and in due time fades and is
gone?"

Answer: "Snow is the rose that opens in the winter; when summer comes,
it fades and is gone."

"The brother chases the sister, the sister the brother, but neither can
catch the other."

Answer: "The sun and the moon."

There is another usage, belonging especially to young girls, which has
given rise to an extensive literature. This literature consists of
*charm-verses*, which are used for fortune-telling. A selection of these
is given on pages [67](alp50.htm#page_67)-68.

Once a year, on the Eve of Ascension Day, young maidens who want their
fortunes told decorate a bowl with certain specially selected flowers.
Into this bowl each girl casts a token --a ring, a brooch, a thimble.
After filling the bowl with flowers of seven different kinds, and water
drawn from seven springs, they cover it with an embroidered cloth and
take it by night to the priest, who says a prayer over it. They then put
it out in the moonlight, open to the stars, leaving it till dawn. Next
morning, at daybreak, furnished with provisions for the whole day, they
go out of the village carrying the bowl, to the side of a spring, to the
foot of a mountain, or into an open field, gathering, on the way,
various kinds of flowers, with which they deck themselves. Arrived at
their destination, they first play games, dance, and sing, then they
take a beautiful little girl, too young to tell where the sun rises, who
has been previously chosen for their purpose and gaily dressed for the
occasion, and who does not know to whom

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

each token belongs, and cover her face with a richly wrought veil, so
that she may not see what is in the bowl. The child draws the articles
out of the bowl, one by one, and holds each in her hand. While she does
this, one of the party recites a charm-song, and the owner of each token
takes the song which accompanies it as her fortune.

There are thousands of these charm-songs. In form they are very simple.
Sometimes two consecutive lines deal with quite distinct subjects,
though they rhyme together and their construction is the same. Each is a
perfect poem.

After the end of the Arsacid dynasty, Armenia remained under the rule of
Persia for two hundred years. During this period, sometimes the whole
country fell temporarily into the hands of the Greeks; on other
occasions the same fate befell a few provinces. Speaking generally,
after the fall of the Arsacidae, the eastern--and more extensive--part
of Armenia remained under Persian rule, and the western--and
smaller--part came under Greek dominion. The Greeks and the Persians
were continually fighting with one another for the possession of the
whole country. Armenia was the battlefield, and the sufferer was always
the Armenian people. After the Arabs had embraced Mohammedanism, they
formed a powerful empire, conquering Mesopotamia and then passing on to
Persia. They forced the Persians to become Mohammedans, and in 640
entered Armenia. Eastern Armenia, which was then in the hands of the
Persians, fell into their possession.

The Greeks greatly dreaded the taking of Armenia by the Arabs, as it
formed a strong barrier against the assault of the Greek colonies in
Asia Minor. Therefore, as they had before fought in Armenia against the
Persians, so they now proceeded to fight against the Arabs; and again
Armenia was the battlefield and the sufferers were the Armenians. The
Greeks came from time to time demanding tribute of them, and if their
demand were resisted, the people were plundered and slaughtered. On the
departure of the Greek army, the Arabs came, making the same demand.
Thus, during the first two hundred years following the fall of the
Arsacidae, the Armenians were between the two fires of the Persians and
the Greeks, and then for another two hundred years between the two fires
of the Greeks and the Arabs. During this period, the Armenian princes
offered resistance from time to time and succeeded in regaining
independence for short intervals. The governors set by the Arabs over
Armenia were in the habit of persecuting the native princes, to prevent
them from organising revolts. Of these governors, the most bloodthirsty
were Kashm and Bugha. The former cunningly invited all the Armenian
princes to the town of Nakhejevan, where they assembled in the church;
whereupon, by order of the government, the church was surrounded by
piles of wood and set on fire, and the princes burnt alive (704). The
army was then set to plunder and

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

slaughter the Armenians and burn the towns and villages, as the people,
deprived of their princes, could offer no resistance. Many were exiled
to the Arab capital, Damascus. Bugha (850) surpassed even Kashm in his
cruelty, but we need not chronicle his atrocities here. Under such
governors as these, the tribute and the taxes were enormous, and the
people became very poor. There were, however, also good governors,
during whose rule the people were free from oppression and were allowed
to pursue their peaceful occupations.

But gradually the power of the Arabs declined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[156:1](alp85.htm#fr_38) The history of this war
is recorded by Eghishé, a contemporary ecclesiastic, whose work is more
widely read than any book except the Bible. He is a poet rather than an
historian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bagratuni Dynasty](alp87)
