[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tot06)  [Next](tot08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417977574/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tilak of Tibet Reveals Life's Purpose*, by Ann Hackett \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### V

### THE SUICIDE

Tilak was drawn in his finer body to Lahore.

Leaving his earthly covering on the simple cot in the Chamber of the
Great Potential, Tilak moved quickly to a side street near the market
place. It was early morning and the city was still. Coming toward him on
the narrow street was a man of thirty-five. As the man walked toward
Tilak he kept glancing back, as though fearful of a hidden enemy who
might spring from a darkened doorway and attack him.

Greatly agitated, the man addressed Tilak: "I have made a great
mistake—Help me!"

"I will, friend," said Tilak: "Tell me what troubles you."

The man's roving eyes sought Tilak's for a moment. Then he hurriedly
said: "I loved the daughter of a great merchant. She returned my love.
Because I was a poor trader her father cast me from the house. I sent a
friend to the house as an emissary. The girl's father told my friend
that unless I could produce three hundred pieces of gold, I was not to
approach his daughter

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

again. Every part of me called to possess the girl. In the great market
place I watched the traders. Much gold and silver passed between them.
On day a trader placed a bag of gold on a small stand. When his back was
turned I stole the bag of money. The bag contained three hundred pieces
of gold. In my poor quarters I gloated over the yellow metal. Now I
could buy the girl I loved from her father! Before I left to visit the
home of the great merchant and give him the gold, a rumor spread
throughout the city that the thief, who had stolen the gold from the
trader, was known. Fear took me in its grasp. I would flee the city! I
waited until night. Every footstep I heard I believed to be directed
toward my abode—that someone was coming to take me before the
magistrate. This apprehension grew, and when I heard a long knock on my
door, in a state of fear, I swallowed a cup of bitterroot poison,
seeking a release of my misdeed in death. I did not die. I found myself
looking down on my earthly body as it was lying stiff and still on the
floor. I stood as one in a spell, looking at the garment that had so
lately served me. Again a knock at the door. Then a man pushed open the
door and entered. It was my friend. He saw my body on the floor. He bent
over and touched my body, and said aloud, 'Poor Das! He is dead! He did
not live to receive my message.' The girl's father had relented and I
was to be received in the household of the woman I loved. The rumor of
the discovery of the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

thief was false. Full of fear, I had believed the rumor—and now, having
wickedly thrown off my earthly covering, what am Ito do?"

Compassionately Tilak gazed at the man before him. The casting aside
prematurely of the earthly covering changes nothing, leaves everything
undone. This Tilak must tell the man. In no other way could he help him.
Softly Tilak said: "Come."

Together they glided noiselessly through the city to the home of the
girl. The daughter of the great merchant was waiting for Das. She had
been weeping, for her eyes were red. For hours she had been standing by
the window watching for the man she loved. Unseen and unheard Tilak
stood with Das near the girl. Tilak said: "Your act of self-destruction
has brought suffering to the one you loved."

In anguish Das cried: "I will speak to her—I will embrace her!"

"She would not hear you, nor feel your touch. You have cast aside the
garment that would have placed you by her side, the garment she knew and
loved. It was given to you for that purpose."

Das cried out to the girl of his heart, but she heard him not. He
touched her, but she felt not his touch. "Why," groaned the man, "should
I have done this thing?—I suffer."

Gently Tilak led him away. Every recent scene of

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the man's earthly life was visited. Each was the same. Das was needed,
and he was not there.

However humble a man's earthly life, however limited his earthly
existence, however few human beings he may meet; he is needed where he
was placed in earthly existence; placed by a great and overshadowing
destiny. When a man is too early removed from his earthly existence, by
the self-severance of an earthly covering, who can do the work that was
allotted to him? All other human beings are carrying their quota; are
performing those things that they were sent to perform. No one can
fulfill the destiny of another.

"I will leave Lahore. I cannot bear to view what is here."

"Where will you go, friend?" asked Tilak quietly.

"To other parts of India—the country is large."

"What will you do in other parts of India?"

"Forget all this!" cried Das.

"If you bear no relationship to other parts of India, to other parts of
the world, they will hold nothing for you, friend, and you will be drawn
back to Lahore where those that knew you live."

"I will try. I must shut all this out!" As Das was speaking he glided
away toward Benares.

Tilak followed at a distance.

Das roamed the streets of Benares. He scanned face after face. No one
did he know. He entered a Temple.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Temple service
struck him as an ice cold wave, driving him out as though with fury.

Disconsolate, Das stood in the market place of Benares. The noise of the
market place impressed him not. He heard a woman sobbing. The sobs
filled his being with sorrow, a sorrow that he could not shake off, as
he had so foolishly his earthly protective garment. The sobs drew him
with the speed of light to Lahore—to the woman he loved. Again he stood
beside the woman. He cried out to her. He touched the face he loved so
well. She heard him not. She felt not his loving touch. Das wept bitter
tears.

Tilak moved to the sorrowing man, and spoke to him: "There is little I
can say that will comfort you. I may be able to give you courage, for
when an individual knows the condition that confronts him, the
individual develops the courage to face the condition. In taking your
earthly covering you have deprived many of your earthly presence, a
presence they needed. Now you must remain and lend a presence that they
cannot see, nor feel. This presence, unknown though it be, must remain
until the life that should have been your earthly existence has run its
full course. During that time you must watch the sorrow and deprivation
that the absence of your physical body caused. In forty-two years you
will be released from this vigil, and will then pass into another field
of activity where you would have passed better qualified should you have

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

remained in your physical body until Fate's Decree removed you. This is
so given that never again when occupying an earthly body will you seek
its early destruction."

Sadly, Das said: "I will build the courage. I will need it. You have
helped me."

Tilak smiled his benediction, and disappeared from the man's presence.

 

#### DESIGN AND PURPOSE

During midsummer Tilak journeyed down the mountainside to the warm
valley below. He wandered through the Valley of the Kashmir. He stopped
now and then to watch the simple folk as they worked in the fields.

Nature was dressed in fairest array. Tilak leaned over and picked up a
bouquet of flowers that had been carelessly dropped. Tilak studied the
bouquet. He studied the reds, the purples, the golden yellows, the
blues, the greens. They presented a fragrant harmony. Each flower
followed a definite design. Within each flower was hidden its seed. The
seed would be faithful to the design of the flower. Follow they not a
plan? Repeat they not themselves eternally?

Man too was designed. How carefully his form is constructed. Every part
serves a purpose. Every part serves man. Man is so designed that he can
absorb all

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

that lies about him. When man is in harmony all his parts are in
harmony.

There is a relationship between the inanimate and man. The inanimate
changes slowly, that the picture be held longer before man; held until
his faculties respond to that so majestically placed before him. Man
cannot retain the inanimate in a pouch by his side. Man retains only
that which becomes part of him.

All things appeal to man's protection and tenderness. If all things
issued forth full grown, the tenderness and protective spirit in man
would remain dormant. That which is young is helpless and needs
guidance. As man guides he awakens within himself the power to guide.

Growth represents the phases of man's comprehension. Man sings through
youthful limbs. He should sing ever. When growing man loses his power to
sing, he has lost his power to absorb and retain the beauties around
him.

A kind act is a bouquet. A pleasant word is a flower. Thus are nature's
bounties distributed.

Every day brings its opportunities. No one can be isolated. If a man
sits alone in his chamber, and believes that he is unattended, he is
permitting to pass unnoticed the teaching of the day. How can man be
isolated, when the mind is tenanted with thoughts? If the thoughts are
low man is in direct communication with other minds that are low. When
his mind soars he soars

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

not alone. There is no place in the entire manifested universe that the
mind of man can move and be alone.

As thoughts race through the mind they have a source. The source is not
man. Man is but a channel through which thoughts are passing. What
interests an individual attracts an individual. If thoughts are
unpleasant hug them not. Would you crush to your breast an armful of
burrs? Man has been given the power to select; what he selects he
nourishes. Let man guard that which he would house.

What does man possess?—Nothing. What does man use?—Everything. What does
man kneed?—That which he uses. On his journey from birth to death man is
what he uses. If he becomes absorbed in the lesser things, he is, while
so absorbed, similar to them. The user of the lesser is easily
entertained.

The physical body has requirements; it also makes demands. Catering to
bodily demands enslaves. Excessive bodily demands bring sorrow, even
though the demands have been satisfied; for man is not body alone.

From birth man is dependent, and unless he seeks to rend the shackles
that bind him, he becomes more dependent as he waxes toward age. Gauge
not value by that which is seen. The value lies in the meaning of that
which is seen to that which sees.

Tilak studied nature's finer forces; world forming forces, invisible to
all sense life. The senses grasp but

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

accumulated particles. The finer forces, Tilak discovered, sustain the
manifested universe. Man has given these invisible finer forces many
names. Plant and tree, growth cannot be seen. It is only the result of
the growth that is perceived. The wind is invisible, yet it is filled
with unused power. The power of moving water is invisible, yet it is
greater than the water itself.. The power of the sun as it meets the
surface of the earth is not seen, yet this power brings to pass growth
and change on the face of the earth.

Tilak discovered that there are also powers moving through man; powers
invisible—nature's finer forces. These invisible forces man can use, but
man neglects them. Man's motive is such a power, as is man's thinking
and feeling. These invisible powers depend not upon man's senses. When
man utilizes these finer forces that move through him, he opens channels
that connect him with the Great Unseen.

As every thought, feeling and act is recorded, man can, with the powers
moving through him, read these recordings, and thereby guide his truant
footsteps.

During a life, or even lives, man spends little time with himself. His
entire consciousness seems to be absorbed by those things about him.
This leads man to believe that injustice stalks the earth. Babes will
often cry when there is naught amiss. So is it with man. Man has ever
with him that which will comb the locks of despair. It is in the halls
of plenty that complaint is

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

loudest. Man demands much that his senses be continually entertained.

Could Tilak, or any other Teacher, approach any one in the market place
and say: "There are greater riches that you can secure; riches greater
than those that abound in the world's marts." Would not the one in the
market place ask: "How much could I get for them? Would they give me
power?"

No man prays that the sun change its course; yet man will pray that the
course of his own life be changed, so that he may bask in the lethargic
state of riches. Such prayer reaches not nature's finer forces.

The earth is as a mirror, which can reflect man at his lowest point. Man
can descend no lower than man. He does not find his source in the animal
kingdom, although he appears often to take on animalistic
characteristics. Because man can growl, he is not the offspring of a
dog. Because man can chirp, his ancestry will not be found in bird life.
Man can show his teeth as a wolf, can devour food as a hog, and yet
these animals knew not his forebears. Animal tendencies man has with the
beasts of the earth, but even with these tendencies he is always man.

Man has wandered far from his source; he must again return to that
source. Man has been made custodian of himself; into his keeping has
been placed the great kingdom of self. Over this he must rule. Man often
seeks to put aside this responsibility; as he does

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

so the finer forces of nature ever seek to turn him back to his rightful
kingdom.

 

#### FUTURE VISION

Cross-legged, Tilak sat before the altar in the Chamber of the Great
Potential. On the brazier he had placed a single drop of the essence of
Future Vision. As the essence filled the Chamber Tilak saw before him
legions of cowled and hooded figures. The cowls hid the faces of this
restless, moving multitude.

From a distance came a loud sound, as the pealing of an iron bell.
Instantly cowl and gown were dropped and Tilak saw before him uniformed
men carrying guns and swords. The men assumed a definite formation, and
marched with the sun glistening on steel helmets. Behind the men came
iron monsters moving on strange wheels; from their upper parts protruded
large guns. As they passed Tilak beheld in the sky thousands of steel
birds who carried missiles of destruction. The faces of the soldiers,
the steel that encompassed head and machine alike, sent forth red
flashes as from a mighty forge.

Tilak was viewing men that were yet to be born of earth; men that by
their method of living were preparing for a work of destruction. These
men were banded together as tightly as links on a great anchor chain;
links that appeared strong and all powerful, but

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

which became as rust and turned to powder—a powder that blew across the
earth, choking all vegetation and aught else that stood in the way.

Tilak knew then that wars are born, and soldiers develop, in the
decaying cavity of baseness. What could turn these men from their chosen
path; these men who were building veritable death, joined together by
destructive purpose—these men, the puppets of an iron age!

Again the scene changed, and other people appeared before Tilak's
vision—men and women that would till the soil, enjoying little of that
which they would harvest. These workers of the soil would, by humble
protest, endeavor to hold back the men with the iron heels.

Then appeared the small group of men who were to be in the seats of
power. Richly covered were their bodies, covered with the finest raiment
earth can produce. The faces above the gaudy garments were without
feeling; the faces appeared in the higher light as skeletons, whose
every finer part had been plucked from the bone, leaving them but as
rattling outlines; whose very breath was as sulphur. Eyes were sunken to
back of skull; mouths worked as vises, and crushed every word that
passed through lipless apertures.

A blast rang out, as though from throat of iron trumpet. Then the whole
air became filled with a bursting noise. On to the fair earth dropped
lethal

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

explosives, tearing into the side of the friendly ground, as a wild
beast tears into the side of its prey. Steel helmeted soldiers appeared.
With a madness they leaped upon other steel helmeted armed men. Carnage
and death! As helmeted soldiers fell in battle again they appeared as
hooded and cloaked figures. When the last steel helmeted soldier had
been struck down, and had passed into the dark mist beyond, the earth
rejoiced.

 

#### THE COMPOSER

A great composer sat in his studio. All was quiet. It was two hours
before dawn. The composer's eyes were closed, but he was not asleep. His
whole self-consciousness was as an eardrum. He strained to catch an
illusive melody that had hovered long near him. The composer hoped to
give to the world a melody that would soften harshness, lift
despondency, inspire to noble act. Near the composer, on the table
within easy reach, was a blank music sheet.

Tilak, sitting in the Chamber of the Great Potential in the mountain
vastness of far away Tibet, received the composer's call—the call for
the melody. The finer body revealed to Tilak that when the composer took
physical birth he had brought with him the melody. The melody had been
impressed on the composer's finer body, and the composer sought to bring
it through

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

to his earthly body. As Tilak listened he heard the melody issuing from
the finer garment of the composer. The melody was sweet; a melody that
would encompass the earth with soothing tones. Tilak strung his polished
stones. Standing before them he touched, with padded staff, one stone
and then another. The composer's melody moved through space until it
reached the eager ear of the composer.

Feverishly the composer filled in the blank music sheet that lay before
him, until the marks represented the complete melody. After the composer
had placed the last note on the paper he dropped into a deep slumber. It
was not until the midday sun cast its rays through the studio window
that the composer awakened. Instantly he reached for the sheet of music
and studied the composition.

Later the people of the earth heard the melody and honored the great
composer; the composer who had brought into their lives a concord of
sweet sound.

*NO GREAT MELODY IS EVER LOST*.

 

#### GENERATING THOUGHTS

Thoughts long held and nourished either find fruit in action or generate
greater thoughts. Thus wrote Tilak on his parchment leaves. Thoughts
that join a past action often ill-fit a present act. Each act should
have its own thought; then the reflection becomes

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

clearer. A person reflecting is arranging his thoughts. Thus reflection
brings order to the mind. When the mind is well ordered disruptive
thoughts seldom enter. Meditation to the mind is as theme to music. If
the theme is sweet the meditation brings ease. Love colors all thinking.
Love places a rainbow through all thought. When love is present thought
soars, for love is ever the wings of thought.

A man would not knowingly house a thief; yet the mind of man will house
thoughts that steal away peace. So often there is but a short distance
between thought and the spoken word. Should not this distance be flower
wreathed? That which issueth from the mouth of man took birth within the
mind. Does man with his spoken word wish to reveal how poorly tenanted
is his mind? What has greater power than kindly words—words of
encouragement that have their source in the vaulted chambers of an
ordered mind? Words clothed with compassion can only come from a mind
filled with compassionate thoughts. Thoughts to be joyful must be free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Invalid](tot08)
