[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft03)  [Next](geft05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

### The Three Sisters and their Stepmother

ONCE upon a time there was a peasant who had three daughters. This man's
wife was dead, so he took to himself another. The stepmother hated the
girls like the plague. Every day she bothered her husband, saying: 'Take
away these daughters of thine, and get rid of them.' Sometimes she
yielded to their father's entreaties, sometimes she gave way to her
dislike. At last she could bear it no longer: she became ill, went to
bed, took with her crisp, flat bread, and began to moan. She turned on
one side, made the loaves crack, and cried out: 'My sides are breaking.
Oh! turn me on my other side!' The cause of all this was her
stepdaughters, so her husband, seeing that nothing was to be done,
consented to get rid of them. He went away into the forest. There he saw
a large apple-tree bearing fruit; underneath it he dug a deep hole, took
an apple for each, and went home. When he came in, he gave each her
apple. The girls liked the taste of the apples, and said to their
father: 'Where didst thou find these? canst thou not bring some more?'
The father replied: 'There are many of these apples in the forest, but I
have not time to bring more. If you like, you can come

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

with me; I will shake them down, you can gather them up and bring them
away.' The girls were delighted, and went with their father.

Their father had secretly covered up the hole, and said to the girls:
'Here are the apples. I will shake them down, but until I tell you do
not gather them up. Then, when I speak, you can all scramble for them,
and whoever picks up an apple, it is hers.' The father went up to the
tree, and when he had shaken it well, called out to his daughters: 'Now,
catch who can!' The girls suddenly rushed on to the covering, which
could not bear their weight; it fell into the hole, taking with it the
three girls. Their father threw them in a great many apples, left them,
and went away.

The girls could not at first understand their father's conduct, but then
they saw that he had brought them into the wood on purpose, and said:
'Our wicked stepmother is to blame for this!' but there was no help for
it, so these three little maidens sat down and wept. They wept and wept
until their faces were pale; their tears shook heaven above and the
earth beneath. At last the apples were finished. They thought and
thought, and decided that each should let blood from her little finger,
and that they should eat her whose blood tasted sweetest. They let
blood, and it was agreed by all that the youngest sister's was sweetest.
She said: 'O sisters! do not eat me. I have three apples hidden; eat
them, and perhaps God will help us.'

Then she bent on her knees, and prayed to God: 'O God, for Thy name's
sake, I beseech Thee, let one of my hands turn into a pickaxe, and the
other into a shovel.' God heard her prayer. One of her hands changed
into a pickaxe, and the other into a shovel. With one hand she dug

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

a hole, and with the other shovelled away the earth. She dug and dug
until she came to a mouse's hole. She took thence nuts, little nuts, and
gave them to her sisters. She went on digging, and broke down a stable
wall. This stable belonged to the king, and almonds and raisins were
strewed about in it. The girls used to go to the stable; they stole the
almonds and raisins, and ate them. The grooms were astonished, and said:
'Who can it be that steals the almonds and raisins? The horses are dying
of starvation.'

The little maiden, in her digging, next broke the window of an old
woman's hut. Every morning the mistress of this hut went to mass.
Feeling sorry for the old woman, the girls stole into the hut, cleaned
and tidied everything, put beans on the fire to cook, broke off
sufficient bread for themselves, and stole away again. When the old
woman came home she was filled with surprise. Who could have been there
and stolen her bread? Perhaps she could find out. She did not go to mass
next day. She rolled herself in a mat, and stuck herself up, like a
stick, near the door. The girls came; they thought the old woman had
gone to mass, and stole into the hut one by one. The old woman watched
from the mat with both her eyes, and she could scarcely believe what she
saw. She saw the three maidens enter--each more beautiful than the
other, all fair, as if the sun had never frowned upon them. She gazed
and gazed until she could bear it no longer: she threw off the mat,
seized one of them in her arms, and said: 'Who art thou, who art so
angelic? Art thou human or an angel?' The maiden replied: 'We are three
sisters, we are human. Thus and thus has it befallen us.' And she told
their tale to the old woman, who was delighted that she had found the
three sisters. She guarded them as the light of her eyes,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

and, when she went out, turned up baskets over them, that none should
see them and take them away.

Once the woman went to mass. She left the girls under baskets, and shut
the doors. Then the idea came into the girls' heads that they would like
some raisins. They rose, took off the baskets, and crept into the
stable. Just as they were beginning to steal raisins, the groom hastened
in seized the three sisters, and took them before the king. The king
asked them who they were, and they told him all their history. The king
said: 'Tell me, what can you do?' The eldest sister said: 'I can weave
such a carpet that every man in thy army could sit on it, and still half
of it would not be unrolled.' The second sister said: 'I can cook enough
food in an egg-shell to feed thine army, and when they have eaten, half
yet shall remain.' The king said to the youngest: 'What canst thou do?'
She replied: 'I can bear golden-haired boys.' The king was pleased with
this answer, and wedded her. He tried her sisters' skill, but the eldest
could not weave a carpet large enough for one man, while the food cooked
by the second sister would not have satisfied a bird. The king waxed
wroth, and said to his wife: 'If thou deceivest me too, none of you
shall live.'

Some time passed, and the youngest sister was with child. At that time
the king's enemy came against him, and he prepared to go forth to
battle. Before he set out he left this message: 'If my wife bears a son,
let a sword be suspended over the door; if she bears a daughter, let a
spinning-wheel be hung up.' Shortly after this his wife went to bed. Her
sisters would allow no one to enter the bed-room; they tended her and
nursed her themselves.

The king's wife brought forth a golden-haired boy. Her

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

two sisters were angry that their youngest sister should be proved
truthful in the sight of the king, while they were liars; they wished
her also to appear untruthful. They arose, and, without the mother's
knowledge, took away the golden-haired boy, and put in his place a puppy
dog. They did not dare to kill the child, so they made a box, laid him
in it, and put it in a river. The river carried it away, and it stuck in
a mill-race. The race was dammed up and the mill stopped. The miller
came out, and saw the box fixed in the race; he took it up and opened
it. Behold, there lay a golden-haired child! He was childless, so he
took it home and brought it up. In the meantime the sisters hung up a
pestle over the door. The king returned from the battle and saw the
pestle. He was very much surprised, and said: 'What does this mean? what
has my wife brought forth?' They said: 'A puppy.' The king was very
angry, but thought: 'Perhaps some one has done this; I will wait and see
if she has a son.'

A year passed, and his wife was again with child. One day, when the king
was out hunting, a golden-haired boy was born. The sisters, as before,
would allow no one in the room. They took the child away secretly, and
put a kitten in its place. They again put the child in a box in the
river, and the miller found it again. The sisters hung the pestle over
the door. When the king returned from the chase, and saw the pestle, he
burned with fires of rage, and sparks shot from his eyes. He took his
wife out, caused her to be wrapped in a bullock's skin, and bound to a
column in front of the palace. Every one who passed by was ordered to
spit in her face and strike her. Thus unjustly did he torture an
innocent being! The miller loved the two golden-haired children as if
they were the apple of his

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

eye. They became very wise, brave, and handsome, and grew as much in a
day as other children grow in a year.

Once when the king was out hunting, he saw a group of children playing,
but among them were two who far excelled the others. The king was very
much taken with these two children, and could not withdraw his eyes from
them. He looked and looked, and would never have been tired of looking;
he wished to gaze on them for ever. He noticed how strongly they
resembled himself. He was astonished, and said to himself: 'Who can
these children be, who are so like myself?' But he could not guess the
truth. Just then, while playing, the cap fell from the head of one of
the brothers, and showed his golden hair. The king was struck, and
inquired: 'Whose children are these?' He was told they were the miller's
sons.

The next day the king gave a banquet, and invited the miller and his
golden-haired sons. When the children came into the king's courtyard,
they saw a woman bound to a column, and they looked long, and knew that
this must be their mother. The cook was roasting a pheasant. The elder
brother went inside, took the spit from the cook, sat down by the
fireside, and turned the pheasant round. When it became red and was
cooked, he began to tell a tale. All ears were pricked up, and the
people looked into his face. The boy began to tell his mother's tale.
After he had told how his mother bore the golden-haired boys, and how
the sisters were so treacherous, he concluded by saying: 'If this story
is true, the bullock's skin will burst, and my mother be free.' And the
bullock's skin burst, and his mother came in.

When the story was quite finished, his younger brother came in and took
the spit in his hand, and said: 'If all my

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

brother's tale is true and this is indeed our mother, this roast
pheasant will have feathers and fly away.' Feathers appeared on the
roast pheasant, and it flew off. The people gazed open-mouthed. The
astonished king commanded the jealous sisters to be brought, bound them
to horses' tails, and had them dragged about. The king took his wife and
children into the palace, and rejoiced greatly that he had learnt the
truth and found his golden-haired sons. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:1](geft04.htm#fr_3.md) Cf. Lady Charlotte
Guest's *Mabinogion*, p. 353. Pwll.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Good-for-nothing](geft05.md)
