[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft36)  [Next](geft38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X

### The Story of Dervish

A HUNTER killed in the mountains a stag, and began to skin it. He then
hung the skin on a bush, and went down to a stream to wash the blood
from his hands. When he came back, he found to his surprise that the
dead stag had come to life, and was bounding away. When he had recovered
from his astonishment, he chased the beast, but could not overtake it,
and it was soon lost to sight. He met a wayfarer, briefly told him the
story, and asked if he had ever seen a stag without a skin. 'I have
never seen a stag without a skin, but I do not wonder at your story.
Near here there is a healing spring where any beast, even if wounded
unto death, can be cured by bathing. Your stag probably bathed there,
and is now sound and well. But if you want to know more about this
wonderful country of ours, seek out a man called Dervish, and he will
tell you things that will soon make you forget all about the stag.'
'Where can I find this Dervish?' asked the hunter. 'Go from village to
village, and look into every courtyard, and when you see a man smoking a
pipe, with an ass and a she-ass bound before him, ask him.'

The hunter went away, and, after a long search, found Dervish, who told
him the following story:--

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

'I was married,' said Dervish, 'and loved my wife, but she deceived me
with my next-door neighbour. When I heard of this I questioned my wife,
but, instead of answering, she struck me with a whip, and, to my horror,
I was turned into a dog. My wife drove me out into the yard, and for
shame I ran away. On the road I suffered hunger, thirst, and despair,
and, for the first time in my life, I knew what it was to be powerless,
and realised what a great difference there is between man and beast.
When I opened my mouth and tried to speak, I only barked and howled. I
tried to stand on my hind legs, and walk like a man, but I fell either
backwards or forwards. Then I jumped about, and did this so easily and
briskly that I regained my spirits, and came to think that even a dog's
life had its pleasures. While I was merrily jumping, I unexpectedly saw
a man. He looked at me and I at him. The man smiled, and I ran up to
him, but he was afraid, and lifted his stick to strike me. We both moved
away from each other. I wanted to speak, but I barked, and the man
raised his stick again. I then began to frolic and jump, and the man
smiled again, and let me come up to him. I understood how dog and man
are always the best of friends, and in my mind I thanked my wicked wife
that she had turned me into a dog, and not some other beast, a pig, for
instance. The man who beckoned me to come to him was a good village
priest, and we soon became great friends. He caressed me, gave me
something to eat, and I went away with him. The kind-hearted priest,
overcome by the heat, lay down to rest under a tree, and I wished to do
the same, but the priest said: "Watch over me!" so I did not go to
sleep, rightly thinking that if the priest woke and found me asleep he
would give me no more bread, and

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

perhaps would drive me away. Ah! the beginning of my dog life was
grievous. In the evening, the priest stopped to sleep with some
shepherds who were watching their flocks. The shepherds, to show honour
to their pastor, killed a lamb for supper, got wine, and made merry.
Though I took no direct part in the feast, I kept close behind my
master. After supper, one of the shepherds looked at me, and said: "This
dog must be fond of wine, for he never takes his eyes from the glass,
and now and then he licks his lips." I nodded my head several times.
Then the shepherds poured me out some wine in a plate, and I lapped it
up with pleasure. When they were all asleep, wolves came and attacked
the sheep. The shepherds' dogs barked, but did not dare to attack the
wolves; I rose and killed three wolves on the spot. When the shepherds
saw this, they offered the priest a good price for me, and he finally
sold me. Before long I had killed a vast number of wolves, and the fame
of me reached the ears of the king of the country. I was brought and
taken to the palace, to the sick daughter of the king, who was tormented
at night by brownies. Every morning the princess woke exhausted and
enfeebled. On the first night of my watch, I saw swans enter the
bedchamber through the closed doors, they choked and trampled upon the
sleeping princess. I was chained up, and could do nothing to help the
poor maiden. In the morning, I was scolded for not having done anything,
but one of the courtiers defended me, saying: "He is a good dog, but he
must be unchained, and then we shall see what he can do." Next night the
swans came again. I killed ten of them, but the eleventh asked me to
spare her, saying she would help me in the matter of my wife and our
neighbour. I trusted the swan, and let her go. To my delight, the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

princess rose healthy and merry next morning. The king was exceedingly
pleased with me, and ordered me to have a heavy gold chain, and to be
fed right royally. I lived well in the palace, but I longed to see my
home and wife again, so I soon ran away. When I entered my own house, my
wife took off my gold chain, struck me with her whip, and turned me into
a duck. I flew into a field near by, where millet had been sown, and,
being inexperienced, was caught at once in nets laid by a peasant. The
peasant took me under his arm, and gave me to his wife, telling her to
cook me for dinner. As soon as the peasant had gone out, the woman
looked at me intently, and then took down from the wall a whip, with
which she struck me, and turned me into a man again, saying: "Have I
helped you or not? We were twelve sisters, you killed ten of us, I am
the eleventh, and your wife is the twelfth. Now go home, take the whip
which hangs over your wife's bed, strike her and your neighbour with it,
and you can turn them into any kind of beasts that you wish." I went in
late at night, when my wife and the neighbour were both asleep, I struck
them with the whip, and turned my wife into an ass, and the man into a
she-ass, and here they are.' The hunter was terrified when he heard this
story of Dervish, he ran away from the enchanted mountain realm as fast
as he could, and resolved never to go back there again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The Father's Prophecy](geft38.md)
