[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft30)  [Next](geft32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### IV

### The King and the Sage

ONCE upon a time, there reigned in one of the realms of the East a shah
named Ali, a man of amiable and merry character. Ali was much beloved by
his subjects, and he too loved them with all his heart. The shah played
with them as if they had been his children; he gave them festivals,
arranged competitions, and gave prizes for the best poetical
productions, etc. The shah was skilled in the famous literature of
Arabia, and was thought to be a learned man; besides this, he was a wit
and a joker, and loved to set his folk merry riddles to guess: prizes
were given to the successful. Once the *ferashes* (or servants) of the
shah made known to the people, that Ali had promised three hundred
pieces of gold to him who should ask his majesty such a question that
the answer must inevitably be: *That is Impossible*.

This announcement created great excitement, and men, women, and children
all alike set themselves to think out such a question. The day of the
competition dawned at last, and the vast square before the palace was
crowded with a curious throng. At the appointed hour, Shah Ali appeared,
surrounded by a brilliant guard, and music filled the air. After
greeting his folk, the shah sat down on a throne, opposite the platform
on which the candidates were to stand while they asked the shah their
questions. Heralds gave out the challenge, and a wit of the town mounted
the rostrum and loudly said: 'Shah! a courier has just galloped into the
town and told me a most astonishing piece of news, to wit, that at dawn
this morning, twenty versts from your capital, the moon fell from the
sky

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

to the ground, and burned two and twenty villages to ashes.' The shah
meditated a moment, and then replied: 'That is possible.' The town wit
got down, amid the laughter of the people.

His place was taken by a courtier, the shah's body-surgeon, who shouted:
'Most illustrious Shah! In your harem a most astounding event has just
happened--your first wife, your beloved Zuleika, has just given birth to
a sucking-pig covered with bristles.' The shah considered, and then
replied: 'That is possible.' The doctor fled in shame, and the people
laughed more loudly than before.

After the doctor came an astrologer, who said: 'Most noble Shah! In
observing the courses of the stars I have discovered a woful piece of
news; an awful fate awaits you. O King, you will soon have horns like a
goat, and claws like a panther, you will lose the power of speech, and
flee from us into the woods, where you will dwell exactly seven years
and three months.' To him likewise the shah replied: 'That is possible,'
and he too disappeared, amid the jeers of the mob.

The competition lasted throughout the whole of that day and the next, to
the delight of the people, until at last they thought of getting a
certain Nasr-Eddin, a wit well known throughout the East, to oppose to
the shah. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53)

On the third, and last, day appeared Nasr-Eddin, tattered and almost
naked, dragging with him two great clay jars. Addressing the shah, he
said: 'Hail to the commander of the faithful, blessed be thy name! Thou
shalt reign yet a hundred years, and the love and confidence of thy
subjects

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

will increase yearly.' 'That is possible,' said the shah. 'That the
confidence your subjects repose in you is unbounded is evident from a
fact which I am about to relate; you will doubtless deign to listen.'
'That is possible.' 'Your late father (God rest his soul!) was very
friendly with my late father (may the Prophet give him a place in
Paradise!) . . .' 'That is possible.' 'Listen to me, O Shah! When your
father went forth to war with the unbelievers, he was so poor that he
could not raise an army.' . . . 'That is possible.' 'Not only is it
possible but true, for, owing to his want of money, he borrowed from my
father these two jars full of gold pieces, and promised on his royal
word that you, O Shah, would pay your father's debt to me.' Shah Ali
burst into laughter, and said: 'That is impossible! Your father was a
tatterdemalion like yourself, and never saw two jars of gold even in his
dreams. Take your three hundred gold pieces, and the devil take you. You
rascal, you have outwitted me.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[161:1](geft31.htm#fr_54) The Mullah Nasr-Eddin
is the hero of hundreds of witty tales. A French translation of some of
them (from the Turkish) was published, by Decourdemanche, in 1878.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The King's Son](geft32)
