[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft11)  [Next](geft13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X

### The Prince

THERE was once a king who had great possessions, but his wife had no
children, and he was a prey to grief.

One day when he was very melancholy a courtier came to him and said:
'Most mighty monarch! thou hast no son, and thou givest no gifts; what
will thy subjects think of thee? What wilt thou do with this wealth
stored up by thee?' The king took these words to heart; the next day he
gave a great feast, and scattered alms lavishly.

From no one knows where there appeared at that time an old woman. She
came to the king and said: 'What wilt thou give me if I bring thee a
son?' The king replied: 'Whatever thou askest of me, that will I give
thee.' The old woman drew forth from her pocket an apple, which she cut
in three and gave to the king, saying, 'Let thy wife eat this, and she
will have three children; but, remember, I shall come back in seven
years and thou must

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

give me thy youngest son.' The king consented, gave his wife the apple,
and she ate it.

Some time passed, and the queen bore three sons, and the youngest was
the most beautiful of all. The king could not bear to think that he must
give him up. He said to himself: 'I shall put him behind nine locks, and
when the old woman comes, I shall tell her that my youngest son is dead,
but that she can take the two elder if she wishes.'

After seven years the old woman came, and demanded of the king his
youngest son. He did just as he had planned. He locked up his youngest
son behind nine locks, and said to the old woman: 'My youngest son is
dead, but here are the other two, take them.' The old woman would not
believe him. She searched every corner of the palace, opened the nine
locks, and took away the young prince. She went homeward, and took him
with her.

When they had gone a little way, they came to a brook where they found
an old woman washing dirty linen. When she saw the beautiful prince she
called him back, and said sadly to him: 'Dost thou know thou art being
led into misfortune? Why dost thou go with that witch? Thou certainly
canst not escape alive from her hands!' When the prince heard this, he
went to the witch and said: 'Let me go and have a word with this old
woman. I shall overtake thee in a minute.' The witch let him go.

The prince went back to his own home, filled a cup with water, and
placed it near the fire. Having done this, he said: 'When that water
changes to blood, I shall be dead, but as long as it is pure I shall be
alive.' Then he went away, quickly overtook the witch, and they went on
together.

At last they arrived in a dark ravine; the home of the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

witch was there in a rocky cave. In the house she had three daughters
and two horses--one for herself and one for her daughters. The old woman
went in, entrusted the prince to her daughters' care, and fell asleep.

Now this old witch had a habit of sleeping for seven days and nights,
and it was impossible to rouse her.

When her daughters saw the prince they admired him very much, and said:
'It is a shame that so handsome a boy should be destroyed! Come, our
mother shall not have him to eat; we must help him to escape in some
way.' 'We will!' cried the sisters; and they thought of a plan of
escape.

The eldest sister gave him her comb, and said: 'When my mother overtakes
thee, throw this behind thee and hasten on; a thick forest will spring
up between thee and my mother, who will have difficulty in passing
through it.'

The second sister gave him a pair of scissors, and said: 'When my mother
overtakes thee, throw these scissors behind thee--jagged rocks, hard as
adamant, will rise between thee and my mother, who will have difficulty
in crossing them, but hasten thou on.'

The youngest sister gave him a lump of salt, and said: 'When my mother
overtakes thee, throw this behind thee--between you will roll a sea,
which my mother will never cross.' Then they carefully saddled their own
steed, gave the youth everything he wanted, and sent him away. He
thanked them heartily and set out.

Seven days passed. The witch awoke, and looked for her dinner, but it
was no longer there. She went to her steed and enquired of it, 'Shall we
eat bread or shall we set out at once?' 'Whether we eat bread or not we
cannot overtake him,' said the steed to the witch. She did

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

not abandon her intention, but, having eaten bread, mounted her horse
and set off in pursuit of the prince.

After riding some distance she overtook him. The prince looked back,
and, seeing the old woman approach, drew the comb from his pocket and
threw it down behind him. Between them, there rose a forest so thick
that even a fly could not go through it. The old woman was annoyed and
hindered, but at last, in some way or other, she passed through it.

When she reached the open country she spurred her horse on with might
and main, and again approached the prince, who looked behind and saw the
old woman. He took the scissors from his pocket, and threw them down.
Between them appeared a jagged rock, hard as steel, so that no iron
could cut it; the horse cut its feet, and, not being able to go any
further, fell down; yet the old woman would not give in. She jumped from
the horse's back and went forward on foot. She passed the rocks, reached
the plain again, and hastened on.

She flew over the ground as if she had wings. The prince looked back,
and saw how near the old woman was. He took the piece of salt from his
pocket, and threw it behind him. There flowed between them a sea so vast
that no bird could cross it. The old woman was not daunted, even by
this, she waded into the sea, determined to cross it, but she was
drowned.

The prince often looked behind, but he could no longer see the old
woman. Then his heart was filled with joy, and he went on gaily. He
himself knew not whither he went. He grew hungry and more hungry, until
he was ravenous.

At last he saw a fire: he went up, and there was burning

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

a huge fire, over which hung a kettle of arrack, and food cooking;
around it lay nine *devis*, who were brothers. They were fast asleep,
but there was a lame one watching as sentinel. The prince did not wait
to ask leave of the *devis*; he came up, lifted the pot off the fire,
took some food, and when he had eaten, put the pot back. He then lay
down and began to snore loudly. The lame *devi* looked on with amazement
from a distance.

A short time afterwards a *devi* awoke. He looked round and saw a human
being sleeping there. He said joyfully: 'This will be a dainty morsel
for us,' and went towards the boy. But the lame *devi* followed him and
said: 'Leave him alone, lay not a hand upon him; he is to be
feared--just now he took our pot from the fire, ate some food, and
placed it on the fire again; he has done alone what is difficult for us
ten.' The *devi* thought better of it, and turned away.

A second *devi* then rose and did the same, but the lame *devi*
prevented him. As each *devi* awoke he went to the boy, but the lame
*devi* took care of them.

When all the *devis* were roused and had begun to eat, the prince woke
up too. He came to the *devis* and asked them to swear brotherhood. The
*devis* said: 'Who art thou, who art so courageous? What brought thee
here?' The prince answered: 'I was hungry, I saw the fire and I came to
the fire.' Then the *devis* said: 'Very well, if thou wishest us to
swear brotherhood with thee, first go till thou findest cross roads,
there a maiden spreads out a handkerchief; if thou seizest this
handkerchief and bringest it here, we shall swear brotherhood with thee;
if thou failest, thou art none of us. Many have tried to take this
handkerchief, but the maiden always kills them.' The *devis* 

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

thought that the prince would be killed too, and that they would thus
get rid of him.

The prince set out and came to the cross roads, and, behold, a beautiful
maiden flew down; a handkerchief was spread out in front of her, and hid
her from his eyes. The prince came up and seized the handkerchief, but
just as he was going away, the maiden attacked him. The prince was
victorious in the fight. After the combat a golden slipper was left in
the prince's hand.

He came to the *devis* with the handkerchief, and gave them the golden
slipper, saying: 'Go to the town, change this for money, and bring it
home.'

The *devis* sent the lame *devi* with the golden slipper. When he
reached the town he met a merchant, to whom he showed the slipper. The
merchant complained and said: 'My wife had golden slippers, thou must
have stolen this one.' The *devi* said that they had found the
slipper--he swore, but the merchant would not believe him. He took the
slipper, and locked up the lame *devi*.

For a long time the other *devis* waited for their lame brother; they
watched, but no lame *devi* was to be seen. Then they sent the ninth
brother to seek him. When he arrived in the town where the *devi* had
gone to exchange the golden slipper, he enquired after his lame brother.
Hearing him ask for a lame *devi*, they said: 'This must be an
accomplice of the thief,' and they locked him up too.

The remaining *devis* waited for their ninth brother, and when they saw
that he did not come, the eighth was sent, but he also was taken; then
the seventh, sixth, fifth, fourth, third, second, and at last the first
*devi* went, but none of them returned.

The prince said to himself: 'What can have happened

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to these *devis*? I will go and seek them, and perchance find out what
misfortune has overtaken them.' So he arose and went forth.

The merchant heard some one was again asking for the lame *devi*, and
wished to entrap him, but the prince said: 'If I do not find the
neighbour to the golden slipper, thou mayst call us liars, and do what
thou wilt to the *devis* and me; but if I find it thou hast lied, and we
shall do what we wish to thee.' 'Agreed!' said the merchant, and the
prince went forth to seek the other golden slipper.

He travelled far, and came at last to a kingdom by the seashore. This
kingdom was ruled by a maiden, fair as the sun. Whoever came to that
kingdom to sell wheat was met by the maiden, who cast the wheat and its
owner into the sea, and there was no escape.

When the prince heard of this, he said to himself: 'I shall bring wheat
to this country, and see what the fair one can do.' He went for the
wheat, and filled a boat with grain, seated himself in another boat, and
set out for the kingdom. On nearing the shore there appeared, from no
one knows where, a beautiful damsel. She stretched out her hand, and was
about to sink the grain, when the prince struck the boat with his foot
and upset it. Then he seized the maiden's hand and drew her towards him.
She, seeing that she was outwitted, pulled with all her might, and
escaped from his hands, but left her rings behind her.

Thus was the maiden defeated. After this, whoever wished to bring wheat
brought it, and there was plenty in that kingdom.

The people of the country fell down and kissed the knees of the prince,
saying: 'We beseech thee, be our king.' But he would not, and replied:
'I am come on

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

other business, I wish for nothing but to find a certain slipper,' and
he told his tale. The slipper could not be found, so he arose and left
that land.

He went on again and came into another country. Here he learnt that a
beautiful maiden had killed the king's son, who was buried in a vault.
Every night the maiden came there and beat him with twigs. When she did
this he came back to life, they supped together, and passed the time
merrily until morning, when she again beat him with twigs. Then he
became a corpse, and she flew away.

When the prince heard this tale, he went to aid the unfortunate youth.
He entered the tomb and waited. Behold, a lovely damsel flew down, took
twigs from her pocket, and beat the king's son until he came back to
life; they supped and made merry until morning. As she was about to beat
the youth and kill him again, the prince snatched the twigs from her
hand; so the king's son lived. Then the prince took him away, and led
him to his father.

Here, too, the prince was offered the throne, but he did not wish to be
king. 'If I could find a certain golden slipper, I should be happy,'
said he; 'I must go forth and seek it.' And he set forth on his quest
again.

When he had gone some way, he came to a wide plain. He presently saw a
beautiful house, and said to himself: 'I wonder who lives there,' and he
went on towards the house. On the way he saw an Arab feeding some mules,
and said: 'Canst thou tell me whose house that is, brother?' The Arab
looked round about and replied: 'Shall I swallow thee head first or feet
first?' 'I asked thee about the house, why wilt thou not answer?' said
the prince. Again the Arab stared round and said: Shall I swallow thee
by the head or by the feet?' 'As to the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

matter of swallowing, I shall soon show thee what I shall do,' said the
prince, giving the Arab such a blow that it sent him over nine
mountains. Then he struck the mules, and went to the house.

He wandered all round it, and was much delighted with its appearance.
Then he went inside through a window, and visited every room. In one of
these he saw a golden throne, and on it were golden slippers like the
one he sought. He said to himself: 'Perhaps this is the house of the
fair damsel who gave me the slipper. I shall wait and see what happens.'
He sat under the throne and waited.

Soon after, there flew in a beautiful maiden, then another, yet a third,
and at last the Arab. They sat down to eat. In the twinkling of an eye
the Arab laid the cloth for the sisters, and whatever heart or soul
could wish was spread upon it.

After a short time the eldest sister took wine and said: 'May God grant
long life to the youth who took from me the handkerchief and the golden
slipper.' She drank, and put the bowl down.

Then the second sister took it and said: 'Long life to the youth who
snatched the rings from my hand, and gave wheat to a kingdom.' She
drank, and put the bowl down.

Then the youngest sister took it and said: 'Long life to the youth who
took the twigs from my hand, and restored life to a prince.' She drank,
and put the bowl down.

At last the Arab took the wine and said: 'Long life to the youth who
gave me a blow, and sent me over nine mountains.' He drank, and put the
bowl down.

Then the prince appeared from under the throne, took the wine and said:
'I have also toasts to propose. May God grant long life to the maiden
from whom I took the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

handkerchief.' He took from his pocket the handkerchief and gave it to
the eldest sister. 'May God grant long life to the maiden from whom I
took the rings,' and he gave the rings to the second sister. May God
grant long life to the maiden from whom I took the twigs.' He returned
the twigs to the youngest sister, and turning to the Arab, he said: 'May
God grant long life to the Arab whom I struck and sent over nine
mountains.' He drank, and put down the bowl.

Then the three sisters jumped up and said: 'He will marry me.' 'No! me.'
And they began to quarrel. The prince said: 'Wherefore quarrel one with
another? I shall wed the youngest sister, since I am the youngest of
three brothers, and you elder shall wed my elder brothers.' The maidens
asked him: 'What is the object of thy journey hither?' 'To seek for the
other golden slipper, and lo! I have found it here,' answered the
prince. 'Because of this slipper, nine brothers, *devis*, are imprisoned
in a certain town, and if I return without it, I, too, shall be
imprisoned to-day with them.' 'This slipper is thine, and as many more
as thou wishest, take them with thee, seat thyself on the Arab's back,
and in three hours thou wilt be in the town,' said the sisters.

The prince did as they told him. He filled a bag with golden slippers,
sat on the Arab's back, and in three hours he was in the town.

The *devis* rejoiced greatly. They called the merchant, and he brought
slippers. He took one by one his own slippers, but, behold, not one of
them would fit the golden slipper. Then, when the prince produced his
bagful of golden slippers, the merchant was proved a liar.

The prince gave the merchant into the hands of the *devis*,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

and said: 'Do to him what ye please, sell all his possessions, but I
must go at once on my way.' When the *devis* heard this, they begged him
to stay with them. But he would not consent.

The prince came to the three beautiful sisters, and married the
youngest. The sisters gave the Arab a saddle bag in which was everything
for the journey, placed in his hand a tree, and said: 'Go to the kingdom
of the prince's father, and when thou art near the palace, in such and
such a place, plant this tree. It will turn into a great plane tree, and
underneath, a beautiful stream will flow; there, on the banks of the
stream, lay the cloth, and prepare everything for our coming.'

The Arab did everything as he was commanded. Then the maidens came.
Every man and woman in the kingdom heard of this, and went out to look
at them. The parents were mourning for their long-lost son.

The cup of water had not changed to blood, but they had given up all
hope of finding him. At last they could stand it no longer, and they too
went to see the maidens.

When the prince saw his mother and father approach, he feigned surprise,
and asked why they mourned. They answered that they had lost a son, and
therefore they mourned. The prince said: 'I am your long-lost son.' The
king and queen rejoiced, and took him home. They prepared such a wedding
that the roof of the palace resounded with merriment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. Conkiajgharuna](geft13)
