[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](geft29)  [Next](geft31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FB5J1C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Georgian Folk Tales, by Marjory Wardrop* \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III

### The Countryman and the Merchant

A COUNTRYMAN caught a pheasant, and was carrying it home to cook it for
himself and his wife. Suddenly the pheasant spoke like a man, and said:
'Let me go, goodman, and I shall repay you.'

The countryman was astonished, and asked:

'What could you do for me?'

The pheasant replied: 'You are an old man, and must soon die; when you
are dead, I shall gather together all the birds of the air, and follow
you to the grave. Since the world began, no king ever had such an honour
paid to him at his funeral.'

The countryman was pleased at the offer, and set the pheasant free. When
he reached home, he told his wife what had happened, and, although she
scolded him at first for

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

letting the bird go, yet she was pleased when the pheasant sent, every
morning, birds to ask after the old man's health.

A happy thought soon occurred to the wife, and she said to her husband:
'Listen to me, we are almost dying of hunger, and we have a good chance
of getting plenty of food. Pretend that you are dead; I shall begin to
cry, and all the birds will come to your funeral, I shall entice them
into our cottage, shut the doors and windows; we can knock them down
with sticks, and thus lay in a store of food to last us for a long
time.'

So the countryman covered himself with a sheet, and lay down, while his
wife went outside and wept loudly.

A hoopoe flew down, and asked after her husband's health; when the wife
announced his death, the hoopoe at once flew away, and, within an hour,
there flew into the yard, in long lines, some thousands of pheasants,
the same number of doves, snipe, quails, woodcock, etc., and even
eagles, kites, hawks, etc.

Some of the birds settled in the cottage, some in the barn, some in the
stable, some in the yard, and the rest, for which there was no room,
remained in serried ranks in the air.

Then the wife shut the doors, and, with her husband, set about killing
the birds; only those that were outside escaped.

In the evening, there came a merchant, and asked to be allowed to spend
the night in the cottage. At supper, the merchant saw a great abundance
of game of all kinds, and asked the countryman how such luxury was
within the reach of a poor man. The countryman replied: 'I have a cat of
a famous breed, which has never yet failed me. When I want game for my
table, I tell her what kind of birds I should like, and how many, and
she goes into the forest and gets them. I do not know what was the
matter with her

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

last night, but see! she went into the wood of her own will, and killed
all the birds in the neighbourhood, and brought them to us.' The
countryman then showed a whole heap of dead game.

The merchant at once began to bargain with the countryman for the cat,
and finally purchased it for a large sum. When the merchant reached
home, he went about his business, and told his wife that he would not
leave her any money for housekeeping, for she had only to give her
orders, and the cat would bring all sorts of game for food. But when he
came in, he was astonished to find that his wife had eaten nothing, the
cat had brought no birds, but had even stolen what was in the house
already. So he went back to ask the countryman about it.

The countryman saw him coming, filled a pot with millet and hung it over
the fire. He then sat down near it, put a grain of millet in the palm of
his hand, and began to wash it. The merchant came in and stood by him;
the countryman pretended not to see the merchant, muttered an
incantation, and dropped the grain into the pot. Then he stirred it with
a spoon, and behold the pot was full. The merchant did not know whether
to quarrel with the countryman or to get this magic pot from him.

'What is this you have done to me?' said he. 'Your cat is useless, it
brings nothing, and steals what we have.'

'Have you been feeding it with roast meat? I forgot to warn you that you
must not do this.'

'Well, it is my fault then,' said the merchant. 'But will you sell me
that pot?'

'I have already lost my famous cat. It is not likely that I shall now
let you have this pot, in which I can make a dish of porridge with only
one grain.'

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

However, they began bargaining, and at last the countryman sold his pot
for a large sum. When the merchant reached home, he consoled his wife by
telling her that from one barleycorn she could now make as much porridge
as she wanted; he then set out again. When he returned, his wife
complained that the pot was of no use. So he called again on the
countryman, to ask for an explanation.

The countryman, foreseeing that the merchant would come, got two hares
exactly alike, and tied ribbons of the same colour round their necks. He
left one hare at home, and took the other out into the fields with him.
He told his wife that if the merchant came, she was to send him out to
the field, and in an hour bring him a dinner consisting of two boiled
fowls, a roast turkey, ten eggs, wine, and bread.

The merchant came, and the woman sent him to the field where her husband
was working. In reply to the reproaches of the merchant, the countryman
said: 'You have probably made some stupid mistake with the pot as you
did with the cat. But let us sit down and dine while we talk it over,
for I cannot suffer you to come to me without feeding you.' The merchant
looked round and said: 'How can we get anything to eat out here in the
fields?'

The peasant went to a bush, untied the hare, and said to it: 'Run at
once, little hare, to my wife, and tell her to come with you and bring
us a pair of fowls, a roast turkey, ten eggs, wine, and bread.'

The hare ran off as fast as it could. It is easy to understand the
astonishment of the merchant when the woman came with the hare, bringing
all that the man had ordered. When they had eaten, the merchant said:
'You have cheated me about the cat and the pot, but I forgive you if

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

you let me have the hare.' The countryman refused at first, but finally
agreed to sell the hare for a large sum. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_51)

On his way home with the hare, the merchant met some friends whom he
asked to sup with him, but seeing that he would not arrive until it was
late, he ordered the hare to run and tell his wife that he was coming
with some guests, and that she was to prepare supper. When he and his
friends reached home, they found the house quite dark, and had
difficulty in rousing the wife from her sleep. She told him that no hare
had been there, and that she did not know what he was talking about.

The merchant was now furious, and determined to punish the countryman
severely. But the countryman guessed what would happen, and arranged
with his wife what should be done. He took the intestine of a small
calf, filled it with blood, and tied it round his wife's neck, telling
her to cover it up with a kerchief. The merchant came in, and without
saying a word rushed at the countryman, who, in his turn, attacked his
wife, accusing her of being the guilty party, and with a knife pierced
the intestine under her throat. She fell on the ground, and pretended
that she was dying. The merchant was alarmed, and cried: 'What have you
done, you wretched man? I would willingly have lost the money rather
than have this innocent blood shed.' The countryman answered: 'That is
my affair. Though I have killed my wife I can raise her to life again.'
'I believe you no longer,' said the merchant, but if you perform this
miracle I shall forgive you all.' The countryman approached his wife
with the knife in his hand, muttered something, and his wife opened her
eyes, and, to the surprise of the merchant, rose up.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

The merchant bought the wonderful knife, saying that his wife, too,
needed a lesson sometimes. When the merchant reached home, his wife
asked where he had been. He told her to be silent and mind her own
business. 'If you are not quiet I will cut your throat.' The woman
looked at him with astonishment, and wondered whether he had gone out of
his mind. The merchant threw down his wife, and cut her throat. All the
neighbours flocked in, and raised a great cry. The merchant said: 'What
if I have killed my wife? I can bring her to life again.' The neighbours
stood by while he muttered the invocations he had learnt, but he could
not raise her. Then he flew to the countryman, tied his hands, and
dragged him into the forest, saying: 'I wish to prolong your sufferings,
and will not kill you at once. I shall starve you, drag you about in the
woods, and, when I have worn you out with tortures, I shall throw you
into the sea.' On the road there was a town, in which a king had just
died, and his funeral was then taking place. Having bound the countryman
to a tree in the depths of the forest, the merchant returned to the town
to see the royal funeral. Just then, a shepherd happened to drive his
flock near the tree to which the countryman was tied. Seeing the
shepherd a little way off, the countryman began to shout: 'I will not be
king! I will not be king! No! No! No!' The shepherd came up and asked
what was wrong. The countryman replied: 'You know, brother, that the
king is dead in the town: they want me to take his place, but I will
not, for I have been king twice, and know what it is. Ah, brother! one
has so many cares, so much work, that one's head swims. I had rather be
tied to this tree than consent to be king.' The shepherd thought for a
moment, and replied: 'I, brother, would give anything in the world to
have a trial of the life of a king.' 'I gladly give you my place,

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

but, so that people may not know, put on my clothes, and I shall bind
you to the tree, and by to-morrow you shall be king.' The shepherd
gladly gave him his flock, and took his place at the tree.

As soon as the countryman was free, he drove away the flock.

When it was quite dark, the merchant appeared, loosed his victim, and
drove him on. When they came to the steep seashore, the shepherd saw
that the merchant wished to drown him, and cried: 'Do not drown me! I
had rather consent to be king.' The merchant thought his prisoner had
lost his wits through fatigue and ill-treatment; without more ado he
threw him into the sea.

A fortnight later, the merchant was travelling on business, when he met
on the road the same countryman whom he, as he thought, had drowned, and
who was now driving a flock. 'What do I see!' cried the merchant. 'Are
you there? Did I not drown you in the sea?'

'My benefactor!' replied the countryman. 'I wish you would drown me
again. You cannot imagine what a quantity of cattle there is down there
at the bottom of the sea. It is a pity I had no stick with me, for I
could not drive out more than these with my hands.'

The merchant besought the countryman, saying: 'You have ruined me. The
cat, the pot, the hare, the knife, have all cost money; thanks to you, I
am a beggar and a widower. If you remember the place where I threw you
into the sea, drown me there, but let me have a stick, so that I may
repair my fortune.' To get rid of the troublesome merchant, the
countryman agreed to fulfil his request, and so drowned him with a very
long switch in his hand. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_52)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[157:1](geft30.htm#fr_52) Cf. Jacobs: *More
English Fairy Tales*, p. 209, and note on p. 242.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[159:1](geft30.htm#fr_53) Cf. the last incident
with the end of 'Little Fairly,' in Samuel Lover's *Legends and Stories
of Ireland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The King and the Sage](geft31)
