
# Sacred Texts: Gypsy Folklore
<title>Intangible Textual Heritage: Roma Folklore</title>

This page links together resources at Intangible Textual Heritage about
the folklore of the Roma people. Also known as 'Gypsies', the Roma are
nomads who originated in India during the middle ages, and spread across
a wide section of Eurasia, preserving a unique culture and language.

NOTE: The term Gypsy was applied to the Roma by outsiders, possibly in
the mistaken belief that they were Egyptian in origin. Some people today
take it to be pejorative, and at the very least its use is deprecated.
Nevertheless, it is used widely in the literature, particularly the
pre-1922 public domain books at this site, by scholars who cannot be
construed as using it in a derogative sense. In new material at this
site we use the term 'Roma' and leave the term 'Gypsy' in existing
documents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Gypsy Folk
Tales](gft/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Francis Hindes
Groomes</span> \[<span class="c_d">1899</span>\]   <span class="c_b">A
treasure trove of Roma stories by a devoted scholar of the
subject.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune
Telling](../../pag/gsft/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Charles G.
Leland</span> \[<span class="c_d">1891</span>\]   <span class="c_b">One
of the primary sources for information on Roma magical practices, by one
of the great 19th century folklorists.</span> </span>

<span class="c_e"> <span class="c_t">[English Gipsies and Their
Language](egl/index.md)</span>   by <span class="c_a">Charles G.
Leland</span> \[<span class="c_d">1874</span>\]   <span
class="c_b">Mid-19th Century English Roma language, folklore and
customs.</span> </span>
