[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl15)  [Next](jftl17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

 

<span id="img_16200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![As the Shah raised
his sword an old man stepped from behind the tree. (&lt;i&gt;Page
166&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/16200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16200.jpg)  
As the Shah raised his sword an old man stepped from behind the tree.
(*Page 166*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### The Story of Bostanai

In the days of long ago, when Persia was a famous and beautiful land,
with innumerable rose gardens that perfumed the whole country and
gorgeous palaces, there lived a king, named Hormuz. He was a cruel
monarch, this Shah of Persia. He tyrannized over his people and never
allowed them to live in peace. Above all, he hated the Jews.

"These descendants of Abraham," he said to his grand vizier, "never know
when they are beaten. How many times it has been reported to me that
they have been wiped out of existence, or driven from the land, I know
not. Yet nothing, it seems, can crush their spirit. Tell me, why is
this?"

"It is because they have a firm faith in their future," answered the
vizier.

"What mean you by those words?" demanded the king, angrily.

"I speak only of what I have heard from their

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

wise men," the vizier replied, hastily. "They hold the belief that they
will be restored as a united people to their own land."

"Under their own king?" interrupted Hormuz. "Under a descendant of the
royal House of David," the vizier answered, solemnly.

The king stamped his foot with rage.

"How dare they think of any other Shah but me," he exclaimed, for his
one idea of ruling over people was that he had every right to be cruel
to them. Then he said suddenly, "Think you that if there were no more
people who could trace their ancestry to this--this David, their faith
would be shattered?"

"Peradventure, it may be so."

"It shall be so," cried the king. "There shall be no remnants of this
House of David."

He summoned his executioners, and when they were lined up before him, he
surveyed the evil-looking band with a cunning gleam in his eye.

"Unto you," he said, in a rasping voice, "I hand over all the
descendants of the House of David to be found among the Jews in the
whole of the realm of Persia. Slay them instantly. See to it that not a
single one--man, woman, or child--is left alive. Woe betide you, and you
my counselors"--this with a meaning glance at

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

the grand vizier--"if my commands are not carried out to the letter. To
your duties. Ye are dismissed from the presence."

Waving them away, he indulged his fancy in thoughts of the coming
executions, chuckling the while.

From day to day he received reports that his commands were being carried
out. The land was filled with weeping, for the cruel butchery was worse
than war. None could defend themselves. Mere suspicion was enough for
the executioners. They wasted no time with doubts, but slew all who were
said to belong to the House of David. The Shah looked over the list each
night and chuckled. At last he was informed that all had been
slaughtered.

"’Tis well, ’tis well," he said, rubbing his hands, gleefully, "I shall
sleep in peace tonight."

He slept in a bower in a rose garden, and nowhere in the world are the
roses so magnificent and so sweet-scented as in Persia.

"I shall have pleasant dreams," he muttered, but instead he had a
nightmare that frightened him terribly.

He dreamed that he was walking in his rose garden, but instead of
deriving pleasure from the beautiful trees, he was only angered.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

"Are there no white, or yellow, or pink roses?" he asked, but received
no answer. "All red, deep, deep red," he muttered, in his troubled
manner.

"Tell me," he demanded fiercely, stopping before a tree heavily laden
with flowers, "why are you so red today?"

And the roses spoke and replied, "Because of the innocent blood that has
been shed. It is royal blood that has drenched the ground, and none but
crimson roses shall bloom this year in Persia."

"Bah!" screamed the enraged Shah and, drawing his scimitar, he began
hacking right and left among the flowers. The beautiful blooms fell to
the ground in great showers until the garden was so littered with the
red petals that it seemed flooded with a pool of blood. At last only one
tree remained, and as the Shah raised his sword to cut it down, an old
man stepped from behind it and confronted the king.

"Who art thou, and whence camest thou?" the monarch asked fiercely.

No answer did the old man make. Gazing sternly into the eyes of the
Shah, he raised his hand suddenly and unexpectedly, and struck the king
such a violent blow that he fell sprawling

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

to the ground. He lay half-stunned among the red petals, looking up at
the old man.

"Art thou not satisfied with the destruction thou hast wrought?" the old
man asked. "Must thou take the life of the last rose tree?"

The old man stooped to pick up the scimitar which had fallen from the
king's grasp.

"No, no," screamed Hormuz, fearing that he was to be slain. He scrambled
to his knees and with clasped hands pleaded to the old man. "Take not my
life," he begged. "Spare me, and I shall spare the last tree and cherish
it tenderly."

"So be it," said the old man, holding the sword above his head. It
dropped to the ground, and looking up, Hormuz saw that the stranger had
vanished.

The Shah awoke. His body trembled with fear, his head was wracked by a
burning pain. He looked round shudderingly to see if the angry old man
still stood above him with the threatening sword. Then he sent for his
wizards.

"Expound to me my horrid dream," he said.

Their interpretations, however, did not please him.

"Ye are fools," he cried. "Make search and find me a man of wisdom who
understands these mysteries. Seek a sage among the Jews."

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

The royal servants hastened to do the king's bidding. Full well they
knew that when Hormuz was in a rage, lives were quickly forfeit.

They seized the aged rabbi of the city and brought him before the Shah.

"Canst thou interpret dreams?" asked the king, abruptly, dispensing with
the usual ceremonies.

"I can explain the meaning of certain things," returned the rabbi.

"Then fail not to unravel the mystery of my dream," said Hormuz, and he
related it. "The secret I must know," he concluded, "or-------." But he
stopped. He was afraid to add the usual threat of death that morning.

"’Tis a simple dream," said the rabbi, slowly. "The things of which
men--and even kings are but men--dream in their sleep are connected with
the deeds performed by day. Thy garden represents the House of David
which thou hast sought to destroy. The old man was King David himself,
and thou hast promised to cherish and nurture his one remaining
descendant."

The Shah listened in silence. Then, with a flash in his eye he said,
"But all the descendants of this King David were slain."

"All but one," said the rabbi. "There is a boy babe, born on the day the
executions ceased."

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

"Where is he?" asked Hormuz.

"Your vow . . ." the rabbi began, nervously, for he did not wish to hand
over this child to death.

"My promise shall be faithfully carried out," interrupted the monarch.

"The boy is in my house," said the rabbi. "His mother, who escaped the
massacre, died when he was born."

"Bring him hither," commanded Hormuz. "Fear not."

From his finger he drew a ring and handed it to the learned man.

"This is my bond," he said. "The possession of this ensures thy safety."

The child was brought to the palace, and the Shah looked at him with
intent gaze.

"He shall be brought up as a prince," said the king. "Servants,
attendants and slaves shall he have in great number to minister unto all
his needs. He shall be treated with the utmost kindness. And because of
my dream in the garden, I name him Bostanai."

The Shah did this because "bostan" is the Persian word for rose garden.

He touched the child with his jeweled scepter and all present bowed low
before the babe and

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

showed him the respect and devotion due to a prince.

Hormuz, however, was too cruel to be quite satisfied. He feared to harm
the boy, but he wanted some proof that Bostanai was really a descendant
of King David. The child grew up into a handsome, clever youth, and
Hormuz, partly out of fear, but partly because he had really grown to
love the boy, kept him constantly by his side.

One day, while sitting in the bower in the garden, he watched the boy
among the roses. The day was hot and a drowsiness came over the king. He
had not slept in that bower since the night of his fateful dream, and he
was not happy about doing so now. But he did not lack courage, and he
called the boy to him.

"Bostanai," he said, "stand guard by the door, and move not while I
sleep."

Hormuz slept soundly and peacefully for some time, and when he awoke he
saw the lad standing motionless where he had placed himself.

"Bostanai," he called, and when the boy turned, he was startled to see
blood trickling from a wound on his face.

"What is that?" he asked, anxiously.

"The sting of a wasp," Bostanai replied.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

"Is it not painful?"

For answer, the boy only smiled.

"How did it happen?" asked the king.

"The wasp stung me while I stood guard."

"But couldst thou not brush it away?"

"No," replied the boy, proudly. "King David was my ancestor, and in the
presence of a king I must stand motionless until bidden to make any
movement."

Then, before the king could catch him, he swooned from loss of blood,
and fell to the ground. He soon recovered, however, and the Shah's
doubts were set at rest.

"I know now thou art truly of the House of David," he said, "for none
other could have shown such fortitude."

Bostanai became the Shah's favorite, and when he grew up he was made the
ruler of a province. He lived happily, and through him the Jews of the
land also lived in prosperity and peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Shepherd-Boy to King](jftl17)
