[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jftl25)  [Next](jftl27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Jewish Fairy Tales and Legends*, by Aunt Naomi (pseud. Gertrude Landa),
\[1919\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

# The Fairy Frog

Once upon a time there lived a man of learning and wealth who had an
only son, named Hanina. To this son, who was grown up and married, he
sent a messenger asking that he should immediately come to his father.
Hanina obeyed, and found both his father and mother lying ill.

"Know, my son," said the old man, "we are about to die. Grieve not, for
it has been so ordained. We have been companions through life, and we
are to be privileged to leave this world together. You will mourn for us
the customary seven days. They will end on the eve of the festival of
the Passover. On that day go forth into the market place and purchase
the first thing offered to thee, no matter what it is, or what the cost
that may be demanded. It will in due course bring thee good fortune.
Hearken unto my words, my son, and all will be well."

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

 

<span id="img_25200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Hanina and his
wife followed the giant frog. (&lt;i&gt;Page
255&lt;/i&gt;).](tn/25200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/25200.jpg)  
Hanina and his wife followed the giant frog. (*Page 255*).  
</span>

 

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

Hanina promised obedience to this strange injunction of his father, and
events fell out in accordance with the old man's prediction. The aged
couple died on the same day, were buried together and after the week of
mourning, on the day preceding the Passover festival, Hanina made his
way to the market place wondering what adventure was in store for him.

He had scarcely entered the market place, where all manner of wares were
displayed, when an old man approached him, carrying a silver casket of
curious design.

"Purchase this, my son," he said, "and it will bring thee good fortune."

"What does it contain?" asked Hanina.

"That I may not inform thee," was the reply. "Indeed I cannot, for I
know not. Only the purchaser can open it at the feast which begins the
Passover."

Naturally, Hanina was impressed by these words. Matters were shaping
just as his father foretold.

"What is the price?" he asked.

"A thousand gold pieces."

That was an enormous sum, nearly the whole that he possessed, but
Hanina, remembering his vow, paid the money and took the casket home.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It was placed upon
the table that night when the Passover festival began. On being opened
it was found to contain a smaller casket. This was opened and out sprang
a frog.

Hanina's wife was sorely disappointed, but she gave food to the frog
which devoured everything greedily. So much did the creature eat that
when the Passover had ended, in eight days it had grown to an enormous
size. Hanina built a cabinet for his strange possession, but it
continued to grow and soon required a special shed.

Hanina was seriously puzzled, for the frog ate so ravenously that he and
his wife had little food for themselves. But they made no complaint,
although their hardships increased daily. They were compelled to dispose
of almost everything they possessed to keep the frog supplied with food,
and at last they were left in a state of abject poverty. Then only did
the courage of Hanina's wife give way and she began to cry.

To her astonishment, the frog, which was now bigger than a man, spoke to
her.

"Listen to me, wife of the faithful Hanina," it said. "Ye have treated
me well. Therefore, ask of me what ye will, and I shall carry out your
wishes."

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

"Give us food," sobbed the woman.

"It is there," said the frog, and at that very moment there was a knock
at the door and a huge basket of food was delivered.

Hanina had not yet spoken, and the frog asked him to name his desire.

"A frog that speaks and performs wonders must be wise and learned," said
Hanina. "I wish that thou shouldst teach me the lore of men."

The frog agreed, and his method of teaching was exceedingly strange. He
wrote out the Law and the seventy known languages on strips of paper.
These he ordered Hanina to swallow. Hanina did so and became acquainted
with everything, even the language of the beasts and the birds. All men
regarded him as the most learned sage of his time.

One day the frog spoke again.

"The day has arrived," he said, "when I must repay you for all the
kindness you have shown me. Your reward shall be great. Come with me to
the woods and you shall see marvels performed."

Hanina and his wife followed the giant frog to the woods very early one
morning, and a comical figure it presented as it hobbled along.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arrived at the
woods, the frog cried out, in its croaking voice:

"Come to me all ye inhabitants of the trees, the caves and streams, and
do my bidding. Bring precious stones from the depths of the earth and
roots and herbs."

Then began the queerest procession. Hundreds upon hundreds of birds came
twittering through the trees; thousands upon thousands of insects came
crawling from holes in the ground; and all the animals in the woods,
from the tiniest to the monsters, came in answer to the call of the
frog. Each group brought some gift and laid it at the feet of Hanina and
his wife who stood in some alarm. Soon a great pile of precious stones
and herbs was heaped before them.

"All these belong to you," said the frog, pointing to the jewels. "Of
equal worth are the herbs and the roots with which ye can cure all
diseases. Because ye obeyed the wishes of the dying and did not question
me, ye are now rewarded."

Hanina and his wife thanked the frog and then the former said: "May we
not know who thou art?"

"Yes," replied the frog. "I am the fairy son

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

of Adam, gifted with the power of assuming any form. Farewell."

With these words, the frog began to grow smaller and smaller until it
was the size of an ordinary frog. Then it hopped into a stream and
disappeared and all the denizens of the woods returned to their haunts.

Hanina and his wife made their way home with their treasures. They
became famous for their wealth, their wisdom and their charity, and
lived in happiness with all peoples for many, many years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Princess of the Tower](jftl27)
