[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcm07)  [Next](mcm09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419460/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO7KA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Musings of a Chinese Mystic*, by Lionel Giles, \[1906\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### THE MYSTERIOUS IMMANENCE OF TAO

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Penumbra said to the Umbra, "At one
moment you move: at another you are at rest. At one moment you sit down:
at another you get up. Why this instability of purpose?"

"I depend," replied the Umbra, "upon something which causes me to do as
I do; and that something depends in turn upon something else which
causes it to do as it does. My dependence is like that of a snake's
scales or of a cicada's wings. How can I tell why I do one thing, or why
I do not do another?"

.        .        .        .        .

Prince Hui's cook was cutting up a bullock. Every blow of his hand,
every heave of his shoulders, every tread of his foot, every thrust of
his knee, every *whshh* of rent flesh, every *chhk* of the chopper, was
in perfect harmony,—rhythmical like the dance of the Mulberry Grove,
simultaneous like the chords of the Ching Shou.

"Well done!" cried the Prince; "yours is skill indeed."

"Sire," replied the cook, "I have always

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

devoted myself to Tao. It is better than skill. When I first began to
cut up bullocks, I saw before me simply *whole* bullocks. After three
years’ practice, I saw no more whole animals. And now I work with my
mind and not with my eye. When my senses bid me stop, but my mind urges
me on, I fall back upon eternal principles. I follow such openings or
cavities as there may be, according to the natural constitution of the
animal. I do not attempt to cut through joints: still less through large
bones.

"A good cook changes his chopper once a year,—because he cuts. An
ordinary cook, once a month,—because he hacks. But I have had this
chopper nineteen years, and although I have cut up many thousand
bullocks, its edge is as if fresh from the whetstone. For at the joints
there are always interstices, and the edge of a chopper being without
thickness, it remains only to insert that which is without thickness
into such an interstice. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) By these
means the interstice will be enlarged, and the blade will find plenty of
room. It is thus that I have kept my chopper for nineteen years as
though fresh from the whetstone.

"Nevertheless, when I come upon a hard part where the blade meets with a
difficulty, I

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

am all caution. I fix my eye on it. I stay my hand, and gently apply my
blade, until with a *hwah* the part yields like earth crumbling to the
ground. Then I take out my chopper, and stand up, and look around, and
pause, until with an air of triumph I wipe my chopper and put it
carefully away."

"Bravo!" cried the Prince. "From the words of this cook I have learnt
how to take care of my life."

.        .        .        .        .

In the State of Chêng there was a wonderful magician named Chi Han. He
knew all about birth and death, gain and loss, misfortune and happiness,
long life and short life—predicting events to a day with supernatural
accuracy. The people of Chêng used to flee at his approach; but Lieh Tzŭ
went to see him, and became so infatuated that on his return he said to
Hu Tzŭ, <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) "I used to look upon your
Tao as perfect. Now I know something more perfect still."

"So far," replied Hu Tzŭ, "I have only taught you the ornamentals, not
the essentials, of Tao; and yet you think you know all about it. Without
cocks in your poultry-yard, what sort of eggs do the hens lay? <span
id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13) If you go about trying to

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

force Tao down people's throats, you will be simply exposing yourself.
Bring your friend with you, and let me show myself to him."

So next day Lieh Tzŭ went with Chi Han to see Hu Tzŭ, and when they came
out Chi Han said: "Alas! your teacher is doomed. He cannot live. I
hardly give him ten days. I am astonished at him. He is but wet ashes."

Lieh Tzŭ went in and wept bitterly, and told Hu Tzŭ; but the latter
said: "I showed myself to him just now as the earth shows us its outward
form, motionless and still, while production is all the time going on. I
merely prevented him from seeing my pent-up energy within. Bring him
again."

Next day the interview took place as before; but as they were leaving
Chi Han said to Lieh Tzŭ: "It is lucky for your teacher that he met me.
He is better. He will recover. I saw he had recuperative power."

Lieh Tzŭ went in and told Hu Tzŭ; whereupon the latter replied: "I
showed myself to him just now as heaven shows itself in all its
dispassionate grandeur, letting a little energy run out of my heels. He
was thus able to detect that I had some. Bring him here again."

Next day a third interview took place, and as they were leaving, Chi Han
said to Lieh Tzŭ: "Your teacher is never one day like another; I can
tell nothing from his physiognomy. Get him

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

to be regular, and I will then examine him again."

This being repeated to Hu Tzŭ as before, the latter said: "I showed
myself to him just now in a state of harmonious equilibrium. Where the
whale disports itself,—is the abyss. Where water is at rest,—is the
abyss. Where water is in motion,—is the abyss. The abyss has nine names.
These are three of them." <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

Next day the two went once more to see Hu Tzŭ; but Chi Han was unable to
stand still, and in his confusion turned and fled.

"Pursue him!" cried Hu Tzŭ; whereupon Lieh Tzŭ ran after him, but could
not overtake him; so he returned and told Hu Tzŭ that the fugitive had
disappeared.

"I showed myself to him just now," said Hu Tzŭ, "as Tao appeared before
time was. I was to him as a great blank, existing of itself. He knew not
who I was. His face fell. He became confused. And so he fled."

Upon this Lieh Tzŭ stood convinced that he had not yet acquired any real
knowledge, and at once set to work in earnest, passing three years
without leaving the house. He helped his wife to cook the family dinner,
and fed his pigs just like human beings. He discarded the artificial and
reverted to the natural. He became merely

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

a shape. Amidst confusion he was unconfounded. And so he continued to
the end.

.        .        .        .        .

Books are what the world values as representing Tao. But books are only
words, and the valuable part of words is the thought therein contained.
That thought has a certain bias which cannot be conveyed in words, yet
the world values words as being the essence of books. But though the
world values them, they are not of value; as that sense in which the
world values them is not the sense in which they are valuable. . . .

Duke Huan was one day reading in his hall, when a wheelwright who was
working below flung down his hammer and chisel, and mounting the steps
said: "What words may your Highness be studying?"

"I am studying the words of the Sages," replied the Duke.

"Are the Sages alive?" asked the wheelwright.

"No," answered the Duke; "they are dead."

"Then the words your Highness is studying," rejoined the wheelwright,
"are only the dregs of the ancients."

"What do you mean, sirrah!" cried the Duke, "by interfering with what I
read? Explain yourself, or you shall die."

"Let me take an illustration," said the wheelwright, "from my own trade.
In making a

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

wheel, if you work too slowly, you can't make it firm; if you work too
fast, the spokes won't fit in. You must go neither too slowly nor too
fast. There must be co-ordination of mind and hand. Words cannot explain
what it is, but there is some mysterious art herein. I cannot teach it
to my son; nor can he learn it from me. Consequently, though seventy
years of age, I am still making wheels in my old age. If the ancients,
together with what they could not impart, are dead and gone, then what
your Highness is studying must be the dregs."

.        .        .        .        .

A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, does not
die. His bones are the same as other people's; but he meets his accident
in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of security. He is not
conscious of riding in the cart; neither is he conscious of falling out
of it. Ideas of life, death, fear, etc., cannot penetrate his breast;
and so he does not suffer from contact with objective existences. And if
such security is to be got from wine, how much more is it to be got from
God? It is in God that the Sage seeks his refuge, and so he is free from
harm.

.        .        .        .        .

Lieh Yü K‘ou instructed Po Hun Wu Jên in archery. Drawing the bow to its
full, he placed a cup of water on his elbow and began to let

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

fly. Hardly was one arrow out of sight ere another was on the string,
the archer standing all the time like a statue.

"But this is shooting under ordinary conditions," cried Po Hun Wu Jen;
"it is not shooting under extraordinary conditions. Now I will ascend a
high mountain with you, and stand on the edge of a precipice a thousand
feet in height, and see how you can shoot then."

Thereupon Wu Jên went with Lieh Tzŭ up a high mountain, and stood on the
edge of a precipice a thousand feet in height, approaching it backwards
until one-fifth of his feet overhung the chasm, when he beckoned to Lieh
Tzŭ to come on. But the latter had fallen prostrate on the ground, with
the sweat pouring down to his heels.

"The perfect man," said Wu Jen, "soars up to the blue sky, or dives down
to the yellow springs, <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) or flies to
some extreme point of the compass, without change of countenance. But
you are terrified, and your eyes are dazed. Your internal economy is
defective."

.        .        .        .        .

A disciple said to Lu Chü: "Master, I have attained to your Tao. I can
do without fire in winter. I can make ice in summer."

"You merely avail yourself of latent heat and

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

latent cold," replied Lu Chü. "That is not what I call Tao. I will
demonstrate to you what my Tao is."

Thereupon he tuned two lutes, and placed one in the hall and the other
in the adjoining room. And when he struck the *kung* note on one, the
*kung* note on the other sounded; when he struck the *chio* note on one,
the *chio* note on the other sounded. This because they were both tuned
to the same pitch.

But if he changed the interval of one string, so that it no longer kept
its place in the octave, and then struck it, the result was that all the
twenty-five strings jangled together. There was sound as before, but the
influence of the key-note was gone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[52:1](mcm08.htm#fr_11) An allusion to the
saying of Lao Tzŭ: "That which has no substance enters where there is no
crevice."

<span id="fn_12"></span>[53:1](mcm08.htm#fr_12) His tutor.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[53:2](mcm08.htm#fr_13) The hens here stand for
the letter of the doctrine; the cocks, for its spirit; and the eggs, for
a real knowledge of it.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[55:1](mcm08.htm#fr_14) *I.e.*, three phases of
Tao.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[58:1](mcm08.htm#fr_15) The infernal regions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Hidden Spring](mcm09)
