[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcm03)  [Next](mcm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419460/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO7KA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Musings of a Chinese Mystic*, by Lionel Giles, \[1906\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="smallcaps">Although</span> Chinese history can show no
authentic contemporary record prior to the Chou dynasty, some eleven
hundred years before Christ, there is no doubt that a high pitch of
civilisation was attained at a much earlier period. Thus Lao Tzŭ was in
no sense the first humanising instructor of a semi-barbaric race. On the
contrary, his was a reactionary influence, for the cry he raised was
directed against the multiplication of laws and restrictions, the growth
of luxury, and the other evils which attend rapid material progress.
That his lifetime should have coincided with a remarkable extension of
the very principles he combated with such energy is one of the ironies
of fate. Before he was in his grave another great man had arisen who
laid unexampled stress on the minute regulation of ceremonies

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

and ritual, and succeeded in investing the rules of outward conduct with
an importance they had never hitherto possessed.

If Lao Tzŭ then had revolted against the growing artificiality of life
in his day, a return to nature must have seemed doubly imperative to his
disciple Chuang Tzŭ who flourished more than a couple of centuries
later, when the bugbear of civilisation had steadily advanced. With
chagrin he saw that Lao Tzŭ's teaching had never obtained any firm hold
on the masses, still less on the rulers of China, whereas the star of
Confucius was unmistakably in the ascendant. Within his own recollection
the propagation of Confucian ethics had received a powerful impetus from
Mencius, the second of China's orthodox sages. Now Chuang Tzŭ was imbued
to the core with the principles of pure Taoism, as handed down by Lao He
might more fitly be dubbed "the Tao-saturated man" than Spinoza "the
God-intoxicated." Tao in its various phases pervaded his inmost being
and was reflected in all his thought. He was therefore eminently
qualified to revive his Master's ringing protest against the
materialistic tendencies of the time.

Chuang Tzŭ's worldly position was not high. We learn from Ssŭ-ma Ch’ien
that he held a petty official post in a small provincial town. But his
literary and philosophical talent must soon have brought him into
repute, for we find him

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

in frequent contact with the leading scholars of the age, against whom
he is said to have defended his tenets with success. It does not appear,
however, that he gained promotion in the public service, which is
doubtless to be attributed to his own lack of ambition and shrinking
from an active career, as we have his personal account of a deputation
which vainly tried to induce him to accept the post of Prime Minister in
the Ch‘u State. Official routine must have proved in the highest degree
distasteful to this finely tempered poetic spirit, as it has to many a
chafing genius since. Bold in fancy yet retiring by disposition, prone
to melancholy yet full of eager enthusiasm, a natural sceptic yet
inspired with boundless belief in his doctrine, he was a man full of
contradictions, but none the less fitted to make a breach in the
cast-iron traditions of Confucianism, if not to draw others after him in
the same track. Of his mental development there remains no record. His
convictions, as they stand revealed in his great philosophical work, are
already mature, if somewhat lacking in consistency; he comes before the
public as a keen adherent of the school of Lao Tzŭ giving eloquent and
impassioned utterance to the ideas which had germinated in the brain of
his Master. Chuang indeed, supplies the prime deficiency of Lao Tzŭ; he
has the gift of language which enables him to clothe in rich apparel the
great

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

thoughts that had hitherto found their only expression in bare
disconnected sayings. These scraps of concise wisdom, which are gathered
together in the patchwork treatise known as the *Tao Tê Ching*, seem to
have formed the kernel of his doctrine, and he proceeded to develop them
in a hundred different directions. It would be unjust, however, to infer
from this that there is nothing in Chuang Tzŭ which cannot be traced
back to the older sage, or that he was incapable of original thought of
distinct and independent value. On the contrary, his mental grasp of
elusive metaphysical problems was hardly if at all inferior to that of
Lao Tzŭ himself, and certainly never equalled by any subsequent Chinese
thinker. His writings also have that stimulating suggestiveness which
stamps the product of all great minds. After reading and re-reading
Chuang one feels there are latent depths still unplumbed. Moreover, he
gives free rein to his own particular fancies and predilections. There
are sides of Lao teaching at which he hardly glances, or which he passes
over entirely, while in other directions he allows his brilliant
imagination to carry him far out of sight of his fountain-head. If the
analogy be not too heavily pressed, we may say that he was to the
Founder of Taoism what St. Paul was to the Founder of Christianity.

As with Lao Tao forms the centre and

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

pivot of Chuang Tzŭ's whole system; and this imparts real unity to his
work, which in other respects appears undeniably straggling and
illcompacted. But Tao as conceived by Chuang Tzŭ is not quite the same
thing as the Tao of which Lao Tzŭ spoke with such wondering awe. The
difference will be better understood after a brief sketch of the gradual
development in the meaning of the word. The first meaning of Tao is
"road" or "way," and in very early times it was used by a figure of
speech for the "way" or method of doing a thing. Thus it came to denote
a rule of right conduct, moral action, or the principle underlying it.
There also grew up in common speech a natural antithesis between the Way
of Heaven (T‘ien Tao) and the Way of man, the former expression
signifying the highest standard of wisdom and moral excellence, as
opposed to the blind groping after truth here below. Finally the "T‘ien"
was dropped, and Tao then stood alone for the great unseen principle of
Good dominating and permeating the Universe. The transition is visible
in Lao Tzŭ, who was probably the first to employ the term in its
transcendental sense, but who also retains the older expression T‘ien
Tao. In one of his sayings T‘ien Tao is practically equivalent to Tao
the First Cause, and must therefore be translated not the Way but the
Tao of Heaven. This brings us to the next stage, of which Chuang

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tzŭ is the
representative. In his writings Tao never seems to mean "way." But he
introduces a new element of perplexity by speaking of T‘ien and Tao as
though they were two co-existent yet perfectly distinct cosmic
principles. He also uses the combination T‘ien Tao, and it is here that
the clue to the difficulty must be sought. The Tao of Heaven is
evidently an attribute rather than a thing in itself, and it is T‘ien
which has now become the First Cause. It is a less impersonal
conception, however, than Lao Tzŭ's transcendental Tao, and in fact
closely approximates to our own term "God." <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) What, then, is Chuang Tzŭ's Tao? Though by
no means always clear and consistent on the subject, he seems to regard
it as the "Virtue" or manifestation of the divine First Principle. It is
what he somewhere calls "the happiness of God,"—which to the Taoist of
course means a state of profound and passionless tranquillity, a "sacred
everlasting calm." Now Lao Tzŭ speaks of Tao as having existed before
Heaven and Earth: "Heaven," he says, "takes its law from Tao; but the
law of Tao is its own spontaneity." With him, therefore, Tao is the
antecedent of T‘ien, being what modern philosophers term the
Unconditioned or the Absolute. As to his T‘ien, the ambiguity which
lurks therein makes it doubtful whether he had any definite

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

conception of it at all. He simply appears to have accepted the already
existing Chinese cosmogony, oblivious or careless of its incompatibility
with his own novel conception of Tao. Chuang Tzŭ to some extent removes
this ambiguity by reverting to the older usage. He deposes Tao from its
premier position as the Absolute, and puts T‘ien in its place. Tao
becomes a mystic moral principle not unlike Lao Tzŭ's Tê, or "Virtue,"
and the latter term when used at all has lost most of its technical
significance. Thus broadly stated, some such explanation will prove
helpful to the reader, though he may still be baffled by a passage like
the following: "A man looks upon God <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
as upon his father, and loves Him in like measure. Shall he, then, not
love that which is greater than God?" The truth is that neither
consistency of thought nor exact terminology can be looked for in
Chinese philosophy as a whole, and least of all, perhaps, in such an
abstract system as that of early Taoism .

Leaving this somewhat barren discussion as to the relative position of
Tao and T‘ien, we now come to what was undoubtedly Chuang greatest
achievement in the region of pure thought. As in so many other cases,
the germ is provided by Lao Tzŭ who has the saying "The recognition of
beauty as such implies the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

idea of ugliness, and the recognition of good implies the idea of evil."
Following up this hint, Chuang Tzŭ is led to insist on the ultimate
relativity of all human perceptions. Even space and time are relative.
Sense-knowledge is gained by looking at things from only one point of
view, and is therefore utterly illusory and untrustworthy. Hence, it
appears that the most fundamental distinctions of our thought are unreal
and crumble away when exposed to the "light of Nature." Contraries no
longer stand in sharp antagonism, but are in some sense actually
identical with each other, because there is a real and all-embracing
Unity behind them. There is nothing which is not objective, nothing
which is not subjective; which is as much as to say, that subjective is
also objective, and objective also subjective. When he pauses here to
ask whether it be possible to say that subjective and objective really
exist at all, he seems to be touching the fringe of scepticism pure and
simple. But the point is not pressed; he is an idealist at heart, and
will not seriously question the existence of a permanent Reality
underlying the flow of phenomena. True wisdom then consists in
withdrawing from one's own individual standpoint and entering into
"subjective relation with all things." He who can achieve this will
"reject all distinctions of this and that," because he is able to descry
an ultimate Unity

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

in which they are merged, a mysterious One which "blends, transcends
them all."

Still keeping Lao Tzŭ in sight, our author draws further curious
inferences from this doctrine of relativity. Virtue implies vice, and
therefore will indirectly be productive of it. In any case, to aim at
being virtuous is only an ignorant and one-sided way of regarding the
principles of the universe. Rather let us transcend the artificial
distinctions of right and wrong, and take Tao itself as our model,
keeping our minds in a state of perfect balance, absolutely passive and
quiescent, making no effort in any direction. The ideal then is
something which is neither good nor bad, pleasure nor pain, wisdom nor
folly; it simply consists in following nature, or taking the line of
least resistance. The attainment of this state, and the spiritual
blessings accruing therefrom, constitute the main theme of Chuang Tzŭ's
discourse. His whole duty of man is thus summed up and put into a
nutshell; "Resolve your mental energy into abstraction, your physical
energy into inaction. Allow yourself to fall in with the natural order
of phenomena, without admitting the element of self."

This elimination of self is in truth the substitution of the ampler
atmosphere of Tao for one's own narrow individuality. But Tao is not
only inert and unchanging, it is also profoundly

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

unconscious—a strange attribute, which at once fixes a gulf between it
and our idea of a personal God. And accordingly, since Tao is the grand
model for mankind, Chuang Tzŭ would have us strive to attain so far as
may be to a like unconsciousness. But absolute and unbroken
unconsciousness during this life being an impossibility, he advocates,
not universal suicide, which would plainly violate the order of nature,
but a state of mental abstraction which shall involve at least a total
absence of self-consciousness. In order to explain his thought more
clearly, he gives a number of vivid illustrations from life, such as the
parable of Prince Hui's cook, who devoted himself to Tao and worked with
his mind and not with his eye. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) He
shows that the highest pitch of manual dexterity is attained only by
those whose art has become their second nature, who have grown so
familiar with their work that all their movements seem to come
instinctively and of themselves, who, in other words, have reached the
stage at which they are really "unconscious" of any effort. This
application of Tao in the humble sphere of the handicraftsman serves to
point the way towards the higher regions of abstract contemplation,
where it will find its fullest scope. The same idea is carried into the
domain of ethics. As we have seen, Chuang Tzŭ would have men neither
moral nor

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

immoral, but simply non-moral. And to this end every taint of
self-consciousness must be purged away, the mind must be freed from its
own criteria, and all one's trust must be placed in natural intuition.
Any attempt to impose fixed standards of morality on the peoples of the
earth is to be condemned, because it leaves no room for that spontaneous
and unforced accord with nature which is the very salt of human action.
Thus, were it feasible, Chuang Tzŭ would transport mankind back into the
golden age which existed before the distinction between right and wrong
arose. When the artificial barrier between contraries was set up, the
world had already, in his eyes, lost its primitive goodness. For the
mere fact of being able to call one's conduct good implies a lapse into
the uncertain sea of relativity, and consequent deviation from the
heavenly pattern. Herein lies the explanation of the paradox, on which
he is constantly harping, that wisdom, charity, duty to one's neighbour
and so on, are opposed to Tao.

It is small wonder that China has hesitated to adopt a system which
logically leads to such extreme conclusions. Nevertheless, we must not
too hastily write Chuang Tzŭ off as an unpractical dreamer. Remote
though his speculations seem from the world of reality, they rest on a
substratum of truth. In order to set forth his views with more startling
effect, he certainly

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

laid undue stress on the mystical side of Lao Tzŭ's philosophy, to the
exclusion of much that was better worth handling. That he himself,
however, was not altogether blind to the untenability of an extreme
position may be gathered from a remark which he casually lets fall:
"While there should be no action, there should be also no inaction."
This is a pregnant saying, which shows how Chuang Tzŭ may have modified
his stubborn attitude to meet the necessities of actual life. What he
means is that any hard-and-fast, predetermined line of conduct is to be
avoided, abstinence from action just as much as action itself. . The
great thing is that nothing be done of set purpose when it seems to
violate the natural order of events. On the other hand, if a certain
course of action presents itself as the most obvious and natural to
adopt, it would not be in accordance with Tao to shrink from it. This is
known as the doctrine of inaction, but it would be more correctly named
the doctrine of spontaneity.

There is another noteworthy element in Chuang Tzŭ's system which does
much to smooth away the difficulty of reconciling theory and practice.
This is what he calls the doctrine of non-angularity and self-adaptation
to externals. It is really a corollary to the grand principle of getting
outside one's personality—a process which extends the mental horizon and
creates sympathy with the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

minds of others. Some such wholesome corrective was necessary to prevent
the Taoist code from drifting into mere quixotry. Here again Lao Tzŭ may
have supplied the seed which was to ripen in the pages of his disciple.
"What the world reverences cannot be treated with disrespect," is the
dictum of the older sage. But Chuang Tzŭ went beyond this negative
precept. He saw well enough that unless a man is prepared to run his
head against a stone wall, he must, in the modern cant phrase, adjust
himself to his environment. Without abating a jot of his inmost
convictions, he must "swim with the tide, so as not to offend others."
Outwardly he may adapt himself, if inwardly he keeps up to his own
standard. There must be no raging and tearing propaganda, but infinite
patience and tact. Gentle moral suasion and personal example are the
only methods that Chuang Tzŭ will countenance; and even with these he
urges caution: "If you are always offending others by your superiority,
you will probably come to grief." Above all, he abhors the clumsy
stupidity which would go on forcing its stock remedies down the people's
throat irrespective of place or season. Thus even Confucius is blamed
for trying to revive the dead ashes of the past and "make the customs of
Chou succeed in Lu." This, he says, is like "pushing a boat on land,
great trouble and no result, except certain injury

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

to oneself." There must be no blind and rigid adherence to custom and
tradition, no unreasoning worship of antiquity. "Dress up a monkey in
the robes of Chou Kung, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) and it will
not be happy until they are torn to shreds. And the difference between
past and present," he adds bitterly, "is much the same as the difference
between Chou Kung and a monkey." The rebuke conveyed in these remarks is
not wholly unmerited. Chuang Tzŭ, while hardly yielding to Confucius
himself in his ardent admiration of the olden time, never fell into the
mistake of supposing that the world can stand still, though he feared it
might sometimes go backward. He believed that to be the wisest
statecraft, which could take account of changed conditions and suit its
measures to the age. Plainly the inactivity he preached, hard though it
be to fathom and harder still to compass, was something very different
from stagnation. It was a lesson China needed; well for her in these
latter days if she had taken it more to heart!

The comparative neglect of Chuang Tzŭ among the *literati* of the Middle
Kingdom is no doubt chiefly due to his cavalier treatment of Confucius,
of which we have just had a sample. Most of the writers who mention him
speak of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

his hostile attitude towards the head of the orthodox school. As a
matter of fact, this hostility has been a little exaggerated. For one
thing, Chuang Tzŭ's attitude is by no means consistent; the tone adopted
towards Confucius passes through every variety of shade. In the first
seven chapters, which form the nucleus of Chuang Tzŭ's work, he is
assigned a very prominent position, acting for the most part as the
mouth-piece of the author's own views, which he is made to expound with
an air of authority. In only one passage is he treated with disrespect,
though in another it is implied that he was a prophet unsuited to his
age. In chapter vi we may even discern a rough attempt at reconciling
the two extremes of mystic Taoism and matter-of-fact Confucianism. It
seems that all may not aspire to the more intimate communion with Tao,
though Tao is the environment of all. For Confucius here resigns himself
to the will of Heaven, which has ordained that he, like the bulk of
mankind, shall travel within the ordinary "rule of life," with its
limited outlook, its prejudices, forms, and ceremonies; but he frankly
recognises the superior blessedness of the favoured few who can
transcend it. In some of the later chapters (the genuineness of which is
not always unimpeachable) the Master is more severely handled.
Especially does he appear to disadvantage, as might naturally be
expected, in

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

his alleged interviews with Lao Tzŭ. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)
But in other places again he is represented as an earnest inquirer after
truth, or even cited as an acknowledged authority. He quotes words which
now stand in the *Tao Tê Ching*, and generally behaves more like a
disciple of Lao Tzŭ than as the head of a rival system. In chapter xxii,
by a strange piece of inadvertence, he is actually made to disparage the
Confucianists with their scholastic quibbles. But it is in the last of
the genuine chapters, entitled *Lieh Tzŭ*, that the acme of
inconsistency is reached. Here Confucius is attacked as "a man of
outward show and specious words. He mistakes the branch for the root."
If entrusted with the welfare of the State, "it will only be by mistake
that he will succeed." Yet this tirade is immediately followed by a
characteristic harangue in the Taoist vein, delivered by no other than
the much-maligned sage himself. It is hard, indeed, to imagine the
central figure of the *Analects* speaking in this strain:—"There is
nothing more fatal than intentional virtue, when the mind looks
outwards. For by thus looking outwards, the power of introspection is
destroyed. . . . What is it to aim at virtue? Why, a man who aims at
virtue practises what he approves and condemns what he does not
practise."

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Misrepresentation
is carried to such lengths that sayings are put into his mouth which are
the exact opposite of what he really uttered. And it is unlikely that
Chuang Tzŭ had much scruple in thus harnessing the great Teacher to his
own doctrines. He was doubtless fully alive to the advantage of
borrowing and, as it were, absorbing the unparalleled prestige of so
great a man; besides which, the sheer audacity of the scheme must have
attracted him; and he carried it out with what the Confucianists are
justified in regarding as the utmost effrontery. Yet it would be too
much to say that this curious form of homage was wholly insincere. There
are signs that Chuang Tzŭ was impressed, almost in spite of himself, by
the pure personal character of the man whose whole view of life he
distrusted, but whose message was so deeply printed in the hearts of his
countrymen. He could not escape the common influence; the very frequency
with which he brings Confucius upon the stage, whether as prophet or
target for abuse, tells of a certain involuntary fascination.

The state of doubt in which we are left with regard to our author's real
estimate of Confucius may serve to call attention to the peculiar
ironical quality of his mind, which pleasantly tempers his dogmatism
and, indeed, often saves him from a sharp descent into the ridiculous.
It would almost seem as if, true to the Taoist

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

precept, he were endeavouring to break through the restraining bonds of
his individual self, and to contemplate his own judgments from the
outside. Needless to say, there is a fount of deep, almost fierce,
earnestness in the man as well. But he never loses a certain delicacy of
touch which lends peculiar aptness to the sobriquet of "butterfly,"
bestowed on him in allusion to his famous dream. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) To these qualities must be added, in order
to complete a faint sketch of this unique figure in Chinese literature,
a recurrent strain of pervasive melancholy, a mournful brooding over
"the doubtful doom of humankind." Take, for instance, these few lines
picturing the mental faculties in their inevitable decline: "Then, as
under autumn and winter's blight, comes gradual decay; a passing away,
like the flow of water, never to return. Finally, the block, when all is
choked up like an old drain,—the failing mind which shall not see light
again." Just as the form of Chuang Tzŭ's work hovers on the borderland
of poetry and prose, so the content is poetic rather than strictly
philosophic, by reason of the lightness and grace with which he skims
over subjects bristling with difficulty. Lucidity and precision of
thought are sometimes sacrificed to imagination and beauty of style. He
seldom attempts passages of sustained reasoning, but prefers to rely on
flashes of literary

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

inspiration. He is said to have shone in his verbal conflicts with Hui
Tzŭ, but the specimens of his dialectic that have been preserved are,
perhaps, more subtle than convincing. The episode of the minnows under
the bridge <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) only proves that in arguing
with a sophist he could himself descend to sophistry naked and
unabashed.

A noteworthy feature of Chuang Tzŭ's method is the wealth of
illustration which he lavishes upon his favourite topics. In a hundred
various ways he contrives to point the moral which is never far from his
thoughts. Realising as fully as Herbert Spencer after him, the necessity
of constant iteration in order to force alien conceptions on unwilling
minds, he returns again and again to the cardinal points of his system,
and skilfully arrays his arguments in an endless stream of episode and
anecdote. These anecdotes are usually thrown into the form of
dialogue—not the compact and closely-reasoned dialogue of Plato, but
detached conversations between real or imaginary persons, sometimes easy
in tone, sometimes declamatory, and here and there rising to fine
heights of rhetoric. It may be objected to this method that it hinders
the proper development of thought by destroying its continuity, and is
therefore more suited to a merely popular work than to that of a really
original

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

thinker; on the other side it can only be urged that it lends dramatic
colouring and relieves the tedium inseparable from a long philosophical
treatise. The objection, on the whole, has much force, and yet it is
equally true that the alternative method would have robbed Chuang Tzŭ's
work of more than half its charm; its immortality is after all due less
to the matter, much of which to modern notions is somewhat crude, than
to the exquisite form. And certainly, as a means of fixing a principle
in the mind, a single anecdote told by Chuang Tzŭ is worth reams of dry
disquisition.

Though the difficulty of his text and the abstruseness of his theme have
been a bar to very wide-spread popularity, Chuang Tzŭ has never lost
favour with the select band of scholars. From time to time, when Taoism
happened to be in fashion, he also enjoyed considerable vogue at Court.
His book, like the *Tao Tê Ching*, formed the subject of lectures and
examinations, and several Emperors are said to have studied and written
upon it. In 713 A.D., it was specially decreed that those members of the
public service should be singled out for promotion who were able to
understand Chuang Tzŭ. That he was always considered a hard nut to crack
is sufficiently shown by the flood of commentaries and other works
devoted to his elucidation. Nevertheless, we are told as usual of a
marvellous boy—

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

one of the infant prodigies in whom Chinese annals are so rich—who at
twelve years of age understood the meaning of both Lao Tzŭ and Chuang
Tzŭ. The philosopher's works, in Kuo Hsiang's standard edition, were
printed for the first time in the year 1005 <span
class="smallcaps">A.D.</span>, and the reigning Emperor presented each
of his Ministers with a copy.

Until we come to Lin Hsi-chung at the beginning of the present dynasty,
native criticism cannot be said to have thrown any very dazzling light
on our author. An early writer, who may possibly have seen him in the
flesh, complains that "he hides himself in the clouds and has no
knowledge of men." Another pronounces him "reckless, one who submitted
to no law." From a third we learn that "in his desire to free himself
from the trammels of objective existences, he lost himself in the
quicksands of metaphysics." Sometimes he is damned with the faintest of
praise: "In his teachings propriety plays no part, neither are they
founded on eternal principles; nevertheless, they wear the semblance of
wisdom and have their good points." On the other hand, rabid
Confucianists insisted that "his book was expressly intended to cast a
slur on their Master, in order to make people accept his own heterodox
teaching; and, consequently, nothing would satisfy them but that his
writings should be burnt and his disciples cut off. As

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

to the rights and wrongs of his system, they were not even worth
discussing."

From kindred poetic souls he has obtained more generous recognition. The
great Po Chü-i, of the Tang dynasty, with whom he appears to have been a
special favourite, was inspired by the perusal of his works to write
three short poems, one of which contains the following stanzas <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7):

PEACEFUL OLD AGE

Chuang Tzŭ said: "Tao gives me this toil in manhood, this repose in old
age, this rest in death."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Swiftly and soon the golden sun goes down,  
The blue sky wells afar into the night;  
Tao is the changeful world's environment,  
Happy are they that in its laws delight.

Tao gives me toil—youth's passion to achieve,  
And leisure in life's autumn and decay:  
I follow Tao,—the seasons are my friends  
Opposing it, misfortune comes my way.

    .        .        .        .        .

Within my breast no sorrows can abide,  
I feel the great world's spirit through me thrill  
And as a cloud I drift before the wind,  
Or with the random swallow take my will.

</div>

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

As underneath the mulberry tree I dream,  
The water-clock drips on, and dawn appears:  
A new day shines o’er wrinkles and white hair,  
The symbols of the fulness of my years.

    .        .        .        .        .

If I depart, I cast no look behind;  
If still alive, I still am free from care.  
Since life and death in cycles come and go,  
Of little moment are the days to spare.

Thus strong in faith I wait and long to be  
One with the pulsings of Eternity.

</div>

The Brahmanistic influence which these lines betray is faithfully
reflected from Chuang Tzŭ. There are critics who would trace the same
influence further back still, and regard the speculations of Lao Tzŭ
himself as borrowed directly from India. But in the absence of any
trustworthy evidence of communication between the two countries at that
early date, the final verdict on this theory cannot yet be pronounced.
With Chuang Tzŭ the case is somewhat different. The intervening period
had seen the rise of Gautama and the spreading of a new and powerful
religion which embodied in itself all the more essential parts of the
Brahmanistic creed. By Chuang Tzŭ's time Buddhism had probably
penetrated far and wide throughout Asia. It was not officially
introduced into China until much later, but it seems only reasonable to
suppose that driblets must have filtered through here and there.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Certainly we find
in the Chinese philosopher such striking points of similarity to
Brahmanism as can hardly be explained as mere coincidences of thought.
He believes, for instance, that every human being has a soul, which is
an emanation from the great impersonal Soul of the universe. In
contradistinction to the mind, which is only the scene or background of
our ever-changing sensations and emotions, and dies with the body, the
soul is in its nature immortal, and after passing through a series of
different states in conditioned being, finally reunites with the divine
essence whence it sprang. How to hasten the attainment of this goal of
supreme bliss—that is the question which lies at the root of Chuang
Tzŭ's philosophy. And his answer points to the abstract contemplation of
Tao as the only means of destroying attachment to existence for its own
sake, and thus loosening the soul from its bodily fetters. So far he
resembles the Buddhist. But when he comes to touch on the contemplative
life, we find him diverging from the recognised Buddhist ideal in one or
two notable particulars. To him the highest form of virtue does not mean
the mortification of animal instincts. Rather would he like these to
have free and natural scope. Nor does it consist in living the life of a
hermit. For "the perfect man can transcend the limits of the human and
yet not withdraw from the world."

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Those," he says,
"who would benefit mankind from deep forests or lofty mountains are
simply unequal to the strain upon their higher natures." Again, his
hatred of outward show leads him to condemn anything approaching
ritualism or asceticism, which he perceives truly enough to be symptoms
of decay in the moral fibre. The only form of fasting he will recommend
is the "fasting of the heart."

But divested thus of every shred of materialistic grossness, and
converted into a purely spiritual creed, Taoism soon became altogether
too shadowy and impalpable to stand alone against its formidable rival.
It had to await the infusion of much-needed Buddhistic elements before
it could re-assert itself as a national religion. This decline it was
Chuang Tzŭ's fate to hasten rather than to arrest. His capital error lay
in neglecting to develop those grand and simple moral truths with which
Lao Tzŭ had leavened his abstruser speculations. The virtues of
humility, gentleness and forgiveness of injury, which the earlier Taoist
gospel held in such high esteem, are by him either passed over in
silence or subordinated to the all-engrossing mystic purpose. Thus it
was that the glowing promise of a singularly exalted moral code died
away in later hands to the dust and ashes of a spurious metaphysic. No
doubt, as a thorough-going exponent of his own principles, Chuang Tzŭ
cared but little

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

for outward and visible results. He was in no sense a propagandist; the
kingdom of the mind was his real province. Yet the fact remains that the
intellectual elevation and refinement of his system placed it beyond the
grasp of all except a few; unlike Confucius, he made little or no
provision for the struggling mass of mankind which could not be expected
to rise to the higher planes of abstract thought.

This, however, is a criticism which leaves Chuang Tzŭ's literary
position unaffected; and it is literature, after all, which claims the
immortal part of his name and fame. For he of all the ancients wielded
the most perfect mastery over Chinese prose style, and was the first to
show to what heights of eloquence and beauty his native language could
attain. And in these respects, great as the achievements are of which
later Chinese literature can boast, he has never been surpassed. Indeed,
his master-hand sounded chords that have vibrated since to no other
touch. Finally, what effect may his writings be expected to produce on
the modern Western mind? It is certain that to many, even through the
necessarily imperfect medium of a translation, he already makes a
powerful appeal; and it may at least be safely predicted that a far
greater number of readers will be attracted by his originality and grace
than repelled by the rather fantastic vagaries of his mysticism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[16:1](mcm04.htm#fr_0) It is translated thus in
the accompanying extracts.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[17:1](mcm04.htm#fr_1) T‘ien.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[20:1](mcm04.htm#fr_2) See [p.
52](mcm08.htm#page_52).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[24:1](mcm04.htm#fr_3) A great jurist and social
reformer of the twelfth century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>,
brother of the first sovereign of the Chou dynasty.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[26:1](mcm04.htm#fr_4) Lao Tzŭ himself does not
escape entirely. See the curious episode on [p. 82](mcm13.htm#page_82)
of the present volume.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[28:1](mcm04.htm#fr_5) See [p.
50](mcm07.htm#page_50).

<span id="fn_6"></span>[29:1](mcm04.htm#fr_6) See [p.
110](mcm16.htm#page_110).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[32:1](mcm04.htm#fr_7) My friend Mr. L.
Cranmer-Byng has kindly added the wings of his verse to my literal prose
translation. All three poems will be found at the end of the section on
Chuang in the great T‘u Shu encyclopædia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Doctrine of Relativity](mcm05)
