[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcm05)  [Next](mcm07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419460/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO7KA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Musings of a Chinese Mystic*, by Lionel Giles, \[1906\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### THE IDENTITY OF CONTRARIES

<span class="smallcaps">Tzŭ Ch‘i</span> of Nan-kuo sat leaning on a
table. Looking up to heaven, he sighed and became absent, as though soul
and body had parted. Yen Chê‘ng Tzŭ Yu, who was standing by him,
exclaimed "What are you thinking about that your body should become thus
like dry wood, your mind like dead ashes? Surely the man now leaning on
the table is not he who was here just now."

"My friend," replied Tzŭ Ch‘i, "your question is apposite. To-day I have
buried myself. . . . Do you understand? . . . Ah! perhaps you only know
the music of Man, and not that of Earth. Or even if you have heard the
music of Earth, you have not heard the music of Heaven."

"Pray explain," said Tzŭ Yu.

"The breath of the universe," continued Tzŭ Ch‘i, "is called wind. At
times, it is inactive. But when active, every aperture resounds to the
blast. Have you never listened to its growing roar? Caves and dells of
hill and forest, hollows in huge trees of many a span in girth,—these

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

are like nostrils, like mouths, like ears, like beam-sockets, like
goblets, like mortars, like ditches, like bogs. And the wind goes
rushing through them, sniffing, snoring, singing, soughing, puffing,
purling, whistling, whirring, now shrilly treble, now deeply bass, now
soft, now loud; until, with a lull, silence reigns supreme. Have you
never witnessed among the trees such a disturbance as this?"

"Well, then," inquired Tzŭ Yu, "since the music of Earth consists of
nothing more than holes, and the music of Man of pipes and flutes, of
what consists the music of Heaven?"

"The effect of the wind upon these various apertures," replied Tzŭ Ch‘i,
"is not uniform. But what is it that gives to each the individuality, to
all the potentiality, of sound? . . . Joy and anger, sorrow and
happiness, caution and remorse, come upon us by turns, with
ever-changing mood. They come like music from hollowness, like mushrooms
from damp. Daily and nightly they alternate within us, but we cannot
tell whence they spring. Can we then hope in a moment to lay our finger
upon their very cause?

"But for these emotions, *I* should not be. But for *me*, they would
have no scope. So far we can go; but we do not know what it is that
brings them into play. ’Twould seem to be a *soul;* but the clue to its
existence is wanting. That such a power operates is credible enough,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

though we cannot see its form. It has functions without form.

"Take the human body with all its manifold divisions. Which part of it
does a man love best? Does he not cherish all equally, or has he a
preference? Do not all equally serve him? And do these servitors then
govern themselves, or are they subdivided into rulers and subjects?
Surely there is some soul which sways them all.

"But whether or not we ascertain what are the functions of this soul, it
matters but little to the soul itself. For, coming into existence with
this mortal coil of mine, with the exhaustion of this mortal coil its
mandate will also be exhausted. To be harassed by the wear and tear of
life, and to pass rapidly through it without possibility of arresting
one's course,—is not this pitiful indeed? To labour without ceasing, and
then, without living to enjoy the fruit, worn out, to depart, suddenly,
one knows not whither,—is not that a just cause for grief?

"What advantage is there in what men call not dying? The body
decomposes, and the mind goes with it. This is our real cause for
sorrow. Can the world be so dull as not to see this? Or is it I alone
who am dull, and others not so? . . . There is nothing which is not
objective: there is nothing which is not subjective. But it is
impossible to start from the objective. Only from subjective knowledge
is

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

it possible to proceed to objective knowledge. Hence it has been said,
'The objective emanates from the subjective; the subjective is
consequent upon the objective. This is the Alternation Theory.'
Nevertheless, when one is born, the other dies. When one is possible,
the other is impossible. When one is affirmative, the other is negative.
Which being the case, the true sage rejects all distinctions of this and
that. He takes his refuge in God, and places himself in subjective
relation with all things.

"And inasmuch as the subjective is also objective, and the objective
also subjective, and as the contraries under each are indistinguishably
blended, does it not become impossible for us to say whether subjective
and objective really exist at all?

"When subjective and objective are both without their correlates, that
is the very axis of Tao. And when that axis passes through the centre at
which all Infinities converge, positive and negative alike blend into an
infinite One. . . Therefore it is that, viewed from the standpoint of
Tao, a beam and a pillar are identical. So are ugliness and beauty,
greatness, wickedness, perverseness, and strangeness. Separation is the
same as construction: construction is the same as destruction. Nothing
is subject either to construction or to destruction, for these
conditions are brought together into One.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

"Only the truly intelligent understand this principle of the identity of
all things. They do not view things as apprehended by themselves,
subjectively; but transfer themselves into the position of the things
viewed. And viewing them thus they are able to comprehend them, nay, to
master them; and he who can master them is near. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md) So it is that to place oneself in
subjective relation with externals, without consciousness of their
objectivity,—this is Tao. But to wear out one's intellect in an
obstinate adherence to the individuality of things, not recognising the
fact that all things are One,—this is called *Three in the Morning*."

"What is *Three in the Morning?*" asked Tzŭ Yu.

"A keeper of monkeys," replied Tzŭ Chi, "said with regard to their
rations of chestnuts, that each monkey was to have three in the morning
and four at night. But at this the monkeys were very angry, so the
keeper said they might have four in the morning and three at night, with
which arrangement they were all well pleased. The actual number of the
chestnuts remained the same, but there was an adaptation to the likes
and dislikes of those concerned. Such is the principle of putting
oneself into subjective relation with externals.

"Wherefore the true sage, while regarding

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

contraries as identical, adapts himself to the laws of Heaven. This is
called following two courses at once.

"The knowledge of the men of old had a limit. It extended back to a
period when matter did not exist. That was the extreme point to which
their knowledge reached. The second period was that of matter, but of
matter unconditioned. The third epoch saw matter conditioned, but
contraries were still unknown. When these appeared, Tao began to
decline. And with the decline of Tao, individual bias arose."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[46:1](mcm06.htm#fr_10.md) *Sc*., to the great goal
of Tao.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Illusions](mcm07.md)
