[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcm11)  [Next](mcm13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419460/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO7KA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Musings of a Chinese Mystic*, by Lionel Giles, \[1906\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

### SELF-ADAPTATION TO EXTERNALS

<span class="smallcaps">Yen Ho</span> was about to become tutor to the
eldest son of Prince Ling of the Wei State. Accordingly he observed to
Chü Po Yü: "Here is a man whose disposition is naturally of a low order.
To let him take his own unprincipled way is to endanger the State. Tot
try to restrain him is to endanger one's personal safety. He has just
wit enough to see faults in others, but not to see his own. I am
consequently at a loss what to do."

"A good question, indeed," replied Chü Po Yü; "you must be careful, and
begin by self- reformation. Outwardly you may adapt yourself, but
inwardly you must keep up to your own standard. In this there are two
points to be guarded against. You must not let the outward adaptation
penetrate within, nor the inward standard manifest itself without. In
the former case, you will fall, you will be obliterated, you will
collapse, you will lie prostrate. In the latter case you will be a
sound, a name, a bogie, an uncanny thing. If he would play the child, do

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

you play the child too. If he cast aside all sense of decorum, do you do
so too. As far as he goes, do you go also. Thus you will reach him
without offending him.

"Don't you know the story of the praying-mantis? In its rage it
stretched out its arms to prevent a chariot from passing, unaware that
this was beyond its strength, so admirable was its energy! Be cautious.
If you are always offending others by your superiority, you will
probably come to grief.

"Do you not know that those who keep tigers do not venture to give them
live animals as food, for fear of exciting their fury when killing the
prey? Also, that whole animals are not given, for fear of exciting the
tiger's fury when rending them? The periods of hunger and repletion are
carefully watched in order to prevent such outbursts. The tiger is of a
different species from man; but the latter too is manageable if properly
treated, unmanageable if excited to fury.

"Those who are fond of horses surround them with various conveniences.
Sometimes mosquitoes or flies trouble them; and then, unexpectedly to
the animal, a groom will brush them off, the result being that the horse
breaks his bridle, and hurts his head and chest. The intention is good,
but there is a want of real care for the horse. Against this you must be
on your guard."

.        .        .        .        .

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

For travelling by water there is nothing like a boat. For travelling by
land there is nothing like a cart. This because a boat moves readily in
water; but were you to try to push it on land you would never succeed in
making it go. Now ancient and modern times may be likened unto water and
land; Chou and Lu to the boat and the cart. To try to make the customs
of Chou succeed in Lu, is like pushing a boat on land: great trouble and
no result, except certain injury to oneself. . . .

Dress up a monkey in the robes of Chou Kung, and it will not be happy
until they are torn to shreds. And the difference between past and
present is much the same as the difference between Chou Kung and a
monkey.

.        .        .        .        .

When Hsi Shih <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) was distressed in
mind, she knitted her brows. An ugly woman of the village, seeing how
beautiful she looked, went home, and having worked herself into a fit
frame of mind, knitted her brows. The result was that the rich people of
the place barred up their doors and would not come out, while the poor
people took their wives and children and departed elsewhere. That woman
saw the beauty of knitted brows, but she did not see wherein the beauty
of knitted brows lay.

.        .        .        .        .

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Kuan Chung being at the point of death, Duke Huan went to see him.

"You are venerable Sir," said the Duke, "really ill. You had better say
to whom, in the event of your getting worse, I am to entrust the
administration of the State."

"Whom does your Highness wish to choose?" inquired Kuan Chung.

"Will Pao Yü do?" asked the Duke.

"He will not," said Kuan Chung. "He is pure, incorruptible, and good.
With those who are not like himself he will not associate. And if he has
once heard of a man's wrong-doing, he never forgets it. If you employ
him in the administration of the empire, he will get to loggerheads with
his prince and to sixes and sevens with the people. It would not be long
before he and your Highness fell out."

"Whom then can we have?" asked the Duke.

"There is no alternative," replied Kuan Chung; "it must be Hsi P‘êng. He
is a man who forgets the authority of those above him, and makes those
below him forget his. Ashamed that he is not the peer of the Yellow
Emperor, he grieves over those who are not the peers of himself.

"To share one's virtue with others is called true wisdom. To share one's
wealth with others is reckoned meritorious. To exhibit superior

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

merit is not the way to win men's hearts. To exhibit inferior merit is
the way. There are things in the State he does not hear; there are
things in the family he does not see. There is no alternative; it must
be Hsi P‘êng."

.        .        .        .        .

To glorify the past and to condemn the present has always been the way
of the scholar. Yet if Hsi Wei Shih <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)
and individuals of that class were caused to re-appear in the present
day, which of them but would accommodate himself to the age?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[79:1](mcm12.htm#fr_20.md) A famous beauty of old.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[81:1](mcm12.htm#fr_21.md) A patriarch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Immortality of the Soul](mcm13.md)
