[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt205)  [Next](pt207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### XXII.

### THE RIDERE (KNIGHT) OF RIDDLES.

From John Mackenzie, fisherman, near Inverary.

THERE was a king once, and he married a great lady, and she departed on
the birth of her first son. And a little after this the king married
another one, and he had a son by this one too. The two lads were growing
up. Then it struck in the queen's head that it was not her son who would
come into the kingdom; and she set it before her that she would poison
the eldest son. And so she sent advice to the cook that they would put
poison in the drink of the heir; but as luck was in it, so it was that
the youngest brother heard them, and he said to his brother not to take
the draught, nor to drink it at all; and so he did. But the queen
wondered that the lad was not dead; and she thought that there was not
enough of poison in the drink, and she asked the cook to put more in the
drink on this night. It was thus they did: and when the cook made up the
drink, she said that he would not be long alive after this draught. But
his brother heard this also, and he told this likewise. The eldest
thought he would put the draught into a little bottle, and he said to
his brother--"If I stay in this house I have no doubt she will do for me
some way or other, and the quicker I leave the house the better. I will
take the world for my pillow, and there is no knowing what fortune will
be on me." His brother said that he would go with him,

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

and they took themselves off to the stable, and they put saddles on two
horses and they took their soles out of that.

They had not gone very far from the house when the eldest one
said--"There is no knowing if poison was in the drink at all, though we
went away. Try it in the horse's ear and we shall see." The horse went
not far when he fell. "That was only a rattle-bones of a horse at all
events," said the eldest one, and together they got up on the one horse,
and so they went forwards. "But," said he, "I can scarce believe that
there is any poison in the drink, let's try it on this horse." That he
did, and they went not far when the horse fell cold dead. They thought
to take the hide off him, and that it would keep them warm on this night
for it was close at hand. In the morning when they woke they saw twelve
ravens coming and lighting on the carcase of the horse, and they were
not long there when they fell over dead.

They went and lifted the ravens, and they took them with them, and the
first town they reached they gave the ravens to a baker, and they asked
him to make a dozen pies of the ravens. They took the pies with them,
and they went on their journey. About the mouth of night, and when they
were in a great thick wood that was there, there came four and twenty
robbers out of the wood, and they said to them to deliver their purses;
but they said that they had no purse, but that they had a little food
which they were carrying with them. "Good is even meat!" and the robbers
began to eat it, but they had not eaten too boldly when they fell hither
and thither. When they saw that the robbers were dead, they ransacked
their pockets, and they

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

got much gold and silver on the robbers. They went forward till they
reached the Knight of Riddles.

The house of the Knight of Riddles was in the finest place in that
country, and if his house was pretty, it was his daughter was pretty
(indeed). Her like was not on the surface of the world altogether; so
handsome was she, and no one would get her to marry but the man who
would put a question to this knight that he could not solve. The chaps
thought that they would go and they would try to put a question to him;
and the youngest one was to stand in place of gillie to his eldest
brother. They reached the house of the Knight of Riddles with this
question--"One killed two, and two killed twelve, and twelve killed four
and twenty, and two got out of it;" and they were to be in great majesty
and high honour till he should solve the riddle.

They were thus a while with the Ridere, but on a day of days came one of
the knight's daughter's maidens of company to the gillie, and asked him
to tell her the question. He took her plaid from her and let her go, but
he did not tell her, and so did the twelve maidens, day after day, and
he said to the last one that no creature had the answer to the riddle
but his master down below. No matter! The gillie told his master each
thing as it happened. But one day after this came the knight's daughter
to the eldest brother, and she was so fine, and she asked him to tell
her the question. And now there was no refusing her, and so it was that
he told her, but he kept her plaid. And the Knight of Riddles sent for
him, and he solved the riddle. And he said that he had two choices: to
lose his head, or to be let go in a crazy boat without food or drink,
without oar or scoop. The chap spoke and he said--"I have another
question to put to thee before all these things

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

happen." "Say on," said the knight. "Myself and my gillie were on a day
in the forest shooting. My gillie fired at a hare, and she fell, and he
took her skin off, and let her go; and so he did to twelve, he took
their skins off and let them go. And at last came a great fine hare, and
I myself fired at her, and I took her skin off and I let her go."
"Indeed thy riddle is not hard to solve, my lad," said the knight. And
so the lad got the knight's daughter to wife, and they made a great
hearty wedding that lasted a day and a year. The youngest one went home
now that his brother had got so well on his way, and the eldest brother
gave him every right over the kingdom that was at home.

There were near the march of the kingdom of the Knight of Riddles three
giants, and they were always murdering and slaying some of the knight's
people, and taking the spoil from them. On a day of days the Knight of
Riddles said to his son-in-law, that if the spirit of a man were in him,
he would go to kill the giants, as they were always bringing such losses
on the country. And thus it was, he went and he met the giants, and he
came home with the three giants' heads, and he threw them at the
knight's feet. "Thou art an able lad doubtless, and thy name hereafter
is the Hero of the White Shield." The name of the Hero of the White
Shield went far and near.

The brother of the Hero of the White Shield was exceedingly strong and
clever, and without knowing what the Hero of the White Shield was, he
thought he would try a trick with him. The Hero of the White Shield was
now dwelling on the lands of the Giants, and the knight's daughter with
him. His brother came and he asked to make a comhrag (fight as a bull)
with him. The men began at each other, and they took to

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

wrestling from morning till evening. At last and at length, when they
were tired, weak, and given up, the Hero of the White Shield jumped over
a great rampart, and he asked him to meet him in the morning. This leap
put the other to shame, and he said to him "Well may it be that thou
wilt not be so supple about this time to-morrow." The young brother now
went to a poor little bothy that was near to the house of the Hero of
the White Shield tired and drowsy, and in the morning they dared the
fight again. And the Hero of the White Shield began to go back, till he
went backwards into a river. "There must be some of my blood in thee
before that was done to me." "Of what blood art thou?" said the
youngest. "’Tis I am son of Ardan, great King of the Albann." "’Tis I am
thy brother." It was now they knew each other. They gave luck and
welcome to each other, and the Hero of the White Shield now took him
into the palace, and she it was that was pleased to see him--the
knight's daughter. He stayed a while with them, and after that he
thought that he would go home to his own kingdom; and when he was going
past a great palace that was there he saw twelve men playing at shinny
over against the palace. He thought he would go for a while and play
shinny with them; but they were not long playing shinny when they fell
out, and the weakest of them caught him and he shook him as he would a
child. He thought it was no use for him to lift a hand amongst these
twelve worthies, and he asked them to whom they were sons. They said
they were children of the one father, the brother of the Hero of the
White Shield, but that no one of them had the same mother. "I am your
father," said he; and he asked them if their mothers were all alive.
They said that they were. He went with them till he found the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

mothers, and when they were all for going, he took home with him the
twelve wives and the twelve sons; and I don't know but that his seed are
kings on Alba till this very day.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

...

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

...

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

...

Written down from the recitation of John Mackenzie, fisherman at
Inverary, who says that he learned the tale from an old man in Lorn many
years ago. He has been thirty-six years at Inverary. He first told me
the tale fluently, and afterwards dictated it to me; and the words
written are, as nearly as possible, those used by Mackenzie on the first
occasion.

HECTOR URQUHART.

April, 1859.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

The word pronounced Rēēt-djĕ-rĕ, and variously spelt Ridir, Righdir, and
Righdeire, is explained in a manuscript history of the Campbells,
written about 1827, as Righ, king--dei, after--Ri, king. If this be
correct, the word would mean a following or minor king. It may equally
be a corruption of Ritter, or Reiter; and I have translated it by
*knight*, because it is now applied to all knights.

The author of the manuscript says:--The term is handed down even in
Gaelic tales, and mentions several which were then current, Righdiere
nan Spleugh, and an Righdeiri Ruadh; he adds, that Righdeirin dubh Loch
Oigh (the Black Knights of Loch Awe) was the name then used by old
Highlanders in mentioning the chiefs of the Duin (Campbells), and that
the ruins of Eredin Castle were then known by no other name than Larach
tai nan Righdeirin--the ruins of the house of the knights.

The writer argues from old manuscript histories, charters, etc., that
the term was brought from Ireland by the colony who settled in Cantire
at a very early period, and, who spread thence over Argyllshire, and
founded a kingdom, of which frequent mention is made in Irish annals as
the Dalreudinan, or Scoto-Irish colonization of Argyll, Cantire, Lorn,
and Islay. It is supposed to have taken place about A.D. 503, under
Laorn, Fergus, and Angus, three sons of Eric, the descendant of Cairbre
Ruadh, a son of Conary II., who ruled as chief king of Ireland A.D. 212.
Be that as it may, all the Gaelic traditions now current in the Isles
point at an Irish migration which took place in the year of grace *once
upon a time*, and the word Righdeire occurs continually, where it seems
to mean a small king, and a king of Erin; for example, "there was a king
(Ree) and a Reet-djer--as there was and will be and, as grows the
fir-tree, some of them crooked and some of them straight--and he was a
king of Erin." Even the word Albanach, now used for Scotchman, means
Wanderer. When the king's son changes his name, after killing the
giants, it seems as if he were made a knight.

This tale, then, would seem to be some mythological account of events
which may be traced in Grimm's stories, in the Classics, and elsewhere,
mixed up with names and titles belonging to the colonization of
Argyllshire by Irish tribes, and all applied to the kings of Scotland in
the last sentence. It is a fair representation of the strange confusion
of reality and fancy, history and mythology, of which I believe these
stories to be composed.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

The nearest story to it which I know is Das Räthsel, in Grimm, No. 22.
Several versions are given in the third volume, which seem to vary from
each other, about as much as this Gaelic version varies from them all.

There is something like the fight between Romulus and his brother. Alba
means Scotland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. The Burgh](pt207)
