[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt206)  [Next](pt208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### XXIII.

### THE BURGH.

From Alexander M'Donald, tenant, and others, Barra, July 1859.

FOUR were watching cattle in Baileburgh (Burgh F Farm). They were in a
fold. The four were Domhnull MacGhilleathain, Domhnull Mac-an-t-Saoir,
Calum MacNill, and Domhnull Domhnullach. They saw a dog. Calum MacNill
said that they should strike the dog. Said Domhnull MacGhilleathain, "We
will not strike. If thou strikest him thou wilt repent it." Calum
MacNill struck the dog, and his hand and his arm lost their power. He
felt a great pain in his hand and his arm, and one of the other lads
carried his stick home; he could not carry it himself. He was lamenting
his hand, and he went where there was an old woman, Nic a Phi, to get
knowledge about his hand. She said to him that he would be so till the
end of a day and a year; and at the end of a day and year, to go to the
knoll and say to it, "If thou dost not let with me the strength of my
hand, I or my race will leave neither stick nor stone of thee that we
will not drive to pieces."

At the end of a day and year his comrades said, "There is now a day and
year since thou hast lost the power of thy hand, come to the knoll till
thy hand get its power, as the woman said." He went himself and his
comrades. They reached the hill. He drew his

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

stick, and he said to the knoll, "If thou dost not let with me the
strength of my hand, I myself or my race will leave neither stick nor
stone of thee that we will not drive to pieces." And he got the power of
his hand.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

Written by Hector MacLean, from the telling of a man in Barra. This may
be compared with the Manks tradition about the Black Dog, at Peel
Castle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. The Tulman](pt208)
