[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt211)  [Next](pt213) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### XXVIII.

### THE SMITH AND THE FAIRIES.

From the Rev. Thomas Pattieson, Islay.

YEARS ago there lived in Crossbrig a smith of the name of MacEachern.
This man had an only child, a boy of about thirteen or fourteen years of
age, cheerful, strong, and healthy. All of a sudden he fell ill; took to
his bed and moped whole days away. No one could tell what was the matter
with him, and the boy himself could not, or would not, tell how he felt.
He was wasting away fast; getting thin, old, and yellow; and his father
and all his friends were afraid that he would die.

At last one day, after the boy had been lying in this condition for a
long time, getting neither better nor worse, always confined to bed, but
with an extraordinary appetite,--one day, while sadly revolving these
things, and standing idly at his forge, with no heart to work, the smith
was agreeably surprised to see an old man, well known to him for his
sagacity and knowledge of out-of-the-way things, walk into his workshop.
Forthwith he told him the occurrence which had clouded his life.

The old man looked grave as he listened; and after sitting a long time
pondering over all he had heard, gave his opinion thus--"It is not your
son you have got. The boy has been carried away by the 'Daoine

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sith,' and they have left a *Sibhreach* in his
place." "Alas! and what then am I to do?" said the smith. "How am I ever
to see my own son again?" "I will tell you how," answered the old man.
"But, first, to make sure that it is not your own son you have got, take
as many empty egg shells as you can get, go with them into the room,
spread them out carefully before his sight, then proceed to draw water
with them, carrying them two and two in your hands as if they were a
great weight, and arrange when full, with every sort of earnestness
round the fire." The smith accordingly gathered as many broken
egg-shells as he could get, went into the room, and proceeded to carry
out all his instructions.

He had not been long at work before there arose from the bed a shout of
laughter, and the voice of the seeming sick boy exclaimed, "I am now 800
years of age, and I have never seen the like of that before."

The smith returned and told the old man. "Well, now," said the sage to
him, "did I not tell you that it was not your son you had: your son is
in Brorra-cheill in a digh there (that is, a round green hill frequented
by fairies). Get rid as soon as possible of this intruder, and I think I
may promise you your son."

"You must light a very large and bright fire before the bed on which
this stranger is lying. He will ask you 'What is the use of such a fire
as that?' Answer him at once, 'You will see that presently!' and then
seize him, and throw him into the middle of it. If it is your own son
you have got, he will call out to save him; but if not, this thing will
fly through the roof.

The smith again followed the old man's advice, kindled a large fire,
answered the question put to him as he had been directed to do, and
seizing the child

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

flung him in without hesitation. The "Sibhreach" gave an awful yell, and
sprung through the roof, where a hole was left to let the smoke out.

On a certain night the old man told him the green round hill, where the
fairies kept the boy, would be open. And on that night the smith, having
provided himself with a bible, a dirk, and a crowing cock, was to
proceed to the hill. He would hear singing and dancing and much
merriment going on, but he was to advance boldly; the bible he carried
would be a certain safeguard to him against any danger from the fairies.
On entering the hill he was. to stick the dirk in the threshold, to
prevent the hill from closing upon him; "and then," continued the old
man, "on entering you will see a spacious apartment before you,
beautifully clean, and there, standing far within, working at a forge,
you will also see your own son. When you are questioned, say you come to
seek him, and will not go without him."

Not long after this, the time came round, and the smith sallied forth,
prepared as instructed. Sure enough as he approached the hill, there was
a light where light was seldom seen before. Soon after a sound of
piping, dancing, and joyous merriment reached the anxious father on the
night wind.

Overcoming every impulse to fear, the smith approached the threshold
steadily, stuck the dirk into it as directed, and entered. Protected by
the bible he carried on his breast, the fairies could not touch him; but
they asked him, with a good deal of displeasure, what he wanted there.
He answered, "I want my son, whom I see down there, and I will not go
without him."

Upon hearing this, the whole company before him

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

gave a loud laugh, which wakened up the cock he carried dozing in his
arms, who at once leaped up on his shoulders, clapped his wings lustily,
and crowed loud and long.

The fairies, incensed, seized the smith and his son, and throwing them
out of the hill, flung the dirk after them, "and in an instant a’ was
dark."

For a year and a day the boy never did a turn of work, and hardly ever
spoke a word; but at last one day, sitting by his father and watching
him finishing a sword he was making for some chief, and which he was
very particular about, he suddenly exclaimed, "That is not the way to do
it;" and taking the tools from his father's hands he set to work himself
in his place, and soon fashioned a sword, the like of which was never
seen in the country before.

From that day the young man wrought constantly with his father, and
became the inventor of a peculiarly fine and well-tempered weapon, the
making of which kept the two smiths, father and son, in constant
employment, spread their fame far and wide, and gave them the means in
abundance, as they before had the disposition to live content with all
the world and very happily with one another.

The walls of the house where this celebrated smith, the artificer of the
'Claidheamh Ceann-Ileach," lived and wrought, are standing to this day,
not far from the parish church of Kilchoman, Islay, in a place called
Caonis gall.

Many of the incidents in this story are common in other collections; but
I do not know any published story of the kind in which the hero is a
smith. This smith was a famous character, and probably a real personage,
to whom the story has attached itself.

The gentleman who has been kind enough to send me this tale, does not
say from whom he got it, but I have heard of the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Islay smith, who could make wonderful swords,
all my life, and of the "Swords of the Head of Islay." The Brewery of
Eggshells, and the Throwing of the Fairy Changeling into the Fire, are
well-known popular tales in collections from Ireland, Scotland, Wales,
and, I think, Brittany. The man carried into the hill and there
remaining for a long time, is also an incident common to many races,
including the Jews, and one which I have heard in the Highlands ever
since I can remember, though I do not remember to have heard any of the
peasantry tell it as a story.

The belief that "the hill" opened on a certain night, and that a light
shone from the inside, where little people might be seen dancing, was
too deeply grounded some years ago to be lightly spoken of; even now, on
this subject, my kind friend Mrs. MacTavish writes--"You may perhaps
remember an old servant we had at the manse who was much offended if any
one doubted these stories--(*I remember her perfectly*). I used to ask
her the reason why such wonders do not occur in our day, to which she
replied, that religious knowledge having increased, people's faith was
stronger than it was in the olden time. In the glebe of Kilbrandon in
Lorn is a hill called Crocan Corr--the good or beautiful hill where the
fairies even in my young days were often seen dancing around their fire.
I sometimes went out with others to look, but never succeeded in seeing
them at their gambols.

"Are you aware that ------'s mother was carried away by the fairies--(*I
know ------ well*). So convinced were many of this absurdity, which I
remember perfectly well, that it was with difficulty they got a nurse
for his brother ------, who being a delicate child, was believed to have
been conveyed away along with his mother, and a fairy left instead of
him during his father's absence \* \* \* The child however throve when
he got a good nurse, and grew up to be a man, which, I suppose,
convinced them of their folly. Mr. ------ minister, of ------ had some
difficulty in convincing a man whose wife was removed in a similar
manner (*she died in childbed*), that his son, a boy twelve years of
age, must have been under some hallucination when he maintained that his
mother had come to him, saying she was taken by fairies to a certain
hill in Muckairn, known to be the residence of the fairies.

"If any one is so unfortunate as to go into one of these hills, which
are open at night, they never get out unless some one goes in quest of
them, who uses the precaution of leaving a GUN or

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

\[paragraph continues\] SWORD across the opening, which the fairies
cannot remove. A certain young woman was decoyed into one of these
openings, who was seen by an acquaintance dancing with the merry race.
He resolved on trying to rescue her, and leaving his gun at the
entrance, went forward, and seizing the young woman by the hand, dragged
her out before they could prevent him. They pursued them, but having got
her beyond the gun, they had no longer power to keep her. She told him
she had nearly dropped down with fatigue, but she could not cease
dancing, though she felt it would soon kill her. The young man restored
her to her friends, to their great joy."

(*I remember exactly the same incident told of a hill called Bencnock in
Islay, and one similar of another hill called Cnock-donn*.) "When poor
women are confined, it is unsafe to leave them alone till their children
are baptised. If through any necessity they must be left alone, the
Bible left beside them is sufficient protection.

"Many were the freaks fairies were guilty of. A family who lived in
Gaolin Castle, Kerrera, near Oban, had, as they supposed, a delicate
child; it was advancing in years but not growing a bit; at length a
visitor from Ireland came to the castle, and recognized her as the fairy
sweetheart of an Irish gentleman of his acquaintance. He addressed her
in Gaelic or Irish, saying--'THA THUSA SIN A SHIRACH BHEAG LEANNAN BRIAN
MACBRAODH.'--There thou art, little fairy sweetheart of Brian MacBroadh.
So offended was the elf at being exposed, that she ran out of the castle
and leaped into the sea from the point called RUTHADH NA SIRACH, the
fairies' point, to this day.

"Fairies were very friendly to some people whom they favoured, but
equally mischievous where they took a dislike. A hill in the farm of
Dunvuilg in Craignish was one of their favourite haunts, and on a
certain occasion they offered to assist an honest tenant's wife in the
neighbourhood, for whom they had a kindness, to manufacture a quantity
of wool she had for clothing for her family. She was very glad to have
their services, and being always an active race, they set to work
directly, repeating 'CIRADH, CARDADH, TLAMADH, CUIGEAL, BEARTIGHE GU
LUATH BURN LUAIDH AIR TEINE CORR IONNDRAIDH MHOR MHAITH BEAN AN TIGHE
FHIN.' Teazing, carding, mixing, distaff, weaving loom, water for
waulking on the fire, the thrifty housewife herself is the best at
sitting up late.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

"In the heat of their operations an envious neighbour came to the door
crying--'DUNBHUILG IRA THEINE,' Dunvuilg on fire! Dunvuilg is on fire!
Dunvuilg is on fire! was re-echoed by all the little company. 'M’ UIRD
IS M' INNEAN! M' UIRD IS' M' INEANN! MO CHLANN BHEAG S' MO DHAOINE MORA!
MO CHLANN BHEAG S' MO DHAOINE MORA!'--'Dunvuilg on fire; my hammers and
my anvil--my hammers and my anvil; my little children and my grown
men--my little children and my grown men!' and they all scampered off,
but not till they had nearly finished the housewife's web.

There is a field in the farm in which I was born, said to have been the
scene of fairy operations. They were seen at work, and heard encouraging
each other with 'CAOL ACHADH MHAIDH BUANADH GU TETH.' The corn in the
field was found in stooks in the morning.

"It is quite common to remark, that the fairies are at some meal as the
time of day may indicate when there is rain with sunshine, but I never
heard the reason why.--(*In England it is the d---l beating his wife*.)

"The night following the 13th of May, or May-day, old style, is a
particularly busy season with both fairies and witches. Then every herd
and dairy-maid and cannie housewife uses various arts to ward off the
many evils the enemy has the power of inflicting. One device which I
have seen used was putting a little tar in the right ear of each cow
beast in the byre; but all these charms or giosragan, as they are
called, had always some reason. Tar has a disinfecting quality, as is
well known, and used to he put on clothing under the arms when a person
had to go into a house where there was any infectious disease."

The Dunbhulaig story is all over the Highlands, and there seem to be
many places so called. Mr. John MacLean, Kilchamaig, Tarbert, Argyle,
has sent me a version which varies but little from that told by Mrs.
MacTavish. The scene is laid on the Largie side of Kintyre. The farmer's
wife was idle, and called for the fairies, who wove a web for her and
shouted for more work. She first set them to put each other out, and at
last got rid of them by shouting "Dunbhulaig on fire!" The fairies'
rhyme when working was--

"Is fad abhras 'n aon laimh air dheradh,  
Ciradh cardadh tlamadh cuigel, <span id="page_64">p. 64</span>  
Feath a bhearst fithidh gu luath,  
'S uisge luaidh air teine  
Obair, obair, obair, obair,  
Is fad abhras 'n son laimh air dheradh.

\[paragraph continues\] Which Mr. MacLean translates freely--

"Work, work, for a single hand  
Can but little work command,  
Some to tease, and card, and spin;  
Some to oil and weave begin;  
Some the water for waulking heat,  
That we may her web complete.  
Work, work, for a single hand  
Can but little work command."

The rhyme, when they depart in hot haste, is--

"Mo mhullachan caise m'ord a's m innean,  
Mo bhean 's mo phaisde s' mo gogan ima,  
Mo bho a' mo gobhair s' mo chiste beag mine,  
Och, och, ochone gur truagh tha mise!"

Freely translated thus by Mr. MacLean--

"My wife, my child, alas, with these,  
My butter pail and little cheese,  
My cow, my goat, my meal-chest gone,  
My hammers too, och, och, ochone!"

\[paragraph continues\] Or more closely thus--

"My mould of cheese, my hammer, and anvil,  
My wife and my child, and my butter crock;  
My cow and my goat, and my little meal kist;  
Och, och, ochone, how wretched am I!"

I heard another version of the same story in Lewis from a medical
gentleman, who got it from an old woman, who told it as a fact, with
some curious variations unfit for printing. And my landlady in Benbecula
knew the story, and talked it over with me in September this year. The
versions which I have of this story vary in the telling as much as is
possible, and each is evidently the production of a different mind, but
the incidents

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

are nearly the same in all, and the rhyme varies only in a few points.
Dunbhulaig is the same in Kintyre, Lorn, Lewis, and Benbecula. I am not
aware that the story has ever before been reduced to writing.

The Man in the Hill is equally well known in Kirkcudbright, but the
*hill*, has become a *mill*, and the fairies Brownies. The fairies of
Kirkcudbright seem to have carried off children, like the Island Elves;
to have borrowed meal, like those of Sutherland, and to have behaved
like their brethren elsewhere. The following four stories were got for
me by the sisters of Miss Mary Lindsay, who has lived so long with us as
to have become one of the family.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kirkcudbright](pt213)
