[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt217)  [Next](pt219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MAN.

The Manks fairy creed is again the same. Similar beings are supposed to
exist, and are known by the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

name of FERISH, which a Manksman assured me was a genuine Manks word. If
so, fairy may be old Celtic, and derived from the same root as Peri,
instead of being derived from it.

The fairies in the Isle of Man are believed to be spirits. They are not
supposed to throw arrows as they are said still to do in the Highlands.
None of the old peasants seemed to take the least interest in "elf
shots," the flint arrows, which generally lead to a story when shown
elsewhere. One old man said, "The ferish have no body, no bones and
scorned the arrow heads. It is stated in Train's history, that no
flint-arrow heads have ever been found in the Isle of Man; but as there
are numerous barrows, flint weapons may yet be discovered when some one
looks for them.

Still these Manks fairies are much the same as their neighbours on the
main land. They go into mills at night and grind stolen corn; they steal
milk from the cattle; they live in green mounds; in short, they axe like
little mortals invested with supernatural power, thus: There was a man
who lived not long ago near Port Erin, who had a LHIANNAN RHEE. "He was
like other people, but he had a fairy sweetheart; but he noticed her,
and they do not like being noticed, the fairies, and so he lost his
mind. Well, he was quite quiet like other people, but at night he slept
in the barn; and they used to hear him talking to his sweetheart, and
scolding her sometimes; but if any one made a noise he would be quiet at
once."

Now, the truth of this story is clear enough; the man went mad; but this
madness took the form of the popular belief, and that again attributed
his madness to the fairy mistress. I am convinced that this was believed

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

to be a case of genuine fairy intercourse; and it shows that the fairy
creed still survives in the Isle of Man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Devonshire](pt219)
