[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt228)  [Next](pt230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

### XXXVII.

### THE BROLLACHAN.

From Widow M. Calder, a pauper, Sutherland.

IN the mill of the Glens, MUILION NA GLEANNAN, lived long ago a cripple
of the name of Murray, better known as "Ally" na Muilinn. He was
maintained by the charity of the miller and his neighbours, who, when
they removed their meal, put each a handful into the lamiter's bag. The
lad slept usually at the mill; and it came to pass that one night, who
should enter but the BROLLACHAN, <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) son
of the FUATH.

Now the Brollachan had eyes and a mouth, and can say two words only,
MI-FHEIN, myself, and THU-FHEIN, thyself; besides that, he has no
speech, and alas no shape. He lay all his lubber-length by the dying
fire; and Murray threw a fresh peat on the embers, which made them fly
about red hot, and Brollachan was severely burnt. So he screamed in an
awful way, and soon comes the "Vough," very fierce, crying, "Och, my
Brollachan, who then burnt you?" but all he could say was "mee!" and
then he said "oo!" (me and thou, mi thu) and she replied, "Were it any
other, wouldn't I be revenged."

Murray slipped the peck measure over himself, and

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

hid among the machinery, so as to look as like a sack as possible,
ejaculating at times, "May the Lord preserve me," so he escaped unhurt;
and the "Vough" and her Brollachan left the mill. That same night a
woman going by the place, was chased by the still furious parent, and
could have been saved had she not been nimble to reach her own door in
time, to leave nothing for the "Vough" to catch but her heel; this heel
was torn off, and the woman went lame all the rest of her days.

 

The word spelt Vough, is probably spelt from ear; but it is the Gaelic
word Fuath, which is spelt Fouah in the map of the estate where the mill
is. The story was told in Gaelic to D. M., gamekeeper, and written by
him in English.

Of the same mill another story was got from the same source, called--

1\. MOULION NA FUADH. One of John Bethune's forebears, who lived in
Tubernan, laid a bet that he would seize the kelpie of Moulin na Fouah
and bring her bound to the inn at Inveran. He procured a brown,
right-sided, maned horse, and a brown black-muzzled dog; and, by the
help of the latter, having secured the Vough, he tied her on the horse
behind him, and galloped away. She was very fierce, but he kept her
quiet by pinning her down with an awl and a needle. Crossing the burn at
the further side of Loch Midgal, she became so restless that he stuck
the shoemaker's and the tailor's weapons into her with great violence.
She cried out, "Pierce me with the awl, but keep that slender hair-like
slave (the needle) out of me. When he reached the clachan of Inveran,
where his companions were anxiously waiting for him, he called to them
to come out and see the Vough. Then they came out with lights, but as
the light fell upon her she dropt off, and fell to earth like the
remains of a fallen star--a small lump of jelly. (These jellies are
often seen on the moors; dropt stars resembling the medusie on the
shore--COLLECTOR. They are white, do not seem to be attached to the
ground, and are always attributed to the stars. They are common on
moors, and I do not know what they are.--J. F. C.)

The same creature, or one of her kind.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

2\. In Beann na Caltuinn, one day called to Donald MacRobb, "Will you
eat any charcoal, Donald?" "No," he said; "my wife will give me supper
when I go home."

3\. And it is said, that a family of Munroes had, many generations ago,
married with the Vougha of Beann na Caltuinn. Their descendants had
manes and tails till within the last four generations.

4\. Four or five miles from Skibo Castle is Loch Nigdal, with a great
granite rock of the same name to the north of it; at one and is a burn
which passes the mill where the Brollachan entered. It is haunted with a
Banshee (that is, female fairy), which the miller's wife saw about three
years ago. She was sitting on a stone, quiet, and beautifully dressed in
a green silk dress, the sleeves of which were curiously puffed from the
wrists to the shoulder. Her long hair was yellow, like ripe corn; but on
nearer view she had no nose.

5\. A very old, coarse, and dirty Banshee belongs to a small sheep-farm
of Mr. Dempster's. A shepherd found her apparently crippled at the edge
of the moss, and offered her a lift on his back. In going, he espied her
feet, which were dangling down, and seeing that she was web-footed, he
threw her off, flung away the plaid on which she had lain, and ran for
his life.

From all these it appears that the Fuath in Sutherland is a
water-spirit; that there are males and females; that they have web-feet,
Yellow hair, green dresses, tails, manes, and no noses; that they marry
men, and are killed by light, and hurt with steel weapons that in
crossing a stream they become restless. From the following stories it
appears that they are hairy, have bare skin on their faces, and have two
large round eyes.

The Rev. Mr. Thomas Pattieson has sent me a story from Islay, which he
has written in English, but which he picked up amongst the people. It is
as follows; but I have ventured to shorten it a little:--

6\. *The Water Horse*.--There is a small island off the Rhinns of Islay,
where there is a light-house now, but which was formerly used for
grazing cattle only. There is a fearful tide, and it is dangerous to
cross the Sound in bad weather. A man and a woman bad charge of a large
herd of cattle there, and the woman was left alone one night, for the
man had to go to the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

mainland, and a storm coming on, he could not return. She sat at her
peat fire in her cabin, when suddenly she heard a sound as of living
creatures all about the hut. She knew her fellow-servant could not have
returned, and, thinking it might be the cows, she glanced at the window
which she had left open. She saw a pair of large round eyes fastened
upon her malignantly, and heard a low whining laugh. The door opened,
and an unearthly creature walked in. He was very tall and large, rough
and hairy, with no skin upon his face but a dark livid covering. He
advanced to the fire and asked the girl what her name was. She answered
as confidently as she could, "MISE MI FHIN"--me myself. The creature
seized the girl, and she threw a large ladle full of boiling water about
him, and he, yelling, bounded out. A great noise ensued of wild
unearthly tongues, questioning their yelling companion as to what was
the matter with him, and who had hurt him. "Mise mi Fhin, Mise mi
Fhin--me myself, me myself," shouted the savage; and thereupon arose a
great shout of laughter. No sooner did that pass than the girl rushed
out in terror, turned one of the cows that was lying outside from its
resting-place, and having made a circle about her, lay there herself.
The storm raged, and she heard the rushing of many footsteps, loud
laughter, and sounds of strife. When morning dawned, she was safe,
protected by the consecrated circle, but the cow she had disturbed was
dead.

An Islay pilot told me this year that water-horses still haunt a glen
near the island. Rattling chains are heard there. An account was
published some years ago in newspapers of the appearance of a mermaid
near the spot.

7\. I myself heard the groundwork of this story long ago from John
Piper; and I heard a similar story this year in Man. (See Introduction.)
It is the same as the Brollachan. The creature was scalded by a woman
(who had said her name was MI FHIN when he came in), because he wanted
to eat her porridge and when he told his friends Myself had burned him,
they said, "Ma 's thu fhin a losg thu fhin bi gad' leigheas fhin thu
fhin--If it was thyself burnt thyself, be thyself healing thyself."

8\. I again heard a similar story this year from a gentleman whom I met
in an inn at Gairloch. He had a large knowledge of Highland tales, and
we spent several pleasant evenings together. He has every right to
stories, for one of his ancestors

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

was a clever doctor in his day, and is now a magician in legends. Some
of his MSS. are in the Advocates' Library.

Mr. Pattieson points out the resemblance which this bear to part of the
story of Ulysses, and, for the sake of comparison, here it is from the
ninth book of Pope's Odyssey:--

9\. Ulysses goes into the cave of the Cyclop with some of his
companions. The Cyclop was a one-eyed shepherd, and his cave is
described as a dairy; his flocks were goats and sheep, which he milked
when he came home:--

Scarce twenty-four wheeled cars compact and strong.  
The massy load could bear or roll along."

He was a giant, therefore, living under ground; and he ate two of the
strangers raw. He spoke Greek, but claimed to be of a race superior to
the Greek gods. He ate two more Greeks for breakfast, and two for
supper. Then got drunk on wine given him by Ulysses, which was better
than his own. Ulysses said, "No man is my name;" and the giant promised
to eat him last, as a return for his gift of rosy wine, and went to
sleep.

Then they heated a stake in the fire, and drilled his eye out. The
Cyclops assembled at his "well-known roar," asked what was the matter,
and were told--

"Friends, no man kills me, no man in the hour  
Of sleep oppresses me with fraudful power.  
If no man hurt thee, but the hand divine  
Inflicts disease, it fits thee to resign.  
To Jove or to thy father Neptune pray,  
The brethren cried, and instant strode away."

It seems, then, that the Cyclop was a water-being as well as the Fuath
and water-horse of Gaelic story, and the kelpie. There is no word in
Gaelic that could be corrupted into Kelpie, but he is the same as Each
uisge. The Gaelic tradition may have been taken from Homer; but if so,
the plagiarist must have lived some time ago, for the story is now
widely spread, and his edition must have had some other reading for
ουτις, because the Gaelic word is "myself," in all versions I know.

10\. THE CAILLEACH MHORE OF CLIBRICK was a very rich and wicked old
woman (I have already shown that there is some reason to suppose she was
a Lapp; and no Lapp ever offered me anything, often as I have been
amongst them), who, though she

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

had plenty of the good things of this world, never gave anything away,
and never asked a traveller to sit down in her house. A bold man once
laid a wager that he would circumvent her. He accordingly walked into
her kitchen, when she craved to know whence he came and what was his
destination. "I come from the south and am going north," said he. "And
what is your name?" said the hag of Greyside. "My name is WILLIAM DEAN
SUIDHE." "WILLIAM dean Suidhe!" (sit down) she repeated; when he flung
himself into a chair, and making her a bow, said, "That will I when the
mistress bids me." She was very angry, and, taking out an enormous
bannock as round as the moon, began to eat without taking any notice of
him. "Your piece seems a dry one, mistress," said William. "The fat side
is to me," said the witch. And indeed she had one side spread with
butter about an inch thick. "The side that is to you shall be to me," he
retorted; and caught at the cake. He called her a satanic old Cailleach,
and left the hut carrying his piece away as a trophy. The old woman was
left cursing, and praying that the cake might kill him; but he had too
much sense to touch it, and his ill-wisher (the hag) foolishly finishing
the remainder, died of its unhallowed effects, to the great relief of
her neighbours.

Those who maintain popular stories are as old as the races who tell
them, will probably consider the Brollachan, and the Water-horse, and
the Greek story, as so many versions of an older original. In this case
Homer has a strong claim; but he has an equal claim to several other
stories in this collection, which Grimm and the Arabian Nights claim as
popular lore. Sindbad, and Conal Crobhi, and Grimms' Robber, if
plagiarists, are far more guilty than the Brollachan; and Murachadh Mac
Brian, who follows, is quite as bad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[203:1](pt229.htm#fr_14) Brollachan is a Gaelic
expression for any shapeless deformed creature.--COLLECTOR. I should
translate it breastling, or bantling.--J. F. C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVIII. Murachadh Mac Brian](pt230)
