[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt231)  [Next](pt233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

### XL.

### THE SON OF THE SCOTTISH YEOMAN WHO STOLE THE BISHOP'S HORSE AND DAUGHTER, AND THE BISHOP HIMSELF.

From Donald MacLean, Grassmarket, Edinburgh. Written in Gaelic, and
translated by the Rev. Mr. MacLauchlan.

THERE was once a Scottish yeoman who had three sons. When the youngest
of them came to be of age to fellow a profession, he set apart three
hundred marks for each of them. The youngest son asked that his portion
might be given to himself, as he was going away to seek his fortune. He
went to the great city of London. He was for a time there, and what was
he doing but learning to be a gentleman's servant? He at last set about
finding a master. He heard that the chief magistrate (provost <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)) of London wanted a servant. He applied to
him, they agreed, and he entered his service. The chief magistrate was
in the habit of going every day in the week to meet the Archbishop of
London in a particular place. The servant attended his master, for he
always went out along with him. When they had broken up their meeting on
one occasion, they returned homewards, and the servant said to his
master by the way,--

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

"That is a good brown horse of the bishop's," said he, "with your leave,
master."

"Yes, my man," said the master, "he has the best horse in London."

"What think you," said the servant, "would be take for the horse, if he
were to sell it?"

"Oh! you fool," said his master, "I thought you were a sensible fellow;
many a man has tried to buy that horse, and it has defied them as yet."

"I'll return and try," said he.

His master returned along with him to see what would happen. This was on
a Thursday. The young man asked the bishop, would he sell the horse? The
bishop became amazed and angry, and said he did not expect that he could
buy it.

"But what beast could you, or any man have," said the young man, "that
might not be bought?"

"Senseless fellow," said the bishop; "how foolish you are I go away
home, you shan't buy my horse."

"What will you wager," said the young man, "that I won't have the horse
by this time to-morrow?"

"Is it my horse you mean?" said the bishop.

"Yes, your horse," said the young man. "What will you wager that I don't
steal it?"

"I'll wager five hundred merks," said the bishop, "that you don't."

"Then," said the young man, "I have only one pound, but I'll wager that,
and my head besides, that I do."

"Agreed," said the bishop.

"Observe," said the young man, "that I have wagered my head and the
pound with you, and if I steal the horse he will be my own property."

"That he will, assuredly," said the chief magistrate.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

"I agree to that," said the bishop.

They returned home that night.

"Poor fellow," said the chief magistrate to his servant by the way, "I
am very well satisfied with you since I got you. I am not willing to
lose you now. You are foolish. The bishop will take care that neither
you nor any other man will steal the horse. He'll have him watched."

When night came, the young man started, and set to work; he went to the
bishop's house. What did he find out there, but that they had the horse
in a room, and men along with it, who were busy eating and drinking. He
looked about him, and soon saw that he would require another clever
fellow along with him. In looking about, who does he find but one of the
loose fellows about the town.

"If you go along with me for a little time," said he, I will give you
something for your pains."

"I'll do that," said the other.

He set off, and at the first start both he and his man reached the
hangman of the city.

"Can you tell me," said he to the hangman, "where I can get a dead man?"

"Yes," said the hangman, "there was a man hanged this very day, after
midday."

"If you go and get him for me," said the young man, "I'll give you
something for your pains."

The hangman agreed, and went away with him to where the body was.

"Do you know now," said the young man, "where I can get a long stout
rope?"

"Yes," said the hangman, "the rope that hanged the man is here quite
convenient; you'll get it."

They set off with the body, both himself and his man.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They reached the bishop's house. He said to his
man when they had reached--

"Stay you here and take charge of this, until I get up on the top of the
house."

He put both his mouth and his ear to the chimney in order to discover
where the men were, as they were now speaking loud from having drunk so
much. He discovered where they were.

"Place the end of the rope," said he to his man, "round the dead man's
neck, and throw the other end up to me."

He dragged the dead man up to the top of the chimney. The men in the
room began to hear the rubbish in the chimney falling down. He let the
body down by degrees, until at last he saw the bright light of the
watchmen falling on the dead man's feet.

"See," said they, "what is this? Oh, the Scottish thief, what a shift!
He preferred dying in this way to losing his head. He has destroyed
himself."

Down from the chimney came the young man in haste. In he went into the
very middle of the men, and as the horse was led out by the door, his
hand was the first to seize the bridle. He went with the horse to the
stable, and said to them that they might now go and sleep, that they
were safe enough.

"Now," said he to the other man, "I believe you to be a clever fellow;
be at hand here to-morrow evening, and I will see you again."

He paid him at the same time, and the man was much pleased. He, himself,
returned to his master's stable with the bishop's brown horse. He went
to rest, and though the daylight came early, earlier than that did his
master come to his door.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

"I wouldn't grudge my pains," said he, if my poor Scotsman were here
before me to-day."

"I am here, good master," said he, "and the bishop's brown horse beside
me."

"Well done, my man," said his master, "you're a clever fellow. I had a
high opinion of you before; I think much more of you now."

They prepared this day, too, to go and visit the bishop. It was Friday.

"Now," said the servant, "I left home without a horse, yesterday, but I
won't leave in the same way to-day."

"Well, my man," said his master, "as you have got the horse, I'll give
you a saddle."

So they set off this day again to meet the bishop, his master and
himself riding their horses. They saw the bishop coming to meet them,
apparently mad. When they came close together they observed that the
bishop rode another horse, by no means so good as his own. The bishop
and chief magistrate met with salutations. The bishop turned to the
chief magistrate's servant,--

"Scroundel," said he, "and thorough thief!"

"You can't call me worse," said the other. "I don't know that you can
call me that justly; for, you know, I told you what I was to do. Without
more words, pay me my five hundred merks."

This had to be done, though not very willingly.

"What would you now say," says the lad, "if I were to steal your
daughter to-night?"

"My daughter, you worthless fellow," said the bishop; "you shan't steal
my daughter."

"I'll wager five hundred merks and the brown horse," said the lad, "that
I'll steal her."

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

"I'll wager ten hundred merks that you don't," said the bishop.

The wager was laid. The lad and his master went home. "Young man," said
his master, "I thought well of you at one time, but you have done a
foolish thing now, just when you had made yourself all right."

"Never mind, good master," said he, "I'll make the attempt at any rate."

When night came, the chief magistrate's servant set off for the bishop's
house. When he reached, he saw a gentleman coming out at the door.

"Oh," said he to the gentleman, "what is this going on at the bishop's
house to-night?"

"A great and important matter," said the gentleman; "a rascally Scotsman
who is threatening to steal the bishop's daughter, but I can tell you
neither he nor any other man will steal her; she is well guarded."

"Oh, I'm sure of that," said the lad, and turned away. "There is a man
in England, however," said he to himself, "who must try it."

He set off, and reached the king's tailors. He asked them whether they
had any dresses ready for great people?

"No," said the tailor, "but a dress I have for the king's daughter and
one for her maid of honour."

"What," said the chief magistrate's servant, "will you take for the use
of these, for a couple of hours?"

"Oh," said the tailor, "I fear I dare not give them to you."

"Don't be in the least afraid," said the lad, "I'll pay you, and I'll
return the two dresses without any injury or loss. You'll get a hundred
merks," said he.

The tailor coveted so large a sum, and so he gave them to him. He
returned, and found his man of the

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

former night. They went to a private place, and got themselves fitted
out in the dresses got from the tailor. When this was done as well as
they could, they came to the bishop's door. Before he arrived at the
door he found out that when any of the royal family came to the bishop's
house they didn't knock, but rubbed the bottom of the door with the
point of the foot. He came to the door, and rubbed. There was a
doorkeeper at the door that night, and he ran and told the bishop.

"There is some one of the royal family at the door," said he.

"No," said the bishop, "there is not. It's the thief of a Scotsman that
is there."

The doorkeeper looked through the key-hole, and saw the appearance of
two ladies who stood there. He went to his master and told him so. His
master went to the door that he might see for himself. He who was
outside would give another and another rub to the door, at the same time
abusing the bishop for his folly. The bishop looked, and recognized the
voice of the king's daughter at the door. The door is quickly opened,
and the bishop bows low to the lady. The king's daughter began
immediately to chide the bishop for laying any wager respecting his
daughter, saying that he was much blamed for what he had done.

"It was very wrong of you," said she, "to have done it without my
knowledge, and you would not have required to have made such a stir or
been so foolish as all this."

"You will excuse me," said the bishop. I can't excuse you," she said.

In to the chamber he led the king's daughter, in which his own daughter
was, and persons watching her.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

\[paragraph continues\] She was in the middle of the chamber, sitting on
a chair, and the others sitting all around.

Said the king's daughter to her, "My dear, your father is a very foolish
man to place you in such great danger; for if he had given me notice,
and placed you under my care, any man who might venture to approach you
would assuredly not only be hanged, but burned alive. Go," said she to
the bishop, "to bed, and dismiss this large company, lest men laugh at
you."

He told the company that they might now go to rest, that the queen's
daughter and her maid of honour would take charge of his daughter. When
the queen's daughter had seen them all away, she said to the daughter of
the bishop,--

"Come along with me, my dear, to the king's palace." He led her out, and
then he had the brown horse all ready, and as soon as the Scotsman got
her to where the horse stood, he threw off the dress he wore, in a dark
place. He put a different dress above his own, and mounted the horse.
The other man is sent home with the dresses to the tailor. He paid the
man, and told him to meet him there next night. He leaped on the brown
horse at the bishop's house, and off he rode to the house of his master.
Early as daylight came, earlier came his master to the stable. He had
the bishop's daughter in his bed. He wakened when he heard his master.

"I wouldn't grudge my pains," said the latter, "if my poor Scotsman were
here before me to-day."

"Eh, and so I am," said the lad, "and the bishop's daughter along with
me here."

"Oh," said he, "I always thought well of you, but now I think more of
you than ever."

This was Saturday. He and his master had to go

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

and meet the bishop this day also. The bishop and chief magistrate met
as usual. If the bishop looked angry the former day, he looked much
angrier this day. The chief magistrate's servant rode on his horse and
saddle behind his master. When he came near the bishop he could only
call him "thief" and "scoundrel."

"You may shut your mouth," said he; "you cannot say that to me with
justice. Send across here my five hundred merks. He paid the money. He
was abusing the other.

"Oh man," said he, "give up your abuse; I'll lay you the ten hundred
merks that I'll steal yourself tonight."

"That you steal me, you worthless fellow," said the bishop. "You shan't
be allowed."

He wagered the ten hundred merks.

"I'll get these ten hundred merks back again," said the bishop, "but
I'll lay you fifteen hundred merks that you don't steal me."

The chief magistrate fixed the bargain for them. The lad and his master
went home.

"My man," said the master, "I have always thought well of you till now;
you will now lose the money you gained, and you can't steal the man."

"I have no fear of that," said the servant.

When night came he set off, and got to the house of the bishop. Then he
thought he would go where he could find the fishermen of the city, in
order to see what might be seen with them. When he reached the fishermen
he asked them whether they had any fresh-killed salmon? They said they
had. He said to them--

"If you skin so many of them for me I will give you

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

such and such a sum of money, or as much as will be just and right."

The fishermen said they would do as he wished, and they did so. They
gave him as many fish skins as he thought would make him a cloak of the
length and breadth he wished. He then went to the tailors. He said to
the tailors, would they make him a dress of the fish skins by twelve
o'clock at night, and that they should be paid for it. They told him
what sum they would take. They took the young man's measure and began
the dress. The dress was ready by twelve o'clock. They could not work
any longer as the Sunday was coming in. He left with the dress, and when
he found himself a short way from the bishop's church he put it on. He
had got a key to open the church and he went in. He at once went to the
pulpit. The doorkeeper casting an eye in on an occasion, while a great
watch was kept over the bishop, he went and said there was a light in
the church.

"A light," said his master, "go and see what light it is." It was past
twelve o'clock by this time.

"Oh," said the doorkeeper, coming back, "there is a man preaching in
it."

The bishop drew out his time-piece, and he saw that it was the beginning
of the Sunday. He went running to the church. When he saw the brightness
that was in the church, and all the movements of the man that was
preaching, he was seized with fear. He opened the door a little and put
in his head that he might see what be was like. There was not a language
under the stars that the man in the pulpit was not taking a while of.
When he came to the languages which the bishop understood, he began to
denounce the bishop as a man who had lost his senses. In the

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

bishop ran, and down he is on his knees before the pulpit. There he
began to pray, and when he saw the brightness that was about the pulpit,
he took to heart the things that were said to him. At length he said to
him, if he would promise sincere repentance, and go along with him, he
would grant him forgiveness. The bishop promised him that he would.

"Come with me till I have a little time of you," said he.

"I will," said the bishop, "though thou shouldst ask me to leave the
world."

He went along with him, and the young man walked before him. They
reached the stable of the chief magistrate. He got a seat for the
bishop, and he kept him sitting. He sat down himself. They required no
light, for the servant's clothes were shining bright where they were. He
was then expounding to the bishop in some languages which he could
understand, and in others which he could not. He went on in that way
[until](errata.htm#4) it was time for his master to come in the morning.
When the time drew near, he threw off the dress, bent down and hid it,
for it was near daylight. The bishop was now silent, and the chief
magistrate came.

"I wouldn't grudge my pains," said he, "if I had my poor Scotsman here
before me to-day."

"Eh, so I am here," said he, "and the bishop along with me."

"Hey, my man," says his master, "you have done well."

"Oh, you infamous scoundrel," said the bishop, "is it thus you have got
the better of me?"

"I'll tell you what it is," said the chief magistrate, "you had better
be civil to him. Don't abuse him. He has got your daughter, your horse,
and your money,

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

and as for yourself, you know that he cannot support you, so it is best
for you to support him. Take himself and your daughter along with you
and make them a respectable wedding." The young man left and went home
with the bishop, and he and the bishop's daughter were lawfully married,
and the father shewed him kindness. I left them there.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

...

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

...

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

...

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

...

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

...

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

...

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

...

I had the above tale from Donald M'Lean, now resident in the
Grassmarket, Edinburgh. It is one of seven I took down from his
recitation about the same time. M'Lean is a native of Ardnamurchan, but
crossed at an early age to Glenforsa in Mull, where he spent several
years. He heard this tale recited by an old man, Angus M'Phie, from
Ardnamurchan, who died about fifty years ago, and he had received it
also from tradition. M'Lean recites his tales without the slightest
hesitation, although in some cases their recitation occupies a couple of
hours. It will be manifest, too, from reading the original tale here
given, that very little variation could be allowed in the words used,
and that the very forms of expression and words must therefore be
retained unchanged. M'Lean's is a remarkable instance of the power of
memory in the uneducated, shewing that it is quite possible to retain
and recite, with perfect accuracy, compositions which would form a
volume. He obtained his tales from different parties, and says they were
recited in the winter evenings at the firesides of the old Highlanders
as their chief amusements. Some of them he heard before he was fourteen
years of age, and never heard since, and yet he retains them accurately.

It will be observed in the tale now given that some of the terms used
are modem, as, for instance, "Probhaisd" (Provost),

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and not known in our older Gaelic. It is remarkable, also, that the
bishop of London is the party fixed upon to have his effects stolen.
This would seem to indicate that the tale originated at a time when the
Highlanders were acquainted with bishops, and would carry it back to a
period previous to the Reformation, the inhabitants, both of
Ardnamurchan and Mull, having been Presbyterians since that period;
unless, indeed, the story has been imported into the Highlands from some
other quarter. Its resemblance to the "Master Thief" in Mr. Dasent's
"Tales from the Norse," cannot fail to strike any one acquainted. with
these interesting stories. The "Tuathanach" is translated "Yeoman," not
that that term expresses with perfect accuracy the meaning of the Gaelic
word, but it is the English term which comes nearest to it. The
"Tuathanach" among the Celts is a "farmer," or one who holds his lands
from another, but the word implies a certain amount of consequence and
dignity, which would indicate that he must hold land of considerable
extent. The term is manifestly either the radix, or a relative of the
Latin "tenoe," whence the English "tenant," and it would seem also to be
the real source of the word "Thane," or one who held as tenant the lands
of the Crown. The tenants and their subholders were distinguished as
"Tuath 'us Ceatharn," from which last is the Saxon "Kern."

T. M'L.

EDINBURGH, *May*, 1860.

 

2\. Another version of this was told to me by Donald MacCraw, drover,
September 1859, as we walked along the road in North Uist. It was given
in return for a bit of another story, which also treats of clever
thieves, part of which I learned from my piper guardian long ago. This
was the fly which raised the fish.

Two thieves once came to a gallows, and the one said to the other,

"We have often heard about this thing, now let us try how it feels. I
will put the rope about my neck, and do thou hang me, and when I have
had enough, I will grin and then thou shalt let me down."

So the first thief was hanged, and when the rope tightened he grinned
horribly, and was let down by his comrade as they had agreed.

"Well," said he, "What was it like?"

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

"Not so bad as I expected," said the other. "Now I will hang thee, and
when thou hast enough, whistle."

So the second agreed, and he as strung up in his turn, and he grinned
too; but because he would not whistle, his friend let him hang, and when
he was tired of waiting, he emptied his pockets and left him there.

"Have you any more of that story?" said I.

"No; but I have one about a smith's servant," said MacCraw.

There was once, long ago, a smith in Eirinn, and he had a servant who
was very clever at stealing; he could steal anything. His master was
working with an UACHDARAN, gentleman, and the gentleman came to the
smithy to have his "powney" shod, (the English word powney is commonly
used in Island Gaelic), and he and the smith were well with each other,
and they began to talk, and the smith to boast of his apprentice, and
how well he could steal. At last he offered to bet that the lad could
steal the gentleman's horse, and the gentleman wagered five notes that
he would not. The smith laid down the money and the bet was made, and
they told this to the lad.

Well, the gentleman went home, and he sent his gillies to watch the
powney, and the lad went and he bought himself three bottles of whisky,
and when the night came he went to the "square" (this word has also
crept into Gaelic, and is applied to a set of farm buildings) of the
gentleman, and he laid himself down amongst the litter, and he began to
snore and snort and pretend to be drunk. So out came one of the watchmen
to see what was the matter, and he began to handle the drunken man, and
presently he felt a bottle in his pocket; then he drew it out, and he
told the others, and they drank it all up. Then they said,

"Let us see if there is not another bottle in the other pocket."

So they went and they rolled over the drunken man, who kept on snoring
and snorting, and they found a second bottle, and then they went into
the stable again. At the end of a little while the lad heard them
getting very "wordy" within, and soon they came out again a third time,
and they rolled him about, and found the third bottle, and that finished
them off and they fell fast asleep. Then the lad got up and stole the
powney, and went to the smithy and then he went to sleep himself.

In the morning the gentleman came to the smithy, and he had to pay the
bet, for the powney was there before him.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

"Well," said the lad, "that is but a small matter, I will wager you now
twenty notes that I will steal your daughter."

"I will take the wager," said the gentleman.

And the lad said, "Now master, lay down the twenty notes for me." So the
smith laid them down, and the gentleman laid down his, and the wager was
made.

(The word "note" is almost always used in Gaelic, because very filthy
one pound notes are common in Scotland. The value of the note is
expressed by "pound saxon." It seems to be necessary to produce the
money, and to deposit it when a wager is laid.)

Now no time was fixed for stealing the daughter, so the gentleman went
home and he set a watch on his daughter's room, who were to go in and
out all night long. The lad went about the country and he travelled till
he came to BAILLE PUIRT, a seaport town on the other side, for it was in
Eirinn; and there he remained till he made friends with a ship captain,
and after much talk (which was given by the narrator) the captain agreed
to help him. So the lad dressed himself up as a woman, and the captain
said, "Now I will say that I have a sister on board, and if we are asked
to the house of the gentleman when the ship arrives, do thou as best
thou canst."

So the ship sailed, and she sailed round Eirinn till she came to the
gentleman's house, and then the captain went up and told how he had been
a long voyage to the Indies.

Then the gentleman asked if he had any one else on board, and he said
that he had a sister, and that she was very unwell.

"Oh!" said the gentleman, "ask her to come up and she shall sleep in my
daughter's room."

So the captain's sister came up and they had a pleasant evening, and
they all went to bed.

But the captain's sister could not sleep, and she said to the
gentleman's daughter, "What are these men that are always walking about
the room, and up and down before the windows?"

And the girl said, "There is a bad man who has laid a wager that he will
steal me, and my father is afraid that he may come any night, and these
are the watchmen who are guarding me. It is not for the money, but my
father is so angry, because that bad man beat him once already."

"Oh, "said the captain's sister, I am so nervous after the

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

sea. I have a sort of nerves (the narrator used the English word) that I
shall never sleep all night. I shall never get a wink of sleep! I would
be so much obliged to you if you would have the goodness to send them
away."

And so at last the men were sent away, but the captain's sister could
not sleep a bit better, and she said,

"When I was in the Indies I used to be so troubled with the heat, that I
got a habit of walking out at night, perhaps I could sleep if I were to
take a little walk now. Will you be so very kind as to come out for a
little walk with me.

So the gentleman's daughter got up, and out they went for a walk, but
when they bad walked a little way, the lad carried her off bodily to the
smithy.

In the morning the gentleman came and he paid the bet, and it is told
that the lad married the daughter.

"And is that all he ever stole?" said I.

"That's all I ever heard about it at all events," said MacCraw.

 

3\. In the Sutherland collection is this reference. "The Master Thief
(see Dasent's Tales, and Thorpe's Tales). This was some twenty or thirty
years ago a common schoolboy's tale. I have tried in vain to get it
written down in Gaelic, but they tell it with all that is in the
Norwegian version, and more besides, such as the theft of some rabbits
(how performed I cannot hear), and that of a lot of calves. The Master
Thief stole these for the robbers, by imitating in the woods and upland
pastures the cry of the cows." C. D.

4\. Another bit of the Master Thief, as given in the Norse Tales, forms
part of a story which is referred to in No. 48. It is the incident of
the man who is persuaded to put his finger into what he believes to be a
cask full of liquor, while the clever rogue rides off on his horse, on
pretence of catching himself.

 

5\. I have heard another of the incidents, as a theft, accomplished by
tempting a man to ran after broken-legged rabbits.

This story, then, is now widely spread in the Highlands, however it got
there. The Rev. Mr. MacLauchlan, one of the best, known and most
respected men in Edinburgh, gets one version from an old man in the
Grassmarket, who gives it a pedigree of some fifty years; I got another
myself from a drover in Uist; a

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

very able collector in Sutherland says it was common there some twenty
or thirty years ago, and is told still; and a scrap of the Norwegian
version comes from Islay. They resemble other versions in other
languages, but they resemble each other more than they do any published
version which I know; and there seems to be but one explanation of the
facts, namely, that this is some very old tradition, common to many
races and languages, and derived from some original of unknown
antiquity.

The incidents in the German of Grimm are shortly these:--

A poor old man is visited by a gentleman in a grand carriage, who turns
out to be his son who had run away and become a master thief. They go to
the Count, who sets him three tasks to try his skill: to steal his
favourite horse; to take away from his wife and from him the counterpane
of their bed, and the ring off the lady's finger; and, thirdly, to steal
the parson and clerk out of the church, on pain of his neck.

He makes the watch drunk, and steals the horse. He makes the Count shoot
at a dead body, and while the Count is gone to bury the supposed thief,
he appears as the Count, and gets the ring and bed-cover from the
Countess.

And he entices the parson and clerk into a sack by pretending to be St.
Peter.

The Norse story has many more incidents, but amongst them are five tasks
set by a great man to try the skill of the Master Thief:--

(1.) To steal the roast from the spit on Sunday, which he does by
enticing the servants to run after three hares which he lets out of a
bag.

(2.) To steal father Laurence, the priest, which he does by pretending
to be an angel, and so enticing him into a sack.

(3.) To steal twelve horses from the stable, which he does by appearing
as an old woman, and making twelve grooms drunk with a sleepy drink in
brandy.

(4.) To steal the horse from under the squire, which he does nearly in
the same way as the clever weaver in the Islay story.

(5.) To steal the sheet of the gentleman's bed, and the shift off his
wife's back, which he does in nearly the same way as it is done in the
German version.

And though the daughter is not stolen in the Norse tale, it is to gain
the daughter that all these tasks are performed.

Now all these are clearly the same as the second "Favola"

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

in the first book of Straparola, printed in Venice, 1567. In this
Italian story the scene is Perugia, the clever thief, a certain
Cassandrino, and the man who tries his skill "Il Pretore," the Priest.

Cassandrino first steals the Priest's bed from under him, by breaking
through the roof and throwing down the dead body of a recently buried
doctor which he had dug up and dressed in his clothes. The Priest thinks
that he has fallen down and killed himself, goes to bury him, and finds
his bed gone when he returns.

Next he steals the horse from the stable. The watchman sleeps in the
saddle; he props him up on sticks, and steals away the horse.

Lastly, he steals a country clergyman, whom he tempts into a sack by
dressing as an angel and standing on an altar after matins, exclaiming,
"Chi vuol andar in gloria entri nel sacco." He gets a hundred florins of
gold each time, and is threatened with terrible punishment in case of
failure. The disguise is a white robe, painted paper wings, and a
shining diadem.

The Italian story again resembles, though in a less degree, the Egyptian
story of Rhampsinitus, told in Herodotus. (Rawlinson's Herod., vol. ii.,
p. 191.)

The king had a treasure chamber built of hewn stone, but the builder
contrived a turning-stone in the wall, and told the secret to his sons
when he was about to die.

The sons plundered the treasury, and the king set a trap which caught
one of them. The other cut his head off to prevent discovery, and went
home with the head, leaving the body in the trap. The king, much
puzzled, exposed the headless body, with guards beside it, to watch if
any one should be seen weeping near it. The mother sent her son to get
back the body, and he did very much as the clever thief in the modern
stories, who stole the horses; he disguised himself, and enticed the
guards into drinking till they fell asleep; then he shaved half their
beards off, and took away the body.

Then the king sent his daughter to find out; and the clever thief went
to her, and told her all about it; but when she tried to seize him, he
gave her the hand of a dead man, which he had cut off and brought with
him; and so he made his escape, leaving the hand.

Then the king proclaimed a free pardon for the clever thief who had
outwitted him three times, and when he came he gave him his daughter in
marriage.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

Other references are given in Grimm's third volume (see page 260), from
which it appears that this story is very widely spread in Europe. Now
the Gaelic agrees with Herodotus, Straparola, and Grimm, in that there
are three tasks accomplished by a clever thief; and the number three is
almost universally used in Gaelic tales.

One of the Gaelic incidents, that of the drunken guards, agrees with the
story in Herodotus, and is common to all those quoted.

The Gaelic agrees with the Italian, German, and Norse, in the theft of
the horse and the clergyman.

The Gaelic alone has the theft of the daughter. The Norwegian version
mentions the daughter, and so does the story of Rhampsinitus, and there
seems to be fair ground for arguing that all this must have come from
some original which it is vain to search for in any modern work or in
any modern age. Such at least is my own opinion, and I have endeavoured
to give others the means of judging for themselves so far as I am able,
by giving all I get unaltered, and by naming all my authorities.

Another Gaelic story, the "Gillie Carrach," of which I lately (June
1860) received a long version from John Dewar, contains three incidents
very like those in Herodotus; mixed with others which are new to me, and
others which I have in Gaelic from other sources, one of which has a
parallel in Italian and in Sanscrit.

It is curious to remark, that the very same ideas seem to have occurred
to Herodotus, while on his travels, which now arise in the minds of
worthy pedagogues in the Highlands. They object to old stories told by
peasants, because they are "fictions," and not historically true. I have
repeatedly met men who look on the telling of these tales as something
almost wicked.

Thus wrote Herodotus, and those who object to traditionary fictions
might take example by the father of history, and while they disbelieve
the stories, write them down.

"Such as think the tales told by the Egyptians credible, are free to
accept them for history. For my own part, I propose to myself,
throughout my whole work, faithfully to record the traditions of the
several nations."

Surely if Herodotus did not think it beneath him to record such
frivolous things, and if men of the highest acquirements now make them a
study, they are not wholly unworthy of notice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[253:1](pt232.htm#fr_22) The Gaelic "Probhaisd"
is an adaptation of the English "Provost," as the latter is of the Latin
"Propositus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLI. The Widow and her Daughters](pt233)
