[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spa02)  [Next](spa04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWQM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
](index)*Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans*, by H.G. Raverty,
\[1868\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### REMARKS ON THE MYSTIC DOCTRINE AND POETRY OF THE ṢŪFĪS.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> poetry of the East, particularly that
of the Muḥammadan nations, differs materially from that of the West; and
when taken up by the uninitiated, would often appear to be the mere
effusions of wild and voluptuous bacchanals, or worthy of Anacreon
himself. These remarks, however, pertain more to Persian than to
Af<u>gh</u>ān poetry, which contains less of the, often, bombastic style
of the former, and approaches nearer to the simplicity of the poetry of
the ancient Arabs. A general subject with the Af<u>gh</u>ān, as well as
other Asiatic poets, is that of love, not *human*, but divine, and a
contempt for the people and vanities of the world; whilst other
Af<u>gh</u>ān poets, such as <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl <u>Kh</u>ān, write
on any subject that may have been uppermost in their minds at the time,
after the manner of Western poets.

The general reader, who would understand many of the poems contained in
the following pages, must know that most of the Asiatic poets profess
the mystical doctrine of the Ṣūfis, the tenets of which, it will be
necessary to explain to him; although Oriental scholars may be supposed
to be sufficiently familiar with the subject.

The Muḥammadan writers state, that these enthusiasts are co-existent
with their religion; and, [probably](errata.htm#0), their rapturous zeal
may have greatly contributed to the first establishment of Islāmism; but
they have since been considered its greatest enemies, and it is avouched
that their doctrines have, for a long time, been even undermining
Muḥammadanism itself. Hence the most rigorous

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

proceedings have, from time to time, been put in practice to repress
their increase, but these, as usual in such cases, have had a contrary
effect; and Ṣūfi-ism is said to be still on the increase. There is no
doubt, but that the free opinions of the sect on the dogmas of the
Muḥammadan religion, their contempt for its forms, and their claim to
communion with, or rather absorption into the Creator, are all more or
less calculated to subvert that faith, of whose outward forms the Ṣūfis
profess their veneration.

The tenets of the Ṣūfi doctrines appear to have been most widely
diffused over Persia; and, indeed, the great reputation acquired by one
of the priests of the sect, enabled his descendants, for above two
centuries, under the name of the Ṣafawīan dynasty, to occupy the throne
of that country. <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1)

The general name by which this sect of enthusiasts is known, is Ṣūfi,
implying *pure*, a term probably derived from the Arabic word <span
id="img__01000"></span> ![](img/_01000.jpg) (*ṣafah*), signifying
purity; and by this name all are known, from the venerated teacher, or
spiritual guide, followed by crowds of disciples, to the humble
*kalandar*, *darwesh*, or *fakir*, who wanders about almost naked, or
only clothed in his *khirkah* or cloak of rags, subsisting upon scanty
alms, to support this, voluntarily adopted, life of prayer and religious
abstraction.

In India, more than in any other country of Asia, from remote ages,
these visionary doctrines appear to have flourished, much after the same
manner as in Egypt and Syria, in the early days of Christianity, as
testified to by the early ecclesiastical writers, who trace to those
countries the mystic, the hermit, and the monk; for there the propensity
to a life of austerity was quite a disease. In the Hindū religion also,
as well as in the people themselves, there is much that tends to foster
a spirit of religious abstraction; and we may thus, with some justice,
suppose that from India other nations

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

have derived this mystic worship of the Deity, but without adopting the
dreadful austerities and macerations, common among the Hindūs, and
deemed necessary for attaining unto this state of beatitude.

To give a full account of the doctrines of the Ṣūfis, would be almost a
useless attempt; for traces of it may be found, in some shape or other,
in all countries; alike, in the sublime theories of the philosophers of
ancient Greece, and in those of modern Europe.

The Ṣūfis affirm, that their creed is adverse to superstition,
scepticism, and error; but "it exists by the active propagation of all
three." <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) The doctrines of their
teachers are given to their disciples in place of the outward forms and
observances of the faith they profess. They are invited to embark upon
the ocean of doubt, piloted by a sacred teacher, or spiritual guide,
whom they must consider superior to all other mortals, and deem worthy
of the most pious and spiritual confidence—in fact, of almost adoration
itself. They are devoted to the search after <span
class="smallcaps">Truth</span>, and are constantly occupied in adoration
of the Deity. He, according to their belief, is diffused throughout all
created things; <span id="fr_3"></span>[†](#fn_3) and they consider,
that the soul of man, and the principle of existence, is *of* God (part
of Him), not *from* Him. Hence their doctrine teaches that the soul of
man is an exile from its Creator, who is its home and source; that the
body is its cage, or prison-house; and the term of life, in this world,
is its period of banishment from Him

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

ere the soul fell it had seen the face of <span
class="smallcaps">Truth</span>, but, in this world, it merely obtains a
partial and shadowy glimpse, "which serves to awaken the slumbering
memory of the past, but can only vaguely recall it; and Sūfi-ism
undertakes, by a long course of education, and moral discipline, to lead
the soul onward, from stage to stage, until, at length, it reaches the
goal of perfect knowledge, truth, and peace." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4)

According to this mysterious doctrine, there are four stages through
which it is necessary man should pass, prior to attaining unto the
highest state, or that of divine beatitude; where, to use their own
words, "his corporeal veil, which had previously obscured his sight,
will be drawn aside, and his soul, emancipated from all material things,
will again unite with the divine and transcendent essence, from which it
had been divided, for a time, but not separated for ever."

The first of these stages is termed *nāsut*, or humanity, in which the
disciple is supposed to be living in obedience to the *<u>sh</u>aræ*, or
orthodox law, and paying due observance to the rites and ceremonies of
religion; for these things are allowed to be necessary and useful in
regulating the lives of the vulgar and weak-minded, and in restraining
within proper bounds, and guiding such as are unable to reach the acme
of divine contemplation and abstraction, who might be led astray by that
very latitude in matters of faith, which instructs and enraptures those
of more powerful intellect, and more ardent piety.

The second stage is termed *t̤arīḳat*, or the way, in which the disciple
attains what is called *jabrūt*, or potentiality and capacity; and he
who reaches this stage, quits, altogether, that state in which he is
merely permitted to follow and revere a teacher or spiritual guide, and
thus he becomes admitted within the pale of Sūfi-ism. All observance of
the rites and forms of religion may be laid aside;

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

for he now, it is supposed, exchanges what is called *æamal-i jismānī*,
or corporeal worship, for *æamal-i-rūḥānī*, or spiritual adoration; but
this stage cannot be attained, save by great piety, virtue, endurance,
and resignation; for it is necessary to restrain the intellect when
weak, until, from habits of mental devotion, grounded upon a proper
knowledge of its own greatness and immortality, and of the Divine
nature, it shall have acquired sufficient energy; since the mind cannot
be trusted in the omission or disuse of the rites and usages of
religion.

The third stage is *æarūf*, signifying knowledge or inspiration; and the
disciple who arrives thereunto, is said to have attained superhuman
knowledge—in fact, to be inspired; and when he has reached this stage,
he is equal to the angels.

The fourth, and final state arrived at, is *ḥaḳīḳat*, or Truth itself,
which signifies that his union with the Divinity is perfect and
complete.

The dignity of <u>Kh</u>alīfah, as the teacher is designated, can only
be obtained after long-continued fasting and prayer, and by complete
abstraction and severance from all mundane things; *for the man must be
annihilated, before the saint can exist*. The preparation for the third
stage of Ṣūfi-ism requires a protracted and fearful probation; and many
lose their lives in their efforts to attain it. The person who makes the
essay must be a devout and godly *murīd* or disciple, who has already
advanced, by his piety and abstraction, beyond the necessity of
observing religion's forms and usages. He must begin by endeavouring to
attain a higher state of beatitude, by a lengthened fast, which should
not be less than forty days; and during this period of fasting he
remains in solitude, and in a posture of contemplation, and takes no
sustenance save enough to keep body and soul together. The character of
the votary greatly depends upon the patience and fortitude he may
display during this severe ordeal; and when, reduced to a mere skeleton,

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

the disciple comes forth from his solitude, he still has years of trial
to endure. He must wander about, companionless, in desert places, or
remain in some frightful solitude, and only seeing, occasionally, the
<u>Kh</u>alīfah, or spiritual guide, whom he follows; for the chief
merit of all ranks of Ṣūfis, is complete devotion to their teacher. When
he dies, he leaves his *<u>kh</u>īrkah*, or patched garment, and worldly
wealth, to the disciple he considers the most worthy to succeed him; and
when the latter dons the holy mantle, he is invested with the power of
his predecessor. <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

The most celebrated Ṣūfi teachers have been alike famed for their
devotion and their learning, in Persia as well as in other countries;
and, in the former, the Ṣūfis have claimed for their own, all who have,
by their writings or sayings, shown a spirit of philosophy, or knowledge
of the nature Divine, which has elevated them above the prejudices of
the vulgar; and, certainly, great numbers of persons, eminent for their
learning, genius, and piety, have adopted the Ṣūfi doctrines. Amongst
the most distinguished of these are poets; for the very essence of
Ṣūfi-ism is poetry. The raptures of genius, expatiating upon a subject
that cannot be exhausted, are held to be divine inspirations, by those
who believe that the soul, when emancipated by devotion, can wander in
the regions of the spiritual world, and, at last, unite with its
Creator, the source from whence it emanated. It is the same with all
Ṣūfi poets, whatever be their country; but Persia is more generally
known as that, in which this species of poetry was supposed to have
reached the highest degree of perfection; but it will be discovered,
from the following pages, that Ṣūfi-ism has produced, amongst the rough
and hardy Af<u>gh</u>āns, conceptions equally as sublime. "Human speech,
however," to quote the words of a writer already mentioned, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[†](#fn_6)"is too weak and imperfect to convey these
lofty experiences of the

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

soul, and hence these can only be represented by symbols and metaphors."
For this reason the Ṣūfi poets, to quote the words of Sir William Jones,
"adopt the fervour of devotion, and the ardent love of created spirits
towards their beneficent Creator; and Ṣūfi poetry consists almost wholly
of a mystical, religious allegory, though it seems, to the uninitiated
ear, to contain merely the sentiments of wild and voluptuous bacchanals;
but although we must admit the danger of such a poetical style, where
the limits between enthusiasm and depravity are so minute, as to be
scarcely distinguishable;"—for the mystical meaning of their poetry
(save in the poems of the Af<u>gh</u>ān poet Mīrzā) never, or rarely,
obtrudes itself;—we may, if we choose, pass it by, confining ourselves
to those passages alone, which tell of a mundane passion, and a
terrestrial summer and wine. Under the veil of earthly love, and the
woes of temporal separation, they disguise the dark riddle of human
life, and the celestial banishment, which lies behind the threshold of
existence; and, under the joys of revelry and inebriation, they figure
mystical transports, and ecstatic raptures. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) Still, we must not censure it severely, and
must allow it to be natural, though a warm imagination may carry it
beyond the bounds of sober reason; "for," to quote the same author, "an
ardently grateful piety is congenial to the undepraved nature of man,
whose mind, sinking under the magnitude of the subject, and struggling
to express its emotions; has recourse to metaphors and allegories, which
it sometimes extends beyond the bounds of cool reason, and often to the
brink of absurdity." <span class="smallcaps">Barrow</span>, who would
have been the sublimest mathematician, if his religious turn of mind had
not made him the deepest theologian of his age, describes Love as "an
affection or inclination of the soul towards an object, proceeding from
an apprehension and esteem of some excellence or convenience in it, as
its beauty, worth, or utility; and producing, if it be absent, a
proportionable desire, and, consequently,

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

an endeavour to obtain such a property in it, such possession of it,
such *an approximation to it, or union with it*, as the thing is capable
of; with a regret and displeasure in failing to obtain it, or in the
want and loss of it; begetting, likewise, a complacence, satisfaction,
and delight, in its presence, possession, or enjoyment, which is,
moreover, attended with a goodwill towards it, suitable to its nature;
that is, with a desire that it should arrive at, or continue in, its
best state, with a delight to perceive it thrive and flourish; with a
displeasure to see it suffer or decay; with a consequent endeavour to
advance it in all good, and preserve it from all evil." Agreeably to
this description, which consists of two parts, and was designed to
comprise the tender love of the Creator towards created spirits, the
great philosopher bursts forth in another place, with his usual
animation, and command of language, into the following panegyric on the
pious love of human souls towards the Author of their happiness:—"Love
is the sweetest and most delectable of all passions; and when, by the
conduct of wisdom, it is directed in a rational way toward a worthy,
congruous, and attainable object, it cannot otherwise than fill the
heart with ravishing delight: such, in all respects, superlatively such,
is <span class="smallcaps">God</span>; who, infinitely beyond all other
things, deserveth our affection, as most perfectly amiable and
desirable; as having obliged us by innumerable and inestimable benefits;
all the good that we have ever enjoyed, or can ever expect, being
derived from His pure bounty; all things in the world, in competition
with Him, being mean and ugly; all things, without Him, vain,
unprofitable, and hurtful to us. He is the most proper object of our
love; for we chiefly were framed, and it is the prime law of our nature,
to love Him; *our soul, from its original instinct, vergeth towards Him
as its centre, and can have no rest till it be fixed on Him:* He alone
can satisfy the vast capacity of our minds, and fill our boundless
desires. He, of all lovely things, most certainly and easily may be
attained; for,

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

whereas, commonly, men are crossed in their affections, and their love
is embittered from their affecting things imaginary, which they cannot
reach, or coy things, which disdain and reject them, it is with <span
class="smallcaps">God</span> quite otherwise: He is most ready to impart
himself; He most earnestly desireth and wooeth our love; He is not only
most willing to correspond in affection, but even doth prevent us
therein: *He doth cherish and encourage our love by sweetest influences,
and most consoling embraces*, by kindest expressions of favour, by most
beneficial returns; and, whereas all other objects do, in the enjoyment,
much fail our expectation, He doth even far exceed it. Wherefore, in all
affectionate motions of our hearts towards <span
class="smallcaps">God</span>; in *desiring* Him, in seeking His favour
or friendship; in *embracing* Him, or setting our esteem, our goodwill,
our confidence, on Him; in *enjoying* Him, by devotional meditations,
and addresses to Him; in a reflective sense of our interest and
propriety in Him; *in that mysterious union of spirit*, whereby we do
closely adhere to, and are, as it were, inserted in Him; in a hearty
complacence in His benignity, a grateful sense of His kindness, and a
zealous desire of yielding some requital for it, we cannot but feel
very, very pleasant transports: indeed, that celestial flame, kindled in
our hearts by the spirit of love, cannot be void of warmth; we cannot
fix our eyes on *infinite beauty*, we cannot taste infinite sweetness,
we cannot cleave to infinite felicity, without also perpetually
rejoicing in the first daughter of <span class="smallcaps">Love</span>
to <span class="smallcaps">God</span>—Charity towards men; which, in
complexion and careful disposition, doth much resemble her mother; for
she doth rid us of all these gloomy, keen, turbulent imaginations and
passions, which cloud our mind, which fret our heart, which discompose
the frame of our soul, from burning anger, from storming contention,
from gnawing envy, from rankling spite, from racking suspicion, from
distracting ambition and avarice; and, consequently, doth settle our
mind in an even temper, in a sedate humour, in an harmonious order, in
*that pleasant state of*

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

*tranquillity, which, naturally, doth result from the voidance of
irregular passions*."

This passage, which borders upon quietism and enthusiastic devotion,
differs no more from the mystic tenets of the Ṣūfi creed, than do
European fruits and flowers from the lusciousness and fragrance of those
of Asia, or than the cold skies and sun of the West differ from the
gorgeous skies and blazing sun of Eastern lands.

It is to express fervid feelings like these that, by Ṣūfi-ism, poetry is
brought into play, which, in its sweetest strains, teaches that all
nature abounds with a Divine love, causing even the humblest plant to
seek the sublime object of its desire.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"In peace, Love tunes the shepherd's reed;  
 In war, he mounts the warrior's steed;  
 In halls, in gay attire is seen;  
 In hamlets, dances on the green.  
 Love rules the camp, the court, the grove,  
 And men below, and saints above;  
 For Love is heaven, and heaven is love."</span> <span
id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8)

</div>

Sir William Jones, in his "Essay on the Mystical Poetry of the Persians
and Hindūs," <span id="fr_9"></span>[†](#fn_9) has given an excellent
description of the Ṣūfis and their doctrine; and I cannot do better here
than extract therefrom such portions as may elucidate my present
subject. "The Ṣūfis," he says, "concur in believing that the souls of
men differ infinitely in *degree*, but not at all in *kind*, from the
Divine Spirit, of which they are *particles*, and in which they will
ultimately be re-absorbed; that the Spirit of God pervades the universe,
always immediately present to His work, and, consequently, always in
substance; that He alone is perfect benevolence, perfect truth, perfect
beauty; that the love of Him alone is *real* and genuine love, while
that of all other objects is *absurd* and

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

illusory; that the beauties of nature are faint resemblances, like
images in a mirror, of the Divine charms; that, from eternity without
beginning, to eternity without end, the Supreme Benevolence is occupied
in bestowing happiness, or the means of attaining it: that men can only
attain it by performing their part of the *primal covenant*, between
them and the Creator; that nothing has a pure, absolute existence but
*mind* or *spirit;* that *material substances*, as the ignorant call
them, are no more than gay *pictures*, presented continually to our
minds by the spiritual Artist; that we must be aware of attachment to
such *phantoms*, and attach ourselves, exclusively, to <span
class="smallcaps">God</span>, who truly exists in us, as we exist solely
in Him; that we retain, even in this forlorn state of separation from
our beloved, the *idea of heavenly beauty*, and the *remembrance* of our
*primeval vows;* that sweet music, gentle breezes, fragrant flowers,
perpetually renew the primary idea, refresh our fading memory, and melt
us with tender affections; that we must cherish these affections, and,
by abstracting our souls from *vanity*, that is, from all but <span
class="smallcaps">God</span>, approximate to His essence, in our final
union with which will consist our supreme beatitude. From these
principles flow a thousand metaphors, and other poetical figures, which
abound in the sacred poems of the Persians and Hindūs, who seem to mean
the same thing in substance, and differ only in expression, as their
languages differ in idiom." It is the same in Af<u>gh</u>ān poetry also,
as the following pages will amply show.

The modern Ṣūfis, who profess a belief in the Ḳur’ān, suppose, with much
sublimity both of thought and diction, that in a prior state of
existence the soul had been united with God; and that, at the Creation,
the created spirits, and the supreme soul from which they emanated, were
summoned together, when a celestial voice demanded from each,
separately, "<span class="smallcaps">Alasto bi-rabbikum</span>?" "*Art
thou not with thy God?*" that is, "*Art thou not bound by solemn*

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

*contract with Him?*" whereunto the spirits answered, "<span
class="smallcaps">Balā</span>," "*Yea!*" And hence it is that "<span
class="smallcaps">Alasto</span>," or "*Art thou not?*" (the question of
this primeval compact), and "<span class="smallcaps">Balā</span>," or
"*Yea!*" occur continually in these mystical compositions of Muḥammadan
poets, whether Persians, Turks, or Af<u>gh</u>āns. "Music, poetry, and
the arts," again to quote the words of a modern writer, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) "are the unconscious aspirations of the
soul, as it hurries along in its restless impulses through the world,
stung by the echo of "<span class="smallcaps">Alasto</span>," yet
ringing in their ears, but with no visible object to claim the
passionate adoration which it burns to pour forth."

"The Hindūs," says Sir William Jones, "describe the same covenant under
the figurative notion, so finely expressed by <span
class="smallcaps">Isaiah</span>, of a *nuptial contract;* for,
considering <span class="smallcaps">God</span> in the three characters
of Creator, Regenerator, and Preserver, and supposing the power of
*Preservation* and *Benevolence* to have become incarnate in the power
of <span class="smallcaps">Kri<u>sh</u>na</span>, they represent him as
married to Rādhā, a word signifying *atonement*, *pacification*, or
*satisfaction*, but applied allegorically to the *soul of man*, or
rather to *the whole assemblage of created souls*, between whom and
their benevolent Creator they suppose that *reciprocal love*, which
<span class="smallcaps">Barrow</span> describes with a glow of
expression perfectly Oriental, and which our most orthodox theologians
believe to have been mystically *shadowed* in the <span
class="smallcaps">Song of Solomon</span>, while they admit that, in a
literal sense, it is an epithalamium on the marriage of the sapient king
with the princess of Egypt. The very learned author of the "Prelections
on Sacred Poetry," declared his opinion, that the <span
class="smallcaps">Canticles</span> were founded on historical truth, but
involved in allegory of that sort, which he named *mystical;* and the
beautiful Persian poem, on the loves of <span
class="smallcaps">Laylā</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Majnūn</span>, by the inimitable Niz̤āmī—to say nothing
of other poems on the same subject—is, indisputably, built on true

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

history, yet avowedly allegorical and mysterious; for the introduction
to it is a continued rapture on *Divine love;* and the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Laylā</span> seems to be used in the *Masnawī* <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11) and the odes of Ḥāfiz̤, for the
omnipresent Spirit of God." If reference is here made to the first of
the poems of the Af<u>gh</u>ān monarch, Aḥmad <u>Sh</u>āh, at page
[294](spa17.htm#page_294), the force of the words of Sir William Jones
will be more fully seen.

According to the interpretation given to these mystical poems, by the
Ṣūfis themselves—for they have even composed a vocabulary of the words
used by these mystics—by *wine* is meant devotion, *sleep* is meditation
on the Divine perfections, and *perfume* the hope of the Divine favour;
the *zephyrs* are outbursts of grace; *kisses* and *embraces*, the
transports of devotion and piety; *idolators*, *infidels*, and
*libertines*, are men of the purest faith, and the *idol they worship*
is the Creator himself; the *tavern* is a secluded oratory, where they
become intoxicated with the wine of love, and its *keeper* is an
enlightened instructor or spiritual guide; *beauty* denotes the
perfection of the Deity; *curls* and *tresses* are the infiniteness of
His glory; the *lips* are the inscrutable mysteries of His essence;
*down* on the cheek, the world of spirits who surround His throne; and
the *black mole* upon the cheek of the beloved, the point of indivisible
unity; and *wantonness*, *mirth*, and *inebriation*, signify religious
enthusiasm, and abstraction from all earthly thoughts and contempt of
all worldly affairs.

The poets themselves give a colour to such interpretations as the
foregoing, in many passages in their poems; and it is impossible to
imagine that such effusions as those of Ḥāfiz̤, Saædī, and their
imitators, would, otherwise, be tolerated in a Musalmān country,
particularly at places like Cairo and Constantinople, where they are
venerated as divine compositions. It must be, however,

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

allowed, that " the mystical allegory, which, like metaphors and
comparisons, should be general only, not minutely exact, is greatly
diminished, if not wholly destroyed, by any attempt at particular and
distinct resemblances; and that this style of composition is open to
dangerous misinterpretation." <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12)

The following ode, by a Ṣūfi of Bo<u>kh</u>ārā, is such an extraordinary
specimen of the mysterious doctrine of the sect, although some of the
poems of the Af<u>gh</u>ān poet Mīrzā are sufficiently so, that I cannot
refrain from inserting it in this place:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Yesterday, half inebriated, I passed by the quarter where the
wine-sellers dwell,  
To seek out the daughter of an infidel, who is a vendor of wine.

At the end of the street, a damsel, with a fairy's cheek, advanced
before me,  
Who, pagan-like, wore her tresses dishevelled over her shoulders, like
the sacerdotal thread.

I said, 'O thou, to the arch of whose eyebrows the new moon is a
shame!  
What quarter is this, and where is thy place of abode?'

'Cast,' she replied, 'thy rosary on the ground, and lay the thread of
paganism thy shoulder upon;  
Cast stones at the glass of piety; and from an o’erflowing goblet quaff
the wine.

After that draw near me, that I may whisper one word in thine ear;  
For thou wilt accomplish thy journey, if thou hearken to my words.'

Abandoning my heart altogether, and in ecstacy wrapt, I followed her,  
’Till I came to a place, where, alike, reason and religion forsook me.

At a distance, I beheld a company, all inebriated and beside
themselves,  
Who came all frenzied, and boiling with ardour from the wine of love;

Without lutes, or cymbals, or viols; yet all full of mirth and melody—  
Without wine, or goblet, or flask; yet all drinking unceasingly.

</div>

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

When the thread of restraint slipped away from my hand,  
I desired to ask her one question, but she said unto me, '<span
class="smallcaps">Silence</span>!'

'This is no square temple whose gate thou canst precipitately attain;  
This is no mosque which thou canst reach with tumult, but without
knowledge:

This is the banquet-house of infidels, and all within it are
intoxicated—  
All, from eternity's dawn to the day of doom, in astonishment lost!

Depart, then, from the cloister, and towards the tavern bend thy
steps;  
Cast away the cloak of the darwesh, and don thou the libertine's robe!'

I obeyed; and if thou desire, with <span class="smallcaps">Ismat</span>,
the same hue and colour to acquire,  
Imitate him; and both this and the next world sell for one drop of pure
wine!"

</div>

The tenets of the Ṣūfi belief, as may be judged from what has been
already stated, are involved in mystery. They begin by instilling
doctrines of virtue and piety, and by teaching forbearance,
abstemiousness, and universal benevolence. This much they profess; but
they have secrets and mysteries for every step and degree, which are
never disclosed to the uninitiated and profane; but I shall now proceed
to quote a few passages from the writings of celebrated Ṣūfis, which may
tend to throw some additional light upon this dark and mystic creed.

The Persian poet, <u>Sh</u>ai<u>kh</u> Saædī, in his "Bostan," or
"Flower Garden," the subject of which is devoted to divine love, thus
describes it:—"The love of a being constituted, like thyself, of water
and clay, destroys thy patience and thy peace of mind; it excites thee,
in thy waking hours, with minute beauties, and occupies thee, in thy
sleep, with vain imaginations. With such real affection dost thou lay
thine head at her feet, that the universe, in comparison with her,
vanishes into nothing before thee; and, since her eye is not allured by
thy gold, gold and dust alike appear equal in thine. Not a breath dost
thou utter unto any one

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

else, for with her thou hast no room for any other; thou declarest that
her abode is in thine eye, or, when thou closest it, in thy heart; thou
hast no power to be at rest for a moment: if she demands thy soul, it
runs, instantly, to thy lip; and if she waves a sword over thee, thy
head falls, immediately, under it. Since an absurd passion, with its
basis on air, affects thee so violently, and commands with a sway so
despotic, canst thou wonder that they who walk in the true path are
overwhelmed in the sea of mysterious adoration? They abandon the world
through remembrance of its Creator; they are inebriated with the melody
of amorous complainings; they remember their beloved, and resign unto
Him both this life and that to come. Through remembrance of God, they
shun the whole of mankind; they are so enamoured of the cup-bearer, that
they spill the wine from the cup. No panacea can cure them; for no
mortal can be apprised of their malady; so loudly have the divine words,
<span class="smallcaps">Alasto</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Balā</span>, the tumultuous exclamation of all
spirits, rung in their ears, from time without beginning. They are a
sect fully employed, though sitting in retirement; their feet are of
earth, but their breath is like flame. With a single shout they could
rend a mountain from its base; with a single cry they could throw a city
into commotion. Like the wind, they are gone, and more
[swiftly](errata.htm#1); like stone, they are silent, yet utter God's
praises. At the dawn of day, their tears flow so copiously, as to wash
from their eyes the black antimony of sleep; <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) though the fleet steed of their
conception ran so swiftly all night; yet the morning finds them left, in
disorder, behind. Night and day they are plunged in an ocean of ardent
desire, until they are, through astonishment, unable to distinguish the
night from the day. With the peerless beauty of Him, who adorned the
human form, so enraptured are they, that, with the beauty of the figure

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

itself, they have no concern; and whenever they behold a beauteous form,
they see in it the mystery of the Almighty's work. The wise take not the
husk in exchange for the kernel; and he who makes that choice has no
understanding. He alone has drunk the pure wine of unity, who has
forgotten, by remembering <span class="smallcaps">God</span>, all things
besides in both worlds."

Jāmī, the author of the celebrated poem of Laylā and Majnūn, defines the
principles of this mystic philosophy in the following words:—"Some wise
and holy men are of opinion, that when the Supreme Being sheds the
refulgence of his Holy Spirit upon any of his creatures, that creature's
essence, attributes, and actions, become so completely absorbed in the
essence, the attributes, and the actions of the Creator, that he finds
himself in the position of regulator or director, with reference to the
rest of the creation, the several existences of which become, as it
were, his limbs—nothing happens to any of them, that he does not feel it
has happened to himself. In consequence of his individual and utter
annihilation, the result of his essential union with the Deity, he sees
his own essence to be the essence of the One and Only; his own
attributes to be His attributes; and his own actions to be His
actions;—and beyond this, there is no stage in progression to complete
union with God attainable by man. When the spiritual vision of any man
is engrossed by contemplating the beauty of the Divine Essence, by the
overpowering influence of the Eternal Spirit, the light of his
understanding, which is that quality by which we are enabled to
distinguish between things, becomes wholly extinguished; and as 'error
passeth away on the appearance of Truth,' so is the power of
discriminating, between the perishable and the imperishable, at once
removed." <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14)

Few orthodox Muḥammadans give a literal construction to the

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

words of the Prophet on the subject of predestination, although the
Ḳur’ān inculcates such; for they deem it impious so to do, as thereby
God would be made the author and cause of man's sin. All Ṣūfis are
fatalists, and believe that the principle which emanates from the
Almighty can do nothing without His will, and cannot refrain from what
He wills that it should do. Some Ṣūfis deny that evil exists at all,
because every thing proceeds from God, and must therefore necessarily be
good; and they exclaim, with the poet—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The writer of our destiny is a fair and truthful
writer,  
 And never did he write that which was evil."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Others, again,
admit, that in this world the principle of evil doth exist; but that man
is not a free agent; and quote the following couplet, from the Persian
poet Ḥāfiz̤—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"My destiny hath been allotted to the tavern <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15) by the Almighty:  
 Then tell me, O teacher! where lieth my crime."</span>

</div>

Such is the remarkable doctrine of the Ṣūfis, and still more so their
language and allegories, which we have been too much accustomed, in
Europe, to consider as the wanton and reckless effusions of Eastern
revellers, all devoted to the pleasure of the hour—"effusions bright,
indeed, with all the gorgeous hues of Eastern colouring, like unto the
skies over their heads, or the gardens around them, but yet transient as
the summer's roses, or the nightingale's notes which welcomed
them." <span id="fr_16"></span>[†](#fn_16)

This may be correct as to the outward form of Eastern poetry in general;
but most Asiatic poets are Ṣūfis, and if we would attempt to read their
poems, we should also desire to understand them; since beneath all this
gorgeous and mysterious imagery their lies a

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

latent signification of far different, and more lasting interest, where
the ardent longings and fervid transports of the soul find utterance,
which we may look for in vain in the venerated literature of pagan
Greece and Rome. Their great Molawī assures us that they profess eager
desire, but with no carnal affection, and circulate the cup, but no
material goblet; since, in their sect, all things are spiritual—all is
mystery within mystery:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"All, all on earth is shadow, all beyond  
 Is substance; the reverse is folly's creed."</span>

</div>

Sāhil-ibn-Æabd-ullah, of <u>Sh</u>ustar, a celebrated Sūfi teacher,
states, "That the soul's secret was first revealed when Faræawn <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17) declared himself a god:" and another,
<u>Sh</u>ai<u>kh</u> Muhī-ud-dīn, writes, "That the mighty host of the
Egyptian monarch was not overwhelmed in the sea of error, but of
knowledge:" and in another place, "That the Christians are not infidels
because they consider Jesus Christ a God, but because they deem him
*alone* a God." Another author, A<u>gh</u>ā Muḥammad Æalī, of
Karmān<u>sh</u>āh, who, however, is an open enemy of the Ṣūfis, says,
that "they ignore the doctrine of reward and punishment," which is as
incompatible with their ideas of the soul's re-absorption into the
divine essence, as with their literal belief of predestination. Some of
their most celebrated teachers, however, deny the truth of this
statement, and maintain that sinners will be punished in a future state,
and that the good will enjoy a much higher and purer bliss than the
sensual paradise of Muḥammad holds out, thus revolting at a literal
translation of the on that subject.

Another Persian Author, of high reputation <span
id="fr_18"></span>[†](#fn_18) for his piety and judgment, has given a
good account of the Ṣūfis and their doctrines. He conceives, with
several other Muḥammadan writers, that some of the principal Muḥammadan
saints were of the Ṣūfi belief; but

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

he applies this name to them, apparently, only as religious enthusiasts,
and no more. He makes a great distinction between those who, whilst they
mortified the flesh, and indulged in an enraptured love of the Almighty,
still kept within the pale of revealed religion; and those wild devotees
who, abandoning themselves to the frenzied wanderings of a heated
imagination, fancied they should draw nearer unto God by departing from
every thing deemed rational among men. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19)

In another passage, this author states, "The Almighty, after his
prophets and holy teachers, esteems none more than the pure Ṣūfis,
because their desire is to raise themselves, through His grace, from
their earthly mansion to the heavenly regions, and to exchange their
lowly condition for that of angels. I have stated what I know of them in
my Preface. The accomplished and eloquent among them form two classes,
the Ḥukamā, or *men of science*, and the Æulamā, or *men of piety and
learning*. The former seek truth by demonstration; the latter, through
revelation. There is another class called Æarūfā, or *men of knowledge*,
and Awliyā, or *holy men*, who, in endeavouring to reach a state of
beatitude, have abandoned the world. These are also *men of science;*
but as, through Divine grace, they have attained to a state of
perfection, their fears are believed to be less than those of others who
remain in worldly occupations. <span id="fr_20"></span>[†](#fn_20) Thus
they are more exalted, and nearer to the rich inheritance of the Prophet
than other men. No doubt there are imminent dangers along the path:
there are many false teachers,

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

and many deluded students pursuing the vapour of the desert, like the
thirsty traveller; and these, if they do not rush unto their death,
return wearied, grieved, and disappointed, from having been the dupes of
their fancy. A true and perfect teacher is most rare; and when he
exists, to discover him is impossible; for who shall discover
perfection, except He who is himself perfect? who but the jeweller shall
tell the price of the jewel? This is the reason why so many miss the
true path, and fall into all the mazes of error. They are deceived by
appearances, and waste their lives in the pursuit of that which is most
defective; conceiving all along that it is most perfect; and thus lose
their time, their virtue, and their religion. It is to save men from
this danger, that God, through the Prophet, has warned us to attend to
established usages, and to be guided by care and prudence. What has been
said applies equally to those who live in the world, and to those who
have abandoned it; for neither abstinence, nor devotion, can exclude the
Devil, who will seek retired mendicants, clothed in the garb of
divinity; and these, like other men, will discover that real knowledge
is the only talisman by which the dictates of the good can be
distinguished from those of the evil spirit. The traveller, on the path
of Ṣūfi-ism, must not, therefore, be destitute of worldly knowledge,
otherwise he will be alike exposed to danger from excess or deficiency
of zeal, and he will certainly act contrary to the most sacred of his
duties. A senseless man is likely to exceed the just bounds, in the
practice of abstinence and abstraction, and then both his bodily and
mental frame become affected, and he loses his labour and his object."

"The Ṣūfi teacher," continues Ḳāzī Nūr-ullah, "professes to instruct his
disciple how to restore the inward man by purifying the spirit,
cleansing the heart, enlightening the head, and anointing the soul: and
when all this is done, they affirm that his desires shall be
accomplished, and his depraved qualities changed into

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

higher attributes, and he shall prove and understand the conditions, the
revelations, the stages, and gradations of exaltation, till he arrives
at the ineffable enjoyment of beholding and contemplating God. If
teachers have not arrived at this consummation of perfection themselves,
it is obvious, that to seek knowledge or happiness from them is a waste
of time; and the devoted disciple will either terminate his labour in
assuming the same character of imposture that he has found in his
instructor, or he will consider all Ṣūfis alike, and condemn this whole
sect of philosophers.

"It often happens, that sensible and well-informed men follow a master,
who, though able, has not arrived at the virtue and sanctity which
constitute perfection: his disciples conceiving that none are better or
more holy than their teacher and themselves, and yet, disappointed at
not reaching that stage of enjoyment which they expected to arrive at,
seek relief from the reproaches of their own mind in scepticism. They
doubt, on the ground of their personal experience, all that they have
heard or read, and believe that the accounts of the holy men who have,
in this world, attained a state of beatitude, are only a string of
fables. This is a dangerous error; and I must therefore repeat, that
those who seek truth should be most careful to commence with prudence
and moderation, lest they be lost in the mazes I have described; and,
from meeting with evils of their own creation, should give way to
disappointment and grief; and, by expelling from their minds that ardent
fervour which belongs to true zeal, should disqualify themselves for the
most glorious of all human pursuits." <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21)

The Ṣūfis are divided into innumerable sects, as must be expected
regarding a doctrine, which may be called an ideal belief. It will not
be necessary to the present subject to enumerate them all; for though
they differ in designation and some minor usages, they

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

all agree as to the principal tenets of their creed; particularly in
inculcating the absolute necessity of entire submission to their
inspired teachers, and the feasibility, through fervent piety, and
enthusiastic devotion, of the soul's attaining a state of heavenly
beatification, whilst the body is yet an inhabitant of this terrestrial
sphere.

I have refrained from attempting to give any description of the
extraordinary phases the Ṣūfi belief has, from time to time, assumed in
Hindūstān, where it has ever flourished, and where it has been
beneficial in tending to unite the opposite elements of Muḥammadanism
and Hindūism, as shown more particularly in the events of the life of
Nānak <u>Sh</u>āh, the *gurū* or spiritual guide of the Sikhs, and
founder of their religion. On the Bombay side of India, also, it has
even taken root among the Gabrs or Pārsīs. Many of the usages and
opinions of the Ṣūfis bear a similarity to those of the Gnostics, and
other Christian sects, as well as to some of the philosophers among the
ancient Greeks. The Ṣūfi writers are familiar with Plato and Aristotle:
their more celebrated works abound with quotations from the former. It
has often been asserted that the Greeks borrowed their knowledge and
philosophy from the East; and, if correct, the debt has been well
repaid. Should an account of Pythagoras be translated into the Persian
or other Eastern language, it would be read as that of a Sufi saint.
"His initiation into the mysteries of the Divine nature, his deep
contemplation and abstraction, his miracles, his passionate love of
music, his mode of teaching his disciples, the persecution he suffered,
and the manner of his death, present us with a close parallel to what is
related of many eminent Ṣūfi teachers, and may lead to a supposition
that there must be something similar, in the state of knowledge and of
society, where the same causes produce the same effects." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22)

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

In the same manner as with Ḥāfiz̤'s poems in Persian, many of the
following odes, particularly those of Raḥmān and Ḥamīd, are commonly
sung all over Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, as popular songs are sung in Europe;
but the singers, generally, unless educated men, have little idea of the
deep meaning that lies beneath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[x:\*](spa03.htm#fr_1) Ismāæīl the First ascended
the throne <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1500, and his family was
subverted by Nādir, <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1736.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:\*](spa03.htm#fr_2) <span
class="smallcaps">Malcolm's History of Persia</span>.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:†](spa03.htm#fr_3) "The creation proceeded at
once from the splendour of God, who poured his spirit upon the universe,
as the general diffusion of light is poured over the earth by the rising
sun; and as the absence of that luminary creates total darkness, so the
partial or total absence of the Divine splendour or light causes partial
or general annihilation. The creation, in its relation to the Creator,
is like unto the small particles discernible in the sun's rays, which
vanish the moment it ceases to shine."—<span class="smallcaps">Persian
MS.</span>

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xii:\*](spa03.htm#fr_4) <span
class="smallcaps">E. B. Cowell, M.A.</span>: "<span
class="smallcaps">Oxford Essays</span>."

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xiv:\*](spa03.htm#fr_5) See 2 <span
class="smallcaps">Kings</span>, chap ii., where Elisha dons the mantle
of Elijah.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xiv:†](spa03.htm#fr_6) <span
class="smallcaps">E. B. Cowell</span>.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xv:\*](spa03.htm#fr_7) <span
class="smallcaps">E. B. Cowell</span>.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xviii:\*](spa03.htm#fr_8) <span
class="smallcaps">Scott</span>.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xviii:†](spa03.htm#fr_9) <span
class="smallcaps">Asiatic Researches</span>, Vol. III.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xx:\*](spa03.htm#fr_10) <span
class="smallcaps">E. B. Cowell</span>.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxi:\*](spa03.htm#fr_11) A collection of poems,
by <span class="smallcaps">Mowlāna Nūr-ud-dīn, Jāmī</span>.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxii:\*](spa03.htm#fr_12) <span
class="smallcaps">Sir W. Jones</span>.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxiv:\*](spa03.htm#fr_13) See note at page
[39](spa05.htm#page_39).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxv:\*](spa03.htm#fr_14) <span
class="smallcaps">Captain W. N. Lees</span>’ Biographical Sketch of the
Mystic Philosopher and Poet, Jāmī. Calcutta, 1859.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxvi:\*](spa03.htm#fr_15) The sinful world is
here referred to.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxvi:†](spa03.htm#fr_16) <span
class="smallcaps">E. B. Cowell</span>.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxvii:\*](spa03.htm#fr_17) <span
class="smallcaps">Pharaoh</span>.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxvii:†](spa03.htm#fr_18) Ḳāzī Nūr-ullah of
<u>Sh</u>ustar.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxviii:\*](spa03.htm#fr_19) <span
class="smallcaps">Malcolm: History of Persia</span>. Some Christians in
the extreme west of England have preached such doctrines, but practised
the contrary.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxviii:†](spa03.htm#fr_20) It is related that
the disciple of a celebrated Ṣūfi, having some money in his pocket when
travelling, began to express his fears. "Cast away thy fear," said the
old man. "How can I cast away a feeling?" he replied. "By casting away
that which excites it," was the answer. He cast his money away, and,
having nothing to lose, felt no fear.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxx:\*](spa03.htm#fr_21) <span
class="smallcaps">Malcolm</span>.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxxi:\*](spa03.htm#fr_22) <span
class="smallcaps">Malcolm</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](spa04)
