[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spa05)  [Next](spa07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWQM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
](index)*Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans*, by H.G. Raverty,
\[1868\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

#### MĪRZĀ KHĀN, ANṢĀRĪ.

MĪRZĀ <u>KH</u>ĀN, ANṢĀRĪ, was a descendant, probably [a
grandson](errata.htm#3), of Pīr Ro<u>s’h</u>ān, the founder of the
Ro<u>s’h</u>ānīān sect, which made a great noise among the
Af<u>gh</u>āns, about the year 1542-3 of our Era. He appears to have
commenced writing poetry in the year <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span>
1040; and these effusions were afterwards brought together in the form
of a Dīwān or Collection of Odes, bearing his name. Some parties contend
that his real name was Fat´ḥ <u>Kh</u>ān, and that he was of the Yūsufzī
tribe of the Af<u>gh</u>āns, and that the term Mīrzā is an assumed name,
usually taken by Oriental poets. Mīṛzā, however, is a Persian word,
signifying a prince or a nobleman, and also a secretary or writer, and
would never be assumed by an Af<u>gh</u>ān, it being a distinctive
appellation applied to persons of Persian descent, by the
Af<u>gh</u>āns. This statement, however, is also fully disproved, from
the fact, that several old copies of his poems, which I have examined or
have in my possession, end in these words: "Here ends the Dīwān of Mīṛzā
<u>Kh</u>ān, Anṣārī."

Ḳāsim Æalī, Afrīdī, an Af<u>gh</u>ān poet of Hindūstān, in one of his
odes, states, that Mīrzā <u>Kh</u>ān was of the family of Bāyazīd, or
Bāzīd, Anṣārī, who assumed the name of Pīr Ro<u>s’h</u>ān, or Saint of
Light, as already mentioned. Bāzīd himself (of whom it will be necessary
to give a brief account, as Mīṛzā's subsequent misfortunes were chiefly
owing to his being a descendant of that impostor) was, altogether, a
remarkable man; and the Anṣārī tribe, to which he belonged, is an
offshoot of an Arab tribe of Madīnah, mentioned in the Ḳur’ān, which
received the prophet Muḥammad

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

after his flight from Makkah; and hence the name Anṣārī, from the Arabic
word *anṣār*, signifying aiders, or assistants. People of this tribe are
to be found, even now, scattered over Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, the Panjāb,
and some parts of India.

Bāzīd's religion, which he instituted in the year <span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1542-3, spread rapidly amongst the Bar
Pu<u>s’h</u>tūn, or Eastern Af<u>gh</u>āns, till, at length, he was able
to assemble armies, and oppose the Mu<u>gh</u>al government. He held the
same tenets as the Ṣūfis (of whose mysticisms some account has been
given in the Introductory Remarks), but having been a disciple, for some
time, of the notorious Mullā Sulīmān—known in the East as Jālandharī
Sulīmān, from the town of Jālandhar, in the Panjāb, where he dwelt—Bāzīd
became initiated in the tenets of the Jogīs, a sect among the Hindūs,
and became a fast convert to the creed of the Metempsychosis, or
[Pythagorean](errata.htm#4) system of the transmigration of souls. On
these doctrines, however, he engrafted some of his own, the most
remarkable of which was, that the most complete manifestations of the
Divinity were made in the persons of holy men. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[\*](#fn_73) The great opponent of Bāzīd was
A<u>kh</u>ūnd Darwezah, the greatest and most venerated of all the
saints of Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, who, in derision of the title of Pīr
Ro<u>s’h</u>ān, or Apostle of Light, which Bāzīd had himself assumed,
conferred on him the name of Pīr Tārik, or Apostle of Darkness, by which
name he is now chiefly known.

Mīrzā, was a great traveller, and was well known from Herāt to Agra,
throughout the Af<u>gh</u>ān country, and also in India; for he himself
had numerous disciples in the mountainous parts of
Af<u>gh</u>ānistān—from Suwāt and Bājawrr, north of Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar, as
far as Ḳandahār and Herāt. He dwelt for a long period in the Rājpūt
state of Rājwārrā or Rājpūtānah, in Hindūstān, the Rājā of which
country, although a Hindū, ever treated him with great

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

veneration and liberality. The Mu<u>gh</u>al Emperor, Aurangzeb, also,
in whose reign Mīrzā flourished, allowed him a regular stipend. The
Emperor, however, was a great bigot, and, as is well known, was entirely
in the hands of the priesthood; and, consequently, on more than one
occasion, at the instigation of some of them more ignorant and bigoted
than others, Mīrzā was summoned by the monarch, to answer accusations of
heresy and blasphemy, preferred against him at their instigation. The
Emperor, with all his bigotry, appears, however, to have had some
scruples of conscience; and, generally, had some plausible excuse to
save Mīrzā from their clutches, and himself from a bad name. The only
reply the Mulls, or priests, could draw from the monarch, who is famous
for personally administering justice, was, that they should enter into
disputation with the accused, and if anything contrary to the

lip orthodox laws of Muḥammad could be drawn from him, he would then
consent to punish Mīrzā, but not otherwise. Notwithstanding Mīrzā's
enemies were thirsting for his blood, still they could not succeed in
drawing him into the snare they had spread for him; and the poet, very
prudently, retired from the scene, fearing lest, at some time or other,
they might be more successful in their machinations, and bring him to
destruction; for, according to the well known Oriental proverb—"Kings
and rulers have neither eyes nor ears; and between truth and falsehood
they are incapable of discerning; for the words of a few designing men
being sufficient to make the innocent guilty, the unfortunates are
plunged into the calamity of destruction." Mira, on this account,
generally confined himself, when in India, to the territories of the
independent or tributary Hindū princes, by whom he was honoured and
respected.

The poems of Mīrzā contain many Arabic and Persian words, which most
Oriental poets freely use; but his Pu<u>s’h</u>to is very ancient,
particularly in words used amongst the hill tribes of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eastern
Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, in his day, and which are not generally understood
by the people of the present time, together with some words purely
Sanskrit; but these latter usually occur in the last words of a line,
when at a loss for a rhyme, in which very great licence is taken and
allowed, by poets, in all Oriental countries, without such words being
common to the language, or used in conversation by the people. Some of
the philosophers of the present day, in their blind rage for comparative
philology—the hobby they ride for the time being—based merely on their
own superficially theoretical, and not practical knowledge of Oriental
languages and subjects—would probably consider this use of some pure
Sanskrit words as conclusive and undeniable evidence to prove the
Pu<u>s’h</u>to or Af<u>gh</u>ān language, of the Sanskrit family of
tongues. They seem to forget that all those parts of Central Asia, now
called Af<u>gh</u>ānistān, from Kabūl eastward, were, even in the days
of Alexander, peopled by a Hindū race, remnants of whom, existing even
at the present day, lived as Helots among the Greeks, to their various
Muḥammadan conquerors, of whom the Af<u>gh</u>āns are the most recent,
the Af<u>gh</u>ān tribes of the Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar district, and its
northern vicinity more particularly, having arrived in those parts as
recently as the beginning of the sixteenth century. They, as will also
be seen from the languages of many other conquering tribes, adopted, for
convenience sake, some few words of the people they conquered. However,
the Sanskrit in Mīrzā's poems may be accounted for, from the fact of his
long residence amongst Hindū people.

The poetry of Mīrzā is deeply tinged with the mysticisms of the Ṣūfis,
and, to some extent, with the religious tenets of his ancestor Pīr
Ro<u>s’h</u>ān. His effusions are, certainly, more difficult than that
of any other poet, from the fact of their being (as I think will be
allowed) more sublime, and grander in conception.

It is said that Mīrzā, in the latter years of his life, married and

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

settled in the Tī-rāh district, lying immediately to the south of the
famous <u>Kh</u>aibar Pass, and ignored the Ro<u>s’h</u>ānīān faith,
which in his more youthful days he had adopted, and manifested great
repentance for every thing he had written or said, contrary to the
*<u>sh</u>aræ*, or orthodox canons of the Muḥammadan creed. On this
account, he soon became great with the ecclesiastics of
Pe<u>s’h</u>āwar—a city, in those days, as famous as Bo<u>kh</u>ārā
itself for theological learning—and thenceforth was held in high
estimation by them. His descendants, on this account, are still greatly
respected by the Muḥammadans of those parts, whether Af<u>gh</u>āns or
others.

Nothing is known, for certain, regarding the death of Mīrzā; for he
passed a great portion of his life in Hindūstān, and must have ended his
days in that country. <span id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74) His
descendants still dwell in the Tī-rāh district, amongst the clan of
Mī-ān <u>Kh</u>el, and have the repute of being quiet and well behaved.
There is generally one of the family who follows the life of an ascetic;
and is allowed, by the simple people, to have the power of working
miracles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[52:\*](spa06.htm#fr_73) <span
class="smallcaps">Elphinstone</span>: Caubul.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[55:\*](spa06.htm#fr_74) A person named Mīrzā,
son of Nūr-ud-Dīn, one of the sons of Pīr Ro<u>sh</u>ān, lived in Shāh
Jahān's reign, and was killed at the battle of Dawlatābād.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poems of Mīrzā <u>Kh</u>ān, Anṣārī](spa07)
