[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spa17)  [Next](spa19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002JTWQM0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)  
](index)*Selections from the Poetry of the Afghans*, by H.G. Raverty,
\[1868\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

### KĀZIM <u>KH</u>ĀN, <u>KH</u>A<u>TT</u>AK,

###### SURNAMED

#### <u>SH</u>AIDĀ.

<span class="smallcaps">Kāzim <u>Kh</u>ān</span> was the son of Muḥammad
Afzāl <u>Kh</u>ān, chief of the <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>aks—and author of
several extensive and valuable prose works in the Pu<u>s’h</u>to
language—who was son of the poet A<u>sh</u>raf <u>Kh</u>ān; and hence
Kāzim was the great-grandson of <u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl <u>Kh</u>ān,
already noticed. He was born some time during the five years subsequent
to <span class="smallcaps">h.</span> 1135 (<span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1722). On the death of his father, the
chieftainship fell to Asad-ullah <u>Kh</u>ān, Kāzim's elder brother,
who, after a fashion too common in Eastern countries, considered it the
safest and most prudent course to act with great severity towards his
brothers and other near male relatives. Kāzim, who was quite a youth at
the time, could not brook this tyrannical treatment, and therefore
separated from him, and even abandoned the jāgīr, or grant of land, then
in his possession. Asad-ullah, who appears to have been rather more
favourably inclined to Kāzim <u>Kh</u>ān than to his other brothers, on
becoming acquainted with the fact of his distrust, sent for Kāzim, and
used every endeavour to soothe his fears and set his mind at ease; and,
the more effectually to bring this about, he conferred upon him an
additional grant of land, and betrothed him to a daughter of one of
their uncles. However, the suspicions and fears of Kāzim—who doubtless
had heard of the treatment the sons and grandsons of
<u>Kh</u>u<u>sh</u>ḥāl had experienced at the hands of his own
father—increased, at all this extreme kindness, to a greater degree than
before; and he secretly

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

fled from his home. Some say that he had an antipathy to his young
cousin as a wife; and that, at the time, he requested his brother not to
betroth her to him, as he did not like her. This Asad-ullah would not
listen to; and, according to the Af<u>gh</u>ān custom, named her as the
future wife of his younger brother. Be this, however, as it may, Kāzim
took to a wandering life, and spent several years in Ka<u>sh</u>mīr,
where he acquired considerable learning. He subsequently lived a long
time at Sirhind, in Upper India, but afterwards proceeded to the
Af<u>gh</u>ān principality of Rāmpūr, in that country, where he took up
his residence; and there he passed the greater part of his life.

On several occasions his brother Asad-ullah sent many of his
confidential friends to endeavour to induce him to return to his native
country; but without effect. On one occasion the poet had gone as far as
Ḥasan Abdāl, a town some few miles east of A<u>tt</u>ak, in the Panjāb,
on a pleasure excursion, with some of his particular acquaintances, at
which time a number of his relatives came to see him, from the
<u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak country, beyond the Indus, and only two days’
journey distant; but, notwithstanding all their entreaties, he would not
return home, and went back to Rāmpūr again.

When the gift of poesy was bestowed upon him, he took the poetical
surname of "<u>Sh</u>aidā," signifying "The Devoted" or "Lovelorn;" for
he had now turned devotee, and had become the disciple of the holy men
of Sirhind; and, according to the mystic doctrines of the Ṣūfis,
considered himself devoted to the love of the Divine. His poetry, like
that of Mīrzā, is deeply tinged with the mysticisms of that sect.

The fame of <u>Sh</u>aidā's poetry soon began to be noised abroad; and
at length, Mī’ān Muḥammadī, son of Mī’ān Æabd-ullah of Sirhind, who
belonged to the family of <u>Sh</u>aidā's spiritual guide, <span
id="fr_348"></span>[\*](#fn_348)

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

expressed a wish to be furnished with a copy, on which the poet sent him
the, at present, only known copy—which now lies before me—bearing the
impression of his seal. These poems were alphabetically collected into
this volume in the year n. 1181 (<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>
1767), and, indeed, it is supposed to be the only copy that was ever
made; for until shown to them by me, the descendants of his elder and
other brothers, who dwell in the vicinity of Pe<u>sh</u>āwar, had never
seen a copy of his poems, although so celebrated among them. This unique
volume, which I procured at Lahore, is most beautifully written and
illuminated, and contains a number of odes inserted on the margins of
the pages.

<u>Sh</u>aidā's poetry is highly polished, but deep and difficult; and
approaches nearer to that of the Persians than of any other of the
Af<u>gh</u>ān poets, whose simplicity is the chief charm of their
writings. The poet also introduces a greater number of Persian and
Arabic words.

<u>Sh</u>aidā's first disappointment appears to have given him a
distaste for matrimony; and he died unmarried, at Rāmpūr, where he had
dwelt so long. Soon after his decease, his relatives came and removed
his remains, and conveyed them to the poet's native country; and they
found a resting-place at Sarā’e, where the <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak
chieftains, and their families, have, for centuries past, been interred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_348"></span>[306:\*](spa18.htm#fr_348) See Introduction,
page [xiii](spa03.htm#page_xiii).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poems of Kāzim <u>Kh</u>ān, <u>Kh</u>a<u>tt</u>ak](spa19)
