[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cab07)  [Next](cab09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135667/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cabala*, by Bernhard Pick, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### THE CABALA IN RELATION TO JUDAISM AND CHRISTIANITY.

**Judaism**.--It must be acknowledged that the Cabala intended to oppose
philosophy and to intensify religion. But by introducing heathenish
ideas it grafted on Judaism a conception of the world which was foreign
to it and produced the most pernicious results. In place of the
monotheistic biblical idea of God, according to which God is the
creator, preserver and ruler of the world, the confused, pantheistically
colored heathenish doctrine of emanation was substituted. The belief in
the unity of God was replaced by the decade of the ten Sephiroth which
were considered as divine substances. By no longer addressing prayers
directly to god, but to the Sephiroth, a real Sephiroth-cult originated.
The legal discussions of the Talmud were of no account; the Cabalists
despised the Talmud, yea, they considered it as a canker of Judaism,
which must be cut out if Judaism were to recover. According

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

to the Zohar, I, 27*b*; III, 275*a*; 279*b*, the Talmud is only a
bondmaid, but the Cabala a controlling mistress.

The Cabalists compared the Talmud to a hard, unfruitful rock, which when
smitten yields only scanty drops that in the end become a cause of
controversy; whereas the study of the Cabala is like a fresh gushing
spring, which one needs only to address to cause it to pour out its
refreshing contents. <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)

And as the Cabalists treated the Talmud, they likewise treated
philosophy, which defined religious ideas and vindicated religious
precepts before the forum of reason. Most Cabalists opposed philosophy.
She was the Hagar that must be driven from the house of Abraham, whereas
the Cabala was the Sarah, the real mistress. At the time of the Messiah
the mistress will rule over the bondmaid.

But the study of the Bible was also neglected, Scripture was no longer
studied for its own sake, but for the sake of finding the so-called
higher sense by means of mystical hermeneutical rules.

Even the rituals were variously changed and recast. The putting on of
the phylacteries and

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

prayer-mantle (*talîth*) was accompanied by the recitation of cabalistic
formulas and sentences; special prayers were also addressed to the
Sephiroth. Connected with all this was an extravagant, intoxicating
superstition. To enable the soul to connect itself with the realm of
light and its spirits, or to be transplanted after death into its
heavenly abode, one underwent all manner of austere ascetical exercises.
With the mysterious name of God they believed themselves enabled to heal
the sick, to deliver demoniacs and to extinguish conflagrations. By
application of the right formulas of prayer, man was to have power and
influence on both the kingdoms of light and darkness. When the Cabalist
prays, God shakes his head, changes at once his decrees, and abolishes
heavy judgments. The magical names of God can even deliver the condemned
and free them from their torments in their place of punishment. In this
respect we even meet with the doctrine of the Catholic mass for the
souls. <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) The Book of Psalms with its
songs and prayers was especially considered as a means of producing all
manner of miracles and magic, as may be seen from the *Sepher Shimmush
Thehillim* (literally,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the Book of the
Cabalistic Application of the Psalms"), a fragment of the practical
Cabala, translated by Gottfried Selig, Berlin, 1788.

This sketch of Professor Wünsche is by no means exaggerated. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73) *Mutatis mutandis* we find the cabalistic
notions among the Chasidim, a sect founded in 1740 by a certain Rabbi
Israel ben Eliezer Baalshem, <span id="fr_74"></span>[4](#fn_74) also
called Besht. Baal-Shem made his public appearance about 1740 in Tlusti,
in the district of Czartkow, from whence he subsequently removed to
Medziboze, in Podolia. The miraculous cures and prophecies attracted
attention in large circles; his mode of life, consisting of
contemplation, study of the Zohar and frequent washings in rivers, soon
spread a halo around him. Added to this were the many miraculous reports
circulated by his disciples; for instance, that his father had been
visited by the prophet Elijah to predict his birth, and that his mother
was a hundred years old when she was delivered of him; that, when a
youth, he had victoriously struggled with evil spirits, etc.--all of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

which may be found in the Book *Shibche ha-Besht*, published in 1815 by
the grandson of Baal-Shem, Rabbi Bar Linz. Baal-Shem <span
id="fr_75"></span>[5](#fn_75) and his successors received the name
*Tsaddik*, "Saint," and his fame attracted multitudes of Jews from all
parts of Poland, who submitted themselves to his guidance. As long as he
lived, the sect formed one great whole, of which he was the head. After
his death, which took place in 1780, it was divided into separate
congregations, each of which had its own Rabbi or Tsaddik or Saint,
unreserved devotion to whom is the most important of all the principles
of the sect. In a word, before Pius IX was declared infallible, the
Chasidim <span id="fr_76"></span>[6](#fn_76) already had their
infallible popes, whose number is still very large in Poland, Wallachia,
Moldavia, Galicia, and Palestine. Of these popes of the Chasidim, a
modern Jewish writer, the late David Cassel (died 1893), says: "To the
disgrace of Judaism and modern culture the Tsaddikim still go on with
their disgraceful business, and are thus the most essential hindrances
to the dissemination of literary progress in Galicia and Russia. There
are still thousands who

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

behold in the Tsaddik the worker of miracles, the prophet, one who is in
close communion with God and angels, and who present him with rich gifts
and promulgate the wonders which they have seen. Covetousness on the one
hand and spiritual narrowness on the other are the channels through
which the evil is fed anew."

**Christianity**.--As soon as the Cabala became better known, Christians
betook themselves to its study and paid it the greatest attention
because of the supposed agreement of its teachings with the dogmas of
the Christian church. It was thought that the Cabala was the connecting
link between Judaism and Christianity. The dogmas of the Trinity, of the
Messiah as the Son of God and his atonement, were the salient points
which especially attracted attention. The first to be drawn to the
Cabala was Raymond Lully, the "Doctor Illuminatus" (1236-1315). He
regarded the Cabala as a divine science and as a genuine revelation
whose light is revealed to a rational soul.

The progress of Christianity towards the Cabala was greatly helped by
the conversion of a large number of Jews to Christianity, "in which they
recognized a closer relation to their gnostic views, and also by the
Christians perceiving that gnosticism could become a powerful instrument
for the conversion of the Jews." Among the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

converted Jews we notice Paulus de Heredia of Aragon (about 1480),
author of *Iggeret ha-Sodot* or *Epistola Secretorum*, treating of the
divinity, death, and resurrection of the Messiah, which has been
ascribed to a certain Nechunjah ben-ha-Kanah, who lived towards the end
of the second Temple. Another convert was Paul Ricci, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[7](#fn_77) of the sixteenth century, the friend of
Erasmus, and physician to the Emperor Maximilian I; Julius Conrad Otto,
author of the "Unveiled Secrets," consisting of extracts from the Talmud
and the Zohar, to prove the validity of the Christian doctrine
(Nuremberg, 1805); John Stephen Rittengel, grandson of the celebrated
Isaac Abravanel, the translator of the Book Jezirah into Latin
(Amsterdam, 1642). Among Christians we may mention Count John Pico di
Mirandola (born in 1463), author of *LXXII conclusiones cabbalisticae*,
Rome, 1486; more especially John Reuchlin (Capnio), 1455-1522. Reuchlin,
the first German scholar who studied the Cabala, wrote two cabalistic
treaties, entitled *De Verbo Mirifico* (Basel, 1494), and *De Arte
cabbalistica* (Hagenau, 1516). <span id="fr_78"></span>[8](#fn_78)

The first treatise is written in the form of a

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

dialogue between an Epicurean philosopher named Sidonius, a Jew named
Baruch, and the author, who is introduced by the Greek name Capnio.
Capnio would have it that the doctrine of the Trinity is to be found in
the first verse of Genesis. He submits, if the Hebrew word *bra*
(*bara*), which is translated "created," be examined, and if each of the
three letters composing this word be taken as the initial of a separate
word, we obtain the expression *ben*, *ruach*, *ab*, i.e., Son, Spirit,
Father. Upon the same principle we find the two persons of the Trinity
in the word *abn* (*eben*), "stone," occurring in Ps. cxviii. 22--"the
stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner," by
dividing the three letters composing the word *abn* into *ab ben*, i.e.,
Father, Son.

The second treatise is also in the form of a dialogue between a
Mohammedan, a Pythagorean philosopher and a Jew. The dialogue is held at
Frankfort where the Jew lives to whom the others come to be initiated
into the mysteries of the Cabala. The whole is a more matured exposition
and elaboration of the ideas hinted at in the first treatise.

How the truths of Christianity can be derived from the Talmud and the
Cabala, the Franciscan Pietro Galatino endeavored to prove in his
treatise *De Arcanis Catholicae Veritatis contra obstinatissimam* 

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Judaecorum
nostrae tempestatis perfidiam* (Ortona di Mare, 1518).

Much as Lully, Mirandola, Reuchlin, and others had already done to
acquaint the Christian world with the secrets of the Cabala, none of
these scholars had given translations of any portions of the Zohar. To
this task Knorr Baron von Rosenroth betook himself by publishing the
celebrated work *Kabbala Denudata* ("the Cabala Unveiled"), in two large
volumes, the first of which was printed in Sulzbach, 1677-78, the second
at Frankfort-on-the-Main, 1864, giving a Latin translation of the
Introduction to and the following portion of the Sohar: the Book of
Mysteries; the Great Assembly; the Small Assembly; <span
id="fr_79"></span>[9](#fn_79) Joseph Gikatilla's Gate of Light (*shaar
orah*); Vital's Doctrine of Metempsychosis (*hagilgulim*), and the Tree
of Life (*etz chayim*); Cordovero's Garden of Pomegranates (*pardes
rim-monim*); Abraham Herera's Gate of Heaven (*sha-ar ha shamayim*);
Naphtali ben Jacob's Valley of the King (*emeq ha bacha*); Naphtali
Cohen's Vision of the Priest (*maré Kohen*) etc., etc., with elaborate
annotations, glossaries and indices. Knorr von Rosenroth has also
collected all the passages of the New Testament which contain similar
doctrines to those propounded by the Cabala. In spite of its many
drawbacks <span id="fr_80"></span>[10](#fn_80) the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

work has been made use of by later scholars, especially by Chr.
Schöttgen in his *Horae hebraicae et talmudicae* (Dresden, 1733) and
*Theologia Judacorum de Messia* (*ibid*., 1742.)

The powerful preponderance of the religious and ecclesiastical
interests, as well as those of practical politics which became
perceptible in the first quarter of the sixteenth century, giving to the
mind a positive impulse, and to the studies a substantial foundation,
arrested the further development of the Cabala; and thus it came about
that in the course of time the zeal for cabalistic studies among
Christians has cooled. It has become generally understood that the
Cabala and Christianity are two different things. The idea of God
according to the writings of the Old and New Testaments is entirely
different. The same is the case with the notion of creation. When the
first triad of the Sephiroth (Crown, Wisdom and Intelligence) is
referred to the three persons of the Deity, their inner immanent
relation is not thereby fully expressed, as Christianity teaches it. The
three Sephiroth only represent three potencies of God or three forms of
his emanation, the other Sephiroth are also such divine

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

powers and forms. One can therefore rightly say that the Cabala teaches
not the Trinity, but the Ten-Unity of God. Also the other
characteristics, when e.g. the Zohar ascribes to God three heads; or
when it speaks of a God-Father (*abba*) of a God-Mother (*imma*) and of
a God-Son; or when we are told (Zohar, III, 262*a*; comp. 67*a*) that
"there are two, and one is connected with them, and they are three; but
in being three, they are one," this does not coincide in the least with
the Christian doctrine of the Trinity. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[11](#fn_81)

In one codex of the Zohar we read on the words "Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord of hosts" (Is. vi. 3): "the first 'holy' refers to the Holy Father;
the second to the Holy Son; and the third to the Holy Ghost"; but this
passage is now omitted from the present recensions of the Zohar, and has
been regarded by some Jewish writers as an interpolation. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[12](#fn_82)

As to the doctrine of Christ, the God incarnate--it cannot be paralleled
with the confused doctrine of Adam Kadmon, the primordial man. According

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

to the Christian notion the reconciliation is effected only through
Christ, the Son of God; according to the Cabala man can redeem himself
by means of a strict observance of the law, by asceticism and other
means whereby he influences God and the world of light in a mystical
manner. For the benefit of the reader we give the following passages
which speak of the atonement of the Messiah for the sins of people,
passages which are given as the explanation of the fifty-third chapter
of Isaiah. "When the righteous are visited with sufferings and
afflictions to atone for the sins of the world, is that they might atone
for all the sins of this generation. How is this proved? By all the
members of the body. When all members suffer, one member is afflicted in
order that all may recover. And which of them? The arm. The arm is
beaten, the blood is taken from it, and then the recovery of all the
members of the body is secured. So it is with the children of the world;
they are members of one another. When the Holy One, blessed be he,
wishes the recovery of the world, he afflicts one righteous from their
midst, and for his sake all are healed. How is this shown? It is
written--'He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities. . . .and with his stripes we are healed' (Is. iii. 5)."
Zohar, III, 218*a*.

To the same effect is the following passage:

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Those souls which
tarry in the nether garden of Eden hover about the world, and when they
see suffering or patient martyrs and those who suffer for the unity of
God, they return and mention it to the Messiah. When they tell the
Messiah of the afflictions of Israel in exile, and that the sinners
among them do not reflect in order to know their Lord, he raises his
voice and weeps because of those sinners, as it is written, 'he is
wounded for our transgressions' (Is. liii. 5). Whereupon those souls
return and take their place. In the garden of Eden there is one place
which is called the palace of the sick. The Messiah goes into this
palace and invokes all the sufferings, pain and afflictions of Israel to
come upon him, and they all come upon him. Now if he did not remove them
thus and take them upon himself, no man could endure the sufferings of
Israel, due as punishment for transgressing the Law; as it is
written--'Surely he hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows,' etc.
(Is. liii, 4 with Rom. xii. 3, 4) . When the children of Israel were in
the Holy Land they removed all those sufferings and afflictions from the
world by their prayers and sacrifices, but now the Messiah removes them
from the world." (Zohar, II, 212*b*). With reference to these
passages <span id="fr_83"></span>[13](#fn_83) which speak of the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

atonement of the Messiah for the sins of the people, which are given in
the Zohar as the explanation of the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah,
Professor Dalman <span id="fr_84"></span>[14](#fn_84) remarks that the
Jews reject and object to cabalistic statements as something foreign to
genuine Judaism. The theosophic speculations of the Cabala are at least
just as Jewish as the religious philosophical statements of Bachja or
Maimonides; yes, it seems to us that the God of revelation and of
scripture is more honestly retained in the former than in the latter,
where he becomes a mathematical One without attribute and thereby may
satisfy a superficial reason, but leaves the heart empty. That these
Jewish thinkers, influenced by Aristotle, had no inclination to find in
Is. liii an expiating mediator, is only too inexplicable. He, who by his
own strength can soar into the sphere of "intelligences" and thus bring
his soul to immortality, needs no mediator. But we are concerned here
not with a philosophical or theosophical thought-complex, but the simple
question whether the prophet speaks in Is. liii of a suffering mediator
of salvation. The

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

answer of the Cabalists at any rate agrees with the testimony of many of
them.

What are we to think of the Cabala? That there is a relationship between
it and neo-Platonism is obvious. Erich Bischoff <span
id="fr_85"></span>[15](#fn_85) thinks that the Cabala represents a
peculiar monism, which in some degree has influenced modern philosophy.
In ethical respects it contains many fruitful and sublime thoughts,
often indeed in fanciful wording. But as magic it has been of great
influence on all kinds of superstitions and even on occultistic
tendencies. It offers a highly interesting object of study whose closer
investigation is rendered more difficult on account of the
[abstruse](errata.htm#2) manner of representation and the many magic and
mystic accessories. But that which is valuable is sufficient to insure
for it a lasting interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[96:1](cab08.htm#fr_71) A collection of passages
abusing the Talmud is given by Landauer in the *Orient*, 1845, pp.
571-574; see also Rubin, *Heidenthum und Kabbala*, Vienna, 1893, pp. 13
f.; also his *Kabbala and Agada*, *ibid*., 1895, p. S, where we read
that according to Abulafia the Cabalists only were genuine men, and the
Talmudists monkeys.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[97:2](cab08.htm#fr_72) Wünsche, whom we have
followed, evidently refers to the prayer called Kaddish, for which see
my article *s.v.* in McClintock and Strong, vol. XII. A very interesting
article on "Jüdische Seelenmesse and Totenanrufung" is given by Dalman
in *Saat auf Hoffnung* (Leipsic, 1890), pp. 169-225.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[98:3](cab08.htm#fr_73) Orelli in his article
"Zauberei" in *Realencyklopädie für protest*. *Theologie and Kirche*,
vol. XXI, 1908, p. 618, remarks: "The Jewish Cabala has promoted the
magic degeneration of the religion; to a great extent it furnished
profound expressions and formulas for the exercise of superstitious
arts."

<span id="fn_74"></span>[98:4](cab08.htm#fr_74) "Lord of the name" =
θεοῦργος, a man who by words of conjuration and other formulas knows how
to exercise a power over the visible and invisible world.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[99:5](cab08.htm#fr_75) Compare Kahana, *Rabbi
Israel Baal Schem-Tob, sein Leben, kabbalistisches System and Wirken*,
Sitomir, 1900.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[99:6](cab08.htm#fr_76) Compare Perl, *Megalleh
temirin*, or *Die enthüllten Geheimnisse der Chassidim*, Lemberg, 1879;
Ch. Bogratschoff, *Entstehung, Entwicklung and Prinzipien des
Chassidismus*, Berlin, 1908.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[101:7](cab08.htm#fr_77) See my article *s.v.*
in McClintock and Strong.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[101:8](cab08.htm#fr_78) These and some other
treatises of the same kind are collected by Pistorius in a collection
entitled *Artis cabbalisticae scriptores*, Basel, 1587.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[103:9](cab08.htm#fr_79) These three parts are
Englished by Mathers.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[103:10](cab08.htm#fr_80) Buddeus in Introductio
in *Historiam Philosophiae* <span id="page_104">p. 104</span>
*Hebraeorum* (Halle 1702) calls Knorr von Rosenroth's work "confusum et
obscurum opus, in quo necessaria cum non necessariis utilia cum
inutilibus, confusa sunt, et in unam velut chaos conjecta." Knorr von
Rosenroth has also written a number of hymns.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[105:11](cab08.htm#fr_81) Compare also Bischoff,
*Die Kabbalah,* p. 26.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[105:12](cab08.htm#fr_82) Compare Joel, *Die
Religionsphilosophie des Sohar*, Leipsic, 1849, pp. 240 ff.--The Zoharic
passages referring to the Trinity are given in the original with a
German translation in *Auszüge aus dem Buche Sohar* (by Tholuck; revised
by Biesenthal), Berlin, 1857; 4th ed., 1876; also by Pauli, *The Great
Mystery; or How Can Three Be One*, London, 1863.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[107:13](cab08.htm#fr_83) A collection of the
passages referring to the atoning work of the Messiah is given in
*Auszüge aus dem* <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> *Buche Sohar*, pp.
35 f., more especially in Wünsche, Die Leiden des Messias, Leipsic,
1870, pp. 95-105; and by Dalman, "Das Kommen des Messias nach dem Sohar"
(in *Saat auf Hoffnung*), Leipsic, 1888, pp. 148-160.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[108:14](cab08.htm#fr_84) In his *Jesaja 53, das
Prophetenwort von Sühnleiden des Heilandes mit besonderer
Berücksichtigung der synagogalen Literatur*, Leipsic, 1890.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[109:15](cab08.htm#fr_85) The author of *Die
Kabbalah*. *Einführung in die jüdische Mystik and Geheimwissenschaft*,
Leipsic, 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](cab09)
