[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tigs00)  [Next](tigs02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028RY8F6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*True Irish Ghost Stories*, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### FOREWORD

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> book had its origin on this wise. In
my *Irish Witchcraft and Demonology*, published in October 1913, I
inserted a couple of famous 17th century ghost stories which described
how lawsuits were set on foot at the instigation of most importunate
spirits. It then occurred to me that as far as I knew there was no such
thing in existence as a book of Irish ghost stories. Books on Irish
fairy and folk-lore there were in abundance—some of which could easily
be spared—but there was no book of ghosts. And so I determined to supply
this sad omission.

In accordance with the immortal recipe for making hare-soup I had first
to obtain my ghost stories. Where was I to get them from? For myself I
knew none worth publishing, nor had I ever had any strange experiences,
while I feared that my friends and acquaintances were in much the

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

same predicament. Suddenly a brilliant thought struck me. I wrote out a
letter, stating exactly what I wanted, and what I did *not* want, and
requesting the readers of it either to forward me ghost stories, or else
to put me in the way of getting them: this letter was sent to the
principal Irish newspapers on October 27, and published on October 29,
and following days.

I confess I was a little doubtful as to the result of my experiment, and
wondered what response the people of Ireland would make to a letter
which might place a considerable amount of trouble on their shoulders.
My mind was speedily set at rest. On October 30, the first answers
reached me. Within a fortnight I had sufficient material to make a book;
within a month I had so much material that I could pick and choose—and
more was promised. Further on in this preface I give a list of those
persons whose contributions I have made use of, but here I should like
to take the opportunity of thanking all those ladies and gentlemen
throughout the length and breadth of Ireland, the majority of whom were
utter strangers to me, who

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

went to the trouble of sitting down and writing out page after page of
stories. I cannot forget their kindness, and I am only sorry that I
could not make use of more of the matter that was sent to me. As one
would expect, this material varied in value and extent. Some persons
contributed incidents, of little use by themselves, but which worked in
as helpful illustrations, while others forwarded budgets of stories,
long and short. To sift the mass of matter, and bring the various
portions of it into proper sequence, would have been a lengthy and
difficult piece of work had I not been ably assisted by Mr. Harry L.
Neligan, D.I.; but I leave it as a pleasant task to the Higher Critic to
discover what portions of the book were done by him, and what should be
attributed to me.

Some of the replies that reached me were sufficiently amusing. One
gentleman, who carefully signed himself "Esquire," informed me that he
was after "reading a great book of ghost stories, but several letters of
mine failed to elicit any subsequent information. Another person offered
to *sell* me ghost stories, while several

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

proffered tales that had been worked up comically. One lady addressed a
card to me as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"<span class="smallcaps">The Rev<sup>d</sup></span>.—

<span class="small">(Name and address lost of the clergyman whose letter
appeared lately in *Irish Times*, *re* apparitions")</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Cappawhite</span>."

</div>

As the number of clergy in the above village who deal in ghost stories
is strictly limited, the Post Office succeeded in delivering it safely.
I wrote at once in reply, and got a story. In a letter bearing the
Dublin postmark a correspondent, veiled in anonymity, sent me a
religious tract with the curt note, "*Re* ghost stories, will you please
read this." I did so, but still fail to see the sender's point of view.
Another person in a neighbouring parish declared that if I were their
rector they would forthwith leave my church, and attend service
elsewhere. There are many, I fear, who adopt this attitude; but it will
soon become out of date.

Some of my readers may cavil at the expression, "*True* Ghost Stories."
For myself I cannot guarantee the genuineness of a single

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

incident in this book—how could I, as none of them are my own personal
experience? This at least I *can* vouch for, that the majority of the
stories were sent to me as first or second-hand experiences by ladies
and gentlemen whose statement on an ordinary matter of fact would be
accepted without question. And further, in order to prove the *bona
fides* of this book, I make the following offer. The original letters
and documents are in my custody at Donohil Rectory, and I am perfectly
willing to allow any responsible person to examine them, subject to
certain restrictions, these latter obviously being that names of people
and places must not be divulged, for I regret to say that in very many
instances my correspondents have laid this burden upon me. This is to be
the more regretted, because the use of blanks, or fictitious initials,
makes a story appear much less convincing than if real names had been
employed.

Just one word. I can imagine some of my readers (to be numbered by the
thousand, I hope) saying to themselves: "Oh! Mr. Seymour has left out
some of the best stories. Did he never hear of such-and-such a

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

haunted house, or place?" Or, "I could relate an experience better than
anything he has got." If such there be, may I beg of them to send me on
their stories with all imagined speed, as they may be turned to account
at some future date.

I beg to return thanks to the following for permission to make use of
matter in their publications: Messrs. Sealy, Bryers, and Walker,
proprietors of the *New Ireland Review;* the editor of the *Review of
Reviews;* the editor of the *Proceedings of the Society for Psychical
Research;* the editor of the journal of the American S.P.R.; the editor
of the *Occult Review*, and Mr. Elliott O’Donnell; Messrs. Longmans,
Green and Co., and Mrs. Andrew Lang; the editor of the *Wide World
Magazine;* the representatives of the late Rev. Dr. Craig.

In accordance with the promise made in my letter, I have now much
pleasure in giving the names of the ladies and gentle-who have
contributed to, or assisted in, the compilation of this book, and as
well to assure them that Mr. Neligan and I are deeply grateful to them
for their kindness.

Mrs. S. Acheson, Drumsna, Co. Roscommon;

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mrs. M. Archibald,
Cliftonville Road, Belfast; J. J. Burke, Esq., U.D.C., Rahoon, Galway;
Capt. R. Beamish, Passage West, Co. Cork; Mrs. A. Bayly, Woodenbridge,
Co. Wicklow; R. Blair, Esq., South Shields; Jas. Byrne, Esq.,
Castletownroche, Co. Cork; Mrs. Kearney Brooks, Killarney; H. Buchanan,
Esq., Inishannon, Co. Cork; J. A. Barlow, Esq., Bray, Co. Wicklow; J.
Carton, Esq., King's Inns Library, Dublin; Miss A. Cooke, Cappagh House,
Co. Limerick; J. P. V. Campbell, Esq., *Solicitor*, Dublin; Rev. E. G.
S. Crosthwait, M.A., Littleton, Thurles; J. Crowley, Esq., Munster and
Leinster Bank, Cashel; Miss C. M. Doyle, Ashfield Road, Dublin; J. Ralph
Dagg, Esq., Baltinglass; Gerald A. Dillon, Esq., Wicklow; Matthias and
Miss Nan Fitzgerald, Cappagh House, Co. Limerick; Lord Walter
Fitzgerald, Kilkea Castle; Miss Finch, Rushbrook, Co. Cork; Rev. H. R.
B. Gillespie, M.A., Aghacon Rectory, Roscrea; Miss Grene, Grene Park,
Co. Tipperary; L. H. Grubb, Esq., J. P., D.L., Ardmayle, Co. Tipperary;
H. Keble Gelston, Esq., Letterkenny; Ven. J. A. Haydn, LL.D., Archdeacon
of Limerick; Miss Dorothy Hamilton, Portarlington;

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Richard Hogan,
Esq., Bowman St., Limerick; Mrs. G. Kelly, Rathgar, Dublin; Miss Keefe,
Carnahallia, Doon; Rev. D. B. Knox, Whitehead, Belfast; Rev. J. D. Kidd,
M. A., Castlewellan; E. B. de Lacy, Esq., Marlboro’ Road, Dublin; Miss
K. Lloyd, Shinrone, King's Co.; Canon Lett, M.A., Aghaderg Rectory; T.
MacFadden, Esq., Carrigart, Co. Donegal; Wm. Mackey, Esq., Strabane;
Canon Courtenay Moore, M.A., Mitchelstown, Co. Cork; J. McCrossan, Esq.,
*Journalist*, Strabane; G. H. Miller, Esq., J.P., Edgeworthstown; Mrs.
P. C. F. Magee, Dublin; Rev. R. D. Paterson, B.A., Ardmore Rectory; E.
A. Phelps, Esq., Trinity College Library; Mrs. Pratt, Munster and
Leinster Bank, Rathkeale; Miss Pim, Monkstown, Co. Dublin; Miss B.
Parker, Passage West, Co. Cork; Henry Reay, Esq., Harold's Cross,
Dublin; M. J. Ryan, Esq., Taghmon, Co. Wexford; P. Ryan, Esq., Nicker,
Pallasgrean; Canon Ross-Lewin, Kilmurry, Limerick; Miss A. Russell,
Elgin Road, Dublin; Lt.-Col. the Hon. F. Shore, Thomastown, Co.
Kilkenny; Mrs. Seymour, Donohil Rectory; Mrs. E. L. Stritch, North Great
Georges

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> St., Dublin; M. C.
R. Stritch, Esq., Belturbet; Very Rev. the Dean of St. Patrick's. D.D.;
Mrs. Spratt, Thurles; W. S. Thompson, Esq., Inishannon, Co. Cork; Mrs,
Thomas, Sandycove, Dublin; Mrs. Walker, Glenbeigh, Co. Kerry; Miss
Wolfe, Skibbereen, Co. Cork; Mrs. E. Welsh, Nenagh; T. J. Westropp,
Esq., M.A., M.R.I.A., Sandymount, Dublin; Mrs. M. A. Wilkins, Rathgar,
Dublin; John Ward, Esq., Ballymote; Mrs. Wrench, Ballybrack, Co. Dublin;
Miss K. E. Younge, Upper Oldtown, Rathdowney.

ST. JOHN D. SEYMOUR.

<span class="smallcaps">Donohil Rectory</span>,  
    <span class="smallcaps">Cappawhite, Tipperary</span>,  
        *February* 2, 1914.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](tigs02)
