[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tigs11)  [Next](tigs13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0028RY8F6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*True Irish Ghost Stories*, by St. John D. Seymour and Harry L. Neligan,
\[1914\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### MISTAKEN IDENTITY—CONCLUSION

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have given various instances of
ghostly phenomena wherein the witnesses have failed at first to realise
that what they saw partook in any way of the abnormal. There are also
many cases where a so-called ghost has turned out to be something very
ordinary. Though more often than not such incidents are of a very
trivial or self-explanatory nature (*e.g.* where a sheep in a churchyard
almost paralysed a midnight wayfarer till he summoned up courage to
investigate), there are many which have an interest of their own and
which often throw into prominence the extraordinary superstitions and
beliefs which exist in a country.

Our first story, which is sent us by Mr. De Lacy of Dublin, deals with
an incident that occurred in the early part of last century. An epidemic
which was then rife in the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

city was each day taking its toll of the unhappy citizens. The wife of a
man living in Merrion Square was stricken down and hastily buried in a
churchyard in Donnybrook which is now closed. On the night after the
funeral one of the city police, or "Charlies" as they were then called,
passed through the churchyard on his rounds. When nearing the centre he
was alarmed to hear a sound coming from a grave close at hand, and
turning, saw a white apparition sit up and address him. This was all he
waited for; with a shriek he dropped his lantern and staff and made off
as fast as his legs would carry him. The apparition thereupon took up
the lamp and staff, and walked to Merrion Square to the house of
mourning, was admitted by the servants, and to the joy of the whole
household was found to be the object of their grief returned,
Alcestis-like, from the grave. It seems that the epidemic was so bad
that the bodies of the victims were interred hastily and without much
care: the unfortunate lady had really been in a state of coma or trance,
and as the grave was lightly covered, when she came to she was able to
force her way

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

up, and seeing the "Charlie" passing, she called for assistance.

An occurrence which at first had all the appearance of partaking of the
supernormal, and which was afterwards found to have a curious
explanation, is related by Dean Ovenden of St. Patrick's Cathedral,
Dublin. "At Dunluce Rectory, Co. Antrim," he writes, "I had a strange
experience. There was a force-pump attached to the back wall of the
house, and many people drew water from it, as it was better than any
obtained at that time in Bushmills. We used to notice, when going to
bed, the sound of someone working the pump. All the servants denied that
they ever used the pump between 11 P.M. and 12 midnight. I often looked
out of the back window when I heard the pump going, but could not see
anyone. I tied threads to the handle, but although they were found
unbroken in the morning the pumping continued, sometimes only for three
or four moves of the handle. On many nights no pumping was heard. The
man-servant sat up with a gun and the dog, but he neither saw nor heard
anything. We gave it up as a bad job, and still the

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

pumping went on. After about two years of this experience, I was one
night alone in the house. It was a calm and frosty night and I went to
bed about 11.30 P.M. and lay awake; suddenly the pump began to work with
great clearness, and mechanically I counted the strokes: they were
exactly twelve. I exclaimed, 'The dining-room clock!' I sprang from bed
and went down, and found that the clock was fast, as it showed two
minutes past twelve o'clock. I set back the hands to 11.55 and lay in
bed again, and soon the pumper began as usual. The explanation was that
the vibration of the rising and falling hammer was carried up to the
bedroom by the wall, but the sound of the hell was never heard. I found
afterwards that the nights when there was no pumping were always windy."

A man was walking along a country lane at night and as he was coming
round a bend he saw a coffin on the road in front of him. At first he
thought it was a warning to him that he was soon to leave this world;
but after some hesitation, he finally summoned up courage to give the

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

thing a poke with his stick, when he found that the coffin was merely an
outline of sea-weed which some passer-by had made. Whereupon he went on
his way much relieved.

The unbeliever will state that rats or mice are more often than not the
cause of so-called ghostly noises in a house. That, at any rate,
instances have happened where one or other of these rodents has given
rise to fear and trepidation in the inmates of a house or bedroom is
proved by the following story from a Dublin lady. She tells how she was
awakened by a most mysterious noise for which she could give no
explanation. Overcome by fear, she was quite unable to get out of bed,
and lay awake the rest of the night. When light came she got up: there
was a big bath in the room, and in it she found a mouse which had been
drowned in its efforts to get out. So her haunting was caused by what we
may perhaps call a ghost in the making.

The devil is very real to the average countryman in Ireland. He has
given his name to many spots which for some reason

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

or other have gained some ill-repute—the Devil's Elbow, a very nasty bit
of road down in Kerry, is an instance in point. The following story
shows how prevalent the idea is that the devil is an active agent in the
affairs of this world.

A family living at Ardee, Co. Louth, were one night sitting reading in
the parlour. The two maids were amusing themselves at some card game in
the kitchen. Suddenly there was a great commotion and the two girls—both
from the country—burst into the sitting-room, pale with fright, and
almost speechless. When they had recovered a certain amount, they were
asked what was the matter; the cook immediately exclaimed, "Oh, sir! the
devil, the devil, he knocked three times at the window and frightened us
dreadfully, and we had just time to throw the cards into the fire and
run in here before he got us." One of the family, on hearing this,
immediately went out to see what had caused all this trepidation, and
found a swallow with a broken neck lying on the kitchen windowsill. The
poor bird had evidently seen the light in the room, and in its efforts
to get

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

near it had broken its neck against the glass of the window.

An amusing account of a pseudo-haunting comes from County Tipperary, and
shows how extraordinarily strong is the countryman's belief in
supernatural phenomena. The incidents related occurred only a very short
time ago. A farmer in the vicinity of Thurles died leaving behind him a
young widow. The latter lived alone after her husband's death, and about
three months after the funeral she was startled one night by loud
knocking at the door. On opening the door she was shocked at seeing the
outline of a man dressed in a shroud. In a solemn voice he asked her did
she know who he was: on receiving a reply in the negative, he said that
he was her late husband and that he wanted £10 to get into heaven. The
terrified woman said she had not got the money, but promised to have it
ready if he would call again the next night. The "apparition" agreed,
then withdrew, and the distracted woman went to bed wondering how she
was to raise the money. When morning came she did not take long in
telling her friends

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

of her experience, in the hope that they would be able to help her.
Their advice, however, was that she should tell the police, and she did
so. That night the "apparition" returned at the promised hour, and asked
for his money. The amount was handed to him, and in a low sepulchral
voice he said, "Now I leave this earth and go to heaven." Unfortunately,
as he was leaving, a sergeant and a constable of the R. I. Constabulary
stopped him, questioned him, and hauled him off to the barracks to spend
the remainder of the night in the cell, where no doubt he decided that
the haunting game has its trials. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

An occurrence of very much the same description took place in County
Clare about three years ago. Again the departed husband returns to his
sorrowing wife, sits by the fire with her, chatting no doubt of old
times, and before he leaves for the other world is regaled with pig's
head and plenty of whisky. The visit is repeated the next night, and a
request made for money to play cards with down below: the wife willingly
gives him the money. Again

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

he comes, and again he borrows on the plea that he had lost the night
before, but hoped to get better luck next time. On the woman telling a
neighbour a watch was kept for the dead man's return, but he never came
near the place again.

An account of a police-court trial which appeared in the *Irish Times*
of 31st December 1913 emphasizes in a very marked degree the
extraordinary grip that superstition has over some of the country
people. A young woman was on her trial for stealing £300 from the
brother of her employer, Patrick McFaul of Armagh. District Inspector
Lowndes, in opening the case for the Crown, told the bench that the
money had been taken out of the bank by McFaul to buy a holding, for the
purchase of which negotiations were going on. The money was carelessly
thrown into a drawer in a bedroom, and left there till it would be
wanted. A short time afterwards a fire broke out in the room, and a heap
of ashes was all that was found in the drawer, though little else in the
room besides a few clothes was injured. "The McFauls appeared to accept
their loss with a complacency,

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

which could only be accounted for by the idea they entertained that the
money was destroyed through spiritual intervention—that there were
ghosts in the question, and that the destruction of the money was to be
taken as a warning directed against a matrimonial arrangement, into
which Michael McFaul was about to enter." The accused girl was servant
to the McFauls, who discharged her a few days after the fire: but before
this she had been into Derry and spent a night there; during her stay
she tried to change three £20 notes with the help of a friend. But
change was refused, and she had to abandon the attempt. "If some of the
money was burned, some of it was certainly in existence three days
later, to the amount of £60. One thing was manifest, and that was that
an incredible amount of superstition appeared to prevail amongst
families in that neighbourhood when the loss of such a sum as this could
be attributed to anything but larceny, and it could for a moment be
suggested that it was due to spiritual intervention to indicate that a
certain course should be abandoned."

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

The foregoing tales have been inserted, not in order that they may throw
ridicule on the rest of the book, but that they may act as a wholesome
corrective. If *all* ghost stories could be subjected to such rigid
examination it is probable that the mystery in many of them would be
capable of equally simple solution—yet a remnant would be left.

And here, though it may seem somewhat belated, we must offer an apology
for the use of the terms "ghost" and "ghost story." The book includes
such different items as hauntings, death-warnings, visions, and
hallucinations, some of which obviously can no more be attributed to
discarnate spirits than can the present writer's power of guiding his
pen along the lines of a page; whether others of these must be laid to
the credit of such unseen influences is just the question. But in truth
there was no other expression than "ghost stories" which we could have
used, or which could have conveyed to our readers, within reasonable
verbal limits, as they glanced at its cover, or at an advertisement of
it, a general idea of the contents of this book.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The day will
certainly come when, before the steady advance of scientific
investigation, and the consequent influencing of public opinion, the
word "ghost" will be relegated to limbo, and its place taken by a number
of expressions corresponding to the results obtained from the analysis
of phenomena hitherto grouped under this collective title. That day is
approaching. And so, though we have used the term throughout the pages
of this book, it must not therefore be assumed that we necessarily
believe in "ghosts," or that we are bound to the theory that all, or
any, of the unusual happenings therein recorded are due to the action of
visitants from the Otherworld.

We may now anticipate one or two possible points of criticism. It might
be alleged that the publication of such a book as this would tend to
show that the Irish nation was enslaved in superstition. Without
stopping to review the question as to what should, or should not, be
classed as "superstition," we would rejoin by gleefully pointing to a
leading article in the *Irish Times* of Jan. 27, 1914, which gives a
short account of a lecture by Mr. Lovett

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

on the folklore of London. Folklore in London! in the metropolis of the
stolid Englishman! The fact is that the Irish people are not one whit
more superstitious than their cross-channel neighbours, while they are
surely on a far higher level in this respect than many of the
Continental nations. They *seem* to be more superstitious because (we
speak without wishing to give any offence) the *popular* religion of the
majority has incorporated certain elements which may be traced back to
pre-Christian times; but that they *are* actually more superstitious we
beg leave to doubt.

Another and more important series of objections is stated by one of our
correspondents as follows. "I must confess that I can never reconcile
with my conception of an All-Wise Creator the type of 'ghost' you are at
present interested in; it seems to me incredible that the spirits of the
departed should be permitted to return and indulge in the ghostly
repertoire of jangling chains, gurgling, &c., apparently for the sole
purpose of scaring housemaids and other timid or hysterical people." The
first and most obvious remark on this is, that our correspondent

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

has never read or heard a ghost story, save of the Christmas magazine
type, else he would be aware that the above theatrical display is *not*
an integral part of the "ghostly repertoire "; and also that persons,
who are *not* housemaids, and who can *not* be classed as timid or
hysterical, but who, on the other hand, are exceedingly sober-minded,
courageous, and level-headed, have had experiences (and been frightened
by them too!) which cannot be explained on ordinary grounds. But on the
main point our correspondent is begging the question, or at least
assuming as fully proved a conclusion which is very far from being so.
Is he quite sure that the only explanation of these strange sights and
weird noises is that they are brought about by the action of departed
spirits (we naturally exclude cases of deliberate fraud, which in
reality are very unusual)? And if so, what meaning would he put upon the
word "spirits"? And even if it be granted that the phenomena are caused
by the inhabitants of another world, why should it be impossible to
accept such a theory, because of its *apparent* incompatibility with any
conception of an

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All-Wise Creator,
of whose workings we are so profoundly ignorant? Are there not many
things in the material world which *to the limited human mind* of our
correspondent must seem puzzling, meaningless, useless, and even
harmful? He does not therefore condemn these offhand; he is content to
suspend judgment, is he not? Why cannot he adopt the same attitude with
respect to psychic phenomena? Our correspondent might here make the
obvious retort that it is *we* who are begging the question, not he,
because such happenings as are described in this book have no existence
apart from the imaginative or inventive faculties of certain persons.
This would be equivalent to saying bluntly that a considerable number of
people in Ireland are either liars or fools, or both. This point we
shall deal with later on.

Our correspondent belongs to a type which knows nothing at all about
psychical research, and is not aware that some of the cleverest
scientists and deepest thinkers of the day have interested themselves in
such problems. They have not found the answer to many of them—goodness
knows if they ever will this side of the grave—but at least they have

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

helped to broaden and deepen our knowledge of ourselves, our
surroundings, and our God. They have revealed to us profundities in
human personality hitherto unsuspected, they have suggested means of
communication between mind and mind almost incredible, and (in the
writer's opinion at least) these points have a very important bearing on
our conceptions of the final state of mankind in the world to come, and
so they are preparing the way for that finer and more ethical conception
of God and His Creation which will be the heritage of generations yet
unborn. The materialist's day is far spent, and its sun nears the
horizon.

Another objection to the study of the subjects dealt with in this book
is that we are designedly left in ignorance of the unseen world by a
Wise Creator, and therefore that it is grossly presumptuous, not to say
impious, on the part of man to make any attempt to probe into questions
which he has not been intended to study. Which is equivalent to saying
that it is impious to ride a bicycle, because man was obviously created
a pedestrian. This might be true if we were confined within a
self-contained

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

world which had, and could have, no connection with anything external to
itself. But the very essence of our existence here is that the material
and spiritual worlds interpenetrate, or rather that our little planet
forms part of a boundless universe teeming with life and intelligence,
yet lying in the hollow of God's hand. He alone is "Supernatural," and
therefore Transcendent and Unknowable; all things in the universe are
"natural," though very often they are beyond our normal experience, and
as such are legitimate objects for man's research. Surely the potential
energy in the human intellect will not allow it to remain at its present
stage, but will continually urge it onwards and upwards. What limits God
in His Providence has seen fit to put upon us we cannot tell, for every
moment the horizon is receding, and our outlook becoming larger, though
some still find it difficult to bring their eyesight to the focus
consequently required. The marvellous of to-day is the commonplace of
to-morrow: "our notion of what is natural grows with our greater
knowledge."

Throughout the pages of this book we have,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

in general, avoided offering explanations of; or theories to account
for, the different stories. Here something may be said on this point. As
we have already pointed out, the expression "ghost stories" covers a
multitude of different phenomena. Many of these may be explained as
"hallucinations," which does not imply that they are simply the effect
of imagination and nothing more. "The mind receives the hallucination as
if it came through the channels of sense, and accordingly externalises
the impression, seeking its source in the world outside itself, whereas
in all hallucinations the source is within the mind, and is not derived
from an impression received through the recognised organ of
sense." <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

Many of these hallucinations are termed *veridical*, or truth-telling,
because they coincide with real events occurring to another person.
Illustrations of this will be found in Chapter VI, from which it would
appear that a dying person (though the power is not necessarily confined
to such) occasionally has the faculty of telepathically communicating
with another; the latter receives the

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

impression, and externalises it, and so sees a ghost," to use the
popular expression. Some hallucinations are *auditory*, *i.e.* sounds
are heard which apparently do not correspond to any objective reality.
Incomprehensible though it may appear, it may be possible for sounds,
and very loud ones too, to be heard by one or more persons, the said
sounds being purely hallucinatory, and not causing any disturbance in
the atmosphere.

Some of the incidents may be explained as due to telepathy, that
mysterious power by which mind can communicate with mind, though what
telepathy is, or through what medium it is propagated, no one can tell
as yet. Belief in this force is increasing, because, as Professor Sir W.
Barrett remarks: "Hostility to a new idea arises largely from its being
unrelated to existing knowledge," and, as telepathy seems to the
ordinary person to be analogous to wireless telegraphy, it is therefore
accepted, or at least not laughed at, though how far the analogy really
holds good is not at all certain.

Again there is the question of haunted houses and places, to accounts of
which the

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

first five chapters of this book are devoted. The actual evidence for
many of these may not come up to the rigorous standard set by the
S.P.R., but it is beyond all doubt that persons who are neither fools,
liars, nor drunkards firmly believe that they have seen and heard the
things related in these chapters (not to speak of Chapters VI–VIII), or
that they have been told such by those in whose statements they place
implicit confidence; while so certain are they that they are telling the
truth that they have not only written down the stories for the
compilers, but have given their names and addresses as well, though not
always for publication. Can we contemptuously fling aside such a weight
of evidence as unworthy of even a cursory examination? This would hardly
be a rational attitude to adopt. Various theories to account for these
strange hauntings have been formulated, which may be found on pp.
199-200 of Sir William Barrett's *Psychical Research*, and so need not
be given here.

Yet, when all is said and done, the very formulating of theories, so far
from solving problems, only raises further and more complex

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

ones, perhaps the greatest of which is, Have the spirits of the departed
anything to do with the matter? As we have shown, we hope with success,
in the preceding paragraphs, many "ghosts" have no necessary connection
with the denizens of the unseen world, but may be explained as being due
to laws of nature which at present are very obscure. Does this hold good
of all "ghosts," or are some of them to be placed to the credit of those
who have passed beyond the veil, or perhaps to spirits, good or evil,
which have never been incarnate? That is the problem for the future, for
in the present state of our knowledge it would be premature to give a
direct answer, either positive or negative.

This book was written with a twofold purpose: first, that of
entertaining our readers, in which we trust we have been successful;
secondly, to stimulate thought. For, strange though it may seem,
authenticated "ghost stories" have a certain educative value. Taking
them at their lowest they suggest inquiry into the strange workings of
the human mind: at their highest how many strange lines of inquiry do
they

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

not suggest? For it is obvious that we have now arrived at one of those
interesting periods in the history of human thought which might be
described as the return of the pendulum. We are in the process of
emerging from a very materialistic age, when men either refused to
believe anything that was contrary to their normal experience, or else
leavened their spiritual doctrines and beliefs with the leaven of
materialism. The pendulum has swung to its highest point in this
respect, and is now commencing to return, so perhaps the intellectual
danger of the future will be that men, instead of believing too little,
will believe too much. Now is the time for laying a careful foundation.
Psychical research, spiritualism, and the like, are not ends in
themselves, they are only means to an end. At the present state of
thought, the transition from the old to the new, from the lower to the
higher, it is inevitable that there must be confusion and doubt, and the
earnest thinker must be prepared to suspend judgment on many points; but
at a later stage, when all absurdity, error, and fraud, now so closely
connected with

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

psychical research in its various branches, will have been swept away,
Truth will emerge and lift the human race to a purer and loftier
conception of God and His universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[256:1](tigs12.htm#fr_14) *Evening Telegraph*
for Dec. 10, 1913

<span id="fn_15"></span>[266:1](tigs12.htm#fr_15) Prof. Sir W. Barrett,
*Psychical Research*, p. iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Place Names](tigs13)
