[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ait09)  [Next](ait11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*American Indian Fairy Tales*, by Margaret Compton, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### WHITE HAWK, THE LAZY.

<span id="img_06500"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![W](img/06500.jpg) |

HITE HAWK was known as the laziest boy in the tribe. When his father set
his nets, even on the coldest days in winter, he had to do it alone; for
White Hawk would never help him either to carry the net or to cut the
ice. He neither hunted nor fished, he took no part in the games of the
young men, and he refused to wait upon his parents, until his name
became a reproach.

His father and mother were deeply grieved by his conduct, for they
themselves were industrious and frugal. They did not, like many of their
tribe, return from the wintering grounds to feast and be idle; but built
themselves a lodge in the forest, where they laid store for the future.
At last they determined to try to shame White Hawk out of his laziness.
So one night when he had refused to go to fetch water for them, the
father said: "Ah, my son, one who is afraid to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

go to the river after dark will never kill the Red Head."

Now, it was the ambition of every Indian boy to kill the Red Head.
Though his parents did not know it, White Hawk had always believed that
he would accomplish it, and he often sat and thought of different ways
in which it might be done, for he was strong, despite his laziness.

He made no answer, but went at once to bed. The next morning he asked
his mother to make him some new moccasins of deer skin while he cut some
arrows. He made only four, which he put into a shabby quiver and laid
beside his moccasins ready to take with him in the morning.

He rose before daylight, and without waking either his father or his
mother put on his moccasins, took his bow and quiver and set out,
determined to kill the Red Head before he returned. He did not know
which way to go, so as soon as it was light he shot an arrow into the
air and followed the direction of its flight.

He traveled all day. Towards night he was tired and hungry, for he had
brought no food with him and had found but a few acorns in the forest.
To his surprise he saw a fat deer with an arrow in its side lying across
his path.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

It was the arrow he had shot that morning. He did not pull it out, but
cut off as much meat as he wanted to eat and left the rest for the
coyotes.

He slept in a hollow tree all night. Early the next morning he shot
another arrow into the air to find out in what direction to go that day,
and at night he found another deer that had been pierced by this arrow.

Thus it happened every day for four days; but as he had not withdrawn
any of the arrows, on the fifth day he had none to use and so was
without food. He was very hungry, for he had long since left the woods
and there were no nuts or berries on the prairie.

He lay down, thinking he might as well die there as elsewhere, for he
was suffering great pain from hunger. It was not long before he heard a
hollow, rumbling sound that seemed to be under ground.

He stood up and looking around, saw a broad, beaten path leading across
the prairie. An old woman was walking along this path, thumping the
ground with a stick at every step.

He went nearer and was terribly frightened, for he discovered that she
was a

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

witch, known throughout the country as "the little old woman who makes
war."

She wore a mantle made entirely of women's scalps. Her staff, which was
a stout, hickory stick, was ornamented with a string of toes and bills
of birds of all kinds. At every stroke of the staff they fluttered and
sang, each in its own fashion, and the discord was horrible.

White Hawk followed her, creeping along in the high grass so as to hide
himself, until he saw her lodge, which was on the shore of the lake. She
entered, took off her mantle and shook it several times. At every shake
the scalps uttered loud shrieks of laughter, in which the old witch
joined.

Presently she came out, and without seeming to look, walked directly up
to White Hawk. She told him that she knew all about his determination to
kill the Red Head, and that she would help him. "Many young men have
thought about killing him," she said, "but you are the only one who has
set out to do it."

She insisted upon his going to her lodge to spend the night, and he
went, although he knew that he would not be able to sleep in such a
place.

She told him to lie down, and taking

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

out a comb, began to comb his hair, which in a few moments became long
and glossy, like a woman's. She tied its with a magic hairstring, and
gave him a woman's dress of fine, soft skin, a necklace, and brooches of
silver, and many strings of wampum. Then she painted his face red and
yellow, not forgetting to put on some love-powder. Last of all she
brought a silver bowl for him and slipped a blade of scented sword-grass
into his girdle.

She told him that the Red Head lived on an island in the center of the
lake on the shore of which her lodge was built.

On the morrow White Hawk should go down to the water and begin dipping
they silver bowl into the lake and drinking from it. The Indians who
were with the Red Head would see him, and, supposing him to be a woman,
would come over in their canoes, and each would wish to make her his
wife.

He was to say, "No, I will only marry the Red Head, and he must bring
his own canoe for me, for I have traveled a long way in order to be his
wife."

When the Red Head should receive the news he would cross in his canoe
and take White Hawk to the island. The witch

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

loaded him with presents to give in the event of a marriage, in which
case he was to be on the watch for an opportunity to kill the Red Head
by cutting off his head with the spear of scented sword-grass.

White Hawk rose next morning, put on the woman's garments that had been
given him, went down to the lake and began dipping water with the silver
bowl.

Presently many canoes were put out from the island. They were driven
swiftly to the spot where he stood, and the men strove with one another
in offers of marriage.

White Hawk acted as the witch told him a woman would under the
circumstances. To all their entreaties he replied: "I have come a great
way to see the Red Head, whom I am resolved to marry. If he wants me let
him come in his own canoe to take me to his wigwam."

The message was taken to the Red Head, who immediately crossed the lake
in his canoe. As it neared the shore White Hawk saw that its framework
was of live rattlesnakes, who thrust out their heads and hissed and
rattled as he stepped into the boat. The Red Head spoke to them and they
quieted down, as dogs at the word of their master.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

When they landed the Red Head went straight to his wigwam and the
marriage was performed. Then a feast was spread, the presents were given
and White Hawk waited his opportunity.

By and by Red Head's mother, who had been watching the bride closely,
said to her husband, "That is no woman our son has married; no woman
ever looked out of her eyes like that."

Her husband was very angry; and White Hawk, who had overheard the
conversation, jumped up and said: "I have been insulted, and by my
husband's people. I cannot live here. I will return at once to my
nation," and he ran out of the wigwam, followed by the guests and by the
Red Head, who motioned to them to leave him.

White Hawk went down to the shore and made pretense of getting into a
canoe, when the Red Head laid a hand upon him and sorrowfully begged him
to wait at least a little time. He turned back and sat down, when the
Red Head threw himself at his wife's feet and put his head into her lap.

White Hawk lost not a moment in drawing out the blade of sword-grass and
cutting off his head at a single stroke. He

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

then plunged into the water and swam across the lake with the head in
his hand.

He had scarcely reached the shore when he saw the Red Head's followers
come down with torches in search of him and his wife. He heard their
shrieks when they found the headless body, and so lost no time in making
his way to the witch's lodge, whither they would not be likely to follow
him.

The witch received him with great joy. She told him that he must give
her a little piece of the scalp for herself, but he might take the rest
home.

He was anxious to return, so she gave him a partridge to offer the
spirit of the earth, in case he should meet him on the way.

As White Hawk crossed the prairie, he heard a great rumbling and
crackling sound, and the earth split and opened in front of him. He
threw the partridge into the crack and it was closed immediately, so
that he passed over it in safety.

On reaching home he found that his parents had fasted and mourned for
him as dead, for he had been gone a year. Many young men had come to
them and had said, "See, I am your son," until

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

when White Hawk did return they would not even look at him.

He threw himself at their feet and told them that he had killed the Red
Head. They paid no attention to him, and the young men of the tribe to
whom he repeated the story laughed in his face.

He went outside the camp and brought back the head. Then indeed his
parents rejoiced, for they knew that he would be admitted at once to the
company of warriors for having rid them of so great an enemy. While they
all wondered how one who was so lazy could have become so great a brave,
he told them why he had acted as he did before he left the village. He
was so strong that he had been afraid of breaking things, and so did not
dare to touch them. He took hold of some fishing-nets, and as he turned
them over in his fingers, they snapped in many places. But now that he
was a man his strength would be useful to him and to the tribe. He could
clear the forest of fallen trees, and carry some to the streams, where
he could throw them so that his people might go from one side to the
other in safety. Thereafter he was not known as White Hawk the Lazy, but
as "The Strong Man."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Magic Feather](ait11)
