[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psc09)  [Next](psc11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING ACTS WHICH SUPERSEDE THE DUE OBSERVANCE OF THE
SABBATH--THE SACRIFICE OF THE PASCHAL OFFERING--WHAT IS TO BE DONE IF
ONE SACRIFICE IS CONFOUNDED WITH ANOTHER.

MISHNA: The following acts necessary for the sacrifice of the paschal
offering supersede the due observance of the Sabbath, namely: The
slaughtering thereof, the sprinkling of its blood, the removal of its
entrails, and the burning of the fat with incense; but the roasting of
the sacrifice, as well as the washing of its entrails, does not
supersede the due observance of the Sabbath. To carry and bring it
beyond the sabbatical legal limits, or to remove a wen (or spreading
sore) thereon, is an act which does not supersede the due observance of
the Sabbath. R. Eliezer, however, says they do supersede it. "For," said
R. Eliezer, "this is surely a logical sequence; if slaughtering an
animal, which is prohibited on the Sabbath as being a principal act of
labor, is allowed in this instance (of the Passover) and even supersedes
the Sabbath, does it not follow that these two acts, which are only
prohibited by rabbinical law, should also in this instance supersede the
Sabbath?" R. Jehoshua answered and said: "The laws concerning the
festival will prove the contrary; for many things prohibited on the
Sabbath as being principal acts of labor are nevertheless permitted on
the festival, <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) while other things
which are prohibited by rabbinical law are yet prohibited on the
festival." <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60.md) R. Eliezer replied: "What
is the matter with thee, Jehoshua? How canst thou adduce proof from
purely voluntary acts (such as cooking) to such as are distinctly
prohibited by biblical law?" R. Aqiba then answered: "The act of
sprinkling (a person who had become unclean) will prove it; for that is
a distinct biblical commandment and is only prohibited on the Sabbath by
rabbinical

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

law, still it does not supersede the due observance of the
Sabbath; <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md) do not therefore wonder
that these acts, which are also religious duties, and are only
prohibited on the Sabbath by rabbinical law, should still not be allowed
to supersede the Sabbath." R. Eliezer replied, however: "I also adduce
my inference from the act of sprinkling, and maintain that if
slaughtering, which is prohibited to be done on the Sabbath as a
principal act of labor, is in this instance allowed to supersede the due
observance of the Sabbath, does it not follow that the sprinkling of a
person who had become unclean, and which is only prohibited to be done
on Sabbath by rabbinical law, should in so much greater a degree
supersede the Sabbath?" But R. Aqiba said: "Rather conclude the reverse:
for if the sprinkling, which is only prohibited by rabbinical law,
nevertheless does not supersede the Sabbath, does it not follow that
slaughtering, which is prohibited as a principal act of labor, should *a
fortiori* not supersede the Sabbath?" R. Eliezer then said to him:
"Aqiba! wouldst thou then annul what is written in the Scriptures
\[Numb. ix. 3\]: 'Toward evening shall ye prepare it, *at its appointed
season*,' (and which signifies) whether it be a week or a Sabbath day?"
Rejoined R. Aqiba: "Rabbi, pray adduce a text that prescribes a
particular (and appointed) time for the performance of these acts
(mentioned in the first part of this Mishna), even as there is one
concerning the slaughtering of the paschal sacrifice." The following
rule therefore did R. Aqiba lay down: Every act necessary for the
paschal sacrifice, which can be accomplished previous to the advent of
the Sabbath, does not supersede the due observance of the Sabbath; but
as the slaughtering of the paschal lamb cannot be done before the
Sabbath, it supersedes the Sabbath.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: The Halakha in the Mishna was not known to
the children of Bathyra; for it once happened that the 14th (of Nissan)
occurred on a Sabbath, and they did not know whether the Passover
sacrifices superseded the due observance of the Sabbath or not. They
therefore commenced to look around for a man who knew the Halakha, and
they were told that there was a man who had recently come from Babylon,
called Hillel of Babylon, and who had learned under the two greatest men
of that generation, namely, Shemaiah

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

and Abtalion; he would probably be able to aid them in their dilemma.
They sent for him and asked him: "Dost thou know whether the
Passover-sacrifice supersedes the Sabbath?" and he answered: "Have we
only one Passover-sacrifice that supersedes the Sabbath? are there not
over two hundred sacrifices that supersede the Sabbath?" (*i.e.*, the
continual daily offerings which are offered twice on the Sabbath and the
additional two sacrifices which are brought especially on the Sabbath).
But they insisted upon his basing his assertion upon some actual text,
and he said: "As it is written concerning the continual daily sacrifice
\[Numb. xxviii. 2\]: 'My offering, etc., shall ye observe to offer unto
me in its due season,' and the same term, 'at its appointed season,' is
mentioned in connection with the Passover-sacrifice \[Numb. ix. 2\],
therefore both may supersede the Sabbath. Aside from this analogous
deduction, there is also an *a fortiori* conclusion; for if on account
of the continual daily sacrifice, for the neglect of which the penalty
of Kareth is *not* incurred, the Sabbath may be violated, so much the
more is this allowed on account of the Passover-sacrifice, for the
omission of which the penalty of Kareth *is* incurred." When they heard
this, they immediately placed him at their head and made him a prince.
Thereupon he sat all day and preached upon the Halakhoth of the
Passover.

Subsequently Hillel began to reproach them, and said: "What induced you
to set me up as a prince among you? Only your own idleness in not taking
advantage of the learning of the two great men of your generation,
Shemaiah and Abtalion."

The following question was propounded to Hillel: "What is the law if a
man had forgotten to bring the slaughtering knife on the day preceding
the Sabbath?" He answered: "I have heard the Halakha but have forgotten
it. Leave this, however, to the Israelites themselves, for though they
are not prophets they are descendants of prophets, and they will know
what to do." On the morrow he noticed that those who brought sheep as a
sacrifice had the knife thrust in the wool of the sheep and those that
brought goats as a sacrifice had the knife stuck between the horns,
whereupon he remembered the Halakha covering the case and exclaimed:
"Thus is the tradition which I have received from my masters Shemaiah
and Abtalion."

The Master said: It is written, "in its due season," etc. Whence is it
adduced, however, that the continual daily sacrifice

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

supersedes the due observance of the Sabbath? From the passage "in its
due season"? Is not the same passage to be found in connection with the
paschal offering? Why, then, was the question put concerning the latter,
while concerning the former it seemed to be an established fact that the
Sabbath might be violated on its account? Certainly such is the case!
For it is explicitly stated \[Numb. xxviii. 10\]: "This is the
burnt-offering of the Sabbath on every Sabbath, *besides* the continual
burnt-offering and its drink-offerings."

The Master said: "On the morrow those who brought a sheep as their
sacrifice had the knife thrust in the wool." Would this not constitute
the performance of work with a consecrated thing (which is prohibited)?
This is in accordance with the custom of Hillel, concerning whom it is
said, that in his time not a single transgression was committed with the
consecrated animals, because he instituted the custom that they be
brought to the court of the Temple in a non-consecrated state, and
consecrated in the court of the Temple.

How can the Passover-sacrifice, however, be brought as an ordinary
animal in the Temple on the Sabbath? It is not allowed to consecrate
things on the Sabbath? This applies only to ordinary articles which were
to be consecrated, but not to such as it was a duty to consecrate; for
R. Johanan said, that Passover sacrifices may be consecrated on a
Sabbath and a festival sacrifice on a festival.

When bringing the sheep with the knife in its wool, did not that
constitute an indirect performance of work on the Sabbath, which,
although it was not prohibited by biblical law, was nevertheless
prohibited by rabbinical law? This was the question propounded to
Hillel, whether an act prohibited only by rabbinical law but not by
biblical might be performed on the Sabbath in order to discharge a
religious duty, and in answer to which he said that he had forgotten the
Halakha, but which he afterwards remembered and decided in the
affirmative.

Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: "He who is arrogant, if he be one
of the sages his wisdom leaveth him, and if he be a prophet his power of
prophecy forsaketh him. If he be a sage his wisdom leaveth him, is aptly
illustrated by the case of Hillel, who, as soon as he reproached the
people and vaunted his own greatness, when asked concerning a certain
Halakha admitted that he had forgotten it; and if he be a prophet his
power of prophecy forsaketh him, may be inferred from the case

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

of Deborah the prophetess, as it is written \[Judges v. 7\]: 'Desolate
were the open towns in Israel, they were desolate until that I arose,
Deborah, that I arose a mother in Israel,' while further on it is
written \[ibid. 12\]: 'Awake, awake, Deborah,' whence the conclusion
that her power left her, for otherwise the admonition to awake would be
unnecessary."

Resh Lakish said: A man who becomes angry, if he be a sage his wisdom
leaveth him, and if he be a prophet his power of prophecy forsaketh him.
The first instance is illustrated by the case of Moses, as it is written
\[Numb. xxxi. 14\]: "And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host,"
and further it says \[ibid. 21\]: "And Elazar the priest said unto the
men of the army who had gone to the battle, This is the ordinance of the
law which the Lord hath commanded Moses," whence the inference that
Elazar said this because Moses must have forgotten it. The second
instance is illustrated by the case of Elisha the prophet, as it is
written \[II Kings iii. 14\]: "And Elisha said, As the Lord of hosts
liveth, before whom I have stood, surely, were it not that I regard the
presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee,
nor see thee," while in the following passage it is said: "But now bring
me a musician. And it came to pass, when the musician played, that the
inspiration of the Lord came upon him," whence the conclusion that his
power forsook him and could be restored only by the aid of a musician.
R. Mani bar Patish said: If a man becomes angry, even if greatness had
been predestined for him, it is not granted him, and whence do I adduce
this? From the case of Eliab, as it is written \[I Samuel xvii. 28\]:
"And Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why didst
thou come down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in
the wilderness? I know thy presumption, and the wickedness of thy heart;
for in order to see the battle art thou come down," and it is also
written, that when Samuel went to anoint one of the sons of Jesse as a
king, and the other sons of Jesse were brought before him, he said:
"This one also hath the Lord not chosen" \[ibid. xvi. 8, 9\], while
concerning Eliab it is written \[ibid. 7\]: "But the Lord said unto
Samuel, Regard not his appearance, nor the height of his stature;
because I have rejected him," whence the conclusion that the Lord had
previously intended to have him anointed, but on account of Eliab's
anger He had subsequently rejected him.

From what we have learned so far, we know that the continual

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

daily offering and the Passover-sacrifice supersede the Sabbath, but
whence do we know that they also supersede the law of uncleanness? I
will tell you! In the same manner as we have deduced (by analogy) from
the continual daily offering the law of the Passover-sacrifice, so we
deduce from the Passover-sacrifice, which supersedes uncleanness, that
the continual daily sacrifice also supersedes uncleanness. Whence do we
know that the Passover-sacrifice itself supersedes the law of
uncleanness? Said R. Johanan: "Because it is written \[Numbers ix. 10\]:
'If any man whatever should be unclean by reason of a dead body,' etc.,
we infer from the term, 'any man whatever,' that only individuals must
defer the Passover-sacrifice until the second Passover; but if there is
a congregation they should prepare the paschal lamb, notwithstanding the
fact that they are unclean."

"*The washing of its entrails*." What is meant by washing the entrails?
Said R. Huna: "The entrails are pricked with a knife and then washed,"
and R. Hyya bar Rabh says: "They are merely pressed with a knife, and in
that manner the filth is removed."

It is written \[Isaiah v. 17\]: "Then shall the sheep feed according to
their wont, and the ruins of the fat ones shall sojourners eat." Said
Menasseh bar Jeremiah in the name of Rabh: The term "according to their
wont" being expressed by (the Hebrew word) *Kedabram*, and "*Debur*"
meaning "speaking," the expression *Kedabram* should be explained to
mean, "as they were spoken of." The word "sheep" refers to the
Israelites, and thus the passage signifies: "Then shall the Israelites
feed as they were spoken of." What was spoken of concerning them? Said
Abayi: "By the latter part of that verse and by the 'sojourners' are
meant the righteous who at that time were strangers, but in the future
they would be the inhabitants and feed on the ruins of the fat ones."
Said Rabha to him: This interpretation would be correct if there were
not the word "and" between the two passages, but that word gives the
latter passage a distinct significance; therefore, said he, the passage
will have the meaning given it by R. Hananel in the name of Rabh, who
said that in the future the righteous would have the power to arouse the
dead; because in this passage quoted it is said: "Then shall the sheep
feed according to their wont," and in another passage \[Micah vii.
14\]." Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old." By
Bashan is meant Elisha,

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the man of Bashan, as it is written \[I Chronicles v. 12\]: "Yanai and
Shaphat in Bashan," and \[II Kings iii. ii\]. "Elisha the son of
Shaphat" (hence Elisha, being the son of Shaphat, was from Bashan). By
Gilead is meant Elijah, as it is written \[I Kings xvii. 1\]: "Elijah
the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead" (and both of these
prophets Elijah and Elisha roused the dead). Thus the original passage
quoted \[Isaiah v. 17\] should be interpreted as follows: As in the days
of old Elijah and Elisha aroused the dead, so will in the future other
righteous men also have that power. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)

R. Samuel ben Na'hmeni in the name of R. Jonathan deduces the above
conclusion from the passage \[Zechariah viii. 4\]: "Thus hath said the
Lord of Hosts, Again shall there sit old men and women in the streets of
Jerusalem, and every one with staff in hand because of their multitude
of years"; and as it is written \[II Kings iv. 29\]: "Lay my staff upon
the face of the lad," the inference that the righteous will have the
power to arouse the dead is deduced from the analogy of the two
passages, the latter of which deals with the arousing of the dead.

"*The burning of the fat with incense*." We have learned in a Boraitha:
R. Simeon said: "Come and observe how pleasing the fulfilment of a
religious duty at its proper time was to them! We well know that the
burning of the fat and of certain pieces could be accomplished at any
time during the night; still they did not postpone it, but accomplished
it immediately."

"*To carry and bring it beyond the sabbatical legal limits*." (This
passage of the Mishna is explained in Tract Erubin, pages 245-246.)

"*For, said R. Eliezer, if slaughtering an animal*," etc. (What could R.
Jehoshua reply to this?) R. Jehoshua holds to his individual theory,
that the enjoyment of a festival by feasting and drinking is also a
religious duty (as explained in a Boraitha on Tract Betza). <span
id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md)

"*R. Aqiba then answered: The act of sprinkling*," etc. We have learned
in a Boraitha: R. Eliezer said to him: "Aqiba, thou hast refuted my
assertion with (the instance of) slaughtering; by slaughter shalt thou
suffer death!" Said R. Aqiba: "Rabbi, the time when thou judgest me, do
not deny what

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

thou thyself taughtest me! The tradition I quote comes from thee, that
sprinkling (an unclean person) is a rabbinical law and does not
supersede the due observance of the Sabbath."

If R. Eliezer actually taught R. Aqiba to this effect, why was he angry
with him? R. Eliezer had forgotten that teaching, and R. Aqiba reminded
him through his answer. Why did R. Aqiba not say at the time that he had
learned it from R. Eliezer? Because it is not seemly that a teacher be
told that he had forgotten.

Why should sprinkling not supersede the due observance of the Sabbath;
it is only a matter of holding a little water, and if necessary to
enable a man to partake of the paschal lamb, why should it not be
permitted on the Sabbath? Said Rabha: "The prohibition is merely a
precautionary measure, lest a man carry the water four ells in public
ground."

According to R. Eliezer, however, who maintains (in Tract Sabbath) that
the preparation for the accomplishment of a religious duty supersedes
the Sabbath, what matters it if the water was carried four ells in
public ground? I will tell you! R. Eliezer in that instance refers to a
religious duty which the man is already obliged to discharge, but in
this case the man, being still unclean, is not subject to the
performance of that duty, but by being sprinkled is merely rendered so,
and in such a case R. Eliezer does not apply his decision.

Rabha said: "According to the opinion of R. Eliezer just quoted, it is
permitted to heat water on Sabbath for a child who is *healthy*, in
order to strengthen it, and then circumcise it, because the child is
already subject to the performance of that duty; but if the child is
*not* well, heating water is not permitted, because in such a condition
the child is not subject to that duty." Replied Rabha: "If the child is
healthy, what need is there of heating water for it? Therefore," said
he, "with respect to circumcision, all children are considered as being
unwell until they are bathed, and are not subject to the duty of
circumcision prior to being bathed. Hence no water should be heated for
a child who is healthy, according to R. Eliezer, on the Sabbath, but on
the preceding day."

"*The following. rule therefore did R. Aqiba lay down*," etc. Said R.
Jehudah in the name of Rabh: "The Halakha prevails according to R.
Aqiba." Concerning circumcision R. Aqiba laid down the same rule, and R.
Jehudah also said in the name of Rabh, that the Halakha prevails
according to R. Aqiba. (At

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

the proper place in Tract Sabbath the reason why R. Aqiba made the rule
in both instances is explained, page 295.)

MISHNA: Under what circumstances is it allowed to bring a festal
offering in addition to the paschal sacrifice? When the paschal
sacrifice is sacrificed on a week-day, when those offering it are
legally (ritually) clean, and if it is insufficient for the number
appointed to partake thereof. But if it is sacrificed on a Sabbath, if
it is sufficient for those appointed to eat it, or when those are
legally unclean, no festal offering may be brought in addition to the
paschal sacrifice. The festal offering may be brought of the flock, of
cattle, lambs or goats, and may be either male or female (animals); the
time during which it is a duty to consume it is two days and a night.

GEMARA: The Tana who holds that a festal offering must not be brought on
the Sabbath is also the same who maintains that bringing or carrying the
paschal sacrifice from beyond the sabbatical legal limits does not
supersede the due observance of the Sabbath. Thus the statement in our
Mishna is merely supplementary to that of the previous Mishna, and
signifies that a festal offering may be brought only on a week-day, but
it does not supersede the Sabbath.

For what purpose is a festal offering brought generally in addition to
the paschal sacrifice? As we have learned in the following Boraitha:
"The festal offering which is brought in addition to the paschal
offering should be eaten prior to the latter, in order that the paschal
offering may be the last to satiate the appetite of those who partake
thereof."

"*Two days and a night*," etc. Our Mishna is not in accordance with the
opinion of Ben Thamah. We have learned in a Boraitha: Ben Thamah said:
"The festal offering brought in addition to the paschal sacrifice is in
all respects equal to the paschal sacrifice itself, and should be eaten
only in the course of one day and night. The festal offering, however,
brought on the 15th (the festival proper) should be consumed during the
course of *two* days and one night. The festal offering brought on the
14th with the paschal sacrifice only fulfils the duty of enjoying the
festival, but the injunction not to come empty-handed into the Temple is
not satisfied thereby. The festal offering brought in addition to the
paschal sacrifice must be brought of sheep only, but not of oxen; it
must be male and not a female, and not over one year old. It should be
consumed in the course of one day and night, and must not be eaten

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

except it be roasted, and not by any except those appointed to eat the
paschal sacrifice."

What is Ben Thamah's reason for this statement? He bases it upon the
teaching of Rabh to Hyya the son of Rabh, as follows: It is written
\[Exod. xxxiv. 25\]: "Neither shall be left unto morning the sacrifice
of the feast of the Passover." From the fact that the passage states
"the feast of the Passover," while it could have merely said "the
Passover," it must be assumed that the festal offering brought in
addition to the paschal sacrifice is meant, and the verse distinctly
states that it must not be left until morning.

We have learned in a Boraitha: Jehudah ben Durthai and his son Durthai
severed themselves from the company of the other sages and settled in
the South (on account of the decree of the sages to the effect that the
festal offering does not supersede the Sabbath). He said to them: "When
Elijah will come and ask you why ye did not offer a festal offering on
the Sabbath, what will ye answer?" and, moreover, he said: "I am
astonished at the two great men of this generation, Shemaiah and
Abtalion, who were so wise and such excellent preachers, that they did
not teach in Israel that the festal offering supersedes the due
observance of the Sabbath."

Said Rabh: What was the basis of Ben Durthai's statement? It is written
\[Deut. xvi. 2\]: "And thou shalt sacrifice the Passover-offering unto
the Lord thy God, of sheep and oxen," and this surely cannot refer to
the paschal sacrifice alone, which must be brought only of sheep and
goats. Hence by "sheep" is meant the paschal sacrifice and by "oxen" the
festal offering, and as it says "thou shalt sacrifice," it certainly
refers to the Sabbath also. Said R. Ashi: Shall we rack our brains to
find justifications for men who had severed themselves from the company
of our sages? Therefore say, rather, that the passage just quoted refers
to the statement of R. Na'hman, who said in the name of Rabba bar
Abbahu: Whence do we know that such sheep as had been left over from
those which had been separated as paschal sacrifices may be brought as
peace-offerings? Because it is written: "Thou shalt sacrifice the
Passover-offering unto the Lord thy God, of sheep and oxen," and this
surely cannot refer to the paschal sacrifice alone, which must be
brought only of sheep or goats. Hence we must say that whatever remains
over from the paschal sacrifice may be used for such sacrifices as can
be brought either from sheep or oxen.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Why does the festal offering in reality not supersede the Sabbath,
according to the decree of the sages? Is it not a congregational
sacrifice, and as such privileged to supersede the observance of the
Sabbath? Said R. Ilayi in the name of R. Jehudah ben Saphra: It is
written \[Levit. xxiii. 41\]: "And ye shall keep it as a feast unto the
Lord seven days in the year." The Feast of Tabernacles (to which this
passage refers) is, however, to be observed eight days? Hence we must
assume that the festal offering does not supersede the observance of the
Sabbath, and (leaving out the Sabbath in consequence) there are only
seven days left.

When Rabhin came from Palestine he said: "I once said in the presence of
my masters that the Feast of Tabernacles may sometimes last only six
days. If, *f.i.*, the first day occurs on Sabbath, the last day would
also be Sabbath, and as it is not allowed to bring festive offerings on
those days, the festival lasts only six days." <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

Said Abayi: "This statement could not have been made by Rabhin (R.
Abhin), but rather by Abhin Thekla (Thekla means one who is childless or
has lost his children), because it cannot stand; for eight feast days
can never occur in succession, as one must be a Sabbath; seven feast
days are the rule, whereas it seldom happens that there should be only
six." <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65.md)

Ula said in the name of R. Elazar: A peace-offering brought on the eve
of Passover cannot serve for the fulfilment of the duty of rejoicing on
the festival nor for the festal offering to be brought with the paschal
sacrifice. The first duty is not discharged, because it is written
\[Deut. xxvii. 7\]: "And thou shalt slay peace-offerings, and eat them
there, and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God." Hence the
peace-offering must be slain when the time for rejoicing had already
arrived, *i.e.*, on the festival; but on the *eve* of Passover it had
not yet arrived. The second duty is not acquitted, because a festive
offering must be brought of ordinary animals and not of consecrated,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

and an animal brought as a peace-offering is already consecrated.

When Rabhin came from Palestine, he said, however, in the name of R.
Elazar: "A peace-offering brought on the eve of Passover fulfils the
duty of rejoicing on the festival, as it need not be brought at the time
when rejoicing is already a duty but may be brought previously; but it
does *not* fulfil the duty of bringing the festal offering, because it
is consecrated, and the festal offering must be brought of
non-consecrated (ordinary) animals."

An objection was made: It is written \[Deut. xvi. 15\]: "And thou shalt
only rejoice," and this is an additional behest to rejoice also on the
night of the last day of the festival. Perhaps this additional behest
refers to the first night? The word "only" in the passage makes the
distinction, and confirms the view that it means the last night. Hence
we must assume that on the first night rejoicing is not possible,
because there was nothing to rejoice with; *i.e.*, the peace-offering
was not yet permitted to be slaughtered and the flesh (with which it is
necessary to celebrate the festival) could not yet be bad. (Is this not
contradictory to Rabhin's decree?)

Nay; the reason the first night is not included in the additional behest
is as is taught in the following Boraitha: Why is the last night of the
festival included in the additional behest and the first night excluded?
The last night was preceded by rejoicing and is for that reason
included, while the first night was preceded by ordinary days and is for
that reason excluded.

R. Kahana said: "Whence do we know that the pieces of the festal
offering which was sacrificed on the 15th day (*i.e.*, the festival
proper) are invalid if allowed to remain until morning? Because it is
written \[Exod. xxiii. 18\]: 'Neither shall the fat of my festive
sacrifice remain until morning,' and immediately following this it is
written: 'The first,' etc., whence we adduce that the morning must be
the first and not the second morning."

R. Joseph opposed this: "So it is only because the subsequent verse
commences with ' the first' that the pieces of the festal offering may
remain only until the first morning, but if the verse did not commence
with 'the first' it would be allowed to leave them even until the second
morning? Can it be that the pieces of a sacrifice the flesh of which
becomes useless in the

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

night of the day it was offered may remain even until the second
morning?" Rejoined Abayi: "Why not? Do we not find in the case of the
paschal offering, according to the opinion of R. Elazar ben Azariah,
that while the flesh thereof becomes invalid in the middle of the night,
the pieces to be offered up become invalid only in the morning?"

Rabha answered: "R. Joseph means to ask, 'Where do we find an instance
of where the Tana dispenses with a passage referring to the flesh,
whereas R. Kahana brings a passage regarding the pieces of the
sacrifice.'"

MISHNA: If a person brought a paschal sacrifice on the Sabbath, not for
its proper purpose, he is obliged to bring a sin-offering in expiation.
If he slaughtered other sacrifices to serve as a paschal offering, if
they were such that they could not be suitable for the paschal
sacrifice, he is guilty; but if they were suitable for that purpose, R.
Eliezer declares him culpable, but R. Jehoshua declares him free. For
thus argues R. Eliezer: If a person is held to be culpable for changing
the name (denomination) of the paschal sacrifice, which he is allowed to
slaughter on Sabbath, does it not follow that if he brought sacrifices
which were in themselves prohibited to be brought on the Sabbath, under
another denomination, that he must in so much greater a degree be
considered culpable? To this R. Jehoshua replied: "Nay; we cannot apply
the decree concerning a sacrifice which was changed to what was
prohibited to offer on the Sabbath, to other sacrifices which had been
changed to that which was permitted to be brought on the Sabbath." R.
Eliezer replied: "The offerings brought for the whole congregation of
Israel shall prove my assertion, for it is lawful to offer them on the
Sabbath for their proper purpose; yet whoever brings other sacrifices
under their denomination is held to be guilty." Then R. Jehoshua
rejoined: "Nay; we cannot apply the decree concerning the offerings of
the whole congregation, which have a determinate number, to the paschal
sacrifices, which have no determinate number." R. Meir said: One who
also offers on the Sabbath other offerings under the denomination of
those of the congregation is absolved.

If a. person slaughtered the paschal sacrifice for those who will not
partake thereof, or for persons who are not appointed to partake
thereof, and for uncircumcised and unclean persons, he is culpable; but
if he had slaughtered it for those who will and also for those who will
not partake thereof, for those appointed,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

to eat it and for those who are not, for circumcised as well as for
uncircumcised, or for clean and also for unclean persons, he is
absolved.

If one slaughtered (the paschal lamb) and a blemish was found thereon,
he is culpable; but if, after being slaughtered, it was found to be
Trephah (prohibited to be eaten) on account of inward blemishes, he is
not culpable. If after slaughtering (the lamb) the man was advised that
the participants had withdrawn themselves from it, or had died, or
become defiled, he is absolved, because when he slaughtered it, it was
under lawful circumstances.

GEMARA: How is the case to be considered concerning the man who brought
a paschal sacrifice not for its proper purpose? Shall we assume that he
made a mistake (and thought that he was slaughtering another sacrifice),
and still he is held culpable? Whence the inference that the
denomination of a thing may also be annulled through error; but this is
not so. Therefore it must be assumed that there was no error, but that
the man intentionally sacrificed the paschal offering for another
purpose (*f.i.*, for a peace-offering); if so, how will the latter
clause, to the effect that if he slaughtered other sacrifices to serve
for a paschal offering and they were suitable for a paschal offering,
R.; Jehoshua declares him free, be consistent; for if he did so
intentionally, what difference does it make whether the sacrifices were
suitable or not, the fact that he sacrificed them on the Sabbath
remains--how then could R. Jehoshua declare him free? Hence it must be
assumed that this latter clause refers to one who did so through error,
and in such an event the first clause of the Mishna will treat of an
intentional case while the next clause will refer to an act committed
through error? Said R. Abin: "Such is indeed the case."

R. Itz'hak bar Joseph found R. Abbahu standing amongst a crowd of men in
a room and asked him how this Mishna should be understood, and he
answered: "The first clause deals with an intentional case and the next
clause with an erroneous com mission of an act." R. Itz'hak learned this
from R. Abbahu! forty times, and he then retained it forever."

An objection was made, based upon the Mishna where R. Eliezer said to R.
Jehoshua: "If a person is held to be culpable for changing the
denomination of the paschal sacrifice," etc. If, however, the first
clause treats of an intentional case and the next clause of a case of
error, would not R. Eliezer's argument

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

be sufficiently answered by R. Jehoshua simply claiming that the man is
free because he committed the deed through error? R. Jehoshua meant to
state: According to my opinion, thy argument does not hold good, from
the very fact that I hold a man to be free if he committed the deed by
mistake; but even according to thy opinion, that a man is also culpable
when committing an act through error, thy argument is not effective, for
in the first instance the sacrifice was changed to an offering which is
prohibited to be brought on Sabbath, while in the second instance the
sacrifice was changed to one which might be brought on Sabbath.

R. Eliezer replied: "The offerings brought for the whole congregation of
Israel shall prove my assertion, for it is lawful to offer them on the
Sabbath for their proper purpose; yet whoever brings other sacrifices
under their denomination is held to be guilty." Then R. Jehoshua
rejoined: "We cannot apply the decree concerning the offerings of the
whole congregation, which have a determinate number, to the paschal
sacrifices, which have no determinate number." Shall we then assume,
that where there is a determinate number R. Jehoshua holds a man to be
culpable; have we not learned in the case of where two children were to
be circumcised, one on the eve of Sabbath and the other on the Sabbath,
and by mistake the father had the one to be circumcised on the eve of
Sabbath circumcised on the Sabbath, R. Jehoshua declared him free,
although there was just *one* (*i.e.*, a determinate number) to be
circumcised on Sabbath? Said R. Ami: "The case of the two children to be
circumcised was as follows: One of them was to be circumcised on the
Sabbath and the other on the eve of Sabbath. When the Sabbath had
arrived neither one was yet circumcised, and the father by mistake had
the one who was to have been circumcised on the preceding day
circumcised on the Sabbath. In doing this he was confused in the
performance of a religious duty, however, and for that reason R.
Jehoshua declares him free, while in the case of the offerings for the
congregation the actual offerings to be brought had already been
sacrificed and the man who brought other offerings under their
denomination did so when the religious duty had already been fulfilled,
and for that reason he is held to be culpable."

What about R. Meir? Does he declare a man free who had offered other
sacrifices under the denomination of those of the congregation, even if
the actual congregational offerings had

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

already been sacrificed? From R. Meir's explanation <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66) (Sabbath, page 306.md), according to the
teaching of R. Hyya of the city of Abel Arab, however, of the dispute
between R. Eliezer and R. Jehoshua, do we not see that such is not the
case? Said the disciples of R. Janai: In the case of the circumcision R.
Meir means to state that the child to be circumcised on the Sabbath had
already been circumcised on the eve of Sabbath, and thus no child was
left to make it obligatory to violate the Sabbath on its account, hence
R. Jehoshua declares the man culpable; but in this case, where the
Sabbath would be violated for a congregational sacrifice, R. Meir holds
that any other sacrifices brought under that denomination are brought
with the intention of fulfilling a religious duty, and for that reason
they do not make a man culpable.

Said R. Ashi to R. Kahana: "Why should this latter case differ from the
former; if a Sabbath may be violated for other congregational
sacrifices, it may surely be violated also for other children who are to
be circumcised on that day?" R. Kahana replied: "In that particular
instance the Sabbath could not be violated by the father of the
children, because he had no child for whom this would have been
necessary, while the instance of the congregational sacrifice embodies a
multitude of men and applies to all alike."

"*If a person slaughtered the paschal lamb for those who will not
partake thereof*," etc. Is this not self-evident? We well know that if a
man slaughtered on an ordinary Passover-day a sacrifice for those who
will not partake thereof the sacrifice is invalid; surely, then, if he
did so on a Sabbath which was also Passover, he is culpable! Because the
latter clause, concerning one who slaughters a sacrifice for those who
will and those who will not partake thereof, teaches that the man is
*not* culpable, it also cites the instance of where he *is* culpable. Is
this latter case not self-evident? If the sacrifice was offered on an
ordinary Passover-day under the same circumstances, we know that it is
valid; surely, then, a man is not culpable if he offers it on Sabbath!
Hence we must assume that because the Mishna commences with an instance
of where the sacrifice was brought not for its proper purpose, it also
mentions the case of where it was brought for those who will not partake
of it.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

For what purpose was the original clause in the Mishna cited? In order
to quote the dispute between R. Eliezer and R. Jehoshua.

"*If after slaughtering the man was advised that the participants had
withdrawn*," etc. R. Huna said in. the name of Rabh: "A
trespass-offering which became ownerless (when it must be allowed to
feed until it receive a blemish) and was slaughtered without its being
stated for what purpose, is valid as a burnt- offering." Thus we see
that it is not absolutely necessary to annul its original denomination
in order to make it valid for another, but it may be offered up without
comment.--Why, then, should it be necessary to allow it to feed until it
receives a blemish, would it not be valid if, for instance, the owner
had offered up something in its place and immediately offered it up
without comment? This is merely a precautionary measure, to prevent a
man from offering up a trespass-offering which was not yet substituted
by another offering.

R. Hisda objected to R. Huna, and based his objection upon our Mishna,
which says: If after slaughtering (the lamb) the man was advised that
the participants had withdrawn themselves from it, he is absolved,
because when he slaughtered it, it was under lawful circumstances; and a
Boraitha teaches, that if a case like this happen on an ordinary
Passover-day and not on a Sabbath, the sacrifice must be immediately
burned. This would be perfectly proper if the original denomination of
the sacrifice had to be plainly annulled, because, as long as its
denomination is not annulled, a paschal offering remains what it is, and
if it have no owner it must be immediately burned, because it becomes of
itself invalid; but if the denomination need not be plainly annulled and
if sacrificed without comment it is of itself changed into a
peace-offering, then it becomes invalid, not because the invalidity is
contained in itself, but because it was offered after the continual
daily offering (of the evening), and we well know that in such an event
the offering must not immediately be burned, but must be left until
morning and then burned. Why, then, does the Boraitha decree that it
must be immediately burned?

R. Joseph the son of R. Sala the Pious explained before R. Papa that the
Boraitha is in accord with the opinion of Joseph ben Hunai, as we have
learned in a Mishna: Joseph ben Hunai said: All sacrifices offered under
the denomination of a paschal offering or a sin-offering are invalid.
Whence we see that the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

invalidity is contained in itself and does not arise on account of other
circumstances. For that reason the Boraitha decrees that it must be
immediately burned. So far as the commission of an act through error is
concerned, Joseph ben Hunai holds with R. Jehoshua, and absolves the
culprit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[125:1](psc10.htm#fr_59.md) Such as cooking,
lighting a fire, splitting wood, etc.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[125:2](psc10.htm#fr_60.md) Such as moving things
from one legal limit into another without the combination of an Erub.
(*Vide* Tract Betza.)

<span id="fn_61"></span>[126:1](psc10.htm#fr_61.md) Even if that day be the
last day on which an unclean person may be sprinkled, and occur on the
14th (of Nissan), when should he not be sprinkled, he would not be
allowed to partake of the paschal lamb.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[131:1](psc10.htm#fr_62.md) This lecture is
inserted because in the previous paragraphs sheep were dealt with in
connection with the Passover-sacrifice.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[131:2](psc10.htm#fr_63.md) The entire argument
concerning the enjoyment of a festival will be brought up at its proper
place in Tract Betza (Yom Tob).

<span id="fn_64"></span>[135:1](psc10.htm#fr_64.md) This statement of
Rabhin is virtually a refutation of R. Ilayi's inference that the Feast
of Tabernacles lasts only seven days, because the Sabbath, on which no
festive offering is brought, is not counted--by stating that at times
the Feast could last only six days.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[135:2](psc10.htm#fr_65.md) The original text only
reads "Could Abhin Thekla have said this?" In the commentary of Solomon
Lurie, entitled "Yam shel Shlomo," it is stated, and rightly so, that
Abayi would not have spoken so disrespectfully of Rabhin, who lived
generations before him and was a great man, and hence the explanation
rendered by us is given.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[140:1](psc10.htm#fr_66.md) In the Boraitha of R.
Meir's explanation, Sabbath, 30, last paragraph before the Mishna, the
words "taught R. Hyya" are missing, Here, however, it says, "R. Hyya of
Abel Arab," which in the original of Sabbath is not mentioned at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Roasting the Paschal Lamb; If the Paschal Lamb
Becomes Defiled; Parts of Lamb Eaten](psc11.md)
