[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psc14)  [Next](psc16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index.md)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# APPENDIX A.

(EXPLANATORY OF THE FIRST MISHNA--PAGE [1](psc05.htm#page_1)..md)

THIS Mishna we have explained in a different manner from that employed
by the Amoraim, in our monthly periodical *Barqai* (in the note on p.
17); and as this explanation has been approved by many eminent scholars,
we translate it here for the English public. The explanation quoted was
in reply to the attempt of the learned Mr. Buhock of Cherson to
interpret this Mishna, in an article printed in the same publication.

After a short preface reviewing the statement of Buhock, the note in
question reads:

But before we endeavor to explain this Mishna according to its literal
meaning, we will preface that on two points we cannot agree with the
learned writer of this article, while on a third we can do so only
partially:

\(1\) That the word "Or," which the Tanaim have used in many Mishnas and
Boraithas, signifies "twilight," when there is still some light
lingering. Aside from the fact that reason does not admit of this
interpretation, we have against it R. Eliezer b. Jacob, who fixes the
time from "Or" as that when work is prohibited, and that is only dawn,
or sunrise, as the sages of the Gemara also admit; and we must say that
he used in his decision a word the meaning of which was known to the
whole world, as his colleague designates the "time after sunrise" by a
term so well known that it is not subject to doubts. Then, as we see
that all the sages understood "Or" to mean daybreak, we need not go out
of our way to give to it another meaning. And inasmuch as we are aware
that the Tana desired to fix the time so that all should know it, why
should he, in such a case, have used

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

an obscure expression, the meaning of which would be subsequently a
matter of dispute?

\(2\) That when our Mishna used the expression "the Chometz," instead of
"Chometz," it refers to the Chometz mentioned in Scripture. But
concerning the Sukka, the Tana has not made it known beforehand that it
is obligatory to sit in a Sukka on certain days; and similarly of the
Lulab and the citron. And notwithstanding this, he begins, "A Sukka
which is high," etc., and not "*the* Sukka," doubtless resting upon the
presumption that the scriptural law is known. Therefore we must find
another leaven which was known at that time, distinct from the leaven of
the Bible, and which was searched for; for of biblical leaven this Tana
says further: "The place where *leaven* is not brought," not "*the*
leaven."

\(3\) Concerning Mr. Buhock's statement, that when the Tana speaks of
the usage in his time to search for leaven, he also fixed the time and
quoted the Halakha ordaining that it be accomplished by the light of a
candle, we can only agree with the first half of the statement, viz.,
that the Tana speaks of the usage. But we deny that it was his purpose
to fix the time and quote Halakhas in question; for in that case he
would also have specified the time *until* when the search should be
made, in the beginning of the Mishna, as he did in specifying the time
of reading Shema, of which he says in the very beginning, "from this
time to this time." And if we should say that he wished to fix the time
of search immediately after a man's coming from the field or from work,
so that the duty should not be forgotten, in that case he had also to
specify the time of ending it, similar to his treatment of Shema, which
was also fixed when one comes from the field, in order that it should
not be forgotten, as it is said in Berachoth: "That he should not say,
'I will eat first, will drink first,' etc., and is then found sleeping
the whole night." Nevertheless, they fixed times, one till the end of
the first watch, one till midnight, and one till dawn, in the very same
place where the time of the beginning is specified. But here, at the end
of the Mishna even, he does not fix any time for stopping, as will be
explained further on. Therefore we must seek another manner of
explaining this Mishna, and in the same connection express our opinion
about all the Mishnayoth which begin with diverse Halakhas before
stating the source and obligatoriness of these Halakhas. We will proceed
to do this after one other prefatory remark, viz., that our sages have
long ago permitted us to

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

interpret the Mishna in a manner different from the sages of the Gemara;
that is to say, not to be at variance with the Halakhas which are
decided in the Gemara, but only in the interpretation of the meaning of
the Mishna, which the Babylonians did not always understand, owing to
their remoteness in place and time. (See A. H. Weiss, Vol. III., p. 17,
etc., and "He'halutz," V., p. 33; and also Tosphath Yom Tob, Tract
Nazir, V., 5.) And sometimes even when they understood it, seeing that
it would not agree with the Halakha which was customary, or even with
the saying of a certain great Amora with whom they could not differ,
they strained the Mishna, discovered it in different readings, and made
strange comment, to make it correspond with the customary Halakha or the
opinion of the Amora. Therefore they made deductions and additions at
their pleasure. And now, without touching on the Halakhas concerning the
search of leaven, we will investigate the origin of this usage in the
times of the Mishna.

The custom was in the East in former days, as well as at the present
time, to eat fresh bread every day; and in every household bread was
baked daily (for bread of bakers was rare, and the populace scarcely
used it). And on the day before Passover, when the first meal, *i.e.*,
of leavened bread, had to be taken in the morning not later than the
fourth hour (*i.e.*, 10 A.M.), they baked their bread in good time,
before daybreak, and after this they searched for any leaven that might
have been left, gathered it to one place, and cleared the house of it;
and as dawn had not yet illuminated the house, they used a candle to
make search in all those places where they were liable to carry leaven.
The Tana of our Mishna, who everywhere used as a support the custom well
known in his time, without beginning to relate the *law* anew (of which
the best proof is the mention of the Lulab, as be begins the Halakha, "A
purloined Lulab is invalid," before he has stated that the palm-boughs
mentioned in the Bible are equivalent to the Lulab; and if he did not
make reference to the custom known to all in his time, be should have
declared what the palm-branches meant), stated, here also, this custom
as follows: "'Or' (at daybreak) on the fourteenth, search is made (by
the women) for the leaven (which they are at the time using), by
candle-light (that it may be transferred to other places before the sun
illuminates the house)." And he approves the custom by saying: "A place
where leaven is not carried does not require searching"; that is to say,
this custom is proof that

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

leaven need not be searched for in other places, and at other times.

"Beth Shammai say, 'also two rows (of barrels) ranging across the whole
cellar' (the women searched for leaven in, because they were accustomed
to go there with hands fresh from kneading leavened dough to fetch the
yeast obtained from the wine for baking); but Beth Hillel say, 'only the
upper row of the two outer rows' (they made search in, because only from
those rows did they fetch the yeast, but not from all barrels of the
cellar). (And) it is not apprehended that a weasel had transferred it
from one spot to another, and from one house to another; for if so, then
it will be feared, from court to court, etc. R. Jehudah says: Search was
made at daybreak on the 14th, and on the morning, and at the time of
clearing (*i.e.*, when the bread is baked, when it is eaten, and when it
is burned), and the sages say: If search has not been made at daybreak
on the 14th, it is made on the 14th (*i.e.*, in the morning); if not on
the 14th, it is done on the intermediate days; if not on these days, it
may be done after the festival (that is to say, the men are under no
particular obligation, and have no particular time prescribed for them,
to make search for the leaven, and it is not feared lest they forget,
for even if that occur, they lose nothing)."

This was the form of the Mishna which the arranger of the Mishnas had
before him, or had heard orally,, and he was not anxious to explain its
meaning, as in his time also the custom had not yet undergone any
change. But some copyist, who did not understand the relevancy of the
cellar to the leaven, added at the margin: "Why were the two rows of
barrels in a cellar mentioned? That is a place whither leaven is
carried." Later this marginal note was inserted into the text of the
Mishna. The sages of the Gemara, truly, were not satisfied with this
remark, and put the question: "Who spoke here of a cellar?" For they
thought that this Mishna stated the Halakha, and therefore were anxious
to ascertain the meaning of the word "Or." R. Huna explained it to mean
"Nog'hi" ("light," in Aramaic), *i.e.*, the beginning of the day; and R.
Jehudah "before daybreak," as in the language of his part of the country
it designated the time before daybreak, when it is yet night. The other
also reasoned, and said: "At the first glance, it seems 'Nog'hi' means
'light,'" etc.; and as it was perplexing to their minds why candle-light
was needed for the search, they sought for reasons in Scripture, and
used passages thereof in support off

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

their opinions, arguments from analogies of expression, etc.. etc.,
which did not enter the Tana's mind at all.

And it is manifest that in all the Boraithoth in which the word "Or" was
used, it means "dawn," which was the latest time for all duties to be
performed in the night. Even in the Boraitha in Yoma, stating: "'Or' on
the Day of Atonement the prayer should be so and so," etc., the word is
also used to designate the whole night till the break of day, during
which the prayer is yet called "prayer of the evening but that after
daybreak is called "morning prayer."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix B](psc16.md)
