[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psc13)  [Next](psc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

# CHAPTER X.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE MEAL ON THE EVE OF PASSOVER AND THE FOUR CUPS
OF WINE TO BE DRUNK WITH THE MEAL.

MISHNA: On the eve of any Passover it is not lawful for a person to eat
anything from the time of Min'hah (afternoon prayer) until after dusk.
Even the meanest in Israel shall not eat until they have arranged
themselves in proper order at ease round the able; nor shall a person
have less than four cups of wine, even if they must be given him from
the funds devoted to the charitable support of the very poor.

GEMARA: Does the law (in the first clause of the Mishna) apply only to
the eve of Passover? is it not unlawful to eat aught on the eve of the
Sabbath or any other festival from the time of Min'hah until after dark,
as we have learned in the following Boraitha: A person must not eat
aught on the eve of Sabbath or of a festival from the time of Min'hah
on, in order that the entry of the Sabbath or the festival may find him
in condition to relish a meal? Such is the decree of R. Jehudah; R.
Jose, however, said: "One may eat continually until it becomes dark."

Said R. Huna, "Our Mishna is even in accordance with the opinion of R.
Jose, who says that one may only eat continually, on the eve of Sabbath
or of any other festival until dark, but on the eve of Passover, when,
as soon as the night of the Passover commences, unleavened bread must be
eaten, he also admits that nothing should be eaten from the time of
Min'hah until dark."

We have learned in a Boraitha: If a meal was in progress on the eve of
Sabbath, and before it was finished the Sabbath was ushered in, the
table must be cleared off and then reset, the Sabbath benediction made,
and then the meal may be continued, in order to demonstrate that the
Sabbath had set in. Such is the decree of R. Jehudah; but R. Jose states
that this is not necessary.

"It once happened that R. Simeon ben Gamaliel, R. Jehudah,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

and R. Jose were sitting on the eve of Sabbath and partaking of a meal
in the city of Achu, and when the Sabbath was about to set in, R. Simeon
ben Gamaliel said to R. Jose the Great: "Wouldst thou desire that we
clear off the table, and act in conformity with the opinion of our
colleague, R. Jehudah?" Replied R. Jose: "Ordinarily thou wouldst favor
my decrees in preference to those of R. Jehudah, and now thou favorest,
in his presence, his decree in preference to mine. 'Will he even do
violence to the queen before me in the house?'" \[Esther vii. 8\].
Rejoined R. Simeon ben Gamaliel: "True! Let us rather not interrupt the
meal, for if the disciples should observe this, they might establish the
ordinance for future generations." It was said that they did not leave
their places until it was decided that the Halakha should prevail
according to R. Jose's opinion.

R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel: "The Halakha does not prevail
either according to R. Jehudah or R. Jose; for if a meal was in progress
on the eve of Sabbath, when Sabbath set in they should change the
table-cloth as a sign and then recite the Kiddush (Sabbath
benediction)." But this is not so! For did not R. Ta'hlipha bar Ab. Dimi
say in the name of Samuel, that in the same manner as a meal must be
interrupted on account of the Kiddush, so must it also be interrupted on
account of the Habdalah (the benediction recited at the close of the
Sabbath). Must we not assume that by interruption is meant clearing away
of the table entirely? Nay; by interruption is meant, that the
table-cloth should be changed.

It once happened that Rabba bar R. Huna came to the house of the
Exilarch, and a small table was set before him; so he covered the table
with a cloth and recited the Kiddush. We also learned in a Boraitha: "A
table must not be brought for each guest separately unless the Kiddush
had already been recited (by the head of the household); but if a table
had been set before him before the Kiddush had been recited, then the
guest should cover the table set before him with a cloth and himself
pronounce that benediction."

"Those that heard the Kiddush pronounced in the synagogue," said Rabh,
"need not recite it at their homes, but should merely pronounce the
customary benediction over wine"; but Samuel said: "They have not
acquitted themselves of the duty of reciting the Kiddush."

According to Rabh, then, why should a man recite the Kiddush

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

at home? In order to give the household an opportunity to hear it, and
according to Samuel, for what purpose should the Kiddush be recited in
the synagogue? In order to afford the guests who eat, drink, and sleep
in the synagogues an opportunity to hear it. Samuel thus holds to his
theory, that the duty of hearing the Kiddush recited can be acquitted
only in the place where the person takes his meals. We might suppose,
therefore, that Samuel's opinion refers only to different. houses;
*i.e.*, if a person hears the Kiddush recited in one house he should not
eat in another, but that it makes no difference as to rooms in one
house, whereupon R. Anan bar Ta'hlipha said to the schoolmen: "I was
several times in the presence of Samuel when he was in the attic of his
house, and I observed that he did not recite the Kiddush until he went
below."

R. Huna also opines, that the Kiddush must be recited only in the place
where the meal is taken; for it once happened that after R. Huna had
recited the Kiddush, the light went out in the room, and he ordered that
the vessels containing the food should be taken into the wedding-room of
his son Rabba, where the lights were still burning, and after again
reciting the Kiddush he sat down to his meal.

Rabba also holds that the Kiddush. must be recited only in the place
where the meal is taken; for Abayi said: "When I was at Master's house,
while he recited the Kiddush (prayer) he would say to the guests:
'Partake of something before ye go to your houses, for should ye come
home and find the lights gone out ye will not be able to recite the
Kiddush in your homes, and thus ye will not acquit yourselves of the
duty unless ye eat something where the Kiddush was recited.'"

R. Johanan, however, said: "One who heard the Kiddush in the synagogue
has not only discharged the duty of the Kiddush but need not even
pronounce a benediction over the wine which he might drink at home."

R. Johanan holds to his own theory; for R. Hanan bar Abayi said in the
name of R. Padath, quoting R. Johanan: "Whether the wine was changed or
whether the places were changed, it is not necessary that another
benediction be made."

An objection was made: "We have learned in a Boraitha, that if the
places were changed another benediction is necessary; but if the wine
was changed it is not!" The objection is not answered.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

R. Idi bar Abin sat in the presence of R. Hisda, and the latter said in
the name of R. Huna: "The teaching, that when places are changed another
benediction must be made, refers to a case of where one went from one
house to another; but if he only went from one room to another in the
same house, another benediction is not necessary." Said R. Idi to him:
"We have learned in a Boraitha, from the disciples of R. Hinaq, a
teaching identical with thine." \[Would then R. Huna say in his own name
that which is taught in a Boraitha? R. Huna had not heard of that
Boraitha.\]

R. Hisda sat, and said upon his own authority: "The teaching. that if
places were changed another benediction must be made, refers to such
objects as require a benediction only before consumption; but if the
objects were such as require also a benediction after consumption, even
if one went from one house to another, he need. not make another
benediction, because it is considered as a continuous meal." R.
Shesheth, however, said: "In either case another benediction is
necessary."

We have learned in a Boraitha in support of R. Hisda: "If a company was
sitting and drinking wine, then left their places and returned, they
need not make another benediction."

The rabbis taught: "If a company were sitting at a meal, and during the
course of the meal Sabbath had set in, a cup of wine is brought to one
of the company, who recites the Kiddush, and another one pronounces the
final benediction at the close of the meal over that cup, thus
interrupting the meal. Su h is the decree of R. Jehudah. R. Jose,
however, said: They may continue to eat until they finish, or until it
becomes dark, and then the first cup of wine brought is used for the
benediction at the conclusion of the meal. The next cup is then used for
the recital of the Kiddush."

Why are two cups of wine required? Cannot the two benedictions be
pronounced over the one cup? Said R. Huna in the. name of, R. Shesheth:
"Two benedictions must not be made over one cup." Why so? Said R.
Na'hman bar Itz'hak: "Religious duties are not to be bunched." Must this
indeed not be done? Have we not learned in a Boraitha, that when one
enters his house at the close of Sabbath, he pronounces a benediction
over wine, light, spices, and then the benediction of the 'Habdalah over
one cup, and if he has not another cup of wine in his house he may leave
that cup until after he has had his evening meal, and then recite the
benediction after the meal

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

over the same cup of wine? Where a man has not another cup of wine, it
is different.

If a festival follow a Sabbath, a man has doubtless more wine in his
house, and still Rabh says, that one must, over one cup of wine,
pronounce the benediction over wine, recite the Kiddush, pronounce the
benediction over light, and the Habdalah? Because Rabh mentions all
these benedictions but omits that of the season (which must be said at
the commencement of each festival), it must be presumed that he refers
to the seventh day of Passover as the festival (because on that day the
benediction of the season is not said), and at that time it is possible
that a man has only one cup of wine left.

How is this possible? On the first day of a festival, when a man surely
has more wine, still Abayi said, that over one cup the benediction of
wine, Kiddush, of the season, of light, and the Habdalah should be
pronounced, and Rabba said, of wine, Kiddush, light, Habdalah, and
finally of the season (and both agree that all this may be done over one
cup of wine); hence we must say, that all these benedictions, like
Kiddush, Habdalah, etc., are classed as one, because the duty of such
benedictions devolves upon a man as soon as the Sabbath draws to a
close, and hence may be made over one cup; but the benediction before
the meal, and that after, are two separate kinds of benedictions and
should not be said over one and the same cup of wine.

The statement previously quoted. "If a festival follow a Sabbath, Rabh
says, one must pronounce the benediction of wine, recite the Kiddush,
say the benediction of light and the Habdalah," is supplemented by
"Samuel says, he must pronounce the benediction of wine, light,
Habdalah, and then recite the Kiddush; Rabba says, of wine, Habdalah,
light, and then Kiddush; Levi says, Kiddush, light, wine, and Habdalah;
other sages say, Kiddush, wine, light, and Habdalah; Mar the son of
Rabhina says, light, Kiddush, wine, and Habdalah; and Martha says in the
name of R. Jehoshua, light, wine, Habdalah, and Kiddush."

The father of Samuel sent to Rabbi the request: "Let Master teach us the
order in which the benediction of Habdalah should be made over the cup
of wine," and Rabbi sent the reply: "So said R. Ishmael the son of R.
Jose in the name of his father, who in turn said in the name of R.
Jehoshua ben Hananiah: 'Light, Habdalah, wine, and Kiddush.'" Said R.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Hanina: This can be compared to the exit of a king from, and to the
entrance of a high official into, a city. First the king is escorted out
of the city, and then the high official is ushered in. (Likewise the
Sabbath, being the holier, is first escorted out with Habdalah, and then
the festival is ushered in with the Kiddush.) How does, finally, the
Halakha prevail? Abayi said: Wine, Kiddush, season, light, and
Habdalah," and Rabba said: "Wine, Kiddush, light, Habdalah, and season."
The Halakha prevails according to Rabba. R. Jacob bar Abba once happened
to be in the house of Rabha, and he noticed that Rabha said the
benediction, "Who hath created the fruit of the vine," over the first
cup, and after the meal was over, before the benediction at the
conclusion of the meal was pronounced, he again made the same
benediction over the wine and then drank it. So R. Jacob asked: "Why
dost thou say so many benedictions? Thou hast already made one over the
wine, why dost thou make another?" Rabha replied: "When I was at the
house of the Exilarch we would do likewise," and R. Jacob replied: "At
the house of the Exilarch this was proper, because it was not known
whether more wine would be given, hence a benediction was said at the
commencement, and then if more wine was given another was said; but
here, when we have the wine before our eyes, surely this is not
necessary!" Said Rabha: "I act as the disciples of Rabh; for R. Brona
and R. Hananel the disciples of Rabh were sitting at a meal, and were
waited on by Yeba the Elder. In the meantime they said: 'Give us a cup
of wine and we will say the benediction (at the conclusion of a meal).'
Subsequently they reconsidered it, and asked for more wine to drink.
Said R. Yeba to them: Thus said Rabh, 'As soon as ye have said, give us
a cup and we will make the benediction, ye have given up the intention
of eating any more, hence ye must not drink until ye have pronounced the
benediction at the conclusion of the meal' (whence we see that the
concluding benediction disconnects all previous benedictions, and if
anything else is eaten afterwards another benediction thereon must be
made)."

\[Ameimar, Mar Zutra, and R. Ashi sat at one meal, and R. Aha the son of
Rabha waited on them. Ameimar made a benediction over each separate cup
of wine. Mar Zutra made a benediction over the first, and then over the
last cup. R. Ashi only made one over the first cup, and no more.\]
(Referring to R. Jacob's visit to Rabha again:) When the time for the
Habdalah

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

prayer arrived, the servant of Rabha lit several candles and joined them
into one flame. Said R. Jacob to him: Why dost thou need so many
candles?" and Rabha replied: The servant did this of his own accord,"
and R. Jacob rejoined: "If the servant did not know that such is thy
wont, he would not have done this; therefore thou probably doest this
always, and I ask thee again, Why so many candles?" He then answered:
"Doth not my master hold, that the flame used at the Habdalah prayer is
a religious duty of the highest degree?"

When Rabha commenced to recite the Habdalah prayer he said thus: "Who
hath made a distinction between sanctified and ordinary days, between
light and darkness, between Israel and other nations, and between the
seventh day and the six working days." Said R. Jacob to him: "Why dost
thou recite such a voluminous prayer? Did not R. Jehudah say in the name
of Rabh, that R. Jehudah Hanassi's mode of reciting the Habdalah was
merely, 'Who hath made a distinction between sanctified and ordinary
days'?" and Rabha replied: "I hold with the following Tana, R. Eliezer
in the name of R. Oshiya said: 'One who desires to embody few
distinctions in the Habdalah prayer should not recite less than three,
and he who would multiply them should not recite more than seven.'" Then
R. Jacob remarked: "Yea, but thou, Master, hast not recited either three
or seven, for there were four." Answered Rabha: "The last one was merely
an adjunct to the conclusion of the prayer, for R. Jehudah said in the
name of Samuel that one who recites the Habdalah prayer must make the
words immediately preceding the conclusion of the prayer similar to the
conclusion itself." The sages of Pumbaditha, however, said: "The
conclusion of that prayer must be identical with the commencement."
Wherein do they differ? Both the commencement and the conclusion read,
"Who hath made the distinction between sanctified and ordinary days."
They differ in a case of a Sabbath followed by a festival, when the
initial and concluding benedictions read: "Who hath made a distinction
between sanctification and sanctification." According to those who say
that the words immediately preceding the conclusion must be similar to
the conclusion itself, the additional sentence, "Who distinguisheth
between the sanctification of the Sabbath and that of the festival,"
must be included; while according to those who say that only the
conclusion and the commencement must be identical, the additional
sentence is not necessary.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

An objection was made: We have learned in a Boraitha: That one who is
accustomed to incorporate many benedictions in the Habdalah prayer may
embody as many as he chooses, while one who is not, may only recite one?
This constitutes a diversity of opinion among Tanaim, as R. Johanan
said: "The son of the Holy says, that only one benediction should be
recited in the Habdalah, but the people generally pronounce three. \[Who
is called the son of the Holy? R. Mena'hem bar Sinai, and the reason he
was called "son of the Holy" was because he never saw the likeness of a
zuz.\]

Said R. Jehoshua ben Levi: "One who recites the Habdalah prayer must
recite it similarly to the Habdalah in the Scriptures."

An objection was made: How is the order of the Habdalah to be observed?
As follows: "Who hath made a distinction between sanctified and
ordinary, between light and darkness, between Israel and other nations,
between the seventh day and working days, between unclean and clean,
between the sea and dry land, between the waters above and beneath,
between priests, Levites, and Israelites," and must conclude with,
"Blessed be He who hath arranged in order the creation," and others say,
"who hath created all things."

R. Jose bar R. Jehudah said: "He must conclude with 'who hath sanctified
Israel.'" How then can it be said that the scriptural order should be
observed? It does not mention sea and dry land? This should be
eliminated. If that should be so, and taking into consideration that the
distinction between the seventh day and working days is merely an
adjunct to the conclusion, then seven benedictions will not remain? I
will tell thee: Between the priests, Levites, and Israelites are
virtually two separate distinctions, because it is written \[Deut. x.
8\]: "At that time did the Lord separate the tribe of Levi," and between
the priests and Levites, as it is written \[I Chronicles xxiii. 13\]:
"The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; and Aaron was set apart, to
sanctify him as most holy."

What is the conclusion of the benediction? Said Rabh: "It concludes with
'who hath sanctified Israel,'" and Samuel said: "It concludes with 'who
maketh a distinction between sanctified and ordinary.'" Abayi, according
to another version R. Joseph, denounced Rabh's decree.

We have learned in a Boraitha upon the authority of R. Jehoshua ben
Hananiah, that one who concludes the benediction

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

with both passages, viz., "who hath sanctified Israel" and "who maketh a
distinction between sanctified and ordinary," his years and days are
prolonged for him; but the Halakha does not prevail accordingly.

Ula once came to Pumbaditha. So R. Jehudah said to his son, R. Itz'hak:
"Go and carry a basket of fruit to Ula, and incidentally observe how he
recites the Habdalah." R. Itz'hak would not go himself, but sent Abayi
in his stead. When Abayi returned, he related that Ula merely said, "who
distinguisheth between sanctified and ordinary (days)," and nothing
more. R. Itz'hak then went to his father and told him that he did not go
himself, but had sent Abayi, who related that Ula merely said, "who
distinguisheth between sanctified and ordinary days," and R. Jehudah
replied: "Thy arrogance and disobedience will be the cause of thy not
being able to cite a Halakha in Ula's name, but thou wilt have to cite
it in Abayi's name."

R. Hananiah bar Shlamia and the disciples of Rabh sat together at a
meal, and R. Hamnuna the Elder waited on them, and they said to him: "Go
and see if the Sabbath, has already set in. If it has, we will stop and
make the meal for Sabbath." He replied: "Ye need not do this; for Rabh
said, that the Sabbath asserts itself without other aid, and it is not
necessary to make a special distinction for it. 'For,' said Rabh, 'as on
the Sabbath the law of giving tithes must be particularly observed, even
when a light meal is taken, because the Sabbath renders it an honorable
duty, so in the case of the Kiddush (prayer)--even if a meal is in the
course of being served, one may arise and recite that prayer without
first clearing off the table.'"

The disciples of Rabh desired to infer therefrom, that as the Sabbath
makes it a duty to recite the *Kiddush* even when in the midst of a
meal, the Habdalah should also be said, even though a meal have to be
interrupted on that account. Said R. Amram to them: "Thus said Rabh:
'For Kiddush this is imperative but not for Habdalah, and as for
interrupting a meal, it need not be done for the sake of Habdalah; at
the same time, it is not lawful to commence eating at the time appointed
for the Habdalah, without first reciting that prayer. No interruption
need be made when solid food is taken; but when drinking, the Habdalah
should be said over the same cup, *i.e.*, an interruption should be made
and the Habdalah recited. Again, the interruption must be made only when
wine or beer is drunk, but when water is the beverage that is not
necessary.'"

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

Rabhina asked R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak: "If a man did not recite the
Kiddush on the eve of Sabbath, is it lawful for him to do so during the
Sabbath day?" and he answered: "The children of Hyya having stated, that
one who had not recited the Habdalah at the close of Sabbath may do so
at any time during the week following, we must assume, that one who had
not recited the Kiddush on the eve of Sabbath may do so during all the
Sabbath day."

Rabhina objected: "The eve of a Sabbath or of a festival brings with it
the duty of saying the Kiddush over a cup (of wine) and also the duty of
including the remembrance in the benediction at the conclusion of meals,
but the Sabbath or the festival days only carry with them the duty of
including remembrance in the benedictions after meals? Now, if it were
allowed to recite the Kiddush on the Sabbath or festival day, because
they have the duty of the benediction in common with the eve of the
Sabbath or the festival, could not a man wilfully postpone the recital
of the Kiddush until the morrow?" Replied R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak: "The
case of a man who does not act in accordance with the proper law is not
considered."

Rabhina again objected: "The honor of the Sabbath day is more important
than that of the eve preceding it, so that if a man have but one cup of
wine for both the Kiddush on the eve of Sabbath and for the purpose of
honoring therewith the Sabbath day, he should rather use it for the
Kiddush; whence we can see, that it should not be postponed until the
next day; for were this allowed, the owner could leave the cup until the
following day and then use it for both purposes." Answered R. Na'hman:
"The fulfilment of a religious duty at its proper time is the more
preferable." Rabhina, however, rejoined: "Is this indeed the case? Have
we not learned in a Boraitha, that if a man enter his house at the close
of the Sabbath, he pronounces a benediction over wine, light, and spices
in the order named, and then recites the Habdalah over the cup? Now if a
man have only one cup of wine, he may leave it until after the meal and
then pronounce all the benedictions over it at once. Is this not proof
positive that the fulfilment of a religious duty at its proper time is
not preferable?" Then R. Na'hman replied: "I am not one of those sages
who would proclaim a decree upon my own authority; neither am I a
prophet nor do 1 quote an authority without corroboration. The
traditional ordinance I quoted I did riot learn from my teachers as
referring to

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

Kiddush alone, but I merely took it upon myself to arrange the order of
the benedictions in the Kiddush and Habdalah, and I did so because I was
convinced that my order was correct; <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82)
for thus it is also taught in the colleges, and the reason of all this
is, that there is a great difference between the entrance of a
sanctified day and its close. At the entrance of such a day, the sooner
we observe its sanctification the better, for we thereby demonstrate
that we consider the duty a pleasure; but at its close, the further we
can postpone its termination the better, for thereby we demonstrate that
it is not a burden to us. (Hence if a meal is in progress at the time
when the Sabbath is about to set in, we should attempt the repast and
say the Kiddush in order to usher in the Sabbath that much sooner; but
if we only have one cup of wine at the close of Sabbath with which to
say the Habdalah, we should first finish our repast and pronounce the
other benedictions, and then recite the Habdalah over that cup in order
to postpone the termination of the holy day that much longer.)"

From the preceding Boraitha we may infer eight things: First: One who
included the Habdalah in his evening prayer must nevertheless recite it
again over a cup (this is inferred from the sentence "if a man enter his
house at the close of the Sabbath," which signifies, that he came from
the house of worship, where he had already recited the Habdalah).
Second: The benediction after a meal must be made over a cup (of wine).
Third: The cup used at the benediction must be of a prescribed capacity
(*i.e.*, a quarter of a lug; for were this not so, it could be divided
and part used for the Habdalah and another part for the other
benediction). Fourth: One who pronounces the benediction over the cup of
wine must taste some (for otherwise the benediction could be made and
the wine left over for the next benediction). Fifth: As soon as part of
the wine is tasted after a benediction, the cup of wine is rendered
unfit for any other benedictions. Sixth: Even if a full meal is eaten at
the close of Sabbath and the sanctification of the day had passed, it is
still a duty to recite the Habdalah. Seventh: Two degrees of
sanctification may be bestowed upon one cup of wine. Lastly: The entire
Boraitha is in accordance with the school of Shammai and with the
interpretation of R. Jehudah (*i.e.*, that

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

the benedictions over light must be pronounced prior to that over
spices, and not *vice versa*).

R. Ashi said: "The inference that the cup of wine must be of a
prescribed quantity, and the one that by tasting the wine the cup
becomes unfit for other benedictions, are virtually one and the same
thing, and the eight inferences are completed thus: Why does tasting of
the cup of wine render it unfit? Because the prescribed quantity is
thereby lessened."

R. Jacob bar Idi was so particular, that if the jug containing the wine
was ever so slightly damaged he would not use the wine for Kiddush or
Habdalah, and R. Idi bar Shesha was only particular about the condition
of the goblet; Mar the son of R. Ashi was particular even about the
condition of the barrel containing the wine, and if it was at all
damaged he would not use the wine for the Kiddush or the Habdalah.

The rabbis taught: "It is written \[Exod. xx. 8\]: 'Remember the Sabbath
day to keep it holy.' The remembrance should be effected over wine.
This, however, refers to the Sabbath day; whence do we know that the
night is also meant? To that end it is written, 'to keep it holy,' which
refers also to the night."

"Whence do we know that the night is also meant," is the question? Is
not the night the principal time of the Sabbath, when the Kiddush must
be said? Then, again, how can the passage refer to the night, when it
distinctly states the day? The following is meant: "Remember the day"
implies that it should be remembered over wine, when the Sabbath sets
in. This therefore refers to the night, and that the day also is meant
is clearly proven by the words, "the Sabbath day."

What benediction is made during the day of Sabbath? Said R. Jehudah:
"Only the usual benediction over the wine, viz., 'who hath created the
fruit of the vine.'"

R. Ashi came to the city of Mehuzza, and the people said to him: "Let
Master recite for us the great Kiddush," and not knowing what they meant
by the great Kiddush, he thought: "Let us see! The first benediction to
be made is the usual one over wine." Accordingly, he pronounced the
benediction, "who hath created the fruit of the vine," in a rather
prolonged manner. He thereupon observed an old man bending over and
sipping the wine (whence he concluded that the one benediction
constituted the great Kiddush). He then applied to himself the passage
\[Ecclesiastes ii. 14\]: "The wise man hath his eyes in his head."

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

We have previously learned that the children of R. Hyya said: "If a man
did not say the Habdalah at the close of the Sabbath, he may say it at
any time during the following week." Until what day of the week? Said R.
Zera: "Until the fourth day of the week (for after that the days belong
to the next week)."

R. Brona said in the name of Rabh: "If a man had washed his hands for a
meal, he should not make the Kiddush, because that will cause an
interruption (and he will be obliged to wash his hands again)." Said R.
Itz'hak bar Samuel bar Martha: "Rabh is not yet dead, and still we have
already forgotten all his Halakhoth. I myself stood before Rabh several
times and noticed that whenever he preferred bread he would make the
Kiddush over bread, and whenever he preferred wine he would make the
Kiddush over wine."

Said R. Huna in the name of Rabh: "If a man had eaten anything prior to
making the Kiddush, he need not make the Kiddush." R. Hana the son of
Hinana asked R. Huna: "If a man had eaten prior to reciting the
Habdalah, what is the law?" and he answered: "I say, that he must
nevertheless recite the Habdalah, but R. Assi said, that he need not do
so."

R. Jeremiah bar Abba was at one time in the house of R. Assi, and
through forgetfulness ate something before saying the Habdalah.
Afterwards he was given a cup of wine and he then said the Habdalah.
Said R. Assi's wife to her husband: "Master does not do this?" and he
replied: "Let him be; he acts according to the teaching of his masters."

R. Joseph in the name of Samuel said: "If a man had thoughtlessly eaten
either before Kiddush or before Habdalah, he need not recite those
prayers," but Rabba in the name of R. Na'hman quoted Samuel to the
contrary, namely, that he may do so. Said Rabha: The Halakha prevails
that one who had eaten before Kiddush or Habdalah may nevertheless
recite those prayers; if one had not made the Kiddush on the eve of
Sabbath, he may do so during the Sabbath day; and if he did not say the
Habdalah at the close of Sabbath, he may say it on the following day.

Mar the Younger and Mar the Elder, sons of R. Hisda, related to R. Ashi
the following: It once happened, that Ameimar was a guest in our house,
and not having any wine, beer was brought for the Habdalah; but he would
not use it for that purpose, and went to sleep without supper. On the
morrow,

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

after a good deal of trouble we succeeded in procuring some wine; and he
said the Habdalah and ate. A year afterwards he was again our guest, and
once more we did not have any wine, so we brought beer for the Habdalah.
He then remarked: "If wine is so scarce with you and your usual beverage
is beer, then the beer may be considered as wine of your land."
Accordingly he said the Habdalah over it and ate his meal.

From this narrative we can infer three things: First, that a man who
heard the Habdalah in the house of worship, must nevertheless recite it
in his house; second, that nothing should be eaten prior to the
Habdalah; and third, that if a man did not say the Habdalah at the close
of Sabbath, he may say it during the following week.

R. Huna asked of R. Hisda: "May the Kiddush be made over beer?" and he
answered: "If as to unfermented barley-beer, fig-beer, and senna-beer,
concerning which Rabh was asked, who in turn asked of R. Hyya, who then
asked Rabbi, it could not be decided whether they may be used or not,
how then can I decide about ordinary beer?"

It was thought, however, that while Kiddush could not be made, it was
surely allowed to make Habdalah with beer. Said R. Hisda to them: "So
said Rabh: 'As the Kiddush cannot be made over beer, so also must
Habdalah not be made over it.'" It was also taught, that R. Ta'hlipha
bar R. Abimi said the same thing in the name of Samuel.

Levi sent Rabbi beer made of a thirteen-fold extract of dates, and it
was very sweet in taste; and Rabbi said: "With this kind of beer the
Kiddush may be made, and all hymns and songs in praise of the Lord may
be sung over it." At night he felt some bad effects on account of that
beer; so he said: "Should a thing which produces a bad effect be used
for the Kiddush?"

R. Joseph said: "I will register a vow before a multitude of people that
I will never again drink beer," and Rabha said: "I would rather drink
water in which flax was soaked than beer," and continued he: "He who
makes the Kiddush over beer, should never have anything else to drink
(*i.e.*, in a place where wine is to be had)."

R. Huna once found Rabh making Kiddush over beer. So he said: "It seems
to me, that Abba will soon commence to deal in beer, if it is so dear to
him."

The rabbis taught: "Neither Kiddush nor any other benediction

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

should be made with anything except wine." Is there then no benediction
made over beer and water, namely: "Through whose word everything came
into being"? Said Abayi: "The teaching of the rabbis relative to any
other benediction means, that the cup given for the benediction after
meals should only be of wine."

The rabbis taught: "Kiddush is not made with beer." It was said upon the
authority of R. Eliezer bar R. Simeon, that Kiddush *may* be made with
beer.

The statement previously made, that the wine must be tasted when Kiddush
is made, means that even ever so little may be tasted, and R. Jose bar
R. Jehudah says, that a mouthful must be tasted.

R. Huna said in the name of Rabh, and likewise R. Giddel of Narash
taught: "If a man made Kiddush and tasted a mouthful of the beverage, he
has fulfilled his duty; but if he had not tasted that much, he has not
acquitted himself of the duty."

"*From the time of Min'hah*," etc. The schoolmen asked: Does this refer
to the long Min'hah (the time for which commences in the half of the
eighth hour, *i.e.*, at half-past one in the afternoon) or to the short
Min'hah (the time for which commences on the half of the tenth hour,
*i.e.*, at half-past three in the afternoon in our time)? Is it not
lawful to eat from the time of the *long* Min'hah, because thereby the
time in which the paschal offering must be brought will be taken up, or
is it not lawful to eat from the time of the *short* Min'hah, because in
that event a man would become satiated, and not be able to do justice to
the Passover-meal of unleavened bread?

Said Rabhina: Come and hear: We have learned: Even King Agrippa, whose
wont it was to eat at the ninth hour of the day (3 P.M.), should on the
eve of Passover not eat until it becomes dark. Now if the short Min'hah
is the time meant, after which it is not lawful to eat, then the case of
King Agrippa is worthy of note; but if the long Min'hah is meant, what
proof does this case exhibit then that it was only because the meal
would interfere with the paschal offering, and why is Agrippa's case
specially mentioned? Hence we may infer therefrom that the short Min'hah
is meant. Still, wherein is the case of Agrippa so noteworthy? If he
commence his meal as usual in the ninth hour, the time when it is
already unlawful to eat will arrive while he is still at his meal? We
might assume, that the ninth

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

hour of Agrippa is the equivalent of our fourth hour. Hence we are told
that such is not the case.

R. Jose said: "While eating is not permitted after the time stated in
the Mishna, it is allowed to partake of a light repast of fruit,
delicacies, etc." R. Itz'hak would partake of herbs. Rabha would drink
wine during all the eve of Passover, in order to arouse his appetite for
unleavened bread at night. R. Shesheth would fast all through the eve of
Passover, because, being in delicate health, had he eaten anything
during the day he would not have been able to eat at night.

"*Even the meanest in Israel*," etc. It was taught: When eating
unleavened bread on the Passover-night it is required that one should
recline in an easy position, but this is not required when the bitter
herbs are eaten. When wine is drunk it was taught in the name of R.
Na'hman that a reclining position should be taken, and also that it need
not be taken. Still, this apparent contradiction presents no difficulty.
The statement quoted of R. Na'hman that a reclining position is
necessary when drinking wine refers to the first two cups, and the
statement that it is not necessary refers to the last two cups. Some
explain the apparent contradiction in the manner quoted because the
first two cups symbolize the commencement of liberty for the previously
enslaved Jews, while the last two cups have no such significance.
Others, however, say on the contrary! The first two cups are a
remembrance of the days of bondage, and should therefore not be drunk in
a reclining position, while the last two cups are a remembrance of the
dawn of freedom, and hence should be drunk in an easy reclining
position.

Leaning backwards is not considered reclining, nor is leaning over on
the right side considered reclining in an easy position, and another
reason why this should not be done is for fear lest the food enter the
trachea instead of the gullet, and thus cause danger.

The woman who sits with her husband need not recline when eating, but if
she is a woman of prominence she should do so. A son sitting with his
father must recline, and the schoolmen raised the question whether a
disciple sitting with his master should also recline or not? Come and
hear: Abayi said: When we were at the house of our master (Rabba) we
disciples would recline each on the other's knee; but when we afterwards
came to R. Joseph, be told us that we need not do this, for it is said
in Aboth: "The fear of thy master should be as the fear of the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

Lord." The schoolmen then inquired whether the servant in the house of
his master must recline or not. Come and hear: R. Jehoshua ben Levi
said: "If the servant ate unleavened bread to the size of an olive in a
reclining position, he has fulfilled his duty." Whence we may infer that
the servant must also recline (for he says "in a reclining position,"
but if not in a reclining position the servant would not have discharged
the duty).

R. Jehoshua ben Levi said again: "Women must also drink the four cups,
because they were also included in the miracles which delivered us all
from Egypt."

R. Jehudah said in the name of Samuel: "Each cup must contain wine
which, when mixed with three parts of water, will be good wine. If
unmixed wine was drunk, the duty has nevertheless been fulfilled. If all
the four cups were poured into one and drunk, the duty has also been
fulfilled. If the household was allowed to drink part of the four cups,
the duty has also been fulfilled." Rabha, however, said: "If the wine
was drunk unmixed the duty of drinking the wine has been acquitted, but
the symbolical feature thereof has not been carried out," and in the
case of where the four cups were poured into one, Rabh said: "The duty
of drinking wine has been accomplished, but the duty of the four cups
has not." If the household was allowed to drink part of the four cups,
R. Na'hman said: "The master of the house has fulfilled the duty of
drinking the four cups, provided he drunk the larger part thereof."

We have learned in a Boraitha, R. Jehudah said: "The cup must contain
the taste and the color of red wine." Said Rabha: "What is the reason of
R. Jehudah's statement? Because it is written \[Proverbs xxiii. 31\]:
'Do not look on the wine when it is red' (whence we adduce, that wine
must be red)."

The rabbis taught: "The duty of drinking the four cups devolves upon all
alike--men, women, and even children." R. Jehudah, however, said: "What
benefit would children derive from wine? They should rather be given
nuts, parched corn, etc., on the eve of Passover, so as to keep them
awake at night, and that may make them inquire into the reason of the
festivity."

It was said of R. Aqiba, that he would deal out nuts and parched corn on
the eve of Passover to the children, in order to keep them awake and
have them ask for reasons.

We have learned in a Boraitha, R. Eliezer said: On the night of the
Passover the unleavened bread is snatched out of the

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

children's hand in order to keep them awake and have them ask for the
reason. <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83)

A Boraitha states that it was told of R. Aqiba, that he never proposed
adjourning the session at the college excepting on the eve of Passover
for the children's sake, that they should not fall asleep, and on the
eve of the Day of Atonement, in order to see that the children be given
their meals at the proper time.

The rabbis taught: It is the duty of every man to cause his household
and his children to rejoice on a festival, as it is written \[Deut. xvi.
14\]: "And thou shalt rejoice on thy feast." Wherewith should a man
cause his household to rejoice? With wine. R. Jehudah, however, said:
"The men with the thing they like best and the women with what is most
pleasing to them." The thing men like best is, of course, wine; but what
is most pleasing to women? R. Joseph taught: "In Babylonia multicolored
dresses and in Judæa pressed linen garments."

We have learned in a Boraitha, R. Jehudah ben Bathyra said: "When the
Temple was still in existence, there was no better mode of rejoicing,
than with (the eating of) flesh, as it is written \[Deut. xxvii. 7\]:
'And thou shalt slay peace-offerings, and eat them there; and thou shalt
rejoice before the Lord thy God'; but now, when there is no Temple, wine
is the principal means of rejoicing, as it is written \[Psalms civ.
15\]: 'And wine that maketh joyful the heart of man.'"

"*Nor shall a person have less than four cups of wine*." How can the
rabbis order a thing which might involve danger? <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84) Have we not learned in a Boraitha, that a
man should not eat two dishes, nor drink two cups, nor do anything by
twos? Said R. Na'hman: "It is written \[Exod. xii. 42\]: 'A night to be
observed was this unto the Lord,' which signifies that on that night one
is exempt from danger." Rabha said: "The cup of benediction (after
meals) is only counted in for good purposes but never for evil, because
its very name implies that it is for good, and thus only three cups are
virtually drunk." Rabhina, however, said: "At all events, the four cups
cannot be conjoined, for each one represents a different duty." <span
id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_85)

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

In Palestine no attention was paid to even or odd numbers, but R. Dimi
of Neherdai was even particular about the signs on his barrels; and it
once happened that he paid no attention to the signs, so one of the
barrels burst. Whence the rule may be adduced, that one who is
particular about things lays himself liable to accidents, but one who is
not is not affected by superstition; still, it might happen that an
accident should occur to him.

When R. Dimi came from Palestine, he said: Two eggs, two nuts, two
cucumbers, and two of some other thing which I cannot remember, prove
injurious to a man, is a Sinaic law; and because the rabbis could not
find out what that other thing was, they included two of everything
among the injurious as a precautionary measure. The statement elsewhere,
that ten, eight, six, and four are excluded from the even numbers which
are injurious only refers to acts caused by evil spirits; but where
witchcraft is concerned, even those and more numbers may prove
injurious, as it happened that a man once divorced his wife and she then
became the wife of a wine-dealer. The first husband would generally go
to that wine-dealer for his wine, and they tried to bewitch him, but
without success; for he was always careful to avoid the even numbers.
One day he imbibed too freely, and after drinking his sixteenth cup he
became confused, and did not know how many he had drunk. So they saw to
it that he drank an even number, and then succeeded in bewitching him.
When he went out into the street he was met by a certain merchant, who
said: "I see a murdered man walking before me." Not being able to
proceed farther, the drunken man embraced a tree for support, when the
tree emitted a groan and dried up, and the man was killed.

R. Avira said: Bowls and loaves of bread are not affected by even
numbers. The rule is, that all things produced artificially are not
subject to the evil arising from even numbers; but natural productions,
such as fruit and edible things, are. Shops are not affected by even
numbers (if one eat in two shops). If one ate one of a certain thing and
then considered it, and ate another, the rule of even numbers does not
apply. Guests are not affected by even numbers; *i.e.*, if one cup of
wine was given a guest and then another, as he had not known in advance
how many he would be given, he is not affected.

A woman is not affected by even numbers, but a prominent woman should
nevertheless be careful.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

Said R. Hinana the son of R. Jehoshua. "Asparagus is always counted in
with things tending to good but not to evil." R. Joseph said: Two cups
of wine and one cup of beer are not counted together; but two cups of
beer and one of wine are counted together. Proof of this can be adduced
from a Mishna in Tract Kelim, to the effect that where uncleanness is
concerned, the less valuable things are defiled by more valuable, but
valuable things are not defiled by things of lesser value.

R. Na'hman said in the name of Rabh: "If two cups are drunk before going
to the table, and one while at table, they are counted together, but one
drunk before going to the table and two drunk at the table are not
counted together." R. Mesharshia opposed this statement. Do we then
concern ourselves with the table? It is the man who is affected, and if
he drank three cups, it is well. Therefore only if a man drank two cups
at the table, pronounced the benediction after the meal, and
subsequently drank another, the three cups are not counted
together. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

"*Even if they must be given him from the funds devoted to charitable
support*." Is this not self-evident? (Is not the poor man equal to all
others?) This statement in the Mishna is made for the purpose of
counteracting the decree of R. Aqiba, to the effect that a man should
even make his Sabbath-day as any other, in order not to depend upon
charity. When the observance of the Passover, however, is concerned, and
the miracles performed for our ancestors are to be proclaimed, even R.
Aqiba admits that a man may avail himself of charity so that he may be
enabled fitly to celebrate the event.

The disciples of Elijah taught: Although R. Aqiba taught that a man
should even make his Sabbath-day as any other, in order not to depend
upon charity, still some slight distinction should be made in honor of
the Sabbath \[What is meant by some slight distinction? Said R. Papa:
"Small fishes should be eaten"\], as it is taught in a Mishna (Aboth):
R. Jehudah

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

ben Thaima said: Thou shalt be bold as a leopard, light as an eagle;
swift as a deer, and strong as a lion to do the will of thy Heavenly
Father (which signifies, that a man should go even beyond his means in
order to honor the Sabbath).

The rabbis taught,. Seven things R. Aqiba commanded his son R. Jehoshua,
viz.: "My child, sit not in the midst of a city, when thou desirest to
study; do not live in a city the officials of which are scholars, for
they do not attend to the wants of the city; do not enter thy house
without warning, and so much the less into thy neighbor's house; never
go bare-footed; always arise early, and immediately eat in summer on
account of the heat and in winter on account of the cold; and rather
make thy Sabbath-day as any other in order not to depend upon charity;
and, finally, have transactions only with such men as have no
ill-fortune." Said R. Papa: "This last injunction does not refer to
buying of or selling to a man in good fortune, but merely to entering
into partnership."

Now that we have heard from R. Samuel bar Itz'hak that the passage \[Job
i. 10\]: "The work of his hands hast thou blessed" signifies, that
whoever only received a coin from the hands of job was fortunate in all
his undertakings, we can infer, that with a man who is fortunate it is
not only beneficial to be associated as a partner, but it is even to
one's interest to buy from or sell to such a person.

Five things R. Aqiba while in prison commanded to R. Simeon ben Jochai:
When R. Simeon ben Jochai said to him: "Master, teach me the Law," and
R. Aqiba replied, "I do not wish to do this," the former said: "If thou
wilt not, I shall complain to my father Jochai, and he will denounce
thee to the government." R. Aqiba then remarked: "My son, more than the
calf desireth to suck is the cow anxious to yield her milk," and R.
Simeon replied: "In this case, however, the calf is in greater danger"
(because R. Aqiba had been in prison already for this offence, while R.
Simeon ben Jochai (the calf) stood yet in danger of being detected).
Whereupon R. Aqiba told him the five things, viz.: If thou wouldst hang
thyself, select at least a stout tree (meaning, that if thou wouldst
have thy words listened to, quote them in the name of some great
authority). If thou wouldst teach thy child, teach it from books free of
errors. \[What is meant thereby? Said Rabha, and according to others R.
Mesharshia: "If a child is taught incorrectly to commence with, it is
next to impossible to correct it subsequently."\] Do

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

not cook in the same pot that thy neighbor once used. \[What is meant
thereby? A divorced woman whose husband is still living; because the
Master said, that if a divorced man marry a divorced woman there are
four different minds in one bed, and others say, that R. Aqiba even
referred to a widow.\] If thou wouldst do an act of charity or perform a
religious duty, and incidentally derive material benefit therefrom, thou
shouldst lend thy money to the husbandman and eat of the fruit of his
land, in which case thou wilt do an act of charity and also derive
material benefit. If thou wouldst perform a religious duty and keep thy
body clean, thou shouldst take a wife and have children.

Four things our holy Rabbi commanded his children, viz.: Do not live in
the city of Shakantzib (because the inhabitants are scorners). Do not
sit on the bed of a Syrian woman. \[What is meant thereby? Some say,
that one should not lie down to sleep without reciting the Shema prayer;
and others say, that one should not marry a proselyte; while still
others say, that the literal meaning is to be accepted on account of
what happened to R. Papa. <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87)\] Do not
try to avoid taxation (for aside from the fact that it is a duty to pay
taxes, should it be known that ye desire to avoid them, your property is
in danger of being confiscated). Lastly, do not stand in front of an ox
just emerging from the swamps, for at that time he is so wild that it
seems as if Satan were moving between his horns. R. Samuel said: "This
refers only to a black ox in the month of Nissan."

R. Oshiya taught: An ox that had attempted to gore a person once should
not be approached for a distance of fifty ells, and one that had done so
three times should be avoided as long as he is in sight. It was taught
in the name of R. Meir: If thou hast perceived an ox so vicious, even if
he still have his head in his crib, climb up an elevation and draw thy
ladder after thee immediately.

Three things R. Ishmael bar R. Jose commanded Rabbi, viz.: Thou shalt
not cause a blemish on thyself \[*i.e.*, thou shalt not deal with three
men, one of whom will sue thee in a court of law and the other two will
serve as witnesses against thee; for then thou wilt surely lose thy
case\]. Thou shalt not haggle

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

over the price of a thing if thou hast not the wherewithal to purchase
it with thee; and on the night when thy wife has returned from the bath
thou shalt have nothing to do with her. Said Rabh: "This refers to a
woman who had been ritually unclean according to biblical law but not to
one who had been unclean according to rabbinical law; for in the former
case, having been unclean only seven days, there is danger of a
recurrence of her uncleanness, while in the latter, where she had been
unclean fourteen days, there is no such danger."

Three things R. Jose bar R. Jehudah also commanded Rabbi, viz.: Thou
shalt not go out at night alone. Thou shalt not stand naked before a
light; and thou shalt not enter a new bathhouse, lest it be imperfectly
constructed and breakdown. \[How long is a bath-house considered new?
Said R. Jehoshua ben Levi: "For twelve months." Why should not a man
stand naked before a light? Because we have learned in a Boraitha: "One
who stands naked before a light is liable to be seized with epilepsy,
and one who has sexual intercourse before a light may produce epileptic
children."\]

The rabbis taught: "One who has intercourse with his wife in a bed where
a child sleeps may cause the child to be epileptic, but this is the case
only if the child is less than six years old. If it is over six years
old, or even if it be less than six years old but sleeps at the foot or
at the head of the bed, it does not matter. If the man, however, put his
hand on the child, no matter where it sleeps, there will be no evil
consequences."

Why should not a man go out alone at night? For we have learned in a
Boraitha: "A man should not go out alone on the night following the
fourth day or on the night following the Sabbath, because an evil spirit
called Agrath, the daughter of Ma'hlath, together with one hundred and
eighty thousand other evil spirits, go forth into the world and have the
right to injure anyone they should chance to meet."

In former times this spirit would go forth every day. Once she met with
R. Hanina ben Dosa and said to him: "If I had not heard it proclaimed in
the heavens, 'Hanina and his knowledge must be respected,' I would
inflict some injury upon thee," and he answered: "If I am esteemed in
the heavens above, I command thee never to appear where men dwell," and
she pleaded: "I must obey thy command, but leave me some freedom,"
whereupon be allowed the night following the fourth day and the night
following the Sabbath.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

At another time this same evil spirit met Abayi, and she also said to
him: "Had I not heard it proclaimed above, 'Respect Na'hmeni (another
name for Abayi) and his knowledge,' I would do thee harm"; and he
answered: "If I am respected above, I command thee never to appear where
men dwell."

Rabh said to R. Assi: "Do not live in a city where thou canst not hear a
horse neigh or a dog bark, and do not live in a city whose (executive)
head is a physician. Do not take unto thee two wives, because they might
conspire against thee to do thee wrong. If thou, however, already hast
two wives, take a third (and should two conspire against thee the third
will betray them to thee)."

Rabh said to R. Kahana: "It were better that thou shouldst occupy
thyself with carrion (for a livelihood) than that thou shouldst break
thy word (promise). Rather skin carrion in the market for pay than say
that thou art a priest or an important person and above such work; for
all honest labor is preferable to accepting charity. When thou goest on
a journey, no matter how short, always take some food with thee. Even
when a hundred cucumbers may be had for one zuz, do not say that thou
wilt buy thy food on the way, but carry it along with thee, for thou
never canst know what might happen on the way."

Rabh said to his son Hyya: "Do not make a habit of taking medicine. Do
not make long strides. Avoid as much as possible having a tooth
extracted. Never try to tease a snake, and do not make sport of a
Persian."

The rabbis taught: Never tease a little (young) Gentile, a small snake,
or a young pupil; because their kingdom is behind their ears (*i.e.*,
when they become older they seek revenge).

Rabh said to Aibo his son: "I have tried to teach thee the holy Law, but
I cannot succeed; come and I will teach thee worldly things. When the
sand is still on thy feet (*i.e.*, if thou hast returned from a
purchasing trip), shouldst thou meet with a buyer sell out at once. Sell
everything, even though thou mightst subsequently regret it, especially
wine, which thou wilt never regret selling, for it might become spoiled.
Make fast thy purse and open thy sack (*i.e.*, when selling, obtain the
money first, secure it well, and then deliver the merchandise). If thou
hast an opportunity to gain a kabh of land in thy immediate vicinity, it
is better than a kur of land far away. If thy basket is filled with
dates, run to the brewer and have him brew the beer; for the dates might
be eaten up, and then thou wilt have

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

naught." \[What quantity of dates should a man have before he goes to
the brewer? Said Rabha: "Three saahs." Said R. Papa: "If I had not
brewed beer, I should never have been rich," and so also said R. Hisda.

Said R. Papa: "All debts requiring promissory notes are doubtful, and
those where the signatures must be verified are even more so; and even
should they be paid, the money will not be good (*i.e.*, will come
little by little)."\]

Three things R. Johanan said in the name of the great men of Jerusalem:
When thou goest to war, and canst persuade others to join thee, stay as
long as possible in order to see that the men that thou hast recruited
all go, and then go thyself last of all. Then upon the return thy reward
shall be that thou shalt be first. Rather make thy Sabbath-day as any
other, and avoid depending on charity. Associate thyself with one upon
whom fortune smiles.

R. Jehoshua ben Levi also said three things in the name of the great men
of Jerusalem, viz.: Do not commit private acts in public (on account of
the evil consequences which have ensued by reason thereof). If thy
daughter is of marriageable age, free thy slave and give her to him in
marriage (rather than allow her to remain single), and watch thy wife
with her first son-in-law. \[Why so? Said R. Hisda: "On account of
love," and R. Kahana said: "On account of money matters." As a matter of
fact, both things should be looked after.\]

R. Johanan said: The following three kinds of men shall inherit the
world to come: Those that live in the Holy Land, those that send their
children to houses of learning, and those that make Habdalah over wine
(*i.e.*, those that have but little and leave some of the wine from the
Kiddush for Habdalah, refraining from drinking it on the Sabbath).

R. Johanan said again: The Holy One, blessed be He, himself proclaims
the virtue of the three following men: Of a bachelor who lives in a
large city and sins not; of a poor man who finds a valuable thing and
returns it to its owner; and of a rich man who gives a tenth of his
profits to charity unbeknown to others.

R. Saphra was a bachelor, and lived in a large city. A certain Tana
repeated the statement of R. Johanan, just quoted, in the presence of
Rabha and R. Saphra. R. Saphra's face beamed with delight. Said Rabha to
him: "A bachelor such as thou art is not meant, but such men as R.
Hanina and R.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Oshiya, who were
shoemakers in the land of Israel and whose shops were in the markets of
the prostitutes. They would make shoes for those women and carry the
shoes to the houses where the prostitutes lived, and even fit them
there. Still, though the women would look at them, they never lifted
their eyes to look at the prostitutes. Thus when oaths were taken, they
would swear by the lives of these holy rabbis of the land of Israel."

The Holy One, blessed be He, loves three kinds of men, viz.: Those that
never become angry, those that never become intoxicated, and those who
do not insist upon asserting themselves. The following three the Lord
hates: The one who speaks with his mouth and thinks otherwise in his
heart; the one who can testify in a man 1 s favor and does not do so;
and the one who alone saw another man doing wrong and testifies against
him in public, although knowing that the testimony of one man is not
sufficient to convict, as it once happened that a certain man by the
name of Tubia sinned. A certain Zigud came to R. Papa and testified
against this Tubia. R. Papa ordered this Zigud chastised, and the latter
said: "Tubia has sinned, and Zigud should be punished?" and R. Papa
answered: "Yea; for it is written \[Deutr. xix. 15\]: 'There shall not
rise up one single witness against a man,' and thou art the single
witness against Tubia; hence thy testimony is of no value and merely
slanders a man."

The rabbis taught: The following three kinds of men do not live a life
worth living, viz.: Those who have too much pity with importunates,
those who are very excitable, and those who are too fastidious. Said R.
Joseph: "I combine in myself all those three defects."

The rabbis taught: The following three species hate others of their own
kind, viz.: a dog, a cock, and a Persian Gueber (fire-worshipper); and
others say, one prostitute hates another; and still others say, one
scholar hates another.

The rabbis taught: The three following love others of their own kind,
viz.: Proselytes, slaves, and ravens. The following four are unbearable
to the sound sense of a man, viz.: A poor man who is vain, a rich man
who constantly tells lies, an old man who is lascivious, and a president
of a congregation who considers himself superior to all others without
cause. Others say, also one who divorces his wife once, remarries, then
divorces her again and again marries her.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

Five things Canaan the son of Ham the son of Noah commanded his
children; viz.: "Love ye one another, love robbery, love lasciviousness,
hate your masters, and never tell the truth."

Six things were said of a horse, viz.: He is very passionate, he loves
war, he is very proud, he hates to sleep, he eats much and casts off
little; and according to others, he loves to kill his owner in a battle.

Rabba bar bar Hana said in the name of R. Samuel bar Martha, quoting
Rabh upon the authority of R. Jose the man of Hutzal: Whence do we know
that an Israelite must not consult astrologers? Because it is written
\[Deutr. xviii. 13\]: "Perfect shalt thou be with the Lord thy God"
(which signifies that perfect confidence must be reposed in the Lord).
Whence do we know that if a man is convinced of the superiority of his
neighbor to himself, even in one instance only, he should respect him?
From the passage \[Daniel vi. 4\]: "Because a superior spirit was in
him: and the king sought to appoint him over the whole kingdom." When a
woman continues in the blood of her purification, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) although she is not defiled, she should
not halve any connection with her husband.

We have learned in a Boraitha: Joseph the man of Hutzal is Joseph the
Babylonian or Issi ben Gur Ariah or Issi ben Jehudah or Issi ben
Gamaliel or Issi ben Mahalalal, and what is (really) his name? Issi ben
Aqabia.

R. Itz'hak ben Tabla is R. Itz'hak ben Haqla and the same as R. Itz'hak
ben Elazar (Ela'a), and where R. Itz'hak is mentioned in Halakha it
refers to R. Itz'hak ben A'ha, while where R. Itz'hak is mentioned in
Haggada it refers to R. Itz'hak ben Pin'has.

Rabba bar bar Hana said in the name of R. Johanan, quoting R. Jehudah
bar Ilayi: Rather eat onions and sit in peace in thy house than geese
and chickens, which thou wilt acquire a taste for and perhaps be unable
to gratify it. Reduce the quality of thy meals, if need be, in order to
improve the quality of thy abode. When Ula came from Palestine, he said:
"There is a saying in Palestine to this effect: He who always eats the
fat of a ram's tail must hide himself from his creditors in an altar,
but he who satisfies himself with herbs, can sit in the centre of, the
market in full view of all."

MISHNA: When the first cup is poured out, the blessing pertaining to the
festival should be said, and then the benediction

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

over the wine must be pronounced. Such is the dictum of Beth Shammai;
but according to Beth Hillel, the benediction over the wine should be
said first, and then the blessing of the festival may be pronounced.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: The following presents one of the instances
wherein Beth Shammai and Beth Hillel continually differ as regards
meals, namely: Beth Shammai hold, first, that the blessing of the
festival should precede that over the wine, because the festival is the
direct cause of drinking the wine; and, second, the festival was already
at hand while the wine was just brought. The school of Hillel, however,
maintain, first, that the blessing over the wine has the preference,
because, were it not for the wine or bread, no Kiddush could be said;
secondly, the wine is usual and drank every day, while the festival only
comes once in a certain period, and the rule is, that between a thing
which occurs frequently and one which occurs only at intervals, the
latter is to be given preference. The Halakha prevails according to Beth
Hillel.

MISHNA: Herbs and vegetables are then to be brought; the lettuce is then
to be immersed, part thereof eaten, and the remainder left until after
the meal arranged for the night is eaten; then unleavened cakes are to
be placed before him as well as the lettuce, sauce (Charoseth), and two
kinds of cooked food, although it is not strictly obligatory to use the
same; R. Elazar ben Zadok, however, said, that it is obligatory. During
the existence of the Holy Temple, the paschal sacrifice was then placed
before him.

GEMARA: Why are two immersions necessary, the one when lettuce is
immersed and the other when the bitter herbs are immersed? In order to
excite the curiosity of the children, and have them inquire into the
reason therefor. Which kinds of the above-mentioned cooked food are
meant? Said R. Huna: "Mangold and rice," and Rabh would see to it that
there was only mangold and rice in place of the cooked victuals, because
he wished to carry out the literal sense of R. Huna's teaching.

Hezkyah said: "Fish, together with an egg, may also serve for the two
kinds of cooked food," and R. Joseph said: "Nay; there must be two kinds
of meat (one roasted and the other boiled), one to serve as a
remembrance of the paschal offering and the other as a remembrance of
the festal offering." Rabhina said: "A bone and some boiled meat
suffice."

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

It is self-evident that if a man have other vegetables besides lettuce
he can say the blessing required for the vegetables, namely, "who hath
created the fruit of the earth," and eat them, and then, when coming to
the bitter herbs, he may say the blessing required, namely, "who hath
commanded us to eat bitter herbs," and then eat them; but if a man have
no other vegetables besides lettuce, how shall he pronounce the
benedictions? Said R. Huna: "He should first say the ordinary
benedictions for vegetables, eat a piece of the lettuce, then say the
blessing over bitter herbs, and proceed to eat."

R. Hisda opposed this: "How can the man say another blessing after he
had already eaten of the thing? Therefore he should say the two
benedictions together, eat part of the lettuce, and when the time
arrives to eat the remainder he can eat it without saying a blessing."

In Suria they acted in accordance with R. Huna's opinion, and R.
Shesheth the son of R. Jehoshua would act in accordance with R. Hisda's
decree. The Halakha prevails according to R. Hisda's decree. R. A'ha the
son of Rabha took care to have other vegetables besides lettuce, in
order to avoid the difference of opinion between the two sages.

Rabhina said: R. Mesharshia the son of R. Nathan told me, that so said
Hillel, quoting a tradition: A man should not place the bitter herbs
between unleavened cakes and eat them in that manner. Why not? Because
the eating of unleavened cakes is a biblical commandment, while the
eating of bitter herbs in this day is only a rabbinical ordinance. Now
if the two be eaten together, the bitter herbs might destroy the taste
of the cakes, and thus a rabbinical ordinance would supersede a biblical
commandment; and even according to those who hold that one commandment
cannot nullify another when both are fulfilled at the same time, such is
only the case where both are biblical or both are rabbinical; but when
one is a biblical and the other a rabbinical commandment, the rabbinical
nullifies the other, and hence their joint fulfilment is not allowed.

Who is the Tana from whom we have heard that the fulfilment of one
commandment does not nullify that of another? That Tana is Hillel, as we
have learned in a Boraitha: It was said of Hillel, that he would take a
piece of the paschal offering, an unleavened cake, and some bitter
herbs, and eat them together, as it is written \[Numb. ix. 11\]: "With
unleavened bread and bitter herbs shall ye eat it."

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

R. Johanan said: "Hillel's colleagues did not agree with him, as we have
learned in a Boraitha: Lest we assume that the paschal offering, the
unleavened bread, and the bitter herbs must be eaten together, therefore
it is written, 'With unleavened bread and bitter herbs shall ye eat it,'
which signifies, that each may even be eaten separately." R. Ashi
opposed this: "If this Boraitha is supposed to be in opposition to
Hillel, why does it state that each may *even* be eaten separately? (If
they may be eaten *even* separately, then surely they may be eaten
together.) Therefore the Boraitha means to state, that *even* if the
three things were eaten separately the duty was acquitted, though they
should rather be eaten together."

Now in this day, when it is not known whether the Halakha prevails
according to the opinion of Hillel or of the opposing sages, the mode of
procedure should be thus: A blessing should be said over the unleavened
bread and a piece thereof eaten; then another blessing should be said
over the bitter herbs and a piece tasted, and finally the unleavened
bread and the bitter herbs should be put together and eaten at the same
time, saying: "This is in remembrance of Hillel's actions when the
Temple was still in existence."

R. Elazar said in the name of R. Oshiya: "When anything is dipped in
sauce, the hands should be perfectly clean"; *i.e.*, previously washed.
Said R. Papa: "Thence we may infer that the lettuce must be entirely
immersed in the Charoseth (sauce), for otherwise what need would there
be of washing the hands, they would not touch the sauce?" Nay; perhaps
this is not so: the odor of the sauce might neutralize any poison which
might be lurking in the lettuce, and thus the lettuce need not be
entirely immersed, and as for washing the hands, that is merely a
precaution lest they accidentally touch the sauce.

R. Papa said again: "The bitter herbs should not be allowed to stay any
length of time in the sauce, lest the spices draw out the bitterness,
and thus make the bitter herbs tasteless."

R. Hisda led Rabbana Ubqa by the arms and the latter preached: "If a man
washed his hands prior to dipping the lettuce the first time, he should
nevertheless wash his hands again when dipping a second time." The
rabbis told this to R. Papa, and remarked that the statement did not
refer to the Passover-meal alone, but that it was a general rule; for if
it referred to the Passover-meal alone, why should a man wash his hands
the second time, he had already performed that duty?

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rejoined R. Papa:
"On the contrary! The statement refers to the Passover-meal alone; for
where do we find that a second dipping is required, and should it be
claimed that the duty had already been performed, hence a second washing
of the hands were unnecessary, it should be taken into consideration,
that between the first and second washing of the hands the recital of
the Haggada and the Hallel prayer was accomplished, and thus the first
washing of the hands might have been lost sight of?"

Rabha said: "If a man swallowed unleavened bread (without masticating
it), even if he did not taste it, he has acquitted himself of the duty
of eating unleavened bread; but if he swallowed the bitter herbs without
getting a taste of the bitterness, he has not discharged the duty
pertaining to eating bitter herbs If he swallowed unleavened bread
together with bitter herbs, he has acquitted himself of the duty
pertaining to unleavened bread, but not of that pertaining to bitter
herbs. If he had, however, wrapped the unleavened bread together with
the bitter herbs in a leaf (or peel of a fruit) and swallowed it, so
that neither the unleavened bread nor the bitter herbs touched the
palate, he did not even discharge the duty pertaining to unleavened
bread."

R. Shimi bar Ashi said: "Unleavened bread, bitter herbs, and Charoseth
must be dealt out to each man separately, but immediately before the
Haggada is read, the tables on which the food is served <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) should not be removed at once, but only
from the man who is about to recite." R. Huna, however, said: "The
things mentioned were only served to the man who was to recite the
Haggada, and he would then deal them out to the others," and the Halakha
prevails according to the decree of R. Huna.

For what purpose were the tables removed? Said the disciples of R.
Janai: "In order to excite the curiosity of the children present, and
induce them to inquire into the reasons."

Abayi while still a child sat at a table in the presence of Rabba, and
observed that the table of Rabba was removed. Said Abayi: "We have not
yet eaten our meal, why are the tables being removed?" and Rabba
replied: "By thy question we are absolved from commencing with the
passage: 'Wherefore is this night distinguished from all nights?' and we
can immediately proceed with the answer: 'Because we were slaves,'" etc.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

Samuel said: It is written \[Deut. xvi. 3\]: "Bread of affliction"
(Le'hem Oni), and as "Oni" can also stand for "proclaiming," the bread
may be called "bread of proclamation," *i.e.*, "[bread
over](errata.htm#10) which proclamations should be made," and thus we
have also learned in a Boraitha (with the following supplementary
statement): Or "Oni" may still be called "poor," and for the reason that
the benediction pertaining to the eating of the unleavened bread should
be made over a broken piece after the manner of the poor.

"*Although it is not obligatory to use Charoseth*," etc. If it is not
obligatory, why is it used? For the purpose of neutralizing any poison
that might be contained in the bitter herbs, said R. Ami.

"*R. Elazar ben Zadok, however, said: It is obligatory*," etc. What
religious purpose can it serve? Said R. Levi: "It serves as a
remembrance of the apple-trees." <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90) R.
Johanan, however, said: "It serves as a remembrance of the loam which
the Israelites were compelled to prepare when in bondage in Egypt." Said
Abayi: Therefore the Charoseth should be made to have an acid taste in
memory of the apple-trees, and also thick, in memory of the loam.

We have learned in a Boraitha in support of R. Johanan, viz.: "The
spices used in the preparation of the Charoseth were in memory of the
straw used in the preparation of the loam, and the Charoseth was in
memory of the loam itself." R. Elazar ben Zadok said: "The vendors of
spices in Jerusalem would shout on the streets, 'Come and buy spices for
the religious purpose'!"

MISHNA: A second cup of wine is poured out; and the son should then
inquire of his father (the reasons for the ceremony). If the son is
mentally incapacitated to do this, the father is bound to instruct him
as follows: Wherefore is this night distinguished from all other nights?
That on all other nights we may eat either leavened or unleavened bread,
but on this it must be all unleavened; on all other nights we may eat
all kinds of herbs, but on this we may only eat bitter herbs; on all
other nights we may eat meat, roasted, boiled, or cooked in different
ways, but on this night we may only eat it roasted; on

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

all other nights we immerse what we eat once, but on this night twice.
And according to the powers of comprehension of the child, thus should
his father teach him: first, he should inform him of the disgrace (of
our ancestors), and then conclude with the recital of the favorable and
laudatory passages; he should expound the passage \[Deutr. xxvi. 5\]: "A
Syrian, wandering about, was my father," etc., until the end of the
passage \[ibid. 9\].

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: One who has an intelligent son should be
asked by his son; if the son is not sufficiently intelligent, the wife
should inquire, and if the wife is not capable, he himself should ask
those questions; and even if two scholars who are well versed in the
laws of the Passover should sit together at the Passover-meal, one
should ask the other the above questions.

The Mishna states, "on all other nights we immerse what we eat once."
"Is, then, this done because it is a duty?" asked Rabha. "Therefore,"
said he, "it should state this: On all other nights we are not even
bound to immerse what we eat once, but on this night we must do so
twice.'"

R. Saphra opposed this: "Shall we tell children of the duty: what do
children know of duty? Therefore let the Mishna rather state: 'On all
other nights we do not immerse what we eat at all, but on this night we
do so twice.'"

MISHNA: Rabbon Gamaliel used to say: Whosoever does not mention the
following three things on the Passover has not fulfilled his duty. They
are: The paschal sacrifice, the unleavened cakes, and the bitter herbs.
The paschal sacrifice is offered because the Lord passed over the houses
of our ancestors in Egypt, as it is written \[Exod. xii. 27\]: "That ye
shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Passover unto the Lord, who passed
over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt," etc.; the
unleavened bread is eaten because our ancestors were redeemed from Egypt
(before they had time to leaven their dough), as it is written \[ibid.
34\]: "And the people took up their dough before it was leavened," etc.;
and bitter herbs are eaten because the Egyptians embittered the lives of
our ancestors in Egypt, as it is written \[ibid. 1-14\]: "And they made
their lives bitter," etc. It is therefore incumbent on every person, in
all ages, that he should consider it as though he had personally gone
forth from Egypt, as it is written \[ibid. xiii. 8\]: "And thou shalt
tell thy son on that day, saying, This is done for the sake of that
which the Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt."

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We are therefore
in duty bound to thank, praise, adore, glorify, extol, honor, bless,
exalt, and reverence Him who wrought all these miracles for our
ancestors and for us; for He brought us forth from bondage to freedom,
He changed our sorrow into joy, our mourning into a feast, He led us
from darkness into a great light, and from servitude into redemption:
let us therefore say in His presence, "Hallelujah" (sing the Hallel
prayer).

How far is the Hallel then to be said? According to Beth Shammai, till
\[Psalms cxiii. 9\]: "He causeth the barren woman to dwell," etc.; but
according to Beth Hillel, till \[ibid. cxiv. 8\]: "Who changeth the rock
into a pool of water," etc., and they are to close with a blessing for
the redemption. R. Tarphon says: This is the form: "Blessed art thou, O
Lord our God, Sovereign of the universe, who hast redeemed us and our
ancestors from Egypt," without any further concluding blessing. R.
Aqiba, however, says: "(The preceding should be continued as follows.)
Thus mayest thou, O Lord our God, and the God of our ancestors, bring us
to the peaceable enjoyment of other solemn feasts and sacred seasons
which are nigh unto us, that we may rejoice in the rebuilding of thy
city and exult in thy service, that we may there eat of the paschal and
other sacrifices," etc., until "Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast
redeemed Israel."

GEMARA: Rabha said: One must say, the Lord hath redeemed us from Egypt,
and he said again. The unleavened bread and the bitter herbs must be
lifted up when about to be eaten, but the meat need not be lifted up;
and, moreover, if the meat were lifted up, it would appear as if
consecrated things were eaten outside (of the Temple).

R. A'ha bar Jacob said: "A blind man is exempt from the recital of the
Haggada, and this is adduced from the comparison by analogy of the two
passages \[Exod. xiii. 8\]: '*This* is done,' etc., and \[Deut. xxi.
20\]: '*This* our son is stubborn,' etc.; and as concerning the latter
verse it is taught elsewhere that, if the parents of the son be blind,
and hence unable to point him out, the son shall not be stoned, so
concerning the former verse it is taught, that a blind man is exempt
from the duty of the recital."

Is this indeed the case? Did not Mareimar say that he asked the teachers
of the disciples of R. Joseph who recited the Haggada in the house of R.
Joseph, and that they answered. "R. Joseph," and who recited the Haggada
in the house of R. Shesheth, and they answered: "R. Shesheth" (R. Joseph
and

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Shesheth were
both blind)? (The answer is,) both R. Joseph and R. Shesheth hold, that
the entire ceremony pertaining to unleavened bread is in these days only
a rabbinical institution (and therefore its observance is optional).

"*It is therefore incumbent on every person*," etc. Said R. Jehoshua ben
Levi: "With ten different expressions of praise the entire Book of
Psalms was composed, namely: With Nitzua'ch, Nigon, Maskil, Mizmor,
Shir, Ashrai, Thehiloh, Thephilalh, Hodaah, and Hallelujah. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) The most important of all the expressions
is that of Hallelujah, because it contains within itself both praise and
the Name."

Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: "The song in the Scriptures
\[Exod. xv.\] was sung by Moses with Israel when coming up out of the
sea, and who recited the Hallel? The prophets among them ordained, that
at all times when they are delivered out of affliction, they should say
it on account of their redemption."

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Meir said: All the praises uttered in
the Book of Psalms were uttered by David, as it is written \[Psalms
lxxii. 20\]: "Here are ended the prayers of David the son of Jesse." Do
not read "Kolu" (are ended), but "Kol Elu" (all these are).

Who said Hallel? Said R. Jose: "My son Elazar says, that Moses together
with Israel said it, when coming up out of the sea, but his colleagues
differ with him, maintaining that David said it; but to me my son's
opinion seems the more reasonable, for how can it be that the Israelites
should slaughter their paschal offerings and take their palm-branches,
and not sing a song of praise?"

The rabbis taught: All the songs and hymns in the Book of Psalms were,
according to the dictum of R. Elazar, sung by David for his own sake;
but R. Jehoshua says, that he did so for the congregation at large, and
the sages say, that some were uttered by him for the congregation at
large while others were only for his own sake, namely, those which he
uttered in the singular were for his own sake and those uttered in the
plural were for the community at large. The Psalms containing the terms
Nitzua'ch and Nigon were intended for the future; those containing the
term Maskil were proclaimed through an interpreter;

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

where the psalm commences "Le-David Mizmor" the Shekhina first rested
upon David and then he sang the psalm, but where it commences "Mizmor
Le-David" he first sang the psalm and then the Shekhina rested upon him,
whence it may be inferred that the Shekhina does not rest upon one who
is in a state of idleness, or sorrow, or laughter, or thoughtlessness,
or upon him who indulges in vain words, but only upon one who rejoices
in the fulfilment of a duty, as it is written \[II Kings iii. 15\]: "But
now bring me a musician. And it came to pass when the musician played,
that the inspiration of the Lord came upon him."

Said R. Jehudah in the name of Rabh: "The same applies to the study of
Halakhaoth," and R. Na'hman said: "The same also applies to a good
dream."

Is this indeed the case? Did not R. Giddel say in the name of Rabh, that
every scholar who sits in the presence of his Master in other than a
serious mood cannot retain anything he has learned, so as to be able to
repeat it with his lips? as it is written \[Solomon's Song v. 13\]: "His
lips, like roses, dripping with fluid myrrh." (The Hebrew term for roses
is "Shoshanim," and for learning the term is "Shanah." The expression
for "myrrh" is "mar," which also signifies bitterness. Thus the passage
may be interpreted as follows:) "The lips that learn, drip with
bitterness (seriousness)." Thus we see that seriousness is necessary
when learning, and not rejoicing? This presents no difficulty. Rejoicing
is necessary for the teacher, *i.e.*, be should be in an agreeable mood;
but the disciple who is learning must be serious, and if you wish, I
will tell you that both apply to the teacher, but the former applies
before the teacher commenced his lecture and the latter when he had
already commenced, as Rabba was wont to do, namely: He would preface his
lecture with a joke and bring his disciples into a good humor; then he
would proceed in all seriousness and teach the Halakha.

The rabbis taught: Who said the Hallel? R. Elazar said: Moses and Israel
said it when standing by the sea. They said what is written \[Psalms
cxv. i\]: "Not for our sake, O Lord, not for our sake, but unto thy name
give glory," and the Holy Spirit replied (Isaiah xlviii. 11\]: "For my
own sake, for my own sake, will I do it"; and R. Jehudah said: Joshua
and Israel said it when they did battle with the kings of the
Canaanites. Israel said: "Not for our sake," etc., and the Holy Spirit
said:

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "For my own sake,"
etc. R. Elazar of Modai said: Deborah and Barak said it when Sissera
waged war upon them. They said: "Not for our sake," and the Holy Spirit
replied: "For my own sake," etc. R. Elazar ben Azariah said: King
Hezekiah and his companions said it when Sennacherib waged war upon
them. They said: "Not for our sake," etc., and the Holy Spirit replied:
"For my sake," etc. R. Aqiba said: Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah said
it when Nebuchadnezzar was about to throw them into the fiery furnace.
They said: "Not for our sake," etc., and the Holy Spirit replied: "For
my sake," etc. R. Jose the Galilean said: Mordechai and Esther said it
when Haman the wicked rose up against them. They said: "Not for our
sake," etc., and the Holy Spirit replied: "For my sake," etc.; but the
sages said, that the prophets among the Israelites arranged so that
whenever affliction overtook the Israelites, they said it in the hour of
their redemption.

Said R. Hisda: "Each Hallelujah denotes the conclusion of a chapter in
Psalms," but Rabba bar R. Huna said: It denotes the commencement of a
chapter." Said R. Hisda: I saw the Book of Psalms in the hands of R.
Hanan bar Rabh, and observed that a Hallelujah stood in the midst of a
chapter, whence I infer that there must have been a doubt whether it
belonged at the beginning of the chapter or at the end, and for that
reason it was placed in the centre." Said R. Hanin the son of Rabha: All
agree, that after the verse \[Psalms cxlv. 21\]: "The praise of the Lord
shall my mouth speak: and let all flesh bless His holy name for ever and
ever," the Hallelujah is the commencement of the chapter; and after the
verse \[ibid. cxii. 10\]: "The wicked shall see it and be vexed; he will
gnash with his teeth and melt away; the longing of the wicked shall
perish," the Hallelujah is also the commencement of a chapter; and after
the verse \[ibid. cxxxv. 2\]: "Ye that stand in the house of the Lord,
in the courts of the house of our God," the Hallelujah is also the
beginning of a chapter. The Karaites <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92)
add to these verses, ibid. cx. 7 and ibid. cxi. 10, after both of which
the Hallelujah is the beginning of a chapter.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

Shall we assume, that the Tanaim also differ concerning the Hallelujah
in the above Mishna? We have learned: How far is the Hallel to be said?
According to Beth Shammai, till \[Psalms cxiii. 9\] "the joyful mother
of children," etc., but according to Beth Hillel, till \[ibid. cxiv. 5\]
"who changeth the rock into a pool of water"; and we have learned in
another Boraitha, according to Beth Shammai, till \[ibid. cxiv. 1\]
"when Israel went forth out of Egypt," and according to Beth Hillel,
till \[ibid. cxv. 1\] "not for our sake, O Lord," etc. Shall we then
assume, that those who say till "the joyful mother of children," hold
that the Hallelujah which succeeds the verse is the beginning of a
chapter, while those who say that the Hallel should be said till "when
Israel went forth out of Egypt," hold the Hallelujah to be the end of a
chapter? Nay; R. Hisda may answer this according to his own theory, that
all agree upon Hallelujah as being the end of a chapter, and that those
who in accordance with Beth Shammai say the Hallel till "when Israel
went forth out of Egypt," are perfectly correct, as they already include
the Hallelujah, but those who according to Beth Shammai in the first
Boraitha say the Hallel as far as "the joyful mother of children," mean
to include that verse also with the Hallelujah.

Rabba bar R. Huna, however, may answer this according to his theory,
that all agree upon Hallelujah as being the beginning of a chapter, and
that those who according to Beth Shammai say the Hallel as far as "the
joyful mother of children," are correct, while those who say it till
"when Israel went forth out of Egypt," mean to *exclude* that verse with
the Hallelujah.

"*They are to close with a blessing for the redemption*." Rabha said: In
the reading of the Shema and the Hallel the redemption of Israel should
be referred to in the past tense, namely: "Who hast redeemed," etc.,
while in the prayer embracing the eighteen benedictions it should be
referred to in the future tense, namely: "Who wilt redeem," etc., for a
prayer should be made to apply to the future and not to the past.

R. Zera said: When the Kiddush is said, the benediction contained
therein must read: "Who hast sanctified us with his commandments," etc.,
but in prayer the sentence should read: "Sanctify us with thy
commandments," etc., because such is the prayer for Mercy.

R. Aha bar Jacob said: In the benediction contained in the Kiddush, the
exodus from Egypt must be referred to, and this

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

is derived from a comparison by analogy in the verses \[Deutr. xvi. 3\]:
"That thou mayest remember the day of thy going forth out of Egypt,"
etc., and \[Exod. xx. 8\]: "Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy,"
whence the inference, that the exodus from Egypt must be remembered in
the Kiddush.

Rabba bar Shela said: In the prayer for redemption, the sentence, "He
causeth to sprout the foundation of help," should be said, and the
benediction pronounced after the recital of the Haphtorah <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93) should be concluded, after the blessing
for the redemption, with "the shield of David." As it is written \[II
Sam. vii. 9\]: "I have made thee a great name, like the name of the
great," etc., and R. Joseph taught that it signifies the conclusion with
"the shield of David."

R. Simeon ben Lakish said: It is written \[Gen. xii. 2\]: "And I will
make of thee a great nation," and this is explanatory to the term "the
God of Abraham" used in prayer. "I will bless thee" \[ibid.\] refers to
"the God of Isaac," and "make thy name great" \[ibid.\] refers to "the
God of Jacob"; and lest we assume that the conclusion of the
benedictions should also be made to embrace all three terms, therefore
the passage \[ibid.\] ends with "and *thou* shalt be a blessing,"
signifying that only one (and that is Abraham) should form the
concluding blessing.

Rabba said: I discovered that the sages of Pumbaditha once sat and
proclaimed the following: "On Sabbath, both in the recital of the
Kiddush and in prayer, the concluding blessing must be 'who hath
sanctified the Sabbath,' and on a festival also, both in prayer and in
the Kiddush, the concluding benediction must be 'who hath sanctified
Israel and the time of the festivals.'" Said I to the sages: "On the
contrary! On Sabbath and on festivals the concluding blessing of the
prayer should be 'who hath sanctified Israel,' but the concluding
benediction of the Kiddush on the Sabbath should be 'who hath sanctified
the Sabbath,' while on a festival it should be 'who hath sanctified
Israel and the time of the festivals,' and I will tell you the reason
both for your assertion and my own. Your reason is, that Sabbath is not
an institution of the Israelites themselves, but one ordained for them
from the beginning; hence it should be said 'who hath sanctified the
Sabbath,' but on the festivals, which are instituted by the Israelites
themselves, by making

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

months intercalary or ordinary, it should be said, 'who hath sanctified
Israel and the time of the festivals.'

"My reason is, however, that as prayer is generally offered up by an
assembly, it should therefore conclude with 'who hath sanctified
Israel'; but Kiddush, which is recited by an individual, should conclude
with 'who hath sanctified the Sabbath,' and, on festivals only, with
'who hath sanctified Israel and the time of the festivals.'" \[This is,
however, no argument; for prayer may be offered up by an individual, and
Kiddush can be said in an assembly.\]

Ula, the son of Rabh, in the presence of Rabha, prayed in accordance
with the dictum of the sages of Pumbaditha, and Rabha did not object;
whence we may infer that he retracted his former statement and finally
agreed with those sages.

R. Nathan the father of R. Huna ben Nathan also prayed in the presence
of R. Papa in accordance with the dictum of the elders of Pumbaditha,
and R. Papa commended him for doing so.

Rabhina said: "I once came to Sura and prayed in the synagogue in the
presence of Mareimar, and the reader prayed in accordance with the
dictum of the sages of Pumbaditha. The congregation, however, desired to
silence him, when Mareimar said to them: 'Let him proceed; for the
Halakha prevails according to the sages of Pumbaditha.'"

MISHNA: A third cup of wine is then poured out, and the benediction
after meals is said. After pouring out the fourth cup, the Hallel should
be concluded over it and the blessings on the songs of praise be said. A
person may drink as much as he chooses between the second and third
cups, but not between the third and fourth.

GEMARA: Said R. Hanan to Rabha: "Infer from this Mishna, that for the
benediction after meals a cup (of wine) is required," and Rabha replied:
"Nay; these four cups serve as a symbol of our freedom, and incidentally
they were divided for the accomplishment of several religious duties,
but no inference should be made that the benediction after meals
requires a cup of wine."

"*And the blessings on the songs of praise (should) be said*." What are
these blessings? R. Jehudah said: The prayer following the Hallel,
namely: "All thy works, O Lord, shall praise thee," etc., and R. Johanan
said: The prayer commencing: "The breath of all living," etc.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

The rabbis taught: On the fourth cup the Hallel is concluded, and the
great Hallel should also be recited thereon. Such is the decree of R.
Tarphon, and according to another version, R. Tarphon decreed that the
chapter \[Psalms xxiii.\], "The Lord is my shepherd," etc., should also
be said. Whence does the great Hallel commence? Said R. Jehudah: From
\[Psalms cxxxvi.\] "Give thanks unto the Lord," etc., until \[ibid.
cxxxvii.\] "by the rivers of Babylon," etc. R. Johanan, however, said:
From \[ibid. cxx.\] "A song of the degrees," etc., until \[ibid.
cxxxvii.\] "by the rivers of Babylon," etc. R. Aha bar Jacob, however,
said: From \[ibid. cxxxv. 4\] "For Jacob hath the Lord chosen," etc.,
until \[ibid. cxxxvii.\] "by the rivers of Babylon," etc.

Why is this called the great Hallel? Said R. Johanan "Because the Holy
One, blessed be He, sits in the uppermost height of the world and thence
deals out food for all his creatures (as it is written \[Psalms cxxxvi.
25, 26\]: "Who giveth food unto all flesh; for to eternity endureth his
kindness. O give thanks unto the God of the heavens," etc.).

R. Jehoshua ben Levi said: "The twenty-six verses of the chapter
\[cxxxvi.\] apply to the twenty-six generations existing before the Law
was given, and who were nourished only by His grace."

R. Hisda said: The passage \[ibid. cxxxvi. 1\], "O give thanks unto the
Lord, for he is good," signifies that the Lord punishes man for evil
deeds only by diminishing his (the man's) possessions (goods); *f.i.*, a
rich man is punished by the loss of an ox, a poor man by the loss of a
sheep, an orphan by the loss of an egg, and a widow by the loss of her
hen, etc.

R. Johanan said: The earning of a man's daily bread is twice as
laborious to him as the bearing of a child is to a woman, for concerning
a woman lying-in it is written \[Gen. iii. 16\]: "In pain (Be'etzeb)
shalt thou bring forth children," while concerning man it is written
\[ibid. 17\]: "In pain (Be'itzabon) shalt thou eat of it all the days of
thy life," which implies a greater degree of pain.

R. Johanan said again: The earning of a man's daily bread is beset with
more difficulty than the redemption; for concerning the redemption it is
written \[Gen. xlviii. 16\]: "The angel who redeemed me from all evil,"
while concerning a man's daily bread it is written \[ibid. 15\]: "The
God who fed me from my first being unto this day," whence we see that
for redemption it

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

only required an angel, while for the sustenance of a man it required
God's providence.

R. Jehoshua ben Levi said: When the Lord said to Adam \[Gen. iii. 18\]:
"And thorns and thistles shall it (the earth) bring forth to thee,"
tears ran from Adam's eyes, and he said: "Creator of the Universe! Shall
then I and my ass eat of the same crib?" but when he heard the Lord say
\[ibid. 19\]: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread," he felt
relieved. Said R. Simeon ben Lakish: "It were better for us had we been
left in our original condition, when we were doomed to eat the herbs of
the field; then we would not have been obliged to work so hard for our
bread." <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94) Said Abayi: "We have not yet
been released from that doom, for there are quite a number of herbs
which we can eat directly from the field."

R. Shezbi said in the name of R. Elazar ben Azariah: "The earning of a
man's daily bread is as difficult of accomplishment as was the dividing
of the Red Sea for the Israelites when going out of Egypt."

If it is necessary to recite the great Hallel, why must the small Hallel
be recited at the Passover-meal? Because the small Hallel contains the
following five things: "The exodus from Egypt, the dividing of the Red
Sea, the giving of the Law to the Israelites, the resurrection of the
dead, and the sufferings in the time of the Messiah." The exodus from
Egypt, as it is written \[Psalms cxiv. 1\]: "When Israel went forth out
of Egypt"; the dividing of the Red Sea, as it is said \[ibid. 3\]: "The
sea beheld it, and fled"; the giving of the Law, as it is said \[ibid.
6\]: "Ye mountains, that ye skip like wethers," referring to the time
when the Law was given to Israel; the resurrection of the dead, as it is
said \[ibid. cxvi. 9\]: "I will walk before the Lord in the lands of
life"; and the sufferings in the time of the Messiah, as it is written
\[ibid. cxv. i\]: "Not for our sake, O Lord," etc., commenting upon
which, R. Johanan said that it refers to the time of the war of Gog and
Magog (which will occur just before the coming of the Messiah and will
be the worst period for the Israelites to pass through).

R. Na'hman bar Itz'hak said: The small Hallel is recited for another
reason, namely, because it contains the transposition of the souls of
the righteous from Gehenna to Heaven, as it is

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

written \[Psalms cxvi. 4\]: "I beseech thee, O Lord! release my soul"
(from Gehenna).

Hez'kyah said: There is still another reason why the small Hallel should
be recited, namely, because it is mentioned that Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah were thrown into the fiery furnace and came out alive: for the
passage, "Not for our sake, O Lord," was said by Hananiah; "but unto thy
name give glory," was said by Mishael, and "for the sake of thy
kindness, for the sake of thy truth," was said by Azariah; and the next
passage, "Wherefore should the nations say, Where now is their God?"
they all three said together. This happened when they were thrown into
the fiery furnace, and when they came out Hananiah said the passage
\[Psalms cxvii.\], "Praise the Lord, all ye nations"; Mishael said:
"Praise him, all ye people." "For mighty is his kindness over us," was
said by Azariah, and "And the truth of the Lord endureth forever,
Hallelujah!" all three said in unison. According to another version,
this last sentence, "The truth of the Lord endureth forever," was said
by the angel Gabriel, because it was said that when Nimrod the wicked
threw Abraham our father into the fiery furnace, the angel Gabriel said
to the Lord: "Permit me to go and make the furnace cold, that it may do
no harm to Abraham," and the Holy One, blessed be He, replied: "Abraham
is now the only one who has forsaken idolatry and believes in God, and I
am the only One in the world, hence it would be but fair that the only
One should rescue the other exception," and as the Holy One, blessed be
He, would not deprive any one creature of the reward due, He said to
Gabriel: "Thou shalt have an opportunity to rescue three of his children
from the fiery furnace, while I Myself shall rescue him." (Whereupon
Gabriel is supposed to have said: "The truth of the Lord endureth
forever.")

R. Simeon of Shiloni preached: When Nebuchadnezzar the wicked threw
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah into the fiery furnace, the angel
Jurqami, master of the waters, came before the Lord and said: "Permit me
to go and cool the furnace, so that I might rescue the righteous from
death." Said Gabriel to him: "This would not prove the power of the
Lord, for it is well known that water can extinguish fire, and thou art
the master of waters; hence it would be but commonplace if through thy
means the furnace were cooled. Rather should I, who am the master of
fire, be permitted to go, and I shall remove the fire on the inside and
make it so much more fierce on the

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

outside, which will be a miracle within a miracle; for a master of fire
will make the fire cool in one place and so much hotter in another."
Whereupon the Lord said: "Go thou, Gabriel, and do so," and Gabriel
said: "The truth of the Lord endureth forever."

R. Nathan said: The truth of the Lord endureth forever, was said by the
fish of the sea, and this is in accordance with the dictum of R. Huna,
who said: When the Israelites were brought forth out of Egypt, they were
still sceptics, and when taken through the Red Sea, they said: "Surely
the Egyptians have passed through the sea at another point, and will
overtake and slay us." So the Lord said to the master of the sea: "Throw
out all the bodies of the Egyptians in the sea on dry land, so that the
Israelites may see them," and the master of the sea replied: "Creator of
the Universe! Is there then a slave who was given a gift by his master,
and was then deprived of it again?" So the Lord replied: "I shall return
to thee half as many again as thou shalt throw out," and the master of
the sea said again: "Creator of the Universe! Is there then a slave who
should demand restitution of his master?" and the Lord answered again:
"The stream of Kishon shall be thy pledge." Whereupon all the bodies of
the Egyptians were thrown up on the dry land, and Israel saw them, as it
is written \[Exod. xiv. 30\]: "And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon
the shore of the sea." Whence do we know that the Lord promised half as
many again in return for the bodies of the Egyptians? Because concerning
the Egyptians it is said \[ibid. xiv. 7\]: "And he took six hundred
chariots," while concerning Sissera it is said \[Judges iv. 3\]: "For he
had nine hundred chariots of iron."

When Sissera came to wage war upon the Israelites, he came with iron
spears; but the Lord changed the position of the stars, as it is written
\[Judges v. 20\]: "From heaven they fought: the stars in their courses
fought against Sissera." As soon as the stars moved, the spears of
Sissera's army became heated, so the men went to cool them in the stream
of Kishon, and then the Lord said to the stream of Kishon: "Thou wast
pledged, Go now, and redeem thy pledge." Whereupon the stream threw them
all into the sea, as it is written \[ibid. 21\]: "The stream of Kishon
swept them away, that ancient stream, the stream of Kishon." Why is it
called the ancient stream? It is so called, because it was given as a
pledge in ancient time. Then, when all those men were swept into the
sea, the fishes, which were

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

thus provided with so much food, said: "The truth of the Lord endureth
forever."

Rabha preached: It is written \[Psalms cxvi. \]: "It is lovely to me,
that the Lord heareth my voice." The congregation of Israel (Kneseth
Israel) said to the Holy One, blessed be He: "Lord of the Universe! When
do I know that I have found favor in thine eyes, when thou hearest my
prayer?" Further, it is written \[ibid. 6\]: "I was in misery, and He
helped me." The congregation of Israel said to the Lord: "Lord of the
Universe! Although I am deficient in the fulfilment of religious duties,
I am nevertheless thine; hence it would be seemly that thou shouldest
help me."

R. Kahana said: When R. Ishmael bar R. Jose became ill, Rabbi sent to
him the following request: "Tell us two or three things which thou wert
wont to say in the name of thy father," and R. Ishmael replied: So said
my father: The passage \[Psalms cxvii. 1\], "Praise the Lord, all ye
nations," signifies that all the nations should praise Him, on account
of the power and the miracles with which He has helped the nations, and
so much the more should we Israelites praise him; for concerning us it
is written \[ibid. 2\]: "For mighty is his kindness over us." My father
also said: In the future, Egypt will bring a gift to our Messiah, and he
will hesitate whether to accept it or not, when the Lord will say unto
him: "Accept it, for they were hospitable to my children in their land,"
and it is written \[Psalms lxviii. 32\]: "Nobles will come out of Egypt"
(with gifts). Seeing this, Ethiopia will say: "If the gifts of Egypt,
which held the Israelites in bondage, were accepted, surely gifts from
us, who never did them any injury, will be so much the more accepted."
So the Lord will say to the Messiah: "Accept their gifts also," and it
is written \[ibid.\]: "Ethiopia will stretch forth her hands eagerly
unto God." When Rome shall see this, they will say: "Surely if the gifts
of the Ethiopians, who are nowise near to the Israelites, were accepted,
gifts from us, who are their brethren, <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) will be accepted." And the Lord said to
the angel Gabriel: "Rebuke the wild beasts" \[Psalms lxviii. 31\], and
R. Hyya bar Abba in the name of R. Johanan explains this to mean:
"Rebuke the wild beasts, whose quills, are used solely to write decrees
to the detriment of the Israelites," and the

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

further passage \[ibid.\], "the troop of steers among the calves of
nations," signifies that they (the Romans) were like a troop who slew
the greatest among the Israelites like calves who had no owners. "That
hasten along with presents of silver," signifies that they stretch forth
their hands to receive bribes from the Israelites, promising them
permission to carry out the ordinances of their law; but when in receipt
of the bribe violate their promises and prevent the Israelites from
performing their religious duties. "He scattereth the nations that are
eager for the fight," signifies the following: "What was the cause of
the scattering of Israel among the nations? Their own eagerness for
strife."

Finally, R. Ishmael sent to them the following saying of his father:
"There will be a city containing 365 market-places; each market will
have 365 stalls; each stall will have 365 steps; and each step will
contain merchandise sufficient for the entire world." So R. Simeon the
son of Rabbi asked his father, according to others he asked R. Ishmael
ben Jose: "To whom will such a city belong?" and the answer was: "To
thee, to thy colleagues, and to the friends of thy colleagues (*i.e.*,
to all righteous men), as it is written \[Isaiah xxiii. 18\]: "And her
gain and her hire shall be holy to the Lord; it shall not be treasured
nor laid up; but for those that dwell before the Lord shall her gain be,
to eat to fulness, and for magnificent clothing.'"

\[Said R. Samuel ben Na'hmeni in the name of R. Jonathan: The passage
\[Psalms cxviii. 21\], "I will thank thee, for thou hast answered me,"
was said by David. The next passage \[ibid. 22\], "The stone which the
builders rejected is become the chief corner-stone," was said by Jesse
(when David was chosen king). The following passage \[ibid. 23\], "From
the Lord is this come to pass," was said by David's brothers, and the
next passage \[ibid. 24\], "This is the day which the Lord hath made,"
was said by Samuel. "We beseech thee, O Lord! save us now" \[ibid. 25\],
was said by the brothers of David. "We beseech thee, O Lord! Send us now
prosperity" \[ibid. ibid.\], was said by David himself. "Blessed be he
that cometh in the name of the Lord" \[ibid. 26\], was said by Jesse,
and "We bless you out of the house of the Lord" \[ibid. ibid.\], was
said by Samuel. "God is the Lord, and he giveth us light" \[ibid. 27\],
was said by all. "Bind the festive sacrifice with cords" \[ibid.
ibid.\], was said by Samuel. "Thou art my God, and I will thank thee"
\[ibid. 28\], was said by David, and "My God, I will exalt thee"
\[ibid.\], was said by all.\]

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

R. Avira preached at one time, saying it in the name of R. Ami, and at
another time quoting it in the name of R. Assi: It is written \[Gen.
xxi. 8\]: "And the child grew and was weaned," which signifies that the
Lord will prepare a meal for the children of Isaac on the day when he
will receive them into his favor. After the meal and the beverages will
have been consumed, the Lord will hand the cup used for the benediction
after meals to Abraham, and Abraham will say: "I am not worthy; for from
me issued forth Ishmael." Isaac will then be asked to pronounce the
benediction, but he will refuse on the ground that from him issued forth
Esau. Jacob will then be offered the cup, but he will refuse on the
ground that he married two sisters, which was afterwards prohibited by
Law. Moses will then be requested to say the benediction, but he also
will refuse, on the ground that he was not destined to enter the
promised land, neither before nor after his death. Joshua will then be
asked to accept the cup, and he also will refuse, saying: "I am not
worthy, for I died childless." David will finally be offered the cup,
and he will accept it, saying: "I am indeed worthy and shall recite the
benediction," as it is written \[Psalms cxvi. 13\]: "The cup of
salvation will I lift up, and on the name of the Lord will I call."

MISHNA: It is unlawful to conclude the eating of the paschal sacrifice
with a dessert.

GEMARA: What is meant by a dessert? Said Rabh: "After the paschal
sacrifice had been eaten in one company, one should not go and eat aught
in another company," and Samuel said: "The literal meaning should be
taken, as, for instance, I am used to eating mushrooms for dessert, and
Abba (Rabh) eats doves for dessert."

R. Hinana bar Shila and R. Johanan both say: "It means, that no dates,
parched corn, or nuts should be eaten afterwards," and so we have also
learned in a Boraitha.

R. Joseph said in the name of R. Jehudah, quoting Samuel: "After the
unleavened bread, dessert may be eaten." Shall we assume that the Mishna
supports this statement by teaching that after the paschal sacrifice no
dessert should be eaten, but after the unleavened bread it may? Nay; on
the contrary, after unleavened bread, which has a hardly perceptible
taste, dessert must certainly not be eaten, but lest we assume that
after the paschal sacrifice, which is fat and has a pungent savor, we
may do so, hence we are taught that it is unlawful.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

And objection was made: "We have learned that sponge-cake, honey-cake,
and sugar-cake may be eaten to satiety, providing a piece of unleavened
bread to the size of an olive be eaten afterwards," whence we see that
those sweetmeats may be eaten before but not afterwards. Nay; this is
merely to teach us, that not only does a man fulfil by eating unleavened
bread when he is hungry, but even if he does so when satiated, he also
acquits himself of the duty.

Rabha said: In the present day, the law pertaining to unleavened bread
is biblical, but that pertaining to bitter herbs is rabbinical. Why is
the law pertaining to bitter herbs rabbinical? Because the biblical law
is, that it should be eaten with the paschal sacrifice; but where the
latter does not exist, the bitter herbs need not be eaten? Would this
not apply also to the unleavened bread? Concerning unleavened bread
there is a separate and distinct commandment, namely \[Exod. xii. 18\]:
"In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening,
shall ye eat unleavened bread." R. A'ha bar Jacob, however, said, that
the law pertaining to unleavened bread is also rabbinical, and the
passage just quoted refers to such as were incapacitated to eat of the
paschal sacrifice, and who might assume that they were exempt from
eating unleavened bread also, hence that passage imposes upon them the
duty.

The following Boraitha supports the statement of Rabha: The passage
\[Deut. xvi. 8\], "Six days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, and on the
seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to the Lord thy God," implying
that on the seventh day eating of unleavened bread is not obligatory:
the same is the case with the other six days. Why so? Because the
seventh day was excluded from the rule governing the whole seven days,
and as there is a tradition that an exception holds good for the entire
rule, so the exception of the seventh day holds good for the entire six;
*i.e.*, if it is not obligatory to eat unleavened bread on the seventh
day, it is also not obligatory on the other six days. Shall we assume,
then, that it is also not obligatory on the first night? for that reason
it is expressly written: "At evening shall ye eat unleavened bread,"
which makes it obligatory for that evening.

Shall we say that as the paschal sacrifice was a duty only when the
Temple was in existence, so it is with the unleavened bread, that after
the destruction of the Temple it is not obligatory; therefore the
passage says: "In the evening ye shall

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

eat Matzoth," consequently the passage made this obligatory forever.

MISHNA: If any of the company fall asleep during the meal, they may eat
of the paschal sacrifice afterwards; but if the whole company have
fallen asleep, they must not again eat thereof (upon awakening). R. Jose
said: "If they are only drowsy, they may eat it, but if they fall fast
asleep, they must not eat of it afterwards."

The paschal offering does, after the hour of midnight, render the hands
unclean. Sacrifices which are rejected or that have remained beyond
their prescribed time, also render the hands unclean.

GEMARA: Abayi was sitting before Rabba. The former said that the Master
was asleep, and he said to him: "Are you asleep, Master?" and he
answered: "I am only drowsy"; and we have learned in a Mishna that if
they are drowsy they may eat, but if they are fast asleep they must not
eat of it afterwards.

Who is the Tana who holds that after midnight on the Passover eve the
remaining portion of the sacrifice is called a remainder within the
meaning of the law? Said R. Joseph: R. Elazar ben Azariah."

Said Rabha: According to R. Elazar ben Azariah, if a man ate unleavened
bread after midnight on the Passover eve, he has not accomplished his
duty. Is this not self-evident? If the unleavened bread is put on a par
with the paschal sacrifice, then surely after midnight the time during
which it must be eaten has elapsed. We might assume that, because the
passage finally separates the unleavened bread from the paschal
sacrifice, it cannot be classed with the latter, therefore we are taught
that it remains on a par with the paschal sacrifice, as stated in the
passage, Exod. xii. 8.

MISHNA: Whosoever has said the blessing on the paschal offering is not
bound to say that on the festal offering, but one who has said the
blessing on the festal offering is bound to say it on the paschal
offering also. Such is the dictum of R. Ishmael; but R. Aqiba said:
"Neither of these absolves from the obligation of saying the other
blessing."

GEMARA: R. Simlai once happened to be at a celebration of the redemption
of a first-born son, and he was asked the following: "It is self-evident
that the benediction, 'who hath sanctified us with his commandments and
has commanded us the

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

redemption of our son,' should be said by the father, but the other
benediction, namely, 'who hath permitted us to live to this time,' who
is to say this--the priest, because he derives material benefit
therefrom, or also the father, because he fulfils the religious duty?"
R. Simlai did not know; so he went to the college and inquired, when he
was told that the father of the son must pronounce both benedictions,
and so the Halakha prevails.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[220:1](psc14.htm#fr_82) This explanation is
taken from the commentary of Rashbam the grandson of Rashi.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[227:1](psc14.htm#fr_83) This is according to
the explanation of Rashbam in the third instance.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[227:2](psc14.htm#fr_84) There was a tradition
extant at that time that anything done an even number of times involved
danger to the perpetrator, but if done an odd number of times the danger
was averted. (According to page [229](#page_229).)

<span id="fn_85"></span>[227:3](psc14.htm#fr_85) In the original edition
of the Talmud an entire page follows here relative to the tradition
quoted in the preceding note, which we have omitted on account of its
irrelevancy to the text proper.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[229:1](psc14.htm#fr_86) All that is stated here
about odd and even numbers, as well as the subject of evil spirits
(which covers here two and one-half pages of the original), is omitted
in Maimonides; and the author of the "History of Oral Law" maintains
that, according to the opinion of Maimonides, it was not contained in
the Talmud originally. (See page 223, vol. iv., Vienna, 1883.) We,
however, although we agree with the above mentioned author, do not care
to omit these themes entirely, and have put in a little of both, as the
tradition of the odd and even numbers at least existed at that time.
(See, also, our Hebrew Commentary to Tract Shekalim, vol. iv., Page 14,
of the Hebrew.)

<span id="fn_87"></span>[231:1](psc14.htm#fr_87) There is a legend that
R. Papa had lent a Syrian woman money, and whenever he would call on her
to collect the debt, she would invite him to sit on a bed. One day she
strangled a child and threw it upon the bed where R. Papa sate. She then
accused him of strangling the babe, and he was compelled to flee for his
life.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[236:1](psc14.htm#fr_88) *Vide* Leviticus xii,
4.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[240:1](psc14.htm#fr_89) The custom was to serve
each man separately on a small table which was placed at the couch upon
which the men would lean while partaking of the meal.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[241:1](psc14.htm#fr_90) The apple-tree that is
mentioned in Solomon's Song (viii. 5), "Under the apple-tree have I
waked thee," upon which is based the legend that when the edict was
promulgated in Egypt to slay the male children of the Israelites, the
mothers would give birth to their children under apple-trees and thus
shield them from the Egyptians.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[244:1](psc14.htm#fr_91) All these ten
expressions are to be found in the original Psalms, and while not all of
exactly the same meaning imply more or less the same thing.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[246:1](psc14.htm#fr_92) There was already in
the time of the Talmud a class of men who did not care for the
figurative explanation of the Scripture, but who explained it almost
literally. They were called Karaier or Baali Mikra, which means men who
depended only on the literal translation of the Scriptures, as the
Hebrew word Kara means verse. The Karaier of the time of the Gaonim have
probably derived their name from them. (See our "History of the Talmud,"
Chap. Karaites.)

<span id="fn_93"></span>[248:1](psc14.htm#fr_93) By Haphtorah is meant
the several passages in the Prophets which are read after the reading of
the section in the Pentateuch of the day has been ended.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[251:1](psc14.htm#fr_94) This explanation of the
text is according to the commentary of Rabbi Samuel Aidlash (Marsha').

<span id="fn_95"></span>[254:1](psc14.htm#fr_95) The Talmud states that
the Romans were descendants of the Edomites, children of Edom or Esau,
the brothers of Jacob, as it is written \[Gen. xxxvi. 1\]; "The
generations of Esau, who is Edom."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix A](psc15)
