[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](yom03)  [Next](yom05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO TRACT YOMAH, OR THE DAY OF ATONEMENT.

THE first seven chapters treat of the manner in which the Day of
Atonement was celebrated in the second Temple: the different sacrifices
brought on that day, the preparation of the high-priest for his
ministry, and the order of service as he performed it, entering fully
into minute details of every circumstance connected therewith. Although
all this has an historical value only, we cannot refrain from giving an
introduction to this tract, on account of that day being so different
from all the holidays of Israel.

All the festivals, although they were not observed all the time during
the first Temple, were nevertheless observed by some of the kings, who
invoked the people to celebrate them some of the time; *e.g.*, the Feast
of Passover, with all its sacrifices, in the reigns of Hezekiah and
Josiah \[2 Chron. xxx.; xxxv.\]. There is also related \[ibid. xxxv.
18\], that in the days of the prophet Samuel, Passover was held. The
Feast of Tabernacles was celebrated in the days of Solomon \[I Kings
viii. 2\], and although the children of Israel did not dwell in the
booths since the days of Joshua b. Nun \[Neh. viii. 17\] nevertheless
the feast was celebrated with all its appertaining sacrifices; and also
the Pentecost they have kept \[2 Chron. viii. 13\]. The Day of
Atonement, however, is not mentioned in the entire Scriptures, with the
exception of Lev. xvi., and among the prescription of the various
sacrifices; but even then we see something unusual among the
commandments of the Scriptures; namely, the remark that he (Aaron) did
as the Lord had commanded Moses. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

Moreover, we can plainly see from the Scriptures, that at the time of
King Solomon the Day of Atonement was one of the seven days of
rejoicing, at the dedication of the Temple \[1 Kings viii.; 2 Chron.
vii. 8, 9\]; and although it is said in the Talmud that the decision not
to keep the Day of Atonement was only a temporary one (as it will be
explained in Tract Moed Katan), still we cannot rely upon an individual
opinion in the Talmud. The facts are that the Day of Atonement was not
observed, not only during the first Temple, but at the beginning of the
second as well, for even in Nehemiah the Feast of Tabernacles is
mentioned, but the Day of Atonement is not. And even during the middle
period of the second Temple the Talmud states that the Day of Atonement
was one of the holidays for the people, in which the daughters of
Israel, all dressed in white, went forth to dance in the vineyards, as
will be explained in Tract Taanith. It would be ridiculous to believe
that, while observing the five afflictions of the day (see chapter viii.
of this tract), they nevertheless danced and sang, trying to captivate
the youths.

Ewald, in speaking of that day, also remarks that it is different in its
respect from all the holidays; but even he does not explain the reason.
He only indicates that it may be a remnant of the pre-Mosaic time. In
order to give the reader an opportunity of forming his own opinion, we
herewith give an extract from Ewald concerning the Day of Atonement:

"The preparatory celebration in the autumn, which took place on the
tenth day of the seventh month, was essentially distinguished from that
of the spring in not being a terror-stricken celebration at the
commencement of the year, which sought to avert the perils of the dim
future and, as it were, the wrath of a new coming God, but in being
rather a pure feast of penance which endeavored to expiate all the human
and national transgressions and impurities which had occurred during the
year, For although the searching stringency of Jahveism, already
described, required that every, even the smallest, impurity and
defilement which had been contracted should be immediately expiated, yet
the higher religion was well aware how little all the

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

secret and slowly advancing desecrations were actually removed from the
entire community. Hence this universal festival of penance and expiation
was established in order that even all these might be expiated as far as
human labor could avail, and that the community, as free as possible
from all guilt, might celebrate with joyous feelings the great happy
festival of the year which immediately followed. Both this origin and
purpose, and also its name, *feast of expiation*, show its genuine
Mosaic character. Here, more than in any other, the entire purpose and
the absolute stringency of the higher religion found expression, and it
was certainly this religion which first founded the festival. Only in
one of its rites, which, strictly speaking, is hardly essential, do we
find a remnant of pre-Mosaic belief and life. The festival, then, was by
no means to be principally of a domestic character, like the Passover;
rather, in contradistinction to the latter, was it to become a
thoroughly public festival. Accordingly, the people were not to offer
any of the regular sacrifices, but a new one, which should go deeper and
reach a more sensitive point in taming man's sensuous nature than the
regular offerings. This was to be a rigid fast from the evening of the
ninth to that of the tenth; the solitary fast which Jahveism annually
required. The whole structure of Jahveism did indeed require that a
sacrifice of the ordinary kind should be offered on this day, as its
peculiar importance demanded; but this continued to be purely
sacerdotal. It was a great expiatory offering, to be made by the
high-priest or his representative. Not only the human members of the
community, including the priests, were now deemed impure and in need of
expiation, but even the visible sanctuary as well, as though, like a
wall between the nation and its God, it received all the stains of
impiety which were incurred in the realm. Hence the high-priest employed
expiatory offerings of two kinds: one, purely sacerdotal and serving
especially for the atonement of the sanctuary, and another, which had
special reference to the share of the community, and must therefore also
proceed from it. The latter bore quite a national stamp, and evidently
forms that portion of the usages which was derived from a pre-Mosaic
time, and still retained subsequently." ("The Antiquities of Israel," by
H. Ewald, pages 361 to 364, which see.)

It seems to us that Ewald's opinion is not altogether right. We do not
agree that this festival shows more of the Mosaic character than any
other festival, nor with his opinion about the he-goat destined for
Azazel, which he considers a pre-Mosaic rite. He is also not correct in
saying that there were no regular sacrifices on that day, only new ones
\[vide Num. xxix. 7, 8\], for the simple reason, if such was the case it
would have been observed at the beginning of the second Temple, at
least, when the entire Law, as we now have it, was discovered by Ezra;
but, as stated above, the observance of that day with pomp and
celebration (see Appendix) was begun some time during the middle period
of the second Temple.

On the contrary, from the great preparations and parade of

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

the high-priest to and from the Temple, and from other matters, which
took place during the service itself, we would be inclined to believe
that the Hellenism which crept into Judaism has served a great deal
towards their origination; and also concerning the he-goat destined for
Azazel we have something to say, but as we do not like to lay before our
readers the grounds for our supposition, we refrain from making our
statement. We content ourselves with referring the reader to the book
"Daath Elohim ba-Arez" ("The Knowledge of God in the Land "), by Abraham
Krochmal, where he will find some hints concerning the Azazel of the
Scripture and the Tsuk (rock of its destination) of the Mishna, and
leave to him to form an opinion of the time of its origin.

Concerning the services proper at the Temple, we have to translate here
for our English readers what we have already written in our Hebrew
commentary to Tract Shekalim, chapter iv., Mishna D: "From this Mishna
we can see that during the time of the Temple the leaders of the priests
kept everything secret, and their customs were not known to any one
else; otherwise there could not have been a dispute concerning the
services there immediately after the destruction of the Temple.
Moreover, R. Ishmael, himself a priest, and his forefathers, Elisha and
Ishmael, were prominent priests during the time of the Temple; also R.
Hanina the Segan was one of the prominent priests, still they knew not
exactly the ceremonies and the manner of their performance, and differed
in their opinions greatly. This must be borne in mind by the readers of
the tracts treating the services and sacrifices."

We have added to this volume the Tract Hagiga, as it relates to the
sacrifices of the festivals, and is also of great historical value.
Although in the old edition the Tract Hagiga is next to Moed Katan, the
last of section Moed, still in our new edition we could not keep up the
old rotation, as we have divided the volumes of the above section in
approximately uniform size, and each part contains a complete tract.
Nevertheless we number the pages of each tract separately, in order that
if any one wishes to bind the volumes in the old order, there should be
no hindrance.

NEW YORK, *January*, 1899.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiii:1](yom04.htm#fr_4) Reading the Scriptures
critically, we deem that Lev. xvi. is merely a continuation of Lev. x.,
where the death of the two sons of Aaron is related when they entered
the sanctuary; and after that Aaron is instructed as to the manner in
which he can enter the sanctuary *so he shall not die*. In the entire
chapter xvi. no mention is made of the Day of Atonement, except that
from verse 29 to the end of the chapter, we find the command that it
shall be a statute forever for all the Israelites, that on the tenth day
of the seventh month the high-priest shall make an atonement <span
id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> for his brother priests, for the
sanctuary, and for the people of Israel; but there is no command that
he, on that day, shall perform all the ceremonies prescribed in the same
chapter, for that concerns only the entrance of Aaron into the
sanctuary. Also Ewald has considered this point; and it is possible that
the sages, during the first Temple, interpreted this passage in the same
manner, and all the sages after them, until the middle period of the
second Temple, since when the learned priests, for a reason unknown to
us, decided that the entire chapter relates to the Day of Atonement; and
the sages of the Talmud, on account of this, afterwards deduced from the
scriptural passages the elaborate manner of the service on that day to
be found in the Talmud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synopsis of Subjects, Tract Yomah](yom05)
