[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](yom09)  [Next](yom11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 3: Tracts Tracts Pesachim, Yomah and Hagiga*,
tr. by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

# CHAPTER V.

REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE REMAINING SERVICES OF THE HIGH-PRIEST ON THIS
DAY IN THE TIMES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND TEMPLES.

MISHNA: They brought to him a \[golden\] spoon and censer: he took two
handfuls \[of incense\] and filled the spoon with it. If he had a large
hand, it was much; otherwise, it was a little: he used the hand as the
measure. He took the censer in his right hand, and the spoon in his left
hand.

GEMARA: In a Boraitha we have learned: They brought him an empty spoon
from the chamber of the utensils, and a censer full of incense from the
chamber of Beth Abtinas.

"*He took two handfuls*." What was the spoon needed for on the Day of
Atonement? It is written \[Lev. xvi. 12\] merely, "both his hands full
of incense, and bring it within the rail"? He could not dispense with a
spoon. If he had carried in the censer first, and thereafter the
incense, he would carry in twice, and it is written "bring in" only
once? If he should take the incense in both his hands, and put the
censer upon them, and carry them in at once, what should he do then?
Take off the censer with his teeth, and put it down? If it would be
unbecoming to do so in presence of a human king, how much more in
presence of the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He? Therefore it
is impossible, and he is to do as the princes \[Num. vii. 14\], "One
spoon . . . full of incense."

"*He took the censer in his right hand*," etc. Shall the citizen be
seated on the ground, and the stranger on the heaven of heavens? ("The
spoon of incense in his *left* hand," etc.) The spoon is small, and more
easily carried in the left hand, while the large censer is borne in the
right hand. And if they should be equally heavy, as occurred to R.
Ishmael b. Qim'hith, who is said to have taken two handfuls of four Kabs
of incense, even he had to take the censer in his right hand, as the
censer was hot (and he had to be more careful).

It was said of R. Ishmael, the son of Qim'hith: It once happened

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

on the Day of Atonement he spoke in a public place with an Arab, whose
saliva was sprinkled on the high-priest's clothes. He became unclean (as
the Arab might be so). Then his brother Jeshohab entered and took his
place, so his mother saw two high-priests of her sons the same day.
Another day it happened that he spoke with a Gentile nobleman, and the
same happened. Then Joseph his brother took his place. And the rabbis
taught: Seven sons had Qim'hith, their mother, and all officiated as
high-priests. When the sages asked her: How hast thou deserved it? She
replied: The ceiling of my house never looked on my hair. The sages
answered: Many did so, and it did not profit them.

The rabbis taught: It is written \[Lev. vi. 8\]: "He shall lift up from
it his handful." We might think, his hand might be overfilled; it is
therefore written, "his hand *full*," not more. We might think, he may
take some with the tips of his fingers. Therefore it is written, "hand
*full*." He should bend his three middle fingers on his palm, and remove
with the extreme finger and thumb the incense found outside of the
three. This was one of the difficult services in the Temple.

R. Johanan said: R. Joshua b. Uza'ah propounded a question, What is the
matter with the incense between the middle fingers? Is it considered as
belonging to the handful, or the overflow? He himself, said R. Johanan,
decided later that it is doubtful. What, then, shall he do therewith?
Says R. Hanina: First he should offer the handful, and then this; for if
he offered this first, perhaps it is superfluous: and elsewhere we have
learned that if the remains of a meal-offering have been lost before the
handful was offered, the handful must not be brought.

R. Papa propounded a question: These handfuls, were they exactly
measured according to the hand, or too full? Said R. Abbi to R. Ashi:
Come and hear the following Boraitha: The handfuls were not exactly
according to the measure of the hand, nor overfull, but middling.

R. Papa propounded another question: When the incense happened to be
spilled by him, how is the law? Shall it be said, his hand is like the
neck of an animal, and the incense is invalid (if the blood has been
received from the throat, it is valid, but not if spilled on the
ground), or shall we say his hand is like other utensils of the Temple,
and if it had been spilled, it may yet be offered? This question is not
decided.

The schoolmen asked R. Shesheth: If he had taken the blood

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

with his left hand, and placed it on the altar, is it valid, or invalid?
He answered: We have learned it in our Mishna, that he took the spoon in
his left hand (and yet it was offered). An objection was raised: We have
learned in a Boraitha: "A layman, a mourner on the first day, a
drunkard, and one who has a blemish, if one of these has received the
blood, or carried it to the altar, or sprinkled it, he makes it invalid.
The same is the case if he did it sitting, or with his left hand." This
objection remains.

R. Papa propounded a question: If his companion took two handfuls, and
emptied them into the priest's hands, how is the law? Shall we say, he
has two handfuls, and it is valid, or shall we say, since it is written,
"he shall take, and bring," it is invalid? This question is not decided.
R. Joshua b. Levi propounded a question: When he had filled his hands
with incense, and suddenly died, how then? Can another take it out from
his hands and bring it in, or is other incense required? R. Hanina said:
Come and see what kind of questions our predecessors have asked. Was R.
Joshua b. Levi older than R. Hanina? Did not R. Joshua b. Levi say that
R. Hanina had given me the permission to drink a beverage of *cress* on
Sabbath? (See Sabbath, Mishna, p. 226.) He means, R. Hanina asked a
profound question like to those asked by the ancestors. How is the law?
Come and hear: "That was the measure." From this we must infer, that as
the measure was outside, so it must be inside (that priest has a
different hand, hence other incense is to be taken).

Perhaps the Mishna means to say that he may use his hand as a measure,
or that he may not add to it or take away from what he has grasped? Come
and hear: How did he do it (empty the frankincense from the spoon into
his hands, both of which were occupied)? He took the handle of the
*spoon* with his fingertips--others say, in his teeth--and moved his
thumbs up the handle (being thus able not to spill the frankincense)
till the handle fell, near his armpits, and the *head* of the spoon was
above his palms. He then overturned the spoon, thus emptying the
frankincense thence into his hands, and heaped the frankincense on the
censer, that the smoke might be retarded; some say, he spread it out
that it should smoke more rapidly.

This was one of the most difficult services of the difficult services
that were in the Temple. Hence we see, he took of the frankincense once
two handfuls, and then once more.

The schoolmen propounded a question: If he died while

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

slaughtering, might the blood be sprinkled? Shall we say, that since it
is written "with a bullock," it is meant, the blood of the bullock
alone, or the whole bull (so that the substitute cannot use him)? R.
Hanina says, the entire bullock; Resh Lakish says, the blood alone. Said
R. Papa: The hide and the flesh and the dung, all agree, are only parts
of the bull; about the blood they differ. One says, the blood is not the
bull; the other thinks the blood only is the bull. Says R. Ashi: It
seems to me, the one who says that the blood is considered as one with
the bull is in the right. Because it is written \[Lev. xvi. 3\], "With
this shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock," is it
meant that he should lead him by the horns? and not simply that he
should bring the blood; hence the blood is considered as one with the
bullock. And what can the other reply to this? His answer is: It is
written, "for a sin-offering"; the word "come" refers, not to the
bullock, but to the sin-offering. Let him who says that the blood is one
with the bull, give the reason that a sin-offering whose owner has died
cannot be used for any purpose, and is only put to death.

Said Rabbin b. R. Adda to Rabba: Thy disciples have said in the name of
R. Amram that this bullock is considered a sin-offering for the
congregation (who are considered its owners, because he comes to atone
for himself and for his fellow-priests), and such is not put to death.

MISHNA: He walked through the Temple till he reached the place between
the two vails which separated the sanctuary from the Holy of Holies--one
ell wide. R. Jose says: There was but one vail, as it is said \[Ex.
xxxi. 33\]: "And the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place
and the most holy."

GEMARA: Did not R. Jose say very correctly to the rabbis? The rabbis may
say: This was only the case in the tabernacle, but as in the second
Temple there was no ell for the entrance at all (because a partition
only an ell thick could not support itself, for the walls of the Temple
were a hundred ells high) and only in the first, it was doubted whether
this ell of the entrance belonged to the Holy of Holies or the
sanctuary. Therefore they made two vails.

The rabbis taught: He walked between the altar and the lamps, so said R.
Jehudah. R. Meir says, between the table and the altar. Others say, he
walked between the table and the walls. Who are the others? That is R.
Jose, who says the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

door of the Temple was in the north. R. Jehudah says the door was in the
south.

R. Jose says that he walked between the table and wall, which is a
public entrance, because the Israelites are a people beloved by God, and
need no delegate to pray for them (as it is written \[1 Kings viii.
38\]: "When they shall be conscious every man of the plague of his own
heart, and he shall then spread forth his hands"), therefore their
delegate to God needed no private entrance, but could do it in sight of
the public.

R. Nathan said: The ell of the entrance was a matter of doubt to the
sages, whether it was holy as the Holy of Holies or the sanctuary, and
that is what R. Johanan has said: Joseph the man of Hutzal has
propounded a question: It is written \[1 Kings vi. 19\]: "And the Debir
in the house *within* did he prepare, to set therein the ark of the
covenant of the Lord." They did not know what is meant: whether the
place inside of the Debir was prepared for the ark, or that the Debir
was itself inside.

MISHNA: The outer one was raised and looked to the southern \[wall\] and
the inner one to the northern. He walked between them, till he reached
the northern \[wall\]: having arrived thither, he turned his face to the
south, he walked back with his left hand to the curtain, reaching the
ark \[which was on his right in the Holy of Holies, reaching the place
where the inner curtain was\]. Coming there, he placed the censer
between the staves, heaped the incense on the top of the coals, so that
the whole house was filled with smoke. He departed in the same manner as
he had come \[facing the Holy of Holies, walking backward\], and said a
short prayer in the outer sanctuary, but not making it a long one, so as
not to alarm the Israelites \[about his absence, lest he had been killed
by God\].

GEMARA: Of which Temple is it spoken? In the first Temple there was a
partition, not a curtain, before the ark; if the second, there was no
ark in it? As we have learned in the following Boraitha: Since the ark
was concealed, with it were hidden the flask of manna \[Ex. xvi. 33\]
and the flask of anointing oil, Aaron's staff, its almonds and buds, and
the box the Philistines sent as a gift to the God of Israel with the
golden vessels. And who concealed them? King Joshiah. Why? Because it is
written \[Deut. xxviii. 36\]: "The Lord will drive thee and thy king
whom thou wilt set over thee," he concealed it; as it is written \[2
Chron. xxxv. 3\]: "And he said unto the Levites that

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

instructed all Israel, who were holy men unto the Lord: Set the holy ark
in the house which Solomon the son of David the King of Israel did
build; ye have not to carry it any more upon your shoulders: now serve
the Lord your God, and His people Israel." And R. Eliezer said to this:
From the analogy of expression--namely, that of the ark--it is said
"there" \[Ex. xxx.\], and of the flask of marina also "there" \[ibid.
xvii.\]; and there are also mentioned "generations" and "for
preservation." R. Eliezer infers that Joshiah concealed them. There was
then no ark? The second Temple is meant; and not the ark, but the place
where it had to stand, is meant. But it is said, "between the two
staves." The place they would occupy is meant.

"*Heaped the incense on the top of the coals*." Our Mishna will agree
with him who has said in a Boraitha: Heap it, that the issue of the
smoke be retarded (made slow). In one Boraitha we have learned: He heaps
it inside, away from him. In another Boraitha: He heaps it outside,
toward himself. How will they agree? Says Abayi: There is a difference
of opinion between two Tanaim; one says one way, the other, otherwise.
Abayi says again: It seems to me the Halakha is according to him who
says that he must heap it inside, away from himself; because, as we have
further learned in a Mishna, they teach him not to heap near his face,
lest he burn himself.

The rabbis taught: It is written \[Lev. xvi. 13\]: "He shall put the
incense upon the fire, before the Lord." "Before the Lord": he must not
prepare it outside, but inside, in the Holy of Holies. This is to
contradict the Sadducecs, who said that he must prepare outside. Why?
Because, they say, it is written \[ibid. 2\]: "For in the cloud will I
appear upon the mercy-seat." Cloud is interpreted, the cloud of the
incense. When he prepares outside, he enters with a cloud of incense.
The sages said to the Sadducees: Is it not written: "He shall put the
incense upon the fire *before the Lord*"? So it has to be prepared
inside. They rejoined: What will you make of the "cloud"? The rabbis
say: From this we deduce that he must put in the herb which straightens
the smoke. How is it known that that herb has to be put in? Because it
is written \[ibid. 13\]: "That the cloud of the incense may envelop."
Without that herb, how will the mercy-seat be enveloped? If he has
omitted to put in this herb or any ingredient, he is liable to capital
punishment. Why give this reason, when, if he come in without the
incense being entirely prepared, he enters the Holy of Holies

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

gratuitously, which involves capital punishment? Says R. Shesheth: The
case is, he had omitted one ingredient intentionally, but entered
unintentionally. R. Ashi says: Even if he did both things intentionally,
but entered with two kinds of incense, one kind prepared as is lawful
and the other not, for entering he is not culpable, but for having
prepared incense lacking some ingredient he deserves capital punishment.

"*He departed in the same manner as he had come*." Whence do we deduce
this? Said R. Shama b. Na'hmain in the name of R. Jonathan: It is
written \[2 Chron. i. 13\]: "Then came Solomon from the high place that
was at Gibeon *to* Jerusalem" (literally, *at*). How comes Gibeon to be
in Jerusalem? His return from Gibeon to Jerusalem is compared to his
entering Gibeon from Jerusalem. As when he entered Gibeon from Jerusalem
his face was turned to the high place, so when he left it, his face was
still turned to the high place. So did also the priests after service,
the Levites after their song, and the Israelites after they had been
standing. When they left, their countenances were turned to the Temple.
So also a disciple, leaving his Master, should do. So R. Elazar, when he
used to part from Johanan. When R. Johanan desired to leave first, he
bent himself in his place till Johanan was out of his sight; when R.
Elazar was to leave first, he walked backwards till he could see him no
longer. Rabba, leaving R. Joseph (who was blind), used to walk backwards
till his feet struck against the threshold, so as to cause them to
bleed. When this was related to R. Joseph, he said to Rabba: May God's
will be that you shall raise your head above the whole city. R.
Alexandri said in the name of R. Joshuah b. Levi: Who prays, should make
three steps backwards, and then say, "Maketh peace," etc. Said R.
Mordecai to him: If he has made three steps backwards, he must stop
there a while. It is like a disciple who has taken farewell of his
Master, and then returns to him on the instant, which is like a dog
returning to his vomit. If he has failed in doing so, he would better
not have prayed at all. In the name of Shemaia it has been said: When he
says these words, he should first bow to the right, then to the left; as
it is written \[Deut. xxx. 2\]: "From his right hand a fiery law." Rabha
saw Abayi, who said "He maketh peace" first on the right, and then on
his left. He said to him: Thinkest thou, thou must say this to the right
side of thyself? nay, of the Holy One, blessed be He, who is opposite to
thee and whose right side thus corresponds to thy left side. R. Hiya the
son of R. Huna

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

said: I saw Abayi and Rabha making the three steps backwards with one
bow.

"*And said a short prayer*." What was the prayer? Rabba and Rabbin the
sons of R. Adda both said in the name of Rabh: May it be Thy will, Lord
our God, that if this year will be a hot one, Thou mayest give plenty of
rain. R. A'ha the son of Rabha said in the name of R. Jehudah that the
high-priest used to conclude the prayer as follows: May no ruler cease
from the house of Judah, and may Thy people Israel not depend for
livelihood on each other (not be paupers), and mayest Thou not heed the
prayers of travellers who ask for the cessation of rain.

R. Hanina Dasa happened to be on the road. It began to rain. He said:
Lord of the Universe, the whole world enjoys, but Hanina is afflicted.
The rain ceased. When he reached home, he said: The whole world is in
anxiety because no rain comes, only Hanina is contented (having no
fields). Rain began to come again.

Says R. Joseph: What availed the prayer of the high-priest against the
prayer of R. Hanina Dasa?

The rabbis taught: It happened that one high-priest made his prayer very
long. When the priests became alarmed, they went to see whether he had
died, and met him returning. They inquired of him why he had made his
prayer so long. He said: Is this displeasing to you, when I prayed the
Lord that the Temple might not be destroyed? They said to him: Do not
thou repeat it, as we have learned in the Mishna, He should not make the
prayer long, lest he alarm the congregation."

MISHNA: When the ark had been taken away, there was a stone from the
time of the first prophets, "Shethia" \[foundation\] it was called,
three-finger high above the ground. Thereupon he placed \[the censer\].
He took the blood from the one who stirred it, went to the place whither
he had gone, and stopped where he had stopped \[in the Holy of Holies\],
and sprinkled from his position once upward and seven times downward
\[Lev. xvi. 14\], without being intent on sprinkling it either upward or
downward, but holding the palm open, either turned outward or toward
himself \[meaning doubtful\]. Thus he was counting: one \[upward\], one
and one \[downward\], one and two, one and three, one and four, one and
five, one and six, one and seven. He departed, and placed it \[the
basin\] on the golden stand in the Temple. They brought to him the
he-goat, he slaughtered it, and received in a basin its blood. He went
to

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

the former place, stopping where he had stopped, and sprinkled thereof
once upward, and seven times downward, without taking care to sprinkle
upward or downward, but holding his palm open, turned in or out, and
counting thus: one, one and one, one and two, etc. He came out, and
placed it on the second stand that was in the Temple. R. Jehudah saith:
There was but one stand there. He took up the bull's blood, and put down
the he-goat's blood. He sprinkled thereof at the curtain which was
opposite to the ark outside, once upward, and seven times down, without
taking care, etc., and thus counting, etc. He lifted the blood \[-filled
basin\] of the he-goat, and put down that of the bull's blood; he
sprinkled of it on the curtain opposite to the ark outside, once upward,
seven times down, etc. He emptied the bull's blood into the he-goat's
blood, and transferred (the contents of) the filled basin into the empty
one.

GEMARA: The Mishna says, "When the ark was taken away," not *concealed*;
it holds, therefore, that it was removed to Babylon. As we have learned
in a Boraitha, R. Eliezer said: The ark was taken into exile in
Babylonia. As it is written \[2 Chron. xxxvi. 10\]: "And with the
expiration of the year did King Nebuchadnezzar send, and had him brought
to Babylon, with the precious vessels of the house of the Lord"
(precious; that is, the ark). R. Simeon b. Jochai infers this from
another passage \[Is. xxxix. 6\]: "No thing shall be left": no word (for
"king," "word," and "commandment" the same Hebrew word is here used)
will be left, none of the ten commandments (or the ark which contained
them). R. Jehudah, however, says: The ark was concealed in its place
(Temple), as it is written \[1 Kings viii. 8\]: "And they had made the
staves so long, that the ends of the staves were seen out in the holy
place in the front of the Debir, but they were not seen without; *and
they have remained there until this day*." And he who says that R.
Simeon b. Jochai thinks that the ark was taken into exile, differs from
Ulla, who says as follows: R. Mathia b. Heresh had asked R. Simeon b.
Jochai in Rome: We see that R. Eliezer infers from two verses that the
ark was taken into exile. One verse is quoted above; the other is \[Lam.
i. 6\]: "There is gone forth from the daughter of Zion all her
splendor." Thereby the ark is meant. What hast thou to say thereto? He
replied: I say, the ark was concealed on the spot, and the proof is the
verse quoted above. Said R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak: We have also learned it
in a Mishna in Shekalim \[VI., b\]: "Once a priest was engaged there,
and he

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

noticed that one of the paving stones on one place appeared different
from the others. He went out to tell others of it; but he had not yet
finished speaking, when he gave up the ghost. Thereby it was known to a
certainty that the ark of the covenant was hidden there." What was he
engaged in? Says R. Helbo: He was busy sporting with his axe. The
disciples of R. Ishmael have taught: There were two blemished priests
who picked out the wood, which was not mouldy. The axe of one fell down
on the place where the ark was concealed; a fire issued, which consumed
him.

"*A stone, Shethia*." We have learned in a Boraitha: The word *Shethia*
means, that the universe has been created from it, as *Shethia* means
*foundation*. This is according to him who says, that from Zion the
world began to be created, as we have learned in the following Boraitha:
R. Eliezer said: The world was created from the very middle, as it is
written \[Job xxxviii. 38\]: "When the dust is poured out as molten
metal, and the clods are made to cleave fast together" (first the
central piece was made, then the other parts adhered to it). R. Joshua
says: The world was created beginning with the extremities, as it is
written \[ibid. xxxvii. 6\]: "For to the snow he saith, Be thou earth.
Likewise to the pouring rain, and to the pouring rains of his strength."
Four times the word "rain" is repeated here (in Hebrew, but "rain" means
in Talmudic dialect "matter"). There were then four pieces of matter,
and of them was composed the world. R. Itz'hak says: The Holy One,
blessed be He, threw a stone into the sea, and therefrom a world was
made. As it is written \[ibid. xxxviii. 6\]: "Upon what are her
foundation-pillars placed at rest? or who threw her corner-*stone*"? The
sages, however, said: The world was created beginning with Zion. As it
is written \[Ps. l. 1, 2\]: "The God of Gods, the Lord Speaketh," etc.
"Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty." That signifies, from Zion began
to be the beauty of the whole world. In another Boraitha we have
learned: R. Eliezer the Great said, It is written \[Gen. ii. 4\]: "These
are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were created,
on the day, that the Lord God made earth and heaven." The luminous
stars, etc., were created from the heavens, and all earthly things from
the earth. But the sages say: Everything was created from Zion. As it is
written \[Ps. l. 1\]: "A Psalm of Assaph. The God of gods," etc. "The
perfection of beauty," *i.e.*, the beauty of the whole world.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

"*Holding the palm open*." What is meant by this? Said R. Jehudah: As
one uses a lash first from the right to the left, and then downward.

"*He took the blood from the one who stirred it*," etc. We have learned
in a Boraitha: When he sprinkled, he did not sprinkle on the top of the
mercy-seat, but opposite; and not that the blood should fall on it, but
on the ground. When he sprinkled on the top of the mercy-seat, he bent
the palm downward, that it should not fall on the mercy-seat, and when
he sprinkled beneath it, he held his palm bent upward, that it should
not fall on the mercy-seat, but on the ground. Whence do we deduce this?
Because it is written \[Lev. xvi. 15\]: "He shall sprinkle it above the
mercy-seat, and before the mercy-seat." This had not to be written, as
it has already been written in the case of the bullock \[ibid. 14\]. It
is meant to make the "before" and "above" equal; as by "before" the
mercy-seat, it is meant that it should not be sprinkled at it, but
opposite to it; so also by "above" is meant, not upon it, but opposite
to it.

The rabbis taught: It is written: "And he shall sprinkle it above the
mercy-seat." From this we know only once above (it, in case of the
goat). How many times had he to sprinkle downward? This we have to infer
from the bullock: as it is written of him seven times, so we infer in
regard to the he-goat. We know that it is equal in case of the bullock
and goat, downward; but we do not know how many times he is to sprinkle
downward in case of the bullock? We apply to the bullock the law in
reference to the goat: as in the case of the goat, so in the case of the
bullock--once downward, seven times upward.

"*One, one and one*," etc. The rabbis taught: He counted one, one and
one, one and two, etc., up to seven. So said R. Meir. R. Jehudah says:
One, one and one, two and one, three and one, four and one, five and
one, six and one, seven and one. They do not differ. Each said according
to the custom in his part of the country (in the one place they said,
*e.g.*, twenty-one, in the other one and twenty). Now we see that all
agree that the first time of sprinkling had to be counted along with
each of the other seven? What is the reason? Said R. Elazar: He should
make no mistake in the number of countings. R. Johanan says: Because it
is written again \[ibid. 14\]: "Shall he sprinkle," superfluously, it is
to teach us that the first he ought to count with all the others, What
is the point of their difference?

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Elazar says: If
he has failed to do it, but made no mistake, it is valid; but according
to R. Johanan, it is not.

"*He departed, and placed it on the golden stand*." One of the scholars
read the prayer in the presence of Rabha, and read, "He departed, and
placed it on the second stand"; and after this he read, "He took the
he-goat's blood, and put down the bullock's blood." Said Rabha to him:
The first thing thou readest according to the rabbis (who say there were
two stands), and the second according to R. Jehudah (who says there was
but one stand, and therefore he took down the bullock's blood when he
came with the goat's blood), you thus contradict yourself. You should
say: He put down the goat's blood (on the second stand), and took up the
bullock's blood (from the first, stand).

The rabbis taught: It is written \[ibid. 16\]: "So shall he do for the
tabernacle," etc. Wherefore had this to be written? It comes to teach
us, that as in the Holy of Holies he had to sprinkle once and seven
times, both from the bullock's blood and the goat's, so he had to do in
the sanctuary.

"*That abideth among them in the midst of their uncleanness*." This
signifies, even when they were unclean, the Shekhina continued to be
among them. A certain Sadducee said to R. Hanina: At the present time,
when the Temple is destroyed, ye are certainly unclean, as it is written
\[Lam. i. 9\]: "Her uncleanness on her skirts." He replied to him: Come
and see. It is written: "That abideth among them in the midst of their
uncleanness."

We have learned in a Boraitha: When he sprinkled on the vail, he
sprinkled not upon it, but opposite to it (that the blood fell on the
ground). R. Eliezer b. R. Jose, however, said: I have seen on the vail
in Rome the marks of the drops of blood of the bullock and goat of the
Day of Atonement.

What is the law, when the bloods of the bullock and goat got mingled?
What shall he do therewith? Says Rabha: He sprinkled thereof once
upward, and seven times downward, and this sufficed for both. This
Halakha has been communicated to Jeremiah in Palestine: He said: Ye
Babylonians are stupid. Because ye live in a dark land, ye say dark
Halakhas. In this manner, he will sprinkle the he-goat's blood before
the bullock's, and it is written \[Lev. xvi. 20\]: "When he hath made an
end of atoning for the holy place." "The end"--hence everything must be
in its proper turn. What, then, shall he do? Says

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Jeremiah: Once
he sprinkles it as the bullock's, and then a second time as the
he-goat's blood.

How if the bloods got mixed, when he has already sprinkled the bullock's
blood upward? Said Rabha: He should sprinkle it seven times downward as
the bullock's, and then upward and downward as the he-goat's, blood. How
if he has confounded the basins? What shall he do then? He should
sprinkle three times, once for the bullock, then for the he-goat, and
the third time for the he-goat (lest the he-goat's blood had preceded
the bullock's when he sprinkled the first time).

"*He emptied the bull's blood into the he-goat's*." Our Mishna will be
according to him who maintains that the bloods must be mixed, for the
purpose of putting it on the corners of the altar. Because it was
taught: R. Joshiah and R. Jonathan said, one of them that they had to be
mingled, and the other that they ought not to be mingled, but put
separately on the corners of the altar. It seems that R. Joshiah was the
one who said they had to be mingled, as we have heard elsewhere, though
it is not written "together" \[Lev. xvi. 18\]; yet since it is written
"and," it is as good as though it had been written "together."

We have learned in another Boraitha: It is written: "He shall take from
the blood of the bullock and the blood of the he-goat." That signifies,
they should be mixed together. But whence do ye know that it means that
they should be sprinkled together, not separately? Therefore it is
written \[Ex. xxx. 10\]: "And Aaron shall make an atonement upon its
horns once in a year": *once*, not repeatedly. We see that the anonymous
Boraitha is according to R. Joshiah.

"*He transferred (the contents of) the filled one into the empty one*."
Rami b. Hama propounded a question of R. Hisda: If he had placed one
basin in the other, and therein received the blood, how is it? Should we
say, as they are of one kind, that forms no invalidation? or that though
of one kind, it is an invalidation? R. Hisda answered him: We have
learned it in our Mishna: He has transferred the filled one into the
empty one. Shall we not assume that it means, he placed the full basin
in the empty one? Nay. It means, he poured the contents of the full
basin into the empty one. But this is already mentioned in the beginning
of the sentence? He transfers the mixed blood again into an empty
vessel, to mix the two kinds of blood the better.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

MISHNA: He then went out to the altar which is before the Lord, which is
the golden altar, and began to cleanse it, downward. Whence does he
begin? From the northeastern corner \[horn\] to the northwestern,
southwestern, southeastern. Where he begins to cleanse the outer altar,
at that spot he finishes cleansing the inner. R. Eliezer says he remains
where he stands, and thence cleanses \[the altar being one ell square\].
Everywhere he sprinkled from below upward, except at the spot where he
stood, whereat he sprinkled from above downward.

He, sprinkled on the clean place of the altar \[where the gold was to be
seen\] seven times, and what remained of the blood he poured at the
western base of the outer altar, and what remained of the blood of the
outer altar he poured at the southern base. Both kinds of blood mingled
in the trench, and flowed out into the brook Kidron. And it was sold to
gardeners as manure, but one offends by \[using without paying for\]
them.

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha: Why is it necessary to repeat
here, "before the Lord"? Said R. Nehemiah: Because we find that when he
held the bloods of the bullock and he-goat he stood inside of the altar,
and sprinkled the blood on the vail, we might think that at the same
time he should sprinkle on the golden altar: therefore it is written
\[Lev. iv. 7\], "the altar of the incense of spice, before the Lord," to
let us know that the altar was before the Lord, but not the priest.
What, then, should he do? He had to come out to the outside of the
altar, and thence sprinkle.

"*Began to cleanse it, downward*." The rabbis taught: He began to
cleanse from above downward. And whence did he begin? From the
southeastern to the southwestern, northwestern, northeastern. So is the
decree of R. Aqiba. R. Jose the Galilean said: From the northeastern to
the northwestern, southwestern, southeastern. So that at the place
where, according to R. Jose, he begins, according to R. Aqiba he
finishes, and *vice versa*. Now we see that, according to all, he does
not begin with the corner he meets first, but some definite corner. What
is the reason? Said Samuel: Because it is written, "He went out to the
altar," till he has come out from the place inside of the altar, and
comes outside. (What is the point of difference between the two Tanaim?)
The following: R. Aqiba thinks he has to walk round the altar, and R.
Jose that he ought only to cleanse the altar at all corners, making its
round with the hand. We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Ishmael said: Two
high-priests

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

remained of the first Temple. One said, he had passed round the altar
with his hand; and the other, he had walked round it with his feet. And
both gave their reasons. The one said: As it is written, "round." The
inner altar was like the outer, which was large, and had to be walked
around; while the other said: It was small, and with his hand one could
reach all corners, as it was only in size like one corner of the outer
altar: hence it was not necessary to walk round it.

"*He sprinkled at the clean place of the altar*." What is meant by the
clean place? Said Rabba b. R. Shila: Where the altar was not covered, as
it is written \[Ex. xxiv. 10\]: "Like the color of heaven in clearness."
We have learned in a Boraitha: Hanania says, he sprinkled on the
northern side, and, R. Jose says, southern. On what point do they
differ? The one says the door of the sanctuary was at the north, the
other says, at the south; but all agree, that where he finished to put
the blood on the corners, at that side he sprinkled on the top. What is
the reason? Because it is written \[Lev. xvi. 19\]: "He shall cleanse it
and hallow it." That signifies where he had hallowed it, there he shall
cleanse it.

"*What remained of the blood*," etc. This is because it is written
\[ibid. iv. 7\]: "All the (remaining) blood of the bullock shall he pour
out," and when he comes out, he meets the western base of the outer
altar first.

"*Of the outer altar, he poured at the southern base*." The rabbis
taught: By the base of the altar, the southern base is meant.

And another Boraitha states that, according to R. Ishmael, it was the
western. The disciples of R. Ishmael, however, taught in the name of R.
Ishmael, as the disciples of R. Simeon b. Jochai, that it was the
southern (that is, R. Ishmael revoked what he said).

"*One may offend*," etc. The rabbis taught: One becomes guilty, when he
uses the blood for his benefit. So is the decree of R. Meir and R.
Simeon. The sages, however, said: The blood may be used. They are at
variance only as to whether it is rabbinically an offence or not; but
all agree that, biblically, one cannot offend (for if they thought it
was biblical, they would not sell it to gardeners. *Tosphath*.) Whence
do we deduce this? Says Ulla: It is written \[Lev. xvii. 11\]: "I have
appointed it for you upon the altar to make an atonement for your
souls": for *you*, it should belong to you. The disciples of R. Simeon
taught: To make an atonement, but not an offence.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> R. Johanan says:
In the same verse it is written, "For the blood it is that maketh an
atonement for the soul." It is (after the atonement) as it had been
before the atonement.

MISHNA: It holds true of all the rites on the Day of Atonement, whose
order is prescribed by the Bible (and stated in the above Mishnas), that
if they are performed in a wrong order, one has done nothing. Had he
used the blood of the he-goat previously to that of the bull, he should
sprinkle once more some of that he-goat's blood after that bull's blood,
and if while he had not completed the offering of the gifts in the inner
part \[Holy of Holies\], the blood was spilled, it is incumbent upon him
to fetch other blood, and once more sprinkle it inside, and the same is
the case in the Temple, and also of the golden altar, because all
\[rites\] are separate atonements. R. Elazar and R. Simeon say, however:
From where he had been mistaken, he should begin anew.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: It holds true of all ceremonies of the Day of
Atonement whose order is stated in the Mishna, if one of them has been
performed earlier than that which should precede it, it is as nothing.
R. Jehudah, however, said: This is only true of the rites performed in
the white garments in the Holy of Holies, but of the ceremonies
performed in the white garments outside (*e.g.*, the lots, emptying the
remaining blood, or confessions), it is true that if he has done them
out of the right order, they are still valid. R. Nehemiah said: The case
is simply, all ceremonies performed not in the right order in the white
garments, whether in the Holy of Holies or outside, are invalid; but the
rites performed in the golden garments outside must not be done again.
Said R. Johanan: Both have deduced it from the same verse. It is written
\[Lev. xvi. 34\]: "And this shall be unto you as a statute for
everlasting, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for all
their sins once a year." R. Jehudah holds, what is meant by "once a
year"? Where the atonements are made once a year, and that is in the
Holy of Holies. R. Nehemiah holds, that not the place where once a year
the rites are performed is meant, but the rites done for atoning once a
year, and that is inside and outside.

How can R. Jehudah say, the place is meant? It is only written "once a
year." We must say, the reason of R. Jehudah is this: It is written,
"and *this* shall be," and then "once a year." Hence two limitations,
one excluding what is performed in the white garments outside of the
Holy of Holies, the other

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

excluding what is done in the golden garments. And R. Nehemiah says: The
one expression excludes what is performed in the golden clothes, and the
other the remainders of the blood, which, if not emptied at all,
involves no transgression.

R. Hanina said: If he has taken the handfuls of frankincense before the
bullock has been slaughtered, he has done nothing. This cannot be
according to R. Jehudah, for according to R. Jehudah it is only the
rites performed in the Holy of Holies, but this is done outside? Nay;
even according to R. Jehudah it would have been invalid. Why? Because it
is a preparatory service for a service performed in the Holy of Holies
(it is equal to such a service).

Ulla said: If he has slaughtered the goat before the bullock's blood had
been sprinkled, he has done nothing. An objection was raised: It is said
in our Mishna, if he has sprinkled the he-goat's blood before the
bullock's, he should sprinkle once more. If it were as Ulla says, it
should have been said: he should slaughter a second time. Ulla explained
the Mishna: That is the case with the offerings in the sanctuary, but in
the Holy of Holies the bullock's blood must be sprinkled first, then the
he-goat must be slaughtered. And so has also R. Ephes explained.

"*The same is the case in the Temple*," etc. The rabbis taught: It is
written \[Lev. xvi. 33\]: "He shall make an atonement for the sanctuary
of holiness, and for the tabernacle of the congregation and for the
altar shall he make an atonement; and also for the priests and for all
the people of the congregation shall he make an atonement." The
sanctuary of holiness--that is, the Holy of Holies; by the tabernacle
the Temple is meant--the altar, literally; "shall he make an
atonement"--by this is meant the court where the priests might walk;
"the priests," literally, "the people of the congregation," Israel;
"make an atonement" once more--that means the Levites.

All are then equal in their atonement; that is, all are atoned for by
the scapegoat for all sins except uncleanness. So said R. Jehudah. R.
Simeon, however, said: As the blood of the he-goat, sprinkled inside,
atones for Israel only the uncleannesses of the Temple and all sacred
things, so the blood of the bullock atones for the priests only the sins
of uncleanness. And as the confession over the scapegoat atoned for
Israel's other sins, so also the confession over the bullock atoned for
the other sins of the priests.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

In a Boraitha we have learned: Rabbi has said: My Master, R. Jacob, has
taught me this difference of opinion of R. Elazar and R. Simeon in our
Mishna is only in relation to the logs offered by lepers.

R. Johanan said: The trespass-offering of a leper, if slaughtered for a
wrong purpose, is where the same difference of opinion of our Mishna
exists. According to R. Meir, who says that if he has made a mistake, he
must begin anew, he must in this case also bring another
trespass-offering. But according to R. Elazar and R. Simeon, who say
that he must begin where he had made the mistake, there is no mending of
this mistake; for it has been slaughtered already (and if he should
slaughter another, he will offer two, while it is written one). The
following Boraitha is according to R. Johanan: If a leper's
trespass-offering has been slaughtered for another purpose, or some of
its blood was not put on the thumbs and great toes of the leper, it may
be offered on the altar, and requires a drink-offering; but another
trespass-offering has to be offered.

The rabbis taught: All things mentioned in our Mishna--bullocks,
he-goats--that have become invalid, defile the garments of him who burns
them, and they must be burned in the place where the real sacrifices are
burned. \[See Lev. xvi. 27, 28.\] So is the decree of R. Eliezer and R.
Simeon. The sages, however, say: They are not to be burned, because only
those which have been used the last, because used for the atonement,
must be burned there. Rabha asked R. Na'hman: (If the he-goats have
become invalid, two others are required) how many shall he despatch as
scapegoats? R. Na'hman answered him: Shall he send a whole flock? R.
Papi says in the name of Rabha: He sends the first. R. Simi says in the
name of the same: The last. It is right according to R. Simi, because
the other of the couple has been used for the atonement; but what is the
reason of Rabha, according to R. Papi's saying? He holds as R. Jose of
the following Boraitha: If one separates his Paschal lamb and the same
be lost, and after he purchases another one in its stead the first one
is found, he may offer either one of them. So is the decree of the
sages. R. Jose, however, says: There is a merit to offer the first one,
unless the second was a better one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Regulations Concerning the He-Goats of the Day of
Atonement And the Sending to the Desert, And the Confession
Thereat.](yom11)
