[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th209)  [Next](th211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

#### COMMENTARY

##### THE TITLE

This beautiful little treatise, in which the great principles of the
Gnosis are set forth so clearly and lucidly by the philosopher-mystic
who penned it so many centuries ago, bears a double, or rather a triple,
title: “Of Hermes to Tat: The Cup or Monad \[or Oneness\].” <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171) The double title, however, is but a
choice of names, for The Cup is The Oneness,—The One Element, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_172) the “Body” of God, which is the Cause of
all bodies and yet itself is bodiless; in other words, the Monad is the
Intelligible Cosmos itself, God’s Image, elsewhere called His
Alone-begotten Son.

That this idea of a Cup or Mixing-bowl (Cratēr), in the symbolic sense
of an all-containing receptacle, in which all the elements were blended
together, and in the metaphysical sense of a transcendent Unity, the
source of all things measurable and numberable, was one of the main
doctrines of the Trismegistic tradition, is plain from the Pœmandrist
Zosimus, who refers especially to this Cup as the symbol of Spiritual
Baptism—that is, the plunging of the whole nature into the Great Ocean
of Spirit or Mind, so that the man becomes irradiate with Life and
illumined with Light.

For a consideration of this Crater or Cup symbolism I must refer the
reader to the chapter so entitled in the “Prolegomena”; it there being
shown that in all probability it was transmitted along the Orphic line

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

of tradition, though doubtless the Egyptian had some similar ideas.

Our treatise should be read in the closest connection with *C. H.*, xi.
(xii.), “The Mind to Hermes,” which is its “esoteric” counterpart. What
is here set forth for Tat by Hermes is there imparted to Hermes by the
Mind; what is here set forth for the probationer or “hearer” is there
set forth for the advanced disciple or “seer”; or, to use Mystery terms,
what is here told to the Mystes is there revealed to the Epopt. Thus,
then, the Tat-instruction begins.

##### THE BAPTISM OF THE MIND

1\. All things are made by Reason, the Formative Energy of the Mind. The
Ideal Cosmos, or World-Order, is the Divine Body.

2\. Earth is the sensible Cosmos; on Earth man, the image of the Image,
or Reason, of God rules. The purpose of man is thus to become the
contemplator (θεατής) of the works of God; it is by the “wonder” aroused
in him by the sight of these marvels that he will rise eventually into a
knowledge of God Himself. This “wonder” is, then, the beginning of the
True Philosophy or God-knowledge (ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ κατανόησις).

3\. All men have in them “reason” (the ray of the Reason or Logos), but
as yet few have “Mind.” This “mind” is the true Son of Mind, it is the
real *man*, the perfect man, self-conscious of his Self. This true
Self-consciousness is the prize set up for souls to win: the crown of
humanity, the Christ-state (or, at any rate, the super-man or true man
state).

The Christ-Baptism is the plunging of the whole nature into the
Mind-filled Cup,—the Plērōma of the Divine Being whose Body and Mind are
one,—for is

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

not the Cup the Body of God, “consecrated unto Himself alone” (§ 1), the
Universal Body of all things?

##### THE HOLY GRAIL

It would be fascinating to speculate on what connection this Cup of
Initiation may have had with the Mystic Eucharist, and the Original of
the later Grail-tradition, which a great master of music and song has in
our days made to live again in undying melody, and so restored it to its
more universal significance. How Wagner sensed the marvel of the
wondrous Vision with a poet’s intuition may be seen from his own words:

“To the enraptured gaze of one longing for celestial love, the clear
blue atmosphere of heaven seems at first to condense itself into a
wonderful, scarcely perceptible, but dazzlingly beautiful Vision. Then
with gradually increasing precision the wonder-working angelic host is
delineated in infinitely delicate outlines, as, conveying the holy
vessel in its midst, it insensibly descends from the blazing heights of
heaven. As the vision grows more and more distinct, . . . the heart
throbs with the pain of ecstasy; . . . and when at last the Grail shows
itself in the marvel of undraped reality, . . . the beholder’s brain
reels—he falls down in a state of adoring annihilation. . . . With
chaste rejoicing the angelic host then returns to the heavenly height,
fading away into the nothingness whence it first emanated.”

But for the Seers of the Gnosis there was a more intimate realization,
for they were bidden to cast aside all hesitation and fearlessly to
plunge themselves into the very Cup Itself, the Ocean of Divine Love and
Wisdom.

This was the Proclamation or Preaching (κήρυγμα),

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

or Good Tidings, of the Herald of God to men, to those who had the
Living Faith they could “ascend to Him who had sent down the Cup,” God’s
Greatest Gift.

By such a Baptism as this, not by a symbolic sprinkling with water, is
it that man is to be redeemed. This is the consummation of man’s earthly
pilgrimage, the realization of the “Gnosis of the Mind, Vision of things
Divine; God-knowledge is it; for the Cup is God’s.”

##### THE “HATING OF THE BODY”

6\. In § 6 we have given us a discipline of the mystic way, the “hating
of the body,” which is by no means to be taken literally.

A misunderstanding of this discipline led many of the mystics of the
time (and, for a matter of that, has led most of the mystics of all
time) to the false belief that the body (or matter generally) was the
source of evil. Hence we have all the mortifications and chastisements
of the flesh which the monkish spirit introduced into Christendom, and
which persist in some quarters even to our own day. Against this the
Common Sense of Christianity as a general religion, basing itself on the
general utterances of the Christ, has ever protested.

Our mystic philosopher, in urging his disciples to hate the body,
apparently does so because they are in the first stages of awakening,
and so far have not got the “Mind” active in them.

In taking the first steps there must be developed a consciousness of the
strong antithesis of good and evil, of love and hate, in order that the
will of the disciple may be strengthened towards the good and weakened
towards the bad.

When, however, his will is *balanced* between the two, when he as easily
wills good as evil, then, and

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

not till then, is he prepared to learn the further great lesson: that
real wisdom consists in balance, in the Middle Way; that nothing is evil
in itself—the Body is as honourable in its own sphere, as absolutely
necessary and indispensable, as is the Mind in its.

He learns the great secret that to have one’s thoughts always in heaven
is as erroneous as to have them always on earth; that there is a higher
mode of existence, when the things of heaven and earth are within each
other, and not apart.

As the Introduction to *The Book of the Great Logos according to the
Mystery* has it:

“Jesus saith: Blessed is the man who knoweth this Word (*Logos*), and
hath brought down the Heaven and borne up the Earth and raised it
Heavenwards.” <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173)

Heaven and Earth must kiss each other for this consummation, this truly
Sacred Marriage.

And yet in the third Synoptic (xvi. 25, 26) we read:

“Jesus saith: If any man come unto Me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his
own soul also, he cannot be My disciple.”

Here we have precisely the same word “hate” (μισεῖ) as in our text.
That, however, this “dark saying” was interpreted in a mystical sense by
Gnostic tradition, as by no means referring to physical parents but to
the past causes of our imperfections, <span
id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174) I have already pointed out on several
occasions <span id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_175); we may therefore

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

conclude that in a gnostic teaching, such as is our treatise, the terms
“hate” and “body” are not to be literally interpreted.

8\. And that this is so may be seen from the declaration in § 8: “For
’tis not God, ’tis *we* who are the cause of evil things, *preferring*
them to good”;—where the cause of evil is not assigned to the body but
to man’s own choice. And finally, to clinch our contention, we would
refer the reader to the Sermon to Asclepius, *C. H.*, vi. (vii.) 6:

“Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius—things
which we cannot flee *or hate.*”

##### THE GNOSIS AND ITS BLESSINGS

9\. In § 9 we have to notice the phrase: “Therefore *to* *It* Gnosis is
no beginning; rather is it that Gnosis doth afford *to us* the first
beginning of *Its being known*”; and compare it with the *logos* quoted
by the Jewish commentator in the Naassene Document (§ 25): “The
Beginning of Perfection is Gnosis of Man, but Gnosis of God is Perfect
Perfection.”

The claim for the Gnosis is therefore a modest one. The Gnosis is not an
end in itself; it is but the beginning of the True Knowledge of God.
They who receive the Baptism of the Mind are made “perfect men,” not
Perfect; not until they have received this touch of the
Christ-consciousness have they reached true manhood.

Those who have received this Baptism know why they have come into
being,—the purpose of life. They become consciously immortal; they
*know* they are deathless, they do not only *believe* it; their
immortality is no longer a *belief*, it is a *fact of knowledge.*

They have won their freedom from Death and Fate, and know the real
constitution of the cosmos up to the Threshold of the Good, the Plain of
Truth—that is to

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

say, presumably in Buddhist terms, as far as the Nirvāṇic state of
consciousness. Not yet, however, have they entered Nirvāṇa—that is to
say, become one with the Logos. They have seen the Sight or Vision of
Nirvāṇa, but not entered into the Promised Land, that “Blessed Space,”
which, as Basilides tells us, “can neither be conceived of nor
characterized by any word.” <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176)

The Vision is an earnest of what they may be. They have become Gods, it
is true, already, or, in other words, enjoy the same freedom and
consciousness as the Gods or Angels, but there is a still more
transcendent state, when they will be at-oned with Deity Himself.

##### THE ANCIENT PATH

Hard as it is to leave the “things we have grown used to,” the things
habitual, it must be done if we are to enter into the Way of the Gnosis.
But no new Path is this, no going forth into new lands (though it may
have all the appearance of being so). The entrance on the Path of the
Gnosis is a Going-Home, it is a Return—a Turning-Back (a True
Repentance). “We must turn ourselves back unto the Old Old Way” (τὰ
παλαιὰ καὶ ἀρχαῖα).

And for the followers of the Doctrine of Thrice-greatest Hermes, this
Old Old Path could have meant nothing but the Archaic Wisdom of Ancient
Egypt. The Wisdom of Egypt was thus the Gnosis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[92:1](th210.htm#fr_171) See R. 193.
Unfortunately, though he twice quotes from our treatise, Stobæus adds
nothing to our knowledge of the title, since he prefixes his extracts
with the simple heading, “Of Hermes.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[92:2](th210.htm#fr_172) Which is to be
equated, I believe, “meta-physically” with the Quintessence or Æther.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[96:1](th210.htm#fr_173) Codex Brucianus; see
*F. F. F.*, p. 520.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[96:2](th210.htm#fr_174) *Cf.* the *Pistis
Sophia*, 341-343, where the text is given as: “He who shall not leave
father and mother to follow after Me is not worthy of Me,” and explained
by the Saviour to mean: “Ye shall leave your Parents the Rulers, that ye
may be Children of the First Everlasting Mystery.”

<span id="fn_175"></span>[96:3](th210.htm#fr_175) See, for instance,
*Extracts from the “Vâhan”* (London, 1904), pp. 374-376.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[98:1](th210.htm#fr_176) See *F. F. F.*, p.
261.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. (VI.) Though Unmanifest God is Most Manifest](th211)
