[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th213)  [Next](th215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

#### COMMENTARY

##### THE TITLE

This sermon, which bears no proper title, but has been headed by some
editor with the enunciation of the subject taken from the opening
sentence of the treatise itself, belongs to the Asclepius-group.

Reitzenstein (p. 194) thinks that this tractate and the previous
Asclepius-Dialogue—*C. H.*, ii. (iii.)—may very well have formed part of
the same collection of Asclepiana.

##### DUALISM?

The teaching of our sermon is apparently dualistic; but is it not only
formally so, and as an exercise to raise the thought of the pupil away
from the “things he has grown used to”? For at the end Hermes declares:

“Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius—*things
which we cannot flee or hate*; for hardest thing of all is that we’ve
need of them and cannot live without them.”

This is a clear advance on the formal Tat-teaching as to “hating” the
body given in *C. H.*, iv. (v.) 6, and points clearly to an instruction
in which the cosmos was not regarded as the plērōma of bad, in spite of
the formal and emphatic statement in § 4:

“ὁ γὰρ κόσμος πλήρωμά ἐστι τῆς κακίας.”

Moreover, if we turn to *C. H.*, ix. (x.), 4—another treatise of Hermes
to Asclepius, and curiously enough having as superscription almost the
same proposition as heads our present treatise we read:

“χωρίον γὰρ αὐτῆς \[κακίας\] ἡ γῆ, οὐχ ὁ κόσμος, ὡς ἔνιοι ποτὲ ἐροῦσι
βλασφημοῦντες.”

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

“Bad’s place is earth, and not the world, as some will sometimes say
with impious tongue.”

Here we have a formal denial in an Asclepius-tractate of the formal
proposition in our Asclepius-sermon.

The cosmos is not evil; it is the beautiful world-order. Evil is a thing
connected with the earth; there is no such thing as a πλήρωμα of evil;
evil has at best only a χωρίον. They who say such things blaspheme.

This is strong language, and there seems no other conclusion to be drawn
from it but that there were various schools within the Trismegistic
tradition, and that they wrangled theologically together.

Is it, however, possible that the Hermes of our treatise is only
speaking metaphorically, so that he may intensify the ideal of the Good,
and that he was subsequently taken as speaking literally? For he must
have known that the Cosmos was regarded as the Son of God, *par
excellence*, the fairest and best-beloved of all, God’s Very Image.

On the other hand, we know that in the Trismegistic doctrine the “cosmic
man” was opposed to the “essential man,” that, in fact, the term
“cosmic” was used in the nomenclature of the time in a theological as
well as in a philosophical sense. This was especially the case in
Christianity. Many instances could be cited from the New Testament
documents; and we have also a striking example of the use of “cosmos” in
this sense in the second *logion* of the First Oxyrhynchus Fragment:

“Jesus saith: Except ye fast to the world (τὸν κόσμον), ye shall in no
wise find the Kingdom of God.”

As, moreover, we nowhere else find mention of a “pleroma of evil,” we
may permissibly conclude that it is here not intended to be taken
literally, but only as a metaphorical expression.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

##### GOD THE PLEROMA OF GOOD

“God is the Pleroma of Good, and Good is the Pleroma of God.”

And so, speaking of the Triumphant Christ as the Cosmic Logos, Paul
writes:

“And Him hath He (God) given as Head over all things unto the
Church, <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_201) which is His Body—the
Fullness (Plērōma) of Him who doth fulfil all things in all.” <span
id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_202)

The thought-atmosphere in which the idea of the “Church” as the Pleroma
arose may be sampled from Philo, *De Prœm. et Pœn.*, § xi. (M. ii. 418,
p. 920; Ri. v. 232):

“And thus the soul, becoming a Pleroma of virtues by means of the three
best \[blessings\]—nature, instruction (*mathēsis*) and practice
(*askēsis*),—leaving no vacant spot in her for entrance of aught else,
brings unto birth a perfect number,—her two hexads of sons, a miniature
and copy of the circle of the types of life, <span
id="fr_203"></span>[3](#fn_203) for the improvement of the things down
here.

“This is the House <span id="fr_204"></span>[4](#fn_204) that naught can
harm, the perfect and continual in the public scriptures, and also in
the secret meanings of the mystic ones,—the House that won the prize, as
I have said, of lordship o’er the tribes of its \[own\] race.”

“It was thus from this House in course of time, as it increased and
became populous, that well-regulated cities were established, yea,
disciplines of wisdom and of righteousness and holiness, in which the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

transmutation (μεταποίησις) of the rest of virtue was sought out in
manner worthy of so high a work.”

In the Trismegistic tradition, however, the idea is simpler, as we learn
from “The Definitions of Asclepius,” *C. H.* (xvi.) 3:

“For that the Fullness of all things is One and is in One,—this latter
One not coming as a second One, but both being One. . . .

“For should one try to separate what *seems* to be both All and One and
Same from One,—he will be found to take his epithet of ‘All’ from the
idea of multitude and not from that of fullness (plērōma),—which is
impossible; for if he put All for the One, he will destroy the All.”

Nevertheless, the Pleroma <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205) of Life
is more specially the Cosmos as the Son of God—that is, as the Logos.
Thus in *C. H.*, xii. (xiii.) 15, we read:

“Matter is one; and the World-order (Cosmos), as a whole,—the Mighty God
and Image of the Mightier One, both with Him unified, and the Conserver
of the Will and Order of the Father,—is Life’s Fullness (Plērōma). . . .

“How then, O son, could there be in the God,—the Image of the Father,
the Plenitude (Plērōma) of Life, <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206)—dead things?”

And again in *C. H.*, ix. (x.) 7:

“For \[Cosmos\] being a most wise Breath, bestows their qualities on
bodies together with the one Pleroma—that of Life.”

5\. This Pleroma of God is the Good and Beautiful. The Path to this True
Good is one of balance,—for it

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

is the Way of Devotion united unto Gnosis—in Sanskrit terms, the
Bhakti-Mārga and Jñāna-Mārga combined. <span
id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207)

6\. Finally we learn, though inferentially, that things are not bad in
themselves; the evil is that men are content with the little goods they
have and cling desperately to these, in ignorance of the greater
blessings to which they could attain, did they but open their spiritual
eyes for the True Vision of the Good. For even the psychic visions of
the soul, in spite of their beauty, give man no hint of that Most
Blessed Sight of All.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[117:1](th214.htm#fr_201) τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ, that is,
the Spiritual Body of the “Elect.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[117:2](th214.htm#fr_202) Eph. i. 23. *Cf.*
Col. ii. 19: “In Him dwelleth the whole Fullness of the Godhead as in a
body.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[117:3](th214.htm#fr_203) *Sc.* the Zodiac.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[117:4](th214.htm#fr_204) *Sc.* of God.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[118:1](th214.htm#fr_205) *Cf.* John i. 16: “Of
His Fullness we have all received, and grace on grace.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[118:2](th214.htm#fr_206) *Cf.* John i. 4: “In
Him was Life and the Life was the Light of men.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[119:1](th214.htm#fr_207) Compare *C. H.*, i.
27: “And I began to preach to men the beauty of Devotion and of Gnosis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. (VIII.) The Greatest Ill Among Men is Ignorance of
God](th215)
