[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th228)  [Next](th230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

#### CORPUS HERMETICUM XIV. (XV.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### \[A LETTER\] OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES TO ASCLEPIUS

##### UNTO ASCLEPIUS GOOD HEALTH OF SOUL! <span id="fr_542"></span>[1](#fn_542)

<span class="small">(Text: P. 128-134; Pat. 49, 50.)</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Since</span> in thy absence my son Tat
desired to learn the nature of the things that are, and would not let me
hold it over, as \[natural to\] a younger son fresh come to gnosis of
the \[teachings\] on each single point,—I was compelled to tell \[him\]
more, in order that the contemplation <span
id="fr_543"></span>[2](#fn_543) \[of them\] might be the easier for him
to follow.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

I would, then, choosing out the chiefest heads of what was said, write
them in brief to thee, explaining them more mystic-ly, <span
id="fr_544"></span>[1](#fn_544) as unto one of greater age and one well
versed in Nature.

2\. If all things manifest have been and are being made, and made things
are not made by their own selves but by another; \[if\] made things are
the *many*,—nay more, are *all* things manifest and all things different
and not alike; and things that are being made are being made by other
\[than themselves\];—there is some one who makes these things; and He
cannot be made, but is more ancient than the things that can.

For things that can be made, I say, are made by other \[than
themselves\]; but of the things that owe their being to their being
made, it is impossible that anything should be more ancient than them
all, save only That which is not able to be made.

3\. So He is both Supreme, and One, and Only, the truly wise in all, as
having naught more ancient \[than Himself\].

For He doth rule o’er both the number, size and difference of things
that are being made, and o’er the continuity of their making \[too\].

Again, things makeable are seeable; but He cannot be seen.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

For for this cause He maketh,—that He may not be able to be seen.

He, therefore, ever maketh <span id="fr_545"></span>[1](#fn_545); and
therefore can He ne’er be seen.

To comprehend Him thus is meet; and comprehending, \[it is meet\] to
marvel; and marvelling, to count oneself as blessed, as having learnt to
know one’s Sire.

4\. For what is sweeter than one’s own true Sire? Who, then, is He; and
how shall we learn how to know Him?

Is it not right to dedicate to Him alone the name of God, or that of
Maker, or of Father, or rather \[all\] the three;—God for His Power, and
Maker for His Energy, and Father for His Good?

Now Power doth differ from the things which are being made; while Energy
consisteth in all things being made.

Wherefore we ought to put away verbosity and foolish talk, and
understand these two—the made and Maker. For that of them there is no
middle \[term\]; there is no third.

5\. Wherefore in all that thou conceivest, in all thou nearest, these
two recall to mind; and think all things are they, reckoning as doubtful
naught, nor of the things above, nor of the things below, neither of
things divine, nor things

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

that suffer change or things that are in obscuration. <span
id="fr_546"></span>[1](#fn_546)

For all things are \[these\] twain, Maker and made, and ’tis impossible
that one should be without the other; for neither is it possible that
“Maker” should exist without the “made,” for each of them is one and the
same thing.

Wherefore ’tis no more possible for one from other to be parted, than
self from self.

6\. Now if the Maker is naught else but That which makes, Alone, Simple,
Uncompound, it needs must do this \[making\] to Itself,—to Which its
Maker’s making is “its being made.” <span
id="fr_547"></span>[2](#fn_547)

And as to all that’s being made,—it cannot be

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[so made\] by
being made by its own self; but it must needs be made by being made by
other. Without the “Maker” “made” is neither made nor is; for that the
one without the other doth lose its proper nature by deprivation of that
other.

If, <span id="fr_548"></span>[1](#fn_548) then, all things have been
admitted to be two,—the “that which is being made” and “that which
makes,”—\[all then\] are one in union of these,—the “that which leadeth”
and the “that which followeth.”

The making God is “that which leadeth”; the “that which is being made,”
whatever it be, the “that which followeth.”

7\. And do not thou be chary of things made because of their variety,
from fear of attribution of a low estate and lack of glory unto God.

For that His Glory’s one,—to make all things; and this is as it were
God’s Body, the making \[of them\]. <span
id="fr_549"></span>[2](#fn_549)

But by the Maker’s self naught is there thought or bad or base.

These things are passions which accompany the making process, as rust
doth brass and filth doth body; but neither doth the brass-smith

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

make the rust, nor the begetters of the body filth, nor God \[make\]
evil.

It is continuance in the state of being made <span
id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_550) that makes them lose, as though it were,
their bloom; and ’tis because of this God hath made change, as though it
were the making clean of genesis.

8\. Is it, then, possible for one and the same painter man to make both
heaven, and gods, and earth, and sea, and men, and all the animals, and
lifeless things, and trees, and yet impossible for God to make all
things?

What monstraus lack of understanding; what want of knowledge as to
God! <span id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_550)

For such the strangest lot of all do suffer; for though they say they
worship piously and sing the praise of God, yet by their not ascribing
unto Him the making of all things, they know not God; and, added unto
this not-knowing, they’re guilty even of the worst impiety to
Him—passions to Him attributing, or arrogance, or impotency.

For if He doth not make all things, from arrogance He doth not make, or
not being able,—which is impiety \[to think\].

9\. One Passion hath God only—Good; and He who’s Good, is neither
arrogant nor impotent.

For this is God—the Good, which hath all power of making all.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

And all that can be made is made by God,—that is, by \[Him who is\] the
Good and who can make all things. <span id="fr_552"></span>[1](#fn_551)

But would’st thou learn how He doth make, and how things made are made,
thou may’st do so.

10\. Behold a very fair and most resemblant image—a husbandman casting
the seed into the ground; here wheat, there barley, and there \[again\]
some other of the seeds!

Behold one and the same man planting the vine, the apple, and \[all\]
other trees!

In just the selfsame way doth God sow Immortality in Heaven, and Change
on Earth, and Life and Motion in the universe.

These are not many, but few and easy to be numbered; for four in all are
they,—and God Himself and Genesis, in whom are all that are.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_542"></span>[257:1](th229.htm#fr_542) εὖ φρονεῖν. I do not
know the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates “to be
truly wise”; Parthey, “*recte sapere*” following Patrizzi; Ménard,
“*sagesse*”; Chambers, “to be rightly wise.” I would suggest that εὖ
φρονεῖν was the form used among these disciples of the Inner Way for the
usual χαίρειν. Instead of wishing one another happiness, they wished
each other wisdom, good thought, right thinking, good health of soul.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[257:2](th229.htm#fr_543) θεωρία.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[258:1](th229.htm#fr_544) That is to say, more
fully and profoundly, as to one more advanced in the mystic science.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[259:1](th229.htm#fr_545) *Cf.* *C. H.*, xvi.
18.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[260:1](th229.htm#fr_546) τῶν ἐν μυχῷ. I do not
know what is the exact meaning of this expression. Everard translates
“things that are in darkness or secret”; Parthey, “*quæ sunt in
abdito*”; Ménard, “*dans les profondeurs*”; Chambers, “those in
secrecy.” I suggest that the technical term μυχός, signifying generally
a shut-in or locked-up place (*conclave*, as Damascius translates it),
is to be referred, along the line of Platonic and Pythagorean tradition,
to Pherecydes. Porphyry (*De Antro Nymph.*, C. 31) tells us that the
synonyms “μυχοί (chambers?), recesses (or pits), caverns, doors, gates”
were used by Pherecydes as symbolical expressions to signify “the
*geneses* and *apogeneses* of souls,” whatever these terms may mean
exactly. The “birth” and “decease” of a soul, in this connection,
presumably mean its coming into the world of genesis out of the womb of
the World-soul, and its reception back again into the bosom of the great
Mother. If this be so, our text would seem to indicate that things are
in two states,—in a state of change (that is, in the active condition),
and again in a passive condition, in the state which Indian philosophers
call *laya* or *pralaya.* See for the μυχοί of Pherecydes Sturz’s
*Pherecydis Fragmenta*, pp. 43 ff. (Leipzig, 1824).

<span id="fn_547"></span>[260:2](th229.htm#fr_547) Or genesis.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[261:1](th229.htm#fr_548) From here to the end
of the sermon, with the exception of the final sentences of § 7 and §
10, and the third sentence of § 9, and with a few very slight verbal
variants, is quoted by Cyril, *Contra Julianum*, ii. 64 (Migne, col. 598
D).

<span id="fn_549"></span>[261:2](th229.htm#fr_549) *Cf.* *C. H.*, xvi.
18.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[262:1](th229.htm#fr_551) Or genesis.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[263:1](th229.htm#fr_552) This sentence, which
appears to be very tautological, is omitted by Cyril.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary](th230)
