[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](isb04)  [Next](isb06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Cork--the Agricultural Show--Father Mathew

 

 A man has no need to be an agriculturist in order to take a warm
interest in the success of the Irish Agricultural Society, and to see
what vast good may result from it to the country. The National Education
scheme--a noble and liberal one, at least as far as a stranger can see,
which might have united the Irish people, and brought peace into this
most distracted of all countries--failed unhappily of one of its
greatest ends. The Protestant clergy have always treated the plan with
bitter hostility; and I do believe, in withdrawing from it, have struck
the greatest blow to themselves as a body, and to their own influence in
the country, which has been dealt to them for many a year. Rich,
charitable, pious, well-educated, to be found in every parish in
Ireland, had they chosen to fraternise with the people and the plan,
they might have directed the educational movement; they might have
attained the influence which is now given over entirely to the priests;
and when the present generation, educated in the national-schools, were
grown up to manhood, they might have had an interest in almost every man
in Ireland. Are they as pious, and more polished, and better educated
than their neighbours the priests? There is no doubt of it; and by
constant communion with the people they would have gained all the
benefits of the comparison, and advanced the interests of their religion
far more than now they can hope to do. Look at the national-school:
throughout the country it is commonly by the chapel side--it is a
Catholic school, directed and fostered by the priests; and as no people
are more eager for learning, more apt to receive it, or more grateful
for kindness than the Irish, he gets all the gratitude of the scholars
who flock to the school, and all the future influence over them, which
naturally and justly comes to him. The Protestant wants to better the
condition of these people: he says that the woes of the country are
owing to its prevalent religion; and in order to carry his plans of
amelioration into effect, he obstinately refuses to hold communion with
those whom he desires to convert to what he believes are sounder
principles and purer doctrines. The clergyman will reply that points of
principle prevent him: with this fatal doctrinal objection, it is not,
of course, the province of a layman to meddle; but this is clear, that
the parson might have had an influence over the country, and he would
not; that he might have rendered the Catholic population friendly to
him, and he would not; but, instead, has added one cause of estrangement
and hostility more to the many which already exist against him. This is
one of the attempts at union in Ireland, and one can't but think with
the deepest regret and sorrow of its failure.

Mr. O'Connell and his friends set going another scheme for advancing the
prosperity of the country,--the notable project of home manufactures,
and a coalition against foreign importation. This was a union certain,
but a union of a different sort to that noble and peaceful one which the
National Education Board proposed. It was to punish England, while it
pre tended to secure the independence of Ireland, by shutting out our
manufactures from the Irish markets; which were one day or other, it was
presumed, to be filled by native produce. Large bodies of tradesmen and
private persons in Dublin and other towns in Ireland associated
together, vowing to purchase no articles of ordinary consumption or
usage but what were manufactured in the country. This bigoted, old-world
scheme of restriction-not much more liberal than Swing's crusade against
the threshing-machines, or the coalition in England against
machinery--failed, as it deserved to do. For the benefit of a few
tradesmen, who might find their account in selling at dear rates their
clumsy and imperfect manufactures, it was found impossible to tax a
people that are already poor enough; nor did the party take into account
the cleverness of the merchants across sea, who were by no means
disposed to let go their Irish customers. The famous Irish frieze
uniform which was to distinguish these patriots, and which Mr. O'Connell
lauded so loudly and so simply, came over made at half-price from Leeds
and Glasgow, and was retailed as real Irish by many worthies who had
been first to join the union. You may still see shops here and there
with their pompous announcement of "Irish Manufactures;" but the scheme
has long gone to ruin: it could not stand against the vast force of
English and Scotch capital and machinery, any more than the Ulster
spinning-wheel against the huge factories and steam-engines which one
may see about Belfast.

The scheme of the Agricultural Society is a much more feasible one; and
if, please God, it can be carried out, likely to give not only
prosperity to the country, but union likewise in a great degree. As yet
Protestants and Catholics concerned in it have worked well together; and
it is a blessing to see them meet upon any ground without heart-burning
and quarrelling. Last year, Mr. Purcell, who is well known in Ireland as
the principal mail-coach contractor for the country,--who himself
employs more workmen in Dublin than perhaps any other person there, and
has also more land under cultivation than most of the great landed
proprietors in the country,--wrote a letter to the newspapers, giving
his notions of the fallacy of the exclusive-dealing system, and pointing
out at the same time how he considered the country might be benefited by
agricultural improvement, namely. He spoke of the neglected state of the
country, and its amazing natural fertility; and, for the benefit of all,
called upon the landlords and landholders to use their interest and
develop its vast agricultural resources. Manufactures are at best but of
slow growth, and demand not only time, but capital; meanwhile, until the
habits of the people should grow to be such as to render manufactures
feasible, there was a great neglected treasure, lying under their feet,
which might be the source of prosperity to all. He pointed out the
superior methods of husbandry employed in Scotland and England, and the
great results obtained upon soils naturally much poorer; and, taking the
Highland Society for an example, the establishment of which had done so
much for the prosperity of Scotland, he proposed the formation in
Ireland of a similar association.

The letter made an extraordinary sensation throughout the country.
Noblemen and gentry of all sides took it up; and numbers of these wrote
to Mr. Purcell, and gave him their cordial adhesion to the plan. A
meeting was held, and the Society formed: subscriptions were set on
foot, headed by the Lord Lieutenant (Fortescue) and the Duke of
Leinster, each with a donation of 200*l*.; and the trustees had soon
5,000*l*. at their disposal: with, besides, an annual revenue of
1,000*l*. The subscribed capital is funded; and political subjects
strictly excluded. The Society has a show yearly in one of the principal
towns of Ireland: it corresponds with the various local agricultural
associations throughout the country; encourages the formation of new
ones; and distributes prizes and rewards. It has further in
contemplation, to establish a large Agricultural school for farmers'
sons; and has formed in Dublin an Agricultural Bazaar and Museum.

\*

It was the first meeting of the Society which we were come to see at
Cork. Will it be able to carry its excellent intentions into effect?
Will the present enthusiasm of its founders and members continue? Will
one political party or another get the upper hand in it? One can't help
thinking of these points with some anxiety--of the latter especially: as
yet, happily, the clergy of either side have kept aloof, and the union
seems pretty cordial and sincere.

There are in Cork, as no doubt in every town of Ireland sufficiently
considerable to support a plurality of hotels, some especially devoted
to the Conservative and Liberal parties. Two dinners were to be given
apropos of the Agricultural meeting; and in order to conciliate all
parties, it was determined that the Tory landlord should find the cheap
ten-shilling dinner for 1,000, the Whig landlord the genteel guinea
dinner for a few select hundreds.

I wish Mr. Cuff, of the "Freemasons' Tavern," could have been at Cork to
take a lesson from the latter gentleman: for he would have seen that
there are means of having not merely enough to eat, but enough of the
very best, for the sum of a guinea; that persons can have not only wine,
but good wine, and if inclined (as some topers are on great occasions)
to pass to another bottle,--a second, a third, or a fifteenth bottle,
for what I know is very much at their service. It was a fine sight to
see Mr. MacDowall presiding over an ice-well and extracting the bottles
of champagne. With what calmness he did it! How the corks popped, and
the liquor fizzed, and the agriculturalists drank the bumpers off! And
how good the wine was too--the greatest merit of all! Mr. MacDowall did
credit to his liberal politics by his liberal dinner.

"Sir," says a waiter whom I asked for currant-jelly for the
haunch--(there were a dozen such smoking on various parts of the
table--think of that, Mr. Cuff!)--"Sir," says the waiter, "there's no
jelly, but I've brought you *some very fine lobster-sauce."* I think
this was the most remarkable speech of the evening; not excepting that
of my Lord Bernard, who, to 300 gentlemen more or less connected with
farming, had actually the audacity to quote the words of the great
agricultural poet of Rome-

 "*O fortunatos nimium sua si," & c.*"

How long are our statesmen in England to continue to back their opinions
by the Latin grammar? Are the Irish agriculturalists so *very* happy, if
they did but know it--at least those out of doors? Well, those within
were jolly enough. Champagne and claret, turbot and haunch, are gifts of
the *justissima tellus,* with which few husbandmen will be disposed to
quarrel:--no more let us quarrel either with eloquence after dinner.

If the Liberal landlord had shown his principles in his dinner, the
Conservative certainly showed his; by conserving as much profit as
possible for himself. We sat down 1,000 to some 250 cold joints of meat.
Every man was treated with a pint of wine, and very bad too, so that
there was the less cause to grumble because more was not served. Those
agriculturalists who had a mind to drink whiskey-and-water had to pay
extra for their punch. Nay, after shouting in vain for half an hour to a
waiter for some cold water, the unhappy writer could only get it by
promising a shilling. The sum was paid on delivery of the article; but
as everybody round was thirsty too, I got but a glassful from the
decanter, which only served to make me long for more. The waiter (the
rascal!) promised more, but never came near us afterwards: he had got
his shilling, and so he left us in a hot room, surrounded by a thousand
hot fellow-creatures, one of them making a dry speech. The
agriculturalists were not on this occasion

nimium fortunati.

To have heard a nobleman, however, who discoursed to the meeting, you
would have fancied that we were the luckiest mortals under the broiling
July sun. He said he could conceive nothing more delightful than to see,
"on proper occasions,"--(mind *on proper occasions*!)--"the landlord
mixing with his tenantry; and to look around him at a scene like this,
and see *the condescension* with which the gentry mingled with the
farmers!" Prodigious condescension truly! This neat speech seemed to me
an oratoric slap on the face to about 970 persons present; and being one
of the latter, I began to hiss by way of acknowledgement of the
compliment, and hoped that a strong party would have destroyed the
harmony of the evening, and done likewise. But not one hereditary
bondsman would join in the compliment--and they were quite right too.
The old lord who talked about condescension is one of the greatest and
kindest landlords in Ireland. If he thinks he condescends by doing his
duty and mixing with men as good as himself, the fault lies with the
latter. Why are they so ready to go down on their knees to my lord? A
man can't help "condescending" to another who will persist in kissing
his shoestrings. They respect rank in England--the people seem almost to
adore it here.

As an instance of the intense veneration for lords which distinguishes
this county of Cork, I may mention what occurred afterwards. The members
of the Cork Society gave a dinner to their guests of the Irish
Agricultural Association. The founder of the latter, as Lord Downshire
stated, was Mr. Purcell: and as it was agreed on all hands that the
Society so founded was likely to prove of the greatest benefit to the
country, one might have supposed that any compliment paid to it might
have been paid to it through its founder. Not so. The society asked the
lords to dine, and Mr. Purcell to meet the lords.

After the grand dinner came a grand ball, which was indeed one of the
gayest and prettiest sights ever seen; nor was it the less agreeable,
because the ladies of the city mixed with the ladies from the country,
and vied with them in grace and beauty. The charming gayety and
frankness of the Irish ladies have been noted and admired by every
foreigner who has had the good fortune to mingle in their society; and I
hope it is not detracting from the merit of the upper classes to say
that the lower are not a whit less pleasing. I never saw in any country
such a general grace of manner and *ladyhood.* In the midst of their
gayety, too, it must be remembered that they are the chastest of women,
and that *no* country in Europe can boast of such a general purity.

In regard of the Munster ladies, I had the pleasure to be present at two
or three evening-parties at Cork, and must say that they seem to excel
the English ladies not only in wit and vivacity, but in the still more
important article of the toilette. They are as well dressed as
Frenchwomen, and incomparably handsomer; and if ever this book reaches a
30th edition, and I can find out better words to express admiration,
they shall be inserted here. Among the ladies' accomplishments, I may
mention that I have heard in two or three private families such fine
music as is rarely to be met with out of a capital. In one house we had
a supper and songs afterwards, in the old honest fashion. Time was in
Ireland when the custom was a common one; but the world grows languid as
it grows genteel; and I fancy it requires more than ordinary spirit and
courage now for a good old gentleman, at the head of his kind family
table, to strike up a good old family song.

The delightful old gentleman who sung the song here mentioned could not
help talking of the Temperance movement with a sort of regret, and said
that all the fun had gone out of Ireland since Father Mathew banished
the whiskey from it. Indeed, any stranger going amongst the people can
perceive that they are now anything but gay. I have seen a great number
of crowds and meetings of people in all parts of Ireland, and found them
all gloomy. There is nothing like the merry-making one reads of in the
Irish novels. Lever and Maxwell must be taken as chroniclers of the old
tunes-the pleasant but wrong old times-for which one can't help having
an antiquarian fondness.

On the day we arrived at Cork, and as the passengers descended from "the
drag," a stout, handsome, honest-looking man, of some two-and-forty
years, was passing by, and received a number of bows from the crowd
around. It was

<span id="img_14"></span> ![](img/14.jpg)

with whose face a thousand little print-shop windows had already
rendered me familiar. He shook hands with the master of the carriage
very cordially, and just as cordially with the master's coachman, a
disciple of temperance, as at least half Ireland is at present.

The day after the famous dinner at Mac Dowall's, some of us came down
rather late, perhaps in consequence of the events of the night
before--(I think it was Lord Bernard's quotation from Virgil, or else
the absence of the currant-jelly for the venison, that occasioned a
slight headache among some of us, and an extreme longing for
soda-water,)--and there was the Apostle of Temperance seated at the
table drinking tea. Some of us felt a little ashamed of ourselves, and
did not like to ask somehow for the soda-water in such an awful presence
as that. Besides, it would have been a confession to a Catholic priest,
and, as a Protestant, I am above it.

<span id="img_15"></span> ![](img/15.jpg)

The world likes to know how a great man appears even to a
valet-de-chambre, and I suppose it is one's vanity that is flattered in
such rare company to find the great man quite as unassuming as the very
smallest personage present; and so like to other mortals, that we would
not know him to be a great man at all, did we not know his name, and
what he had done. There is nothing remarkable in Mr. Mathew's manner,
except that it is exceedingly simple, hearty, and manly, and that he
does not wear the downcast, demure look which, I know not why; certainly
characterises the chief part of the gentlemen of his profession. Whence
comes that general scowl which darkens the faces of the Irish
priesthood? I have met a score of these reverend gentlemen in the
country, and not one of them seemed to look or speak frankly, except Mr.
Mathew, and a couple more. He is almost the only man, too, that I have
met in Ireland, who, in speaking of public matters, did not talk as a
partisan. With the state of the country, of landlord, tenant, and
peasantry, he seemed to be most curiously and intimately acquainted;
speaking of their wants, differences, and the means of bettering them,
with the minutest practical knowledge. And it was impossible in hearing
him to know, but from previous acquaintance with his character, whether
he was Whig or Tory, Catholic or Protestant. Why does not Government
make a Privy Councillor of him?--that is, if he would honour the Right
Honorable body by taking a seat amongst them. His knowledge of the
people is prodigious, and their confidence in him as great; and what a
touching attachment that is which these poor fellows show to any one who
has their cause at heart--even to any one who says he has!

Avoiding all political questions, no man seems more eager than he for
the practical improvement of this country. Leases and rents, farming
improvements, reading societies, music societies-he was full of these,
and of his schemes of temperance above all. He never misses a chance of
making a convert, and has his hand ready and a pledge in his pocket for
sick or poor. One of his disciples in a liverv-coat came into the room
with a tray--Mr. Mathew recognized him, and shook him by the hand
directly; so he did with the strangers who were presented to him; and
not with a courtly popularity-hunting air, but, as it seemed, from sheer
hearty kindness, and a desire to do every one good.

When breakfast was done-(he took but one cup of tea, and says that, from
having been a great consumer of tea and refreshing liquids before, a
small cup of tea, and one glass of water at dinner, now serve him for
his day's beverage)--he took the ladies of our party to see his
burying-ground--a new and handsome cemetery, lying a little way out of
the town, and where, thank God! Protestants and Catholics may lie
together, without clergymen quarrelling over their coffins.

It is a handsome piece of ground, and was formerly a botanic garden; but
the funds failed for that undertaking, as they have for a thousand other
public enterprises in this poor disunited country; and so it has been
converted into a *hortus siccus* for us mortals. There is already a
pretty large collection. In the midst is a place for Mathew
himself--honour to him living or dead! Meanwhile, numerous stately
monuments have been built, flowers planted here and there over dear
remains, and the garden in which they lie is rich, green, and beautiful.
Here is a fine statue, by Hogan, of a weeping genius that broods over
the tomb of an honest merchant and clothier of the city. He took a
liking to the artist, his fellow-townsman, and ordered his own monument,
and had the gratification to see it arrive from Rome a few weeks before
his death. A prettier thing even than the statue is the tomb of a little
boy, which has been shut in by a large and curious *grille* of iron
work. The father worked it, a blacksmith, whose darling the child was,
and he spent three years in hammering out this mausoleum. It is the
beautiful story of the pot of ointment told again at the blacksmith's
anvil; and who can but like him for placing this fine gilded cage over
the body of his poor little one? Presently you come to a Frenchwoman's
tomb, with a French epitaph by a French husband, and a pot of artificial
flowers in a niche-a wig, and a pot of rouge, as it were, just to make
the dead look passably well It is *his* manner of showing his sympathy
for an immortal soul that has passed away. The poor may be buried here
for nothing; and here, too, once more Thank God! each may rest without
priests or parsons scowling hell-fire at his neighbour unconscious under
the grass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cork--The Ursuline Convent](isb06)
