[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](isb07)  [Next](isb09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From Cork to Bantry; with an account of the city of Skibbereen.

 

 That light four-inside, four-horse coach, the "Skibbereen
Perseverance," brought me 52 miles to-day, for the sum of
three-and-sixpence, through a country which is, as usual, somewhat
difficult to describe. We issued out of Cork by the western road, in
which, as the Guide-book says, there is something very imposing. "The
magnificence of the county court house, the extent, solidity, and
characteristic sternness of the county jail," were visible to us for a
few minutes; when turning away southward from the pleasant banks of the
stream, the road took us towards Bandon, through a country that is bare
and ragged-looking, but yet green and pretty; and it always seems to me,
like the people, to look cheerful in spite of its wretchedness, or, more
correctly, to look tearful and cheerful at the same time.

The coach, like almost every other public vehicle I have seen in
Ireland, was full to the brim and over it. What can send these restless
people travelling and hurrying about from place to place as they do? I
have heard one or two gentlemen hint that they had "business" at this
place or that; and found afterwards that one was going a couple of score
of miles to look at a mare, another to examine a setter-dog, and so on.
I did not make it my business to ask on what errand the gentlemen on the
coach were bound; though two of them, seeing an Englishman, very
good-naturedly began chalking out a route for him to take, and showing a
sort of interest in his affairs which is not with us generally
exhibited. The coach, too, seemed to have the elastic hospitality of
some Irish houses; it accommodated an almost impossible number. For the
greater part of the journey the little guard sat on the roof among the
carpet-bags, holding in one hand a huge tambour-frame, in the other a
bandbox marked "Foggarty, Hatter." (What is there more ridiculous in the
name of Foggarty than in that of Smith? and yet, had Smith been the
name, I never should have laughed at or remarked it.) Presently by his
side clambered a green-coated policeman with his carbine, and we had a
talk about the vitriol-throwers at Cork, and the sentence just passed
upon them. The populace has decidedly taken part with the
vitriol-throwers: parties of dragoons were obliged to surround the
avenues of the court; and the judge who sentenced them was abused as he
entered his carriage, and called an old villain, and many other
opprobrious names.

This case the reader very likely remembers. A saw-mill was established
at Cork, by which some 400 sawyers were thrown out of employ. In order
to deter the proprietors of this and all other mills from using such
instruments further, the sawyers determined to execute a terrible
vengeance, and cast lots among themselves which of their body should
fling vitriol into the faces of the mill-owners. The men who were chosen
by the lot were to execute this horrible office on pain of death, and
did so,--frightfully burning and blinding one of the gentlemen owning
the mill. Great rewards were offered for the apprehension of the
criminals, and at last one of their own body came forward as an
approver, and the four principal actors in this dreadful outrage were
sentenced to be transported for life. Crowds of the ragged admirers of
these men were standing round "the magnificent county court-house" as we
passed the building. Ours is a strange life indeed. What a history of
poverty and barbarity, and crime and even kindness, was that by which we
passed before the magnificent county court house, at eight miles an
hour! What a chapter might a philosopher write on them! Look yonder at
those 200 ragged fellow-subjects of yours: they are kind, good, pious,
brutal, starving. If the priest tells them, there is scarce any penance
they will not perform; there is scarcely any pitch of misery which they
have not been known to endure, nor any degree of generosity of which
they are not capable: but if a man comes among these people, and can
afford to take land over their heads, or if he invents a machine which
can work more economically than their labour, they will shoot the man
down without mercy, murder him, or put him to horrible tortures, and
glory almost in what they do. There stands the men; they are only
separated from us by a few paces; they are as fond of their mother and
children as we are; their gratitude for small kindnesses shown to them
is extraordinary; they are Christians as we are; but interfere with
their interests, and they will murder you without pity.

It is not revenge so much which these poor fellows take, as a brutal
justice of their own. Now, will it seem a paradox to say, in regard to
them and their murderous system, that the way to put an end to the
latter is to *kill them no more!* Let the priest be able to go amongst
them and say, The law holds a man's life so sacred that it will on no
account take it away. No man, nor body of men, has a right to meddle
with human life: not the Commons of England any more than the Commons of
Tipperary. This may cost two or three lives, probably, until such time
as the system may come to be known and understood; but which will be the
greatest economy of blood in the end?

By this time the vitriol-men were long passed away, and we began next to
talk about the Cork and London steamboats; which are made to pay, on
account of the number of paupers whom the boats bring over from London
at the charge of that city. The passengers found here, as in everything
else almost which I have seen as yet, another instance of the injury
which England inflicts on them. "As long as these men are strong and can
work," says one, "you keep them; when they are in bad health, you fling
them upon us." Nor could I convince him that the agricultural gentlemen
were perfectly free to stay at home if they liked: that we did for them
what was done for English paupers--sent them, namely, as far as possible
on the way to their parishes; nay, that some of them (as I have seen
with my own eyes) actually saved a bit of money during the harvest, and
took this cheap way of conveying it and themselves to their homes again.
But nothing would convince the gentleman that there was not some wicked
scheming on the part of the English in the business; and, indeed, I find
upon almost every other subject a peevish and puerile suspiciousness
which is worthy of France itself.

By this time we came to a pretty village called Innishannon, upon the
noble banks of the Bandon river; leading for three miles by a great
number of pleasant gentlemen's seats to Bandon town. A good number of
large mills were on the banks of the stream; and the chief part of them,
as in Carlow, useless. One mill we saw was too small for the owner's
great speculations; and so he built another and larger one: the big mill
cost him 10,000*l*, for which his brothers went security; and, a lawsuit
being given against the mill-owner, the two mills stopped, the two
brothers went off, and yon fine old house, in the style of Anne, with
terraces and tall chimneys--one of the oldest country-houses I have seen
in Ireland--is now inhabited by the natural son of the mill-owner, who
has more such interesting progeny. Then we came to a tall, comfortable
house, in a plantation; opposite to which was a stone castle, in its
shrubberies on the other side of the road. The tall house in the
plantation shot the opposite side of the road in a duel, and nearly
killed him; on which the opposite side of the road built this castle,
*in order to plague* the tall house. They are good friends now; but the
opposite side of the road ruined himself in building his house. I asked,
" Is the house finished?"--"A good deal of it is"' was the answer.--And
then we came to a brewery, about which was a similar story of
extravagance and ruin; but, whether before or after entering Bandon,
does not matter.

We did not, it appears, pass through the best part of Bandon: I looked
along one side of the houses in the long street through which we went,
to see if there was a window without a broken pane of glass, and can
declare on my conscience that every single window had three broken
panes. There we changed horses, in a market-place, surrounded, as usual,
by beggars; then we passed through a suburb still more wretched and
ruinous than the first street, and which, in very large letters, is
called DOYLE STREET: and the next stage was at a place called Dunmanway.

Here it was market-day, too, and, as usual, no Jack of attendants:
swarms of peasants in their blue cloaks, squatting by their stalls here
and there. There is a little miserable old market-house, where a few
women were selling buttermilk; another, bullocks' hearts, liver, and
such like scraps of meat; another had dried mackerel on a board; and
plenty of people huckstering of course. Round the coach came crowds of
raggery, and blackguards awning for money. I wonder who gives them any!
I have never seen any one give yet; and were they not even so numerous
that it would be impossible to gratify them all, there is something in
their cant and supplications to the Lord so disgusting to me, that I
could not give a halfpenny.

In regard of pretty faces, male or female, this road is very
unfavourable. I have not seen one for 50 miles; though, as it was
market-day all along the road, we have had the opportunity to examine
vast numbers of countenances. The women are, for the most part, stunted,
short, with fiat Tartar faces; and the men no handsomer. Every woman has
bare legs, of course; and as the weather is fine, they are sitting
outside their cabins, with the pig, and the geese, and the children
sporting around.

Before many doors we saw a little flock of these useful animals, and the
family pig almost everywhere: you might see him browsing and poking
along the hedges, his fore and hind legs attached with a wisp of hay to
check his propensity to roaming. Here and there were a small brood of
turkeys; now and then a couple of sheep or a single one grazing upon a
scanty field, of which the chief crop seemed to be thistles and stone;
and, by the side of the cottage, the potato-field always.

The character of the landscape for the most part is bare and sad; except
here and there in the neighbourhood of the towns, where people have
taken a fancy to plant, and where nature has helped them, as it almost
always will in this country. If we saw a field with a good hedge to it,
we were sure to see a good crop inside. Many a field was there that had
neither crop nor hedge. We passed by and over many streams, running
bright through brilliant emerald meadows; and I saw a thousand charming
pictures, which want as yet an Irish Berghem. A bright road winding up a
hill; on it a country cart, with its load, stretching a huge shadow; the
before-mentioned emerald pastures and silver rivers in the foreground; a
noble sweep of hills rising up from them, and contrasting their
magnificent purple with the green; in the extreme distance the clear
cold outline of some far-off mountains, and the white clouds tumbled
about in the blue sky overhead.

It has no doubt struck all persons who love to look at nature, how
different the skies are in different countries. I fancy Irish or French
clouds are as characteristic as Irish or French landscapes. It would be
well to have a daguerreotype and get a series of each. Some way beyond
Dunmanway the road takes us through a noble savage country of rocks and
heath. Nor must the painter forget long black tracts of bog here and
there, and the water glistening brightly at the places where the turf
has been cut away. Add to this, and chiefly by the banks of rivers, a
ruined old castle or two: some were built by the Danes, it is said. The
O'Connors, the O'Mahonys, the O'Driscolls were lords of many others, and
their ruined towers may be seen here and along the sea.

Near Dunmanway that great coach, "The Skibbereen Industry," dashed by us
at seven miles an hour; a wondrous vehicle: there were gaps between
every one of the panels; you could see daylight through and through it.
Like our machine, it was full, with three complementary sailors on the
roof, as little harness as possible to the horses, and as long stages as
horses can well endure: ours were each 18-mile stages. About eight miles
from Skibbereen a one-horse car met us, and carried away an offshoot of
passengers to Bantry. Five passengers and their luggage, and a very
wild, steep road: all this had one poor little pony to overcome! About
the towns there were some show of gentlemen's cars, smart and well
appointed, and on the road great numbers of country carts: an army of
them met us, coming from Skibbereen, and laden with grey sand for
manure.

Before you enter the city of Skibbereen, the tall new poorhouse presents
itself to the eye of the traveller; of the common model, being a
bastard-Gothic edifice, with a profusion of cottage-ornee (is cottage
masculine or feminine in French?)--of cottage-ornee roofs, and
pinnacles, and insolent-looking stacks of chimneys. It is built for 900
people, but as yet not more than 400 have been induced to live in it;
the beggars preferring the freedom of their precarious trade to the
dismal certainty within its walls. Next we come to the chapel, a very
large, respectable-looking building of dark-grey stone; and presently,
behold, by the crowd of blackguards in waiting, "The Skibbereen
Perseverance" has found its goal, and you are inducted to the "hotel"
opposite.

Some gentlemen were at the coach, besides those of lower degree. Here
was a fat fellow with large whiskers, a geranium, and a cigar; yonder a
tall handsome old man that I would swear was a dragoon on half-pay. He
had a little cap, a Taglioni coat, a pair of beautiful spaniels, and a
pair of knee-breeches which showed a very handsome old leg; and his
object seemed to be to invite everybody to dinner as they got off the
coach. No doubt he has seen the "Skibbereen Perseverance " come in ever
since it was a "Perseverance." It is wonderful to think what will
interest men in prisons or country towns!

There is a dirty coffee-room, with a strong smell of whiskey; indeed
three young "materialists" are employed at the moment: and I hereby beg
to offer an apology to three other gentlemen--the captain, another, and
the gentleman of the geranium, who had caught hold of a sketching-stool
which is my property, and were stretching it, and sitting upon it, and
wondering, and talking of it, when the owner came in, and they bounced
off to their seats like so many school-boys. Dirty as the place was,
this was no reason why it should not produce an exuberant dinner of
trout and Kerry mutton; after which Dan the waiter, holding up a dingy
decanter, asks how much whiskey I'd have.

That calculation need not be made here; and if a man sleeps well, has he
any need to quarrel with the appointments of his bedroom, and spy out
the deficiencies of the land? As it was Sunday, it was impossible for me
to say what sort of shops "the active and flourishing town" of
Skibbereen contains. There were some of the architectural sort, viz.:
with gilt letters and cracked mouldings, and others into which I thought
I saw the cows walking; but it was only into their little cribs and
paddocks at the back of the shops. There is a trim Wesleyan chapel,
without any broken windows; a neat church standing modestly on one side.
The Lower Street crawls along the river to a considerable extent, having
by-streets and boulevards of cabins here and there.

The people came flocking into the place by hundreds, and you saw their
blue cloaks dotting the road and the bare open plains beyond. The men
came with shoes and stockings to clay, the women all bare-legged, and
many of them might be seen washing their feet in the stream before they
went up to the chapel. The street seemed to be lined on either side with
blue cloaks, squatting along the doorways as is their wont. Among these,
numberless cows were walking to and fro, and pails of milk passing, and
here and there a hound or two went stalking about. Dan the waiter says
they are hunted by the handsome old captain who was yesterday inviting
everybody to dinner.

Anybody at eight o'clock of a Sunday morning in summer may behold the
above scene from a bridge just outside the town. He may add to it the
river, with one or two barges lying idle upon it; a flag flying at what
looks like a custom-house; bare country all around; and the chapel
before him, with a swarm of the dark figures round about it.

I went into it, not without awe (for, as I confessed before, I always
feel a sort of tremor on going into a Catholic place of worship: the
candles, and altars, and mysteries, the priest and his robes, and nasal
chanting, and wonderful genuflexions, will frighten me as long as I
live). The chapel-yard was filled with men and women; a couple of shabby
old beadles were at the gate, with copper shovels to collect money, and
inside the chapel four or five hundred people were on their knees, and
scores more of the blue-mantles came in, dropping their curtsies as they
entered, and then taking their places on the flags.

<span id="img_19"></span> ![](img/19.jpg)

And now the pangs of hunger beginning to make themselves felt, it became
necessary for your humble servant (after making several useless
applications to a bell, which properly declined to work on Sundays) to
make a personal descent to the inn-kitchen, where was not a bad study
for a painter. It was a huge room, with a peat fire burning, and a
staircase walking up one side of it, on which stair was a damsel in a
partial though by no means picturesque dishabille. The cook had just
come in with a great frothing pail of milk, and sat with her arms
folded; the ostler's boy sat dangling his legs from the table; the
ostler was dandling a noble little boy of a year old, at whom Mrs. Cook
likewise grinned delighted. Here, too, sat Mr. Dan the waiter; and no
wonder the breakfast was delayed, for all three of these worthy
domestics seemed delighted with the infant.

He was handed over to the gentleman's arms for the space of 30 seconds;
the gentleman being the father of a family, and of course an amateur.

"Say Dan for the gentleman," says the delighted cook.

"Dada," says the baby; at which the assembly grinned with joy: and Dan
promised I should have my breakfast "in a hurry"

But of all the wonderful things to be seen in Skibbereen, Dan's pantry
is the most wonderful: every article within is a makeshift, and has been
ingeniously perverted from its original destination. Here lie bread,
blacking, fresh-butter, tallow-candles, dirty knives--all in the same
cigar-box with snuff, milk, cold bacon, brown sugar, broken teacups and
hits of soap No pen can describe that establishment, as no English
imagination could have conceived it. But lo! the sky has cleared after a
furious fall of rain--(in compliance with Dan's statement to that
effect, "that the weather would be fine ")--and a car is waiting to
carry us to Loughine.

Although the description of Loughine can make but a poor figure in a
book, the ride thither is well worth the traveller's short labour. You
pass by one of the cabin-streets out of the town into a country which
for a mile is rich with grain, though bare of trees; then through a
boggy bleak district, from which you enter into a sort of sea of rocks,
with patches of herbage here and there. Before the traveller, almost all
the way, is a huge pile of purple mountain, on which, as one comes near,
one perceives numberless waves and breaks, as you see small waves on a
billow in the sea; then clambering up a hill, we look down upon a bright
green flat of land, with the lake beyond it, girt round by grey
melancholy hills. The water may be a mile in extent; a cabin tops the
mountain here and there; gentlemen have erected one or two anchorite
pleasure-houses on the banks, as cheerful as a summer-house would be on
Salisbury Plain. I felt not sorry to have seen this lonely lake, and
still happier to leave it. There it lies with crags all round it, in the
midst of desolate plains: it escapes somewhere to the sea; its waters
are salt: half a dozen boats lie here and there upon its banks, and we
saw a small crew of boys plashing about and swimming in it, laughing and
yelling. It seemed a shame to disturb the silence so.

The crowd of swaggering "gents" (I don't know the corresponding phrase
in the Anglo-Irish vocabulary to express a shabby dandy) awaiting the
Cork mail, which kindly goes 20 miles out of its way to accommodate the
town of Skibbereen, was quite extraordinary. The little street was quite
blocked up with shabby gentlemen, and shabby beggars, awaiting this
daily phenomenon. The man who had driven us to Loughine did not fail to
ask for his fee as driver; and then, having received it, came forward in
his capacity of boots and received another remuneration. The ride is
desolate, bare, and yet beautiful. There are a set of hills that keep
one company the whole day; they were partially hidden in a grey sky,
which flung a general hue of melancholy too over the green country
through which we passed. There was only one wretched village along the
road, but no lack of population ragged people who issued from their
cabins as the coach passed, or were sitting by the wayside. Everybody
seems sitting by the wayside here: one never sees this general repose in
England--a sort of ragged lazy contentment. All the children seem to be
on the watch for the coach; waited very knowingly and carefully their
opportunity, and then hung on by scores behind. What a pleasure to run
over flinty roads with bare feet, to be whipped off, and to walk back to
the cabin again.

These were very different cottages to those neat ones I had seen in
Kildare. The wretchedness of them is quite painful to look at; many of
the potato-gardens were half dug up, and it is only the first week in
August, near three months before the potato is ripe and at full growth;
and the winter still six months away. There were chapels occasionally,
and smart new-built churches--one of them has a congregation of ten
souls, the coachman told me. Would it not be better that the clergyman
should receive them in his room, and that the church-building money
should be bestowed otherwise?

At length, after winding up all sorts of dismal hills speckled with
wretched hovels, a ruinous mill every now and then, black bog-lands, and
small winding streams, breaking here and there into little falls, we
come upon some ground well tilled and planted, and descending (at no
small risk from stumbling horses) a bleak long hill, we see the water
before us, and turning to the right by the handsome little park of Lord
Bearhaven, enter Bantry. The harbour is beautiful. Small mountains in
green undulations rising on the opposite side; great grey ones farther
back; a pretty island in the midst of the water, which is wonderfully
bright and calm. A handsome yacht, and two or three vessels with their
Sunday colours out, were lying in the bay. It looked like a seaport
scene at a theatre, gay, cheerful, neat, and picturesque. At a little
distance the town, too, is very pretty. There are some smart houses on
the quays, a handsome court-house as usual, a fine large hotel, and
plenty of people flocking round the wonderful coach.

The town is most picturesquely situated, climbing up a wooded hill, with
numbers of neat cottages here and there, an ugly church with an air of
pretension, and a large grave Roman Catholic chapel the highest point of
the place. The Main Street was as usual thronged with the squatting blue
cloaks, carrying on their eager trade of buttermilk and green apples,
and such cheap wares. With the exception of this street and the quay,
with their whitewashed and slated houses, it is a town of cabins. The
wretchedness of some of them is quite curious: I tried to make a sketch
of a row which lean against an old wall, and are built upon a rock that
tumbles about in the oddest and most fantastic shapes, with a brawling
waterfall dashing down a channel in the midst. These are, it appears,
the beggars' houses: any one may build a lodge against that wall,
rent-free; and such places were never seen! As for drawing them, it was
in vain to try; one might as well make a sketch of a bundle of rags. An
ordinary pigsty in England is really more comfortable. Most of them were
not six feet long or five feet high, built of stones huddled together, a
hole being left for the people to creep in at, a ruined thatch to keep
out some little portion of the rain. The occupiers of these places sat
at their doors in tolerable contentment, or the children came down and
washed their feet in the water. I declare I believe a Hottentot kraal
has more comforts in it: even to write of the place makes one unhappy,
and the words move slow. But in the midst of all this misery there is an
air of actual cheerfulness; and go but a few score yards off, and these
wretched hovels lying together look really picturesque and pleasing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rainy Days at Glengariff.](isb09.md)
