[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](isb11)  [Next](isb13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Killarney--The Races--Muckross.

 

The races were as gay as races could be, in spite of one or two untoward
accidents that arrived at the close of the day's sport. Where all the
people came from that thronged out of the town was a wonder; where all
the vehicles, the cars, barouches and shandrydans, the carts, the horse
and donkey-men could have found stable and shelter, who can tell? Of all
these equipages and donkeypages I had a fine view from Mrs.
Macgillicuddy's window, and it was pleasant to see the happy faces
shining under the blue cloaks as the carts rattled by.

A very handsome young lady--I presume Miss MacG.--who gives a hand to
the drawing-room and comes smiling in with the teapot--Miss MacG., I
say, appeared to-day in a silk bonnet and stiff silk dress, with a
brooch and a black mantle, as smart as any lady in the land, and looking
as if she was accustomed to her dress too, which the housemaid on banks,
of Thames does not. Indeed, I have not met a more ladylike young person
in Ireland than Miss MacG.; and when I saw her in a handsome car on the
course, I was quite proud of a bow.

Tramping thither, too, as hard as they could walk, and as happy and
smiling as possible, were Mary the coachman's wife of the day before,
and Johanna with the child, and presently the other young lady: the man
with the stick, you may be sure: he would toil a year for that day's
pleasure. They are all mad for it: people walk for miles and miles round
to the race; they come without a penny in their pockets often, trusting
to chance and charity, and that some worthy gentleman may fling them a
sixpence. A gentleman told me that he saw on the course persons from his
part of the country, who must have walked eighty miles for the sport.

For a mile and a half to the racecourse there could be no pleasanter
occupation than looking at the happy multitudes who were thronging
thither; and I am bound to say that on rich or poor shoulders I never
saw so many handsome faces in my life. In the carriages, among the
ladies of Kerry, every second woman was handsome; and there is something
peculiarly tender and pleasing in the looks of the young female
peasantry that is perhaps even better than beauty. Beggars had taken
their stations along the road in no great numbers, for I suspect they
were most of them on the ground, and those who remained were
consequently of the oldest and ugliest It is a shame that such horrible
figures are allowed to appear in public as some of the loathsome ones
which belong to these unhappy people.

On went the crowd, however, laughing and as gay as possible; all sorts
of fun passing from car to foot-passengers as the pretty girls came
clattering by, and the "boys" had a word for each. One lady, with long
flowing auburn hair, who was turning away her head from some "boys" very
demurely, I actually saw, at a pause of the cart, kissed by one of them.
She gave the fellow a huge box on the ear and he roared out, "O
murther!" and she frowned for some time as hard as she could, whilst the
ladies in the blue cloaks at the back of the car uttered a shrill rebuke
in Irish. But in a minute the whole party was grinning, and the young
fellow who had administered the salute may, for what I know, have taken
another without the slap on the face by way of exchange.

And here, lest the fair public may have a bad opinion of the personage
who talks of kissing with such awful levity, let it be said that with
all this laughing, romping, kissing, and the like, there are no more
innocent girls in the world than the Irish girls; and that the women of
our squeamish country are far more liable to err. One has but to walk
through an English and Irish town, and see how much superior is the
morality of the latter. That great terror-striker, the Confessional, is
before the Irish girl, and sooner or later her sins must be told there.

By this time we are got upon the course, which is really one of the most
beautiful spots that ever was seen: the lake and mountains lying along
two sides of it, and of course visible from all. They were busy putting
up the hurdles when we arrived: stiff bars and poles, four feet from the
ground, with furze-bushes over them. The grand stand was already full
along the hedges sat thousands of the people, sitting at their ease
doing nothing, and happy as kings. A daguerreotype would have been of
great service to have taken their portraits and I never saw a vast
multitude of heads and attitudes so picturesque and lively. The sun
lighted up the whole course and the lakes with amazing brightness,
though behind the former lay a huge rack of the darkest clouds against
which the corn fields and meadows shone in the brightest green and gold,
and a row of white tents was quite dazzling.

There was a brightness and intelligence about this immense Irish crowd,
which I don't remember to have seen in an English one. The women in
their blue cloaks, with red smiling faces peering from one end, and bare
feet from the other, had seated themselves in all sorts of pretty
attitudes of cheerful contemplation; and the men, who are accustomed to
lie about, were doing so now with all their might-sprawling on the
banks, with as much ease and variety as club-room loungers on their soft
cushions,--or squatted leisurely among the green potatoes. The sight of
so much happy laziness did one good to look on. Nor did the honest
fellows seem to weary of this amusement. Hours passed on, and the
gentlefolks (judging from our party) began to grow somewhat weary; but
the finest peasantry in Europe never budged from their posts, and
continued to indulge in greetings, indolence, and conversation.

When we came to the row of white tents, as usual it did not look so
brilliant or imposing as it appeared from a little distance, though the
scene around them was animating enough. The tents were long humble
booths stretched on hoops, each with its humble streamer or ensign
without, and containing, of course, articles of refreshment within. But
Father Mathew has been busy among the publicans, and the consequence is
that the poor fellows are now condemned for the most part to sell "tay"
in place of whiskey; for the concoction of which beverage huge cauldrons
were smoking, in front of each hut door, in round graves dug for the
purpose and piled up with black smoking sod.

Behind this camp were the carts of the poor people, which were not
allowed to penetrate into the quarter where the quality cars stood. And
a little way from the huts, again, you might see (for you could scarcely
hear) certain pipers executing their melodies and inviting people to
dance.

<span id="img_25"></span> ![](img/25.jpg)

Anything more lugubrious than the drone of the pipe, or the jig danced
to it, or the countenances of the dancers. and musicians, I never saw.
Round each set of dancers the people formed a ring, in the which the
figurantes and coryphées went through their operations. The toes went in
and the toes went out; then there came certain mystic figures of hands
across, and so forth. I never saw less grace or seemingly less
enjoyment--no, not even in a quadrille. The people, however, took a
great interest, and it was "Well done, Tim! " "Step out, Miss Brady!"
and so forth during the dance.

Thimble-rig too obtained somewhat, though in a humble way. A ragged
scoundrel--the image of Hogarth's Bad Apprentice--went bustling and
shouting through the crowd with his dirty tray and thimble, and as soon
as he had taken his post, stated that this was the "royal game of
thimble" and called upon "gintlemen" to come forward. And then a ragged
fellow would be seen to approach, with as innocent an air as he could
assume, and the bystanders might remark that the second ragged fellow
almost always won. Nay, he was so benevolent, in many instances, as to
point out to various people who had a mind to bet, under which thimble
the pea actually was. Meanwhile, the first fellow was sure to be looking
away and talking to some one in the crowd; but somehow it generally
happened-and how of course I can't tell--that any man who listened to
the advice of rascal No. 2**,** lost his money. I believe it is so even
in England.

<span id="img_26"></span> ![](img/26.jpg)

Then you would see gentlemen with halfpenny roulette-tables; and, again,
here were a pair who came forward disinterestedly with a table and a
pack of cards, and began playing against each other for ten shillings a
game, betting crowns as freely as possible.

Gambling, however, must have been fatal to both of these gentlemen, else
might not one have supposed that, if they were in the habit of winning
much, they would have treated themselves to better clothes? This,
however, is the way with all gamblers, as the reader has no doubt
remarked: for, look at a game of loo or *vingt-et-un* played in a
friendly way, and where you, and three or four others, have certainly
lost three or four pounds,--well. ask at the end of the game who has
won, and you invariably find that nobody has. Hopkins has only covered
himself; Snooks has neither lost nor won; Smith has won four shillings;
and so on. Who gets the money? The devil gets it, I dare say; and so, no
doubt, he has laid hold of the money of yonder gentleman in the handsome
great-coat.

But, to the shame of the stewards be it spoken, they are extremely
averse to this kind of sport; and presently comes up one, a stout old
gentleman on a bay horse, wielding a huge hunting-whip, at the sight of
which all fly, amateurs, idlers, professional men and all. He is a rude
customer to deal with, that gentleman with the whip; just now he was
clearing the course, and cleared it with such a vengeance, that a whole
troop on a hedge retreated backward into a ditch opposite, where was
rare kicking, and sprawlina and disarrangement of petticoats, and cries
of "O murther!" Mother of God!" "I'm kilt!" and so on. But as soon as
the horsewhip was gone, the people clambered out of their ditch again,
and were as thick as ever on the bank.

The last instance of the exercise of the whip shall be this. A groom
rode insolently after a gentleman, calling him names, and inviting him
to fight. This the great flagellator hearing, rode up to the groom,
lifted him gracefully off his horse into the air, and on to the ground,
and when there administered to him a severe and merited fustigation;
after which he told the course-keepers to drive the fellow off the
course, and enjoined the latter not to appear again at his peril.

As for the races themselves, I won't pretend to say that they were
better or worse than other such amusement: or to quarrel with gentlemen
who choose to risk their lives in manly exercise. In the first race
there was a fall: one of the gentlemen was carried off the ground, and
it was said *he was dead.* In the second race, a horse and man went over
and over each other, and the fine young man (we had seen him five
minutes before, full of life and triumph, clearing the hurdles on his
gray horse, at the head of the race):-- in the second heat of the second
race the poor fellow missed his leap, was carried away stunned and
dying, and the bay horse won.

I was standing, during the first heat of this race, (this is the second
man the gray has killed--they ought to call him the Pale Horse,) by half
a dozen young giris from the gentleman's village, and hundreds more of
them were there, anxious for the honour of their village, the young
squire, and the grey horse. Oh, how they hurrah'd as he rode ahead! I
saw these girls--they might be fourteen years old--after the
catastrophe. "Well," says I, "this is a sad end to the race." *"And is
it the pink jacket or the blue has won this time?"* says one of the
girls. It was poor Mr. C---'s only epitaph: and wasn't it a sporting
answer? That girl ought to be a hurdle-racer's wife; and I would like,
for my part, to bestow her upon the groom who won the race

I don't care to confess that the accident to the poor young gentleman so
thoroughly disgusted my feeling as a man and a cockney, that I turned
off the racecourse short, and hired a horse for sixpence to carry me
back to Miss Macgillicuddy. In the evening, at the inn, (let no man who
values comfort go to an Irish inn in race-time,) a blind old piper, with
silvery hair and of a most respectable, bard-like appearance, played a
great deal too much for us after dinner. He played very well, and with
very much feeling, ornamenting the airs with flourishes and variations
that were very pretty indeed, and his pipe was by far the most melodious
I have heard; but honest truth compels me to say, that the bad pipes are
execrable, and the good inferior to a clarionet.

Next day, instead of going back to the racecourse, a car drove me out to
Muckross, where, in Mr. Herbert's beautiful grounds, lies the prettiest
little *bijou* of a ruined abbey ever seen--a little chapel with a
little chancel, a little cloister, a little dormitory, and in the midst
of the cloister a wonderful huge yew--tree which darkens the whole
place. The abbey is famous in book and legend; nor could two young
lovers, or artists in search of the picturesque, or picnic-parties with
the cold chicken and champagne in the distance, find a more charming
place to while away a summer's day than in the park of Mr. Herbert. But
depend on it, for show-places and the due enjoyment of scenery, that
distance of cold chickens and champagne is the most pleasing perspective
one can have. I would have sacrificed a mountain or two for the above,
and would have pitched Mangerton into the lake for the sake of a friend
with whom to enjoy the rest of the landscape.

The walk through Mr. Herbert's demesne carries you, through all sorts of
beautiful avenues, by a fine house which be is building in the
Elizabethan style, and from which, as from the whole road, you command
the most wonderful rich views of the lake. The shore breaks into little
bays, which the water washes; here and there are picturesque grey rocks
to meet it, the bright grass as often, or the shrubs of every kind which
bathe their roots in the lake. It was August, and the men before Turk
Cottage were cutting a second crop of clover, as fine, seemingly, as the
first drop elsewhere: a short walk from it brought us to a neat lodge,
whence issued a keeper with a key, quite willing, for the consideration
of sixpence, to conduct us to Turk waterfall.

Evergreens and other trees, in their brightest livery; blue sky; roaring
water, here black, and yonder foaming of a dazzling white; rocks shining
in the dark places, or frowning black against the light, all the leaves
and branches keeping up a perpetual waving and dancing round about the
cascade: what is the use of putting down all this? A man might describe
the cataract of the Serpentine in exactly the same terms, and the reader
be no wiser. Suffice it to say, that the Turk cascade is even handsomer
than the before-mentioned waterfall of O'Sullivan, and that a man may
pass half an hour there, and look, and listen, and muse, and not even
feel the want of a companion, or so much as think of the iced champagne.
There is just enough of savageness in the Turk cascade to make the view
*piquante.* It is not, at this season at least, by any means fierce,
only wild; nor was the scene peopled by any of the rude, red-shanked
figures that clustered about the trees of O'Sullivan's
waterfall,--savages won't pay sixpence for the prettiest waterfall ever
seen--so that this only was for the best of company.

The road hence to Killarney caries one through Muckross village, a
pretty cluster of houses, where the sketcher will find abundant
materials for exercising his art and puzzling his hand. There are not
only noble trees, but a green common and an old water-gate to a river,
lined on either side by beds of rushes and discharging itself beneath an
old mill-wheel. But the old mill-wheel was perfectly idle, like most men
and mill-wheels in this country: by it is a ruinous house, and a fine
garden of stinging-nettles: opposite it, on the common, is another
ruinous house, with another garden containing the same plant) and far
away are sharp ridges of purple hills, which make as pretty a landscape
as the eye can see. I don't know how it is, but throughout the country
the men and the landscapes seem to be the same, and one and the other
seem ragged, ruined, and cheerful

Having been employed all day (making some abominable attempts at
landscape-drawing, which shall not be exhibited here), it became
requisite as the evening approached to recruit an exhausted cockney
stomach which after a very moderate portion of exercise, begins to sigh
for beef steaks in the most peremptory manner. Hard by is a fine hotel
with a fine sign stretching along the road for the space of a dozen
windows at least, and looking inviting enough All the doors were open,
and I walked into a great number of rooms, but the only person I saw was
a woman with trinkets of arbutus, who offered me, by way of refreshment,
a walking-stick or a card-rack. I suppose everybody was at the races;
and an evilly-disposed person might have laid *main-basse* upon the
great-coats which were there, and the silver-spoons, if by any miracle
such things were kept--but Britannia metal is the favourite composition
in Ireland; or else iron by itself; or else iron that has been silvered
over, but that takes good care to peep out at all the corners of the
forks: and blessed is the traveller who has not other observations to
make regarding his fork, besides the mere abrasion of the silver.

This was the last day's race, and on the next morning (Sunday), all the
thousands who had crowded to the race seemed trooping to the chapels,
and the streets were blue with cloaks. Walking in to prayers, and
without his board, came my young friend of the thimble-rig, and
presently after sauntered in the fellow with the long coat, who had
played at cards for sovereigns. I should like to hear the confession of
himself and friend the next time they communicate with his reverence.

The extent of this town is very curious, and I should imagine its
population to be much greater than five thousand, which was the number,
according to Miss Macgillicuddy. Along the three main streets are
numerous arches, down every one of which runs an alley, intersected by
other alleys, and swarming with people. A stream or gutter runs commonly
down these alleys, in which the pigs and children are seen paddling
about. The men and women loll at their doors or windows, to enjoy the
detestable prospect. I saw two pigs under a fresh-made deal staircase in
one of the main streets near the Bridewell two very well-dressed girls,
with their hair in ringlets, were looking out of the parlour-window:
almost all the glass in the upper rooms was of course smashed, the
windows patched here and there (if the people were careful), the
wood-work of the door loose, the whitewash peeling off,--and the house
evidently not two years old.

By the Bridewell is a busy potato-market, picturesque to the sketcher,
if not very respectable to the merchant: here were the country carts and
the country cloaks, and the shrill beggarly bargains going on-a world of
shrieking and gesticulating, and talk, about a pennyworth of potatoes.

All round the town miserable streets of cabins are stretched, You see
people lolling at each door, women staring and combing their hair, men
with their little pipes, children whose rags hang on by a miracle,
idling in a gutter. Are we to set all this down to absenteeism, and pity
poor injured Ireland? Is the landlord's absence the reason why the house
is filthy, and biddy tolls in the porch all day? Upon my word, I have
heard people talk as if, when Pat's thatch was blown off, the landlord
ought to go fetch the straw and the ladder, and mend it himself. People
need not be dirty if they are ever so idle; if they are ever so poor,
pigs and men need not live together. Half an hour's work, and digging a
trench, might remove that filthy dunghill from that filthy window. The
smoke might as well come out of the chimney as out of the door. Why
should not Tim do that, instead of walking a hundred-and-sixty miles to
a race? The priests might do much more to effect these reforms than even
the landlords themselves: and I hope now that the excellent Father
Mathew has succeeded in arraying his clergy to work with him in the
abolition of drunkenness, they will attack the monster Dirt, with the
same good-will, and surely with the same success.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tralee--Listowel--Tarbert](isb13.md)
