[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](isb13)  [Next](isb15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Limerick.

 

A capital steamer, which on this day was thronged with people, carried
us for about four hours down the noble stream and landed us at Limerick
quay. The character of the landscape on either side the stream is not
particularly picturesque, but large, liberal, and prosperous. Gentle
sweeps of rich meadows and corn-fields cover the banks, and some, though
not too many, gentlemen's parks and plantations rise here and there. But
the landscape was somehow more pleasing than if it had been merely
picturesque; and, especially after coming out of that desolate county of
Kerry, it was pleasant for the eye to rest upon this peaceful, rich, and
generous scene. The first aspect of Limerick is very smart and pleasing:
fine neat quays with considerate liveliness and bustle, a very handsome
bridge (the Wellesley Bridge) before the spectator; who, after a walk
through two long and flourishing streets, stops at length at one of the
best inns in Ireland--the large, neat, and prosperous one kept by Mr.
Cruise. Except at Youghal, and the poor fellow whom the Englishman
belaboured at Glengariff, Mr. Cruise is the only landlord of an inn I
have had the honour to see in Ireland. I believe these gentlemen
commonly (and very naturally) prefer riding with the hounds, or manly
sports, to attendance on their guests; and the landladies, if they
prefer to play the piano, or to have a game of cards in the parlour,
only show a taste at which no one can wonder: for who can expect a lady
to be troubling herself with vulgar chance-customers, or looking after
Molly in the bedroom or waiter Tim in the cellar?

Now beyond this piece of information regarding the excellence of Mr.
Cruise's hotel, which every traveller knows, the writer of this doubts
very much whether he has anything to say about Limerick that is worth
the trouble of saying or reading. I can't attempt to describe the
Shannon, only to say that on board the steamboat there was a piper and a
bugler, a hundred of genteel persons coming back from donkey-riding and
bathing at Kilkee, a couple of heaps of raw hides that smelt very
foully, a score of women nursing children, and a lobster-vendor, who
vowed to me upon his honour that he gave eightpence apiece for his fish,
and that he had boiled them only the day before; but when I produced the
Guide-book, and solemnly told him to swear upon that to the truth of his
statement, the lobster-seller turned away quite abashed, and would not
be brought to support his previous assertion at all. Well, this is no
description of the Shannon, as you have no need to be told, and other
travelling cockneys will no doubt meet neither piper nor lobster-seller,
nor raw hides; nor, if they come to the inn where this is written, is it
probable that they will hear, as I do this present moment, two fellows
with red whiskers, and immense pomp and noise and blustering with the
waiter, conclude by ordering a pint of ale between them. All that one
can hope to do is, to give a sort of notion of the movement and manners
of the people; pretending by no means to offer a description of places,
but simply an account of what one sees in them.

<span id="img_28"></span> ![](img/28.jpg)

So that if any traveller after staying two days in Limerick should think
fit to present the reader with forty or fifty pages of dissertation upon
the antiquities and history of the place, upon the state of commerce,
religion, education, the public may be pretty well sure that the
traveller has been at work among the guide-books, and filching extracts
from the topographical and local works.

They say there are three towns to make one Limerick: there is the Irish
Town on the Clare side; the English Town with its old castle (which has
sustained a deal of battering and blows from Danes, from fierce Irish
Kings, from English warriors who took an interest in the place, Henry
Secundians, Elizabethans, Cromwellians, and, *vice versa,* Jacobites,
King Williamites,--and nearly escaped being in the hands of the Robert
Emmettites); and finally the district called Newtown-Pery. In walking
through this latter tract, you are at first led to believe that you are
arrived in a second Liverpool, so tall are the warehouses and broad the
quays; so neat and trim a street of near a mile which stretches before
you. But even this mile-long street does not, in a few minutes, appear
to be so wealthy and prosperous as it shows at first glance; for of the
population that throng the streets, two-fifths are barefooted women, and
two-fifths more ragged men: and the most part of the shops which have a
grand show with them appear, when looked into, to be no better than they
should be, being empty makeshift-looking places with their best goods
outside.

Here, in this handsome street too, is a handsome club-house, with plenty
of idlers, you may be sure, lolling at the portico likewise you see
numerous young officers, with very tight waists and absurd brass
shell-epaulettes to their little absurd frock-coats, walking the
pavement-the dandies of the street. Then you behold whole troops of
pear, apple, and plum-women, selling very raw, green looking fruit,
which, indeed, it is a wonder that any one should eat and live. The
houses are bright red--the street is full and gay, carriages and cars in
plenty go jingling by--dragoons in red are every now and then clattering
up the street, and as upon every car which passes with ladies in it you
are sure (I don't know how it is) to see a pretty one, the great street
of Limerick is altogether a very brilliant and animated sight.

If the ladies of the place are pretty, indeed the vulgar are scarcely
less so. I never saw a greater number of kind, pleasing, clever-looking
faces among any set of people. There seem, however, to be two sorts of
physiognomies which are common: the pleasing and somewhat melancholy one
before mentioned, and a square, high-cheeked, flat-nosed physiognomy,
not uncommonly accompanied by a hideous staring head of dry red hair.
Except, however, in the latter case, the hair flowing loose and long is
a pretty characteristic of the women of the country: many a fair one do
you see at the door of the cabin, or the poor shop in the town, combing
complacently that "greatest ornament of female beauty," as Mr. Rowland
justly calls it.

The generality of the women here seem also much better clothed than in
Kerry; and I saw many a one going barefoot, whose gown was nevertheless
a good one, and whose cloak was of fine cloth. Likewise it must be
remarked, that the beggars in Limerick were by no means so numerous as
those in Cork, or in many small places through which I have passed.
There were but five, strange to say, round the mail-coach as we went
away; and, indeed, not a great number in the streets.

The belles lettres seem to be by no means so well cultivated here as in
Cork. I looked in vain for a Limerick guide-book: I saw but one good
shop of books, and a little trumpery circulating library, which seemed
to be provided with those immortal works of a year old--which, having
been sold for half a guinea the volume at first, are suddenly found to
be worth only a shilling. Among these, let me mention, with perfect
resignation to the decrees of fate, the works of one Titmarsh: they were
rather smartly bound by an enterprising publisher, and I looked at them
in Bishop Murphy's Library at Cork, in a book-shop in the remote little
town of Ennis, and elsewhere, with a melancholy tenderness. Poor
flowerets of a season! (and a very short season too), let me be allowed
to salute your scattered leaves with a passing sigh! \* \* \* Besides
the book-shops, I observed in the long, best street of Limerick a
half-dozen of what are called French shops, with knicknacks,
German-silver chimney-ornaments, and paltry finery. In the windows of
these you saw a card with "Cigars;" in the book-shop, "Cigars;" at the
grocer's, the whiskey-shop, "Cigars everybody sells the noxious weed, or
makes believe to sell it, and I know no surer indication of a
struggling, uncertain trade than that same placard of "Cigars." I went
to buy some of the pretty Limerick gloves (they are chiefly made, as I
have since discovered, at Cork). I think the man who sold them had a
patent from the Queen, or his Excellency, or both, in his window: but,
seeing a friend pass just as I entered the shop, he brushed past, and
held his friend in conversation for some minutes in the street,--about
the Killarney races no doubt, or the fun going on at Kilkee. I might
have swept away a bagful of walnut-shells containing the flimsy gloves;
but instead walked out, making him a low bow, and saying I would call
the next week. He said "wouldn't I wait?" and resumed his conversation;
and, no doubt, by this way of doing business, is making a handsome
independence. I asked one of the ten thousand fruit-women the price of
her green pears. "Twopence apiece," she said; and there were two little
ragged beggars standing by, who were munching the fruit. A
book-shopwoman made me pay threepence for a bottle of ink which usually
costs a penny; a potato-woman told me that her potatoes cost
fourteenpence a stone: and all these ladies treated the stranger with a
leering, wheedling servility which made me long to box their ears, were
it not that the man who lays his hand upon a woman is an, &c., whom
'twere gross flattery to call a what-d'yecall-'im? By the way, the man
who played Duke Aranza at Cork delivered the celebrated claptrap above
alluded to as follows:--

"The man who lays his  hand upon a woman,  
Save in the *way* of kindness, is a villain,  
whom 'twere a *cross piece* of flattery to call a coward;"

and looked round calmly for the applause, which deservedly followed his
new reading of the passage.

To return to the apple-women; legions of ladies were employed through
the town upon that traffic, there were really thousands of them,
clustering upon the bridges, squatting down in doorways and vacant sheds
for temporary markets, marching and crying their sour goods in all the
crowded lanes of the city. After you get out of the Main Street the
handsome part of the town is at an end, and you suddenly find yourself
in such a labyrinth of busy swarming poverty and squalid commerce as
never was seen--no, not in Saint Giles's, where Jew and Irishman side by
side exhibit their genius for dirt. Here every house almost was a half
ruin, and swarming with people: in the cellars you looked down and saw a
barrel of herrings, which a merchant was dispensing; or a sack of meal,
which a poor dirty woman sold to people poorer and dirtier than herself:
above was a tinman, or a shoemaker, or other craftsman, his battered
ensign at the door, and his small wares peering through the cracked
panes of his shop. As for the ensign, as a matter of course the name is
never written in letters of the same size.  You read:

<span id="img_irishx1"></span> ![](img/irishx1.jpg)

High and low, in this country, they begin things on too large a scale.
They begin churches too big and can't finish them; malls and houses too
big, and are ruined before they are done; letters on sideboards too big,
and are up in a corner before the inscription is finished. There is
something quite strange, really, in this general consistency.

Well, over James Hurley, or Pat Hanlahan, you will most likely see
another board of another tradesman, with a window to the full as
curious. Above Tim Carthy evidently lives another family. There are
long-haired girls of fourteen at every one of the windows, and dirty
children everywhere. In the cellars, look at them in dingy white
nightcaps over a bowl of stirabout; in the shop, paddling up and down
the ruined steps, or issuing from beneath the black counter; up above,
see the girl of fourteen is tossing and dandling one of them: and a
pretty tender sight it is, in the midst of this filth and wretchedness,
to see the women and children together. It makes a sunshine in the dark
place, and somehow half reconciles one to it. Children are everywhere.
Look out of the nasty streets into the still more nasty back lanes:
there they are, sprawling at every door and court, paddling in every
puddle; and in about a fair proportion to every six children an old
woman--a very old, blear-eyed, ragged woman--who makes believe to sell
something out of a basket, and is perpetually calling upon the name of
the Lord. For every three ragged old women you will see two ragged old
men, praying and moaning like the females. And there is no lack of young
men, either, though I never could make out what they were about: they
loll about the street, chiefly conversing in knots; and in every street
you will be pretty sure to see a recruiting-sergeant, with gay ribbons
in his cap, loitering about with an eye upon the other loiterers there.
The buzz and hum and chattering of this crowd is quite inconceivable to
us in England, where a crowd is generally silent. As a person with a
decent coat passes, they stop in their talk and say, "God bless you for
a fine gentleman!" In these crowded streets, where all are beggars, the
beggary is but small: only the very old and hideous venture to ask for a
penny, otherwise the competition would be too great.

As for the buildings that one lights upon every now and then in the
midst of such scenes as this, they are scarce worth the trouble to
examine: occasionally you come on a chapel with sham Gothic windows and
a little belfry, one of the Catholic places of worship; then, placed in
some quiet street, a neat-looking Dissenting meeting-house. Across the
river yonder, as you issue out from the street where the preceding
sketch was taken, is a handsome hospital; near it the old cathedral, a
barbarous old turreted edifice-of the fourteenth century it is said: how
different to the sumptuous elegance which characterises the English and
continental churches of the same period! Passing by it, and walking down
other streets,--black, ruinous, swarming, dark, hideous,--you come upon
the barracks and the walks of the old castle, and from it on to an old
bridge, from which the view is a fine one. On one side are the grey
bastions of the castle; beyond them, in the midst of the broad stream,
stands a huge mill that looks like another castle; further yet is the
handsome new Wellesley Bridge, with some little craft upon the river,
and the red warehouses of the New Town looking prosperous enough. The
Irish Town stretches away to the right; there are pretty villas beyond
it; and on the bridge are walking twenty-four young girls, in parties of
four and five, with their arms round each other's waists, Swaying to and
fro, and singing or chattering, as happy as if they had shoes to their
feet. Yonder you see a dozen pair of red legs glittering in the water,
their owners being employed in washing their own or other people's rags.

The Guide-book mentions that one of the aboriginal forests of the
country is to be seen at a few miles from Limerick, and thinking that an
aboriginal forest would be a huge discovery, and form an instructive and
delightful feature of the present work, I hired a car in order to visit
the same, and pleased myself with visions of gigantic oaks, Druids,
Norma, wildernesses and awful gloom, which would fill the soul with
horror. The romance of the place was heightened by a fact stated by the
carman, viz.: that until late years robberies were very frequent about
the wood; the inhabitants of the district being a wild, lawless race.
Moreover, there are numerous castles round about,--and for what can a
man wish more than robbers, castles, and an aboriginal wood?

The way to these wonderful sights lies through the undulating grounds
which border the Shannon; and though the view is by no means a fine one,
I know few that are pleasanter than the sight of these rich, golden,
peaceful plains, with the full harvest waving on them and just ready for
the sickle. The hay harvest was likewise just being concluded, and the
air loaded with the rich odour of the hay. Above the trees, to your
left, you saw the mast of a ship, perhaps moving along, and every now
and then caught a glimpse of the Shannon, and the low grounds and
plantations of the opposite county of Limerick. Not an unpleasant
addition to the landscape, too, was a sight which I do not remember to
have witnessed often in this country--that of several small and decent
farm-houses, with their stacks and sheds and stables, giving an air of
neatness and plenty that the poor cabin with its potato-patch does not
present. Is it on account of the small farms that the land seems richer
and better cultivated here than in most other parts of the country? Some
of the houses in the midst of the warm summer landscape had a strange
appearance, for it is often the fashion to whitewash the roofs of the
houses, leaving the slates of the walls of their natural colour: hence,
and in the evening especially, contrasting with the purple sky, the
house-tops often looked as if they were covered with snow.

According to the Guide-book's promise, the castles began soon to appear:
at one point we could see three of these ancient mansions in a line,
each seemingly with its little grove of old trees, in the midst of the
bare but fertile country. By this time, too, we had got into a road so
abominably bad and rocky, that I began to believe more and more with
regard to the splendour of the aboriginal forest, which must be most
aboriginal and ferocious indeed when approached by such a savage path.
After travelling through a couple of lines of wall with plantations on
either side, I at length became impatient as to the forest, and, much to
my disappointment, was told this was it. For the fact is, that though
the forest has always been there, the trees have not, the proprietors
cutting them regularly when grown to no great height, and the monarchs
of the woods which I saw round about would scarcely have afforded timber
for a bed-post. Nor did any robbers make their appearance in this
wilderness: with which disappointment, however, I was more willing to
put up than with the former one.

But if the wood and the robbers did not come up to my romantic notions,
the old Castle of Bunratty fully answered them, and indeed should be
made the scene of a romance, in three volumes at least.

"It is a huge, square tower, with four smaller ones at each angle; and
you mount to the entrance by a steep flight of steps, being commanded
all the way by the cross-bows of two of the Lord De Clare's retainers,
the points of whose weapons may be seen lying upon the ledge of the
little narrow *meurtriére* on each side of the gate. A venerable
seneschal, with the keys of office, presently opens the little back
postern, and you are admitted to the great hall-a noble chamLer,
*pardi!* some seventy feet in length and thirty high. 'Tis hung round
with a thousand trophies of war and chase,--the golden helmet and spear
of the Irish king, the long yellow mantle he wore, and the huge brooch
that bound it. Hugo De Clare slew him before the castle in 1305, when he
and his kernes attacked it. Less successful in 1314, the gallant Hugo
saw his village of Bunratty burned round his tower by the son of the
slaughtered O'Neil; and, sallying out to avenge the insult, was brought
back--a corpse! Ah! what was the pang that shot through the fair bosom
of the *Lady Adela* when she knew that 'twas the hand of *Redmond
O'Neil* sped the shaft which slew her sire

"You listen to this sad story, reposing on an oaken settle (covered with
deer's-skin taken in the aboriginal forest of Carclow hard by) placed at
the enormous hall-fire. Here sits Thonom an Diaoul, 'Dark Thomas,' the
blind harper of the race of De Clare, who loves to tell the deeds of the
lordly family. 'Penetrating in disguise,' he continues, 'into the
castle, Redmond of the golden locks sought an interview with the Lily of
Bunratty; but she screamed when she saw him under the disguise of the
gleeman, and said, "My father's blood is in the hall!" At this, up
started fierce Sir Ranulph. "Ho, Bludyer l" he cried to his squire,
"call me the hangman and Father John; seize me, vassals, yon villain in
gleeman's guise, and hang him on the gallows on the tower!'"

"'Will it please ye walk to the roof of the old castle and see the beam
on which the lords of the place execute the refractory?' 'Nay, marry,'
say you, 'by my spurs of knighthood, I have seen hanging enough in merry
England, and care not to see the gibbets of Irish kernes.' The harper
would have taken fire at this speech reflecting on his country; but
luckily here Gulph, your English squire entered from the pantler (with
whom he had been holding a parley), and brought a manchet of bread, and
bade ye, in the Lord de Clare's name, crush a cup of Ypocras, well
spiced, *pardi* and by the fair hands of the Lady Adela.

"'The Lady Adela!" say you, starting up in amaze. 'Is not this the year
of grace 1600, and lived she not three hundred years syne?'

"'Yes, Sir Knight, but Bunratty tower hath *another Lily:* will it
please you see your chamber?'

"So saying, the seneschal leads you lip a winding stair in one of the
turrets, past one little dark chamber and another, without a fire-place,
without rushes (how different from the stately houses of Nonsuch or
Audley End!), and, leading you through another vast chamber above the
baronial hall, similar in size, but decorated with tapestries and rude
carvings, you pass the little chapel ('Marry,' says the steward, 'many
would it not hold, and many do not come!') until at last you are located
in the little cell appropriated to you. Some rude attempts have been
made to render it fitting for the stranger; but, though more neatly
arranged than the hundred other little chambers which the castle
contains, in sooth 'tis scarce fitted for the serving-man, much more for
Sir Reginald, the English knight.

"While you are looking at a bouquet of flowers, which lies on the
settle--magnolias, geraniums, the blue flowers of the cactus, and in the
"midst of the bouquet, *one lily;* whilst you wonder whose fair hands
could have culled the flowers--hark! the horns are blowing at the
drawbridge and the warder lets the portcullis down. You rush to your
window, a stalwart knight rides over the gate, the hoofs of his black
courser clanging upon the planks. A host of wild retainers wait round
about him: see, four of them carry a stag, that hath been slain no doubt
in the aboriginal forest of Carclow. 'By my fay!' say you, ''tis a stag
of ten.'

"But who is that yonder on the grey palfrey, conversing so prettily, and
holding the sportive animal with so light a rein?--a light green
riding-habit and ruff, a little hat with a green plume--sure it must be
a lady, and a fair one. She looks up. O blessed Mother of Heaven, that
look! those eyes that smile, those sunny golden ringlets! It is--*it is*
the Lady Adela: the Lily of Bunrat \* \* \*"

If the reader cannot finish the other two volumes for him or herself, he
or she never deserves to have a novel from a circulating library again;
for my part, I will take my affidavit the English knight will marry the
Lily at the end of the third volume, having previously slain the other
suitor at one of the multifarious sieges of Limerick. And I beg to say
that the historical part of this romance has been extracted carefully
from the Guide-book: the topographical and descriptive portion being
studied on the spot. A policeman shows you over it, halls, chapels,
galleries, gibbets and all. The huge old tower was, until late years,
inhabited by the family of the proprietor, who built himself a house in
the midst of it: but he has since built another in the park opposite,
and half-a-dozen "Peelers," with a commodity of wives and children, now
inhabit Bunratty. On the gate where we entered were numerous placards
offering rewards for the apprehension of various country offenders; and
a turnpike, a bridge, and a quay have sprung up from the place which Red
Redmond (or anybody else) burned.

-------

On our road to Galway the next day, we were carried once more by the old
tower, and for a considerable distance along the fertile banks of the
Fergus lake, and a river which pours itself into the Shannon. The first
town we come to is Castle Clare, which lies conveniently on the river,
with a castle, a good bridge, and many quays and warehouses, near which
a small ship or two were lying. The place was once the chief town of the
county, but is wretched and ruinous now, being made up for the most part
of miserable thatched cots, round which you see the usual dusky
population. The drive hence to Ennis lies through a country which is by
no means so pleasant as that rich one we have passed through, being
succeeded "by that craggy, bleak, pastoral district which occupies so
large a portion of the limestone district of Clare." Ennis, likewise,
stands upon the Fergus--a busy little narrow-streeted, foreign-looking
town, approached by half a mile of thatched cots, in which I am not
ashamed to confess that I saw some as pretty faces as over any half-mile
of country I ever travelled in my life.

A great light of the Catholic Church, who was of late a candlestick in
our own communion, was on the coach with us, reading devoutly out of a
breviary on many occasions along the road. A crowd of black coats and
heads, with that indescribable look which belongs to the Catholic
clergy, were evidently on the look-out for the coach; and as it stopped,
one of them came up to me with a low bow, and asked if I was the
Honorable and Reverend Mr. S---? How I wish I had answered him I was! It
would have been a grand scene. The respect paid to this gentleman's
descent is quite absurd the papers bandy his title about with pleased
emphasis--the Galway papers calls him the *very* reverend. There is
something in the love for rank almost childish: witness the adoration of
George IV.; the pompous joy with which John Tuam records his
correspondence with a great man; the continual My Lording of the
Bishops, the Right-Honorabling of Mr O'Connell--which title his party
papers delight on all occasions to give him--nay, the delight of that
great man himself when first he attained the dignity: he figured in his
robes in the most good-humoured simple delight at having them, and went
to church forthwith in them; as if such a man wanted a title before his
name.

At Ennis, as well as everywhere else in Ireland, there were of course
the regular number of swaggering-looking buckeens and shabby-genteel
idlers to watch the arrival of the mail-coach. A poor old idiot, with
his grey hair tied up in bows, and with a ribbon behind, thrust out a
very fair soft hand with taper fingers, and told me, nodding his head
very wistfully, that he had no father nor mother: upon which score he
got a penny. Nor did the other beggars round the carriage who got none
seem to grudge the poor fellow's good fortune. I think when one poor
wretch has a piece of luck, the others seem glad here and they promise
to pray for you just the same if you give as if you refuse.

The town was swarming with people; the little dark streets, which twist
about in all directions, being full of cheap merchandise and its
vendors. Whether there are many buyers, I can't say. This is written
opposite the market-place in Galway, where I have watched a stall a
hundred times in the course of the last three hours and seen no money
taken: but at every place I come to, I can't help wondering at the
numbers; it seems market-day everywhere-apples, pigs, and potatoes being
sold all over the kingdom. There seems to be some good shops in those
narrow streets; among others, a decent little library, where I bought,
for eighteenpence, six volumes of works strictly Irish, that will serve
for a half-hour's gossip on the next rainy day.

The road hence to Gort carried us at first by some dismal,
lonely-looking, reedy lakes, through a melancholy country; an open
village standing here and there, with a big chapel in the midst of it,
almost always unfinished in some point or other. Crossing at a bridge
near a place called Tubbor, the coachman told us we were in the famous
county of Galway, which all readers of novels admire in the warlike
works of Maxwell and Lever; and, dismal as the country had been in
Clare, I think on the northern side of the bridge it was dismaller
still--the stones not only appearing in the character of hedges, but
strewing over the fields, in which sheep were browsing as well as they
could.

We rode for miles through this stony, dismal district, seeing more lakes
now and anon, with fellows spearing eels in the midst. Then we passed
the plantations of Lord Gort's Castle of Loughcooter, and presently came
to the town which bears his name, or *vice vcrsa.* It is a
regularly-built little place, with a square and street: but it looked as
if it wondered how the deuce it got into the midst of such a desolate
country, and seemed to *bore* itself there considerably. It bad nothing
to do, and no society.

A short time before arriving at Oranmore, one has glimpses of the sea,
which comes opportunely to relieve the dullness of the land. Between
Gort and that place we passed through little but the most woeful
country, in the midst of which was a village, where a horse-fair was
held, and where (upon the word of the coachman) all the bad horses of
the country were to be seen. The man was commissioned, no doubt, to buy
for his employers, for two or three merchants were on the look-out for
him, and trotted out their cattle by the side of the coach. A very,
good, neat-looking, smart-trotting chestnut horse, of seven years old,
was offered by the owner for 8*l*.; a neat brown mare for 10*l*., and a
better (as I presume) for 14*l*.; but all *looked* very respectable, and
I have the coachman's word for it that they were good serviceable
horses. Oranmore, with an old castle in the midst of the village, woods,
and park-plantations round about, and the bay beyond it, has a pretty
and romantic look; and the drive, of about four miles thence to Galway,
is the most picturesque part perhaps of the fifty miles' ride from
Limerick. The road is tolerably wooded. You see the town itself, with
its huge old church-tower, stretching along the bay, "backed by hills
linking into the long chain of mountains which stretch across Connemara
and the Joyce country." A suburb of cots that seems almost endless has,
however, an end at last among the houses of the town; and a little fleet
of a couple of hundred fishing-boats was manoeuvring in the bright
waters of the bay.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galway--Kilroy's Hotel--Galway Nights' Entertainments--First
Night: An evening with Captain Kenny](isb15)
