[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](isb19)  [Next](isb21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Westport.

 

Nature has done much for this pretty town of Westport; and after Nature,
the traveller ought to be thankful to Lord Sligo, who has done a great
deal too. In the first place, he has established one of the prettiest,
comfortablest inns in Ireland, in the best part of his little town,
stocking the cellars with good wines, filling the house with neat
furniture, and lending, it is said, the whole to a landlord gratis, on
condition that he should keep the house warm, and furnish the larder,
and entertain the traveller. Secondly, Lord Sligo has given up, for the
use of the townspeople, a beautiful little pleasure-ground about his
house. "You may depand upon it," said a Scotchman at the inn, "that
they've right of pathway through the groonds, and that the marquess
couldn't shut them oot." Which is a pretty fair specimen of charity in
this world--this kind world, that is always ready to encourage and
applaud good actions, and find good motives for the same. I wonder how
much would induce that Scotchman to allow poor people to walk in *his*
park, if he had one

In the midst of this pleasure-ground, and surrounded by a thousand fine
trees, dressed up in all sorts of verdure, stands a pretty little
church; paths through the wood lead pleasantly down to the bay; and, as
we walked down to it on the day after our arrival, one of the green
fields was suddenly black with rooks, making a huge cawing and clanging
as they settled down to feed. The house, a handsome massive structure,
must command noble views of the bay, over which all the colours of
Titian were spread as the sun set behind its purple islands.

Printer's ink will not give these wonderful hues; and the reader will
make his picture at his leisure. That conical mountain to the left is
Croaghpatrick: it is clothed in the most magnificent violet-color, tud a
couple of round clouds were exploding as it were from the summit, that
part of them towards the sea lighted up with the most delicate gold and
rose colour. In the centre is the Clare Island, of which the edges were
bright cobalt, whilst the middle was lighted up with a brilliant scarlet
tinge, such as 1 would have laughed at in a picture, never having seen
in nature before, but looked at now with wonder and pleasure until the
hue disappeared as the sun went away. The islands in the bay (which was
of a gold colour) looked like so many dolphins and whales basking there.
The rich park-woods stretched down to the shore; and the immediate
foreground consisted of a yellow corn-field, whereon stood innumerable
shocks of corn, casting immense long purple shadows over the stubble.
The farmer, with some little ones about him, was superintending his
reapers; and I heard him say to a little girl, "Norey, I love you the
best of all my children!" Presently, one of the reapers coming up, says,
"It's always the custom in these parts to ask strange gentlemen to give
something to drink the first day of reaping; and we'd like to drink your
honour's health in a bowl of coffee." *O fortunatos nimium!* The cockney
takes out sixpence, and thinks that he never passed such a pleasant
half-hour in all his life as in that corn-field, looking at that
wonderful bay.

<span id="img_41"></span> ![](img/41.jpg)

A car which I had ordered presently joined me from the town, and going
down a green lane very like England, and across a causeway near a
building where the carman proposed to show me "me lard's caffin that he
brought from Rome, and a mighty big caffin entirely," we came close upon
the water and the port. There was a long handsome pier (which, no doubt,
remains at this present minute), and one solitary cutter lying alongside
it; which may or may not be there now. There were about three boats
lying near the cutter, and six sailors, with long shadows, lolling about
the pier. As for the warehouses, they are enormous; and might
accommodate, I should think, not only the trade of Westport, but of
Manchester too. There are huge streets of these houses, ten storeys
high, with cranes, owners' names, &c., marked Wine Stores, Flour Stores,
Bonded Tobacco Warehouses, and so forth. The six sailors that were
singing on the pier no doubt are each admirals of as many fleets of a
hundred sail that bring wines and tobacco from all quarters of the world
to fill these enormous warehouses. These dismal mausoleums, as vast as
pyramids, are the places where the dead trade of Westport lies buried--a
trade that, in its lifetime, probably was about as big as a mouse. Nor
is this the first nor the hundredth place to be seen in this country,
which sanguine builders have erected to accommodate an imaginary
commerce. Mill-owners over-mill themselves, merchants over-warehouse
themselves, squires over-castle themselves, little tradesmen about
Dublin and the cities over-villa and over-gig themselves, and we hear
sad tales about hereditary bondage and the accursed tyranny of England.

Passing out of this dreary, pseudo-commercial port, the road lay along
the beautiful shores of Clew Bay, adorned with many a rickety villa and
pleasure-house, from the cracked windows of which may be seen one of the
noblest views in the world. One of the villas the guide pointed out with
peculiar exultation: it is called by a grand name--Waterloo Park, and
has a lodge, and a gate, and a field of a couple of acres, and belongs
to a young gentleman who, being able to write Waterloo Park on his card,
succeeded in carrying off a young London heiress with a hundred thousand
pounds. The young couple had just arrived, and one of them must have
been rather astonished, no doubt, at the "park." But what will not love
do? With love and a hundred thousand pounds, a cottage may be made to
look like a castle, and a park of two acres may be brought to extend for
a mile. The night began now to fail, wrapping up in a sober grey livery
the bay and mountains, which had just been so gorgeous in sunset; and we
turned our backs presently upon the bay, and the villas with the cracked
windows, and scaling a road of perpetual ups and downs, went back to
Westport. On the way was a pretty cemetery, lying on each side of the
road, with a ruined chapel for the ornament of one division, a holy well
for the other. In the holy well lives a sacred trout, whom sick people
come to consult, and who operates great cures in the neighbourhood. If
the patient sees the trout floating on his back, he dies; if on his
belly, he lives; or *vice versa.* The little spot is old, ivy-grown, and
picturesque, and I can't fancy a better place for a pilgrim to kneel and
say his beads at.

But considering the whole country goes to mass, and that the priests can
govern it as they will, teaching what shall be believed and what shall
be not credited, would it not be well for their reverences, in the year
eighteen hundred and forty-two, to discourage these absurd lies and
superstitions, and teach some simple truths to their flock? Leave such
figments to magazine-writers and ballad-makers; but, corbleu! it makes
one indignant to think that people in the United Kingdom, where a press
is at work and good sense is abroad, and clergymen are eager to educate
the people, should countenance such savage superstitions and silly,
grovelling heathenisms.

The chapel is before the inn where I resided, and on Sunday, from a very
early hour, the side of the street was thronged with worshippers, who
came to attend the various services. Nor are the Catholics the only
devout people of this remote district. There is a large Presbyterian
church very well attended, as was the Established Church service in the
pretty church in the park. There was no organ, but the clerk and a choir
of children sang hymns sweetly and truly; and a charity sermon being
preached for the benefit of the diocesan schools, I saw many pound-notes
in the plate, showing that the Protestants here were as ardent as their
Roman Catholic brethren. The sermon was extempore, as usual, according
to the prevailing taste here. The preacher by putting aside his
sermon-book may gain in warmth, which we don't want, but lose in reason,
which we do. If I were Defender of the Faith, I would issue an order to
all priests and deacons to take to the book again; weighing well, before
they uttered it, every word they proposed to say upon so great a subject
as that of religion; and mistrusting that dangerous facility given by
active jaws and a hot imagination. Reverend divines have adopted this
habit, and keep us for an hour listening to what might well be told in
ten minutes. They are wondrously fluent, considering all things; and
though I have heard many a sentence begun whereof the speaker did not
evidently know the conclusion, yet, somehow or other, he has always
managed to get through the paragraph without any hiatus, except perhaps
in the sense. And as far as I can remark, it is not cairn, plain,
downright preachers who preserve the extemporaneous system for the most
part, but pompous orators, indulging in all the cheap graces of
rhetoric-exaggerating words and feelings to make effect, and dealing in
pious caricature. Churchgoers become excited by this loud talk and
captivating manner, and can't go back afterwards to a sober discourse
read out of a grave old sermon-book, appealing to the reason and the
gentle feelings, instead of to the passions and the imagination. Beware
of too much talk, O parsons! If a man is to give an account of every
idle word he utters, for what a number of such loud nothings, windy
emphatic tropes and metaphors, spoken, not for God's glory, but the
preacher's, will many a cushion-thumper have to answer! And this rebuke
may properly find a place here, because the clergyman by whose discourse
it was elicited is not of the eloquent dramatic sort, but a gentleman,
it is said, remarkable for old-fashioned learning and quiet habits, that
do not seem to be to the taste of the many boisterous young clergy of
the present day.

The Catholic chapel was built before their graces the most reverend lord
archbishops came into fashion. It is large and gloomy, with one or two
attempts at ornament by way of pictures at the altars, and a good
inscription warning the in-corner, in a few bold words, of the
sacredness of the place he stands in. Bare feet bore away thousands of
people who came to pray there: there were numbers of smart equipages for
the richer Protestant congregation. Strolling about the town in the
balmy summer evening, I heard the sweet tones of a hymn from the people
in the Presbyterian praying-house. Indeed, the country is full of piety,
and a warm, sincere, undoubting devotion.

On week-days the street before the chapel is scarcely less crowded than
on the Sabbath: but it is with women and children merely; for a stream
bordered with lime-trees runs pleasantly down the street, and hither
come innumerable girls to wash, while the children make dirt-pies and
look on. Wilkie was here some years since, and the place affords a great
deal of amusement to the painter of character. Sketching, *tant bien que
mal*, the bridge and the trees, and some of the nymphs engaged in the
stream, the writer became an object of no small attention; and at least
a score of dirty brats left their dirt-pies to look on, the bare-legged
washing-girls grinning from the water.

One, a regular rustic beauty, whose face and figure would have made the
fortune of a frontispiece, seemed particularly amused and *agacante;*
and I walked round to get a drawing of her fresh jolly face: but
directly I came near she pulled her gown over her head, and resolutely
turned round her back; and, as that part of her person did not seem to
differ in character from the backs of the rest of Europe, there is no
need of taking its likeness.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pattern at Croaghpatrick](isb21.md)
