[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](isb28)  [Next](isb30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Giant's Causeway--Coleraine--Portrush.

 

The traveller no sooner issues from the inn by a back door, which he is
informed will lead him straight to the Causeway than the guides pounces
upon him, with a dozen rough boatmen who are likewise lying in wait; and
a crew of shrill beggar-boys with boxes of spars, ready to tear him and
each other to pieces seemingly, and bawl incessantly round him. "I'm the
guide Miss Henry recommends," shouts one. "I'm Mr Macdonald's guide,"
pushes in another. "This way" roars a third, and drags his prey down a
precipice; the rest of them clambering and quarrelling after. I had no
friends, I was perfectly helpless. I wanted to walk down to the shore by
myself, but they would not let me, and I had nothing for it but to yield
myself into the hands of the guide who had seized me, who hurried me
down the steep to a little wild bay flanked on each side by rugged
cliffs and rocks, against which the waters came tumbling, frothing, and
roaring furiously. Upon some of these black rocks two or three boats
were lying: four men seized a boat, pushed it shouting into the water,
and ravished me into it. We had slid between two rocks, where the
channel came gurgling in: we were up one swelling wave that came in a
huge advancing body 10 feet above us and were plunging madly down
another, (the descent causes a sensation in the lower regions of the
stomach which it is not necessary here to describe,) before I had
leisure to ask myself why the deuce I was in that boat, with four rowers
hurrooing and bounding madly from one huge liquid mountain to
another--four rowers whom I was bound to pay. I say, the query came
qualmishly across me why the devil I was there, and why not walking
calmly on the shore.

<span id="img_58"></span> ![](img/58.jpg)

The guide began pouring his professional jargon into my ears. "Every one
of them bays," says he, "has a name (take my place and the spray won't
come over you): that is Port Noffer, and the next Port na Gauge; them
rocks is the Stookawns (for every rock has its name as well as every
bay); and yonder--give way, my boys,--hurray, we're over it now: has it
wet you much, sir?--that's the little cave: it goes five hundred feet
under ground, and the boats goes into it easy of a calm day."

"Is it a fine day or a rough one now?" said I; the internal disturbance
going on with more severity than ever.

"It's betwixt and between; or, I may say, neither one nor the other. Sit
up, sir. Look at the entrance of the cave. Don't be afraid, sir: never
has an accident happened in any one of these boats, and the most
delicate ladies has rode in them on rougher days than this. Now, boys,
pull to the big cave. That, sir, is 660 yards in length, though some
says it goes for miles inland, where the people sleeping in their houses
hear the waters roaring under them."

The water was tossing and tumbling into the mouth of the little cave. I
looked,--for the guide would not let me alone till I did,--and saw what
might he expected: a black hole of some 40 feet high, into which it was
no more possible to see than into a mill-stone. "For heaven's sake,
sir,'' says I, '' if you've no particular wish to see the mouth of the
big cave, put about and let us see the Causeway and get ashore." This
was done, the guide meanwhile telling some story of a ship of the
Spanish Armada having fired her guns at two peaks of rock, then visible,
which the crew mistook for chimney-pots--what benighted fools these
Spanish Armadilloes must have been: it is easier to see a rock than a
chimney-pot; it is easy to know that chimney-pots do not grow on
rocks.--"But where, if you please, is the Causeway?"

"That's the Causeway before you," says the guide.  
  
"Which?  
  
"That pier which you see jutting out into the bay, right a-head."  
  
"Mon Dieu! and have I travelled a hundred and fifty miles to see

that!"

I declare upon my conscience, the barge moored at Hungerfood market is a
more majestic object, and seems to occupy as much space. As for telling
a man that the Causeway is merely a part of the sight; that he is there
for the purpose of examining the surrounding scenery; that if he looks
to the westward he will see Portrush and Donegal Head before him; that
the cliffs immediately in his front are green in some places, black in
others, interspersed with blotches of brown and streaks of
verdure;--what is all this to a lonely individual lying sick in a boat,
between two immense waves that only give him momentary glimpses of the
land in question, to show that it is frightfully near, and yet you are
an hour from it? They won't let you go away--that cursed guide *will*
tell out his stock of legends and stories. The boatmen insist upon your
looking at boxes of "specimens"; even the dirty lad who pulls number
three, and is not allowed by his comrades to speak, put in *his* oar,
and hands you over a piece of Irish diamond (it looks like half-sucked
alicompayne), and scorns you. "Hurray, lads, now for it, give way!" how
the oars do hurtle in the rowlocks as the boat goes up an aqueous
mountain, and then down into one of those cursed maritime valleys where
there is no rest as on shore!

At last, after they had pulled me enough about, and sold me all the
boxes of specimens, I was permitted to land at the spot whence we set
out, and whence, though we had been rowing for an hour, we had never
been above 500 yards distant. Let all Cockneys take warning from this;
let the solitary one caught issuing from the back door of the hotel,
shout at once to the boatmen to be gone-that he will have none of them.
Let him, at any rate, go first down to the water to determine whether it
be smooth enough to allow him to take any decent pleasure by riding on
its surface. For after all it must be remembered that it *is* pleasure
we come for--that we are not *obliged* to take those boats.--well well!
I paid ten shillings for mine, and ten minutes before before would
cheerfully have paid five pounds to be allowed to quit it: it was no
hard bargain after all. As for the boxes of spar and specimens, I at
once, being on terra firma, broke my promise, and said I would see them
all--first. It is wrong to swear, I know; but sometimes it relieves one
*so* much.

The first act on shore was to make a sacrifice to Sanctissima Tellus;
offering up to her a neat and becoming Taglioni coat bought for a guinea
in Covent Garden only three months back. I sprawled on my back on the
smoothest of rocks that is, and tore the elbows to pieces: the guide
picked me up; the boatmen did not stir, *for* they had had their will of
me; the guide alone picked me up; I say, and bade me follow him. We went
across a boggy ground in one of the little bays, round which rise the
green walls of the cliff, terminated on either side by a black crag, and
the line of the shore washed by the polupthloisboiotic, nay, the
poluphloisboiotatotic sea. Two beggars stepped over the bog after us
howling for money, and each holding up a cursed box of specimens. No
oaths, threats, entreaties, would drive these vermin away; for some time
the whole scene had been spoilt by the incessant and abominable jargon
of them, the boatmen, and the guides. I was obliged to give them money
to be left in quiet, and if, as no doubt will be the case, the Giant's
Causeway shall be a still greater resort of travellers than ever, the
country must put policemen on the rocks to keep the beggars away, or
fling them in the water when they appear.

And now, by force of money, having got rid of the sea and land beggars,
you are at liberty to examine at your leisure the wonders of the place.
There is not the least need for a guide to attend the stranger, unless
the latter have a mind to listen to a parcel of legends, which may be
well from the mouth of a wild simple peasant who believes in his tales,
but are odious from a dullard who narrates them at the rate of sixpence
a lie. Fee him and the other beggars, and at last you are left tranquil
to look at the strange scene with your own eyes, and enjoy your own
thoughts at leisure.

That is, if the thoughts awakened by such a scene may be called
enjoyment; but for me, I confess, they are too near akin to fear to be
pleasant; and I don't know that I would desire to change that sensation
of awe and terror which the hour's walk occasioned, for a greater
familiarity with this wild, sad, lonely place. The solitude is awful. I
can't understand how those chattering guides dare to lift up their
voices here, and cry for money.

It looks like the beginning of the world, somehow: the sea looks older
than in other places, the hills and rocks strange, and formed
differently from other rocks and hills-as those vast dubious monsters
were formed who possessed the earth before man. The hill-tops are
shattered into a thousand cragged fantastical shapes; the water comes
swelling into scores of little strange creeks, or goes off with a leap,
roaring into those mysterious caves yonder, which penetrate who knows
how far into our common world?

The savage rock-sides are painted of a hundred colours. Does the sun
ever shine here? Was the world was moulded and fashioned out of formless
chaos this must have been the *bit over--*a remnant of chaos? Think of
that!--it is a tailor's simile. Well, I am a Cockney: I wish I were in
Pall Mall! Yonder is a kelp-burner: a lurid smoke from his burning kelp
rises up to the leaden sky, and he looks as naked and fierce as Cain.
Bubbling up out of the rocks at the very brim of the sea rises a little
crystal spring: how comes it there? and there is an old grey hag beside,
who has been there for hundreds and hundreds of years and there sits and
sells whiskey at the extremity of creation! How do you dare to sell
whiskey there, old woman? Did you serve old Saturn with a glass when he
lay along the Causeway here? In reply she says, she has no change for a
shilling: she never has; but her whiskey is good.

This is not a description of the Giant's Causeway (as some clever critic
will remark), but of a Londoner there who is by no means so interesting
an object as the natural curiosity in question. That single hint is
sufficient; I have not a word more to say. "If," says he, "you cannot
describe the scene lying before us--if you cannot state from your
personal observation that the number of basaltic pillars composing the
Causeway has been computed at about forty thousand which vary in
diameter, their surface presenting the appearance of a tesselated
pavement of polygonal stones--that each pillar is formed of several
distinct joints, the convex end of the one being accurately fitted in
the concave of the next, and the length of the joints varying from five
feet to four inches--that although the pillars are polygonal, there is
but one of three sides in the whole forty thousand (thiink of that!),
but three of nine sides and that it may be safely computed that ninety
nine out of one hundred pillars have either five, six, or seven sides if
you cannot state something useful, you had much better, sir, retire and
get your dinner

Never was summons more gladly obeyed The dinner must be ready by this
time, so, remain you, and look on at the awful scene, and copy it down
in words if you can. If at the end of the trial you are dissatisfied
with your skill as a painter and find that the biggest of your words
cannot render the hues and vastness of that tremendous swelling sea--of
those lean solitary crags standing rigid along the shore, where they
have been watching the ocean ever since it was made--of those grey
towers of Dunluce standing upon a leaden rock and looking as if some
old, old princess, of old, old fairy times, were dragon-guarded
within--of yon flat stretches of sand where the Scotch and Irish
mermaids hold conference--come away too, and prate no more afloat the
scene! There is that in nature, dear Jenkins, which passes even our
powers. We can feel the beauty of a magnificent landscape, perhaps: but
we can describe a leg of mutton and turnips better. Come, then, this
scene is for our betters to depict. If Mr. Tennyson were to come hither
for a month, and brood over the place, he might in some of those lofty
heroic lines which the author of the "Morte d'Arthur" knows how to pile
up, convey to the reader a sense of this gigantic desolate scene. What!
you, too, are a poet? Well, then, Jenkins, stay! but believe me, you had
best take my advice, and come off.

\* \* \* \*

The worthy landlady made her appearance with the politest of bows and an
apology,--for what does the reader think a lady should apologise in the
most lonely rude spot in the world?--because a plain servant-woman was
about to bring in the dinner, the waiter being absent on leave at
Coleraine! O heaven and earth! where will the genteel end? I replied
philosophically that I did not care twopence for the plainness or beauty
of the waiter, but that it was the dinner I looked to, the frying
whereof made a great noise in the huge lonely house; and it must be
said, that though the lady was plain, the repast was exceedingly good.
"I have expended my little all," says the landlady, stepping in with a
speech after dinner, "in the building of this establishment and though
to a man its profits may appear small, to such a *being* as I am it will
bring, I trust, a sufficient return " and on my asking her why she took
the place, she replied that she had always, from her earliest youth, a
fancy to dwell in that spot, and had accordingly realised her wish by
building this hotel--this mausoleum. In spite of the bright fire, and
the good dinner, and the good wine, it was impossible to feel
comfortable in the place; and when the car wheels were heard, I jumped
up with joy to take my departure and forget the awful lonely shore, and
that wild, dismal, genteel inn. A ride over a wide gusty country, in a
grey, misty, half-moonlight, the loss of a wheel at Bushmills, and the
escape from a tumble, were the delightful varieties after the late awful
occurrences. "Such a being" as I am, would die of loneliness in that
hotel; and so let all brother Cockneys be warned.

Some time before we came to it, we saw the long line of mist that lay
above the Bann, and coming through a dirty suburb of low cottages,
passed down a broad street with gas and lamps in it (thank heaven, there
are people once more!), and at length drove up in state, across a gas
pipe in a marketplace, before an hotel in the town of Coleraine famous
for linen and for Beautiful Kitty who must be old and ugly now, for it's
a good five and thirty years since she broke her pitcher according to Mr
Moore's account of her. The scene as entered the Diamond was rather a
lively one--a score of little stalls were brilliant with lights; the
people were thronging in the place making their Saturday bargains; the
town clock began to toll nine; and hark! faithful to a minute, the horn
of the Derry mail was heard tootooing, and four commercial gentlemen,
with Scotch accents, rushed into the hotel at the same time with myself.

Among the beauties of Coleraine may he mentioned the price of beef,
which a gentleman told me may be had for fourpence a pound; and I saw
him purchase an excellent codfish for a shilling. I am bound, too, to
state for the benefit of aspiring Radicals, what two Conservative
citizens of the place stated to me viz.;--that though there were two
Conservative candidates then canvassing the town, on account of a
vacancy in the representation, the voters were so truly liberal that
they would elect any person of any other political creed, who would
simply bring money enough to purchase their votes There are 220 voters
it appears; of whom it is not, however, necessary to "argue" with more
than fifty, who alone are open to conviction, but as parties are pretty
equally balanced, the votes of the quinquagint, of course, carry an
immense weight with them. Well this is all discussed calmly standing on
an inn steps with a jolly landlord and a professional man of the town to
give the information. So, heaven bless us, the ways of London are
beginning to be known even here. Gentility has already taken up her seat
in the Giant's Causeway, where she apologises for the plainness of her
look: and, lo! here is bribery, as bold as in the most civilised
places--hundreds and hundreds of miles away from St. Stephen's and Pall
Mall. I wonder in that little island of Raghery, so wild and lonely,
whether civilisation is beginning to dawn upon them?--whether they bribe
and are genteel? But for the rough sea of yesterday, I think I would
have fled thither to make the trial.

The town of Coleraine, with a number of cabin suburbs belonging to it,
lies picturesquely grouped on the Bann river: and the whole of the
little city was echoing with psalms as I walked through it on the Sunday
morning. The piety of the people seems remarkable; some of the inns even
will not receive travellers on Sunday; and this is written in an hotel
of which every room is provided with a Testament, containing an
injunction on the part of the landlord to considerthis world itself as
only a passing abode. Is it well that Boniface should furnish his guest
with Bibles as well as bills, and sometimes shut his door on a
traveller, who has no other choice but to read it on a Sunday? I heard
of a gentleman arriving from shipboard at Kilrush on a Sunday, when the
pious hotel-keeper refused him admittance; and some more tales, which to
go into would require the introduction of private names and
circumstances, but would tend to show that the Protestant of the North
is as much priest-ridden as the Catholic of the South--priest and old
woman-ridden, for there are certain expounders of doctrine in our
church, who are not, I believe, to be found in the church of Rome; and
woe betide the stranger who comes to settle in these parts, if his
"seriousness" be not satisfactory to the heads (with false fronts to
most of them, of the congregations).

Look at that little snug harbour of Portrush! a hideous new castle
standing on a rock protects it on one side, a snug row of gentlemen's
cottages curves round the shore facing northward, a bath-house, an
hotel, more smart houses, face the beach west-ward, defended by another
mound of rocks. In the centre of the little town stands a new-built
church; and the whole place has an air of comfort and neatness which is
seldom seen in Ireland. One would fancy that all the tenants of these
pretty snug habitations, sheltered in this nook far away from the world,
have nothing to do but to be happy, and spend their little comfortable
means in snug hospitalities among one another, and kind little charities
among the poor. What does a man in active life ask for more than to
retire to such a competence, to such a snug nook of the world; and there
repose with a stock of healthy children round the fireside, a friend
within call, and the means of decent hospitality wherewith to treat him?

Let any one meditating this pleasant sort of retreat, and charmed with
the look of this or that place as peculiarly suited to his purpose, take
a special care to understand his neighbourhood first, before he commit
himself, by lease-signing or house-buying. It is not sufficient that you
should he honest, kind-hearted, hospitable, of good family--what are
your opinions upon religious subjects? Are they such as agree with the
notions of old Lady This, or Mrs. That, who are the patronesses of the
village? If not, woe betide you! you will be shunned by the rest of the
society, thwarted in your attempts to do good, whispered against over
evangelical bohea and serious muffins. Lady This will inform every new
arrival that you are a repro bate, and lost and Mrs That will consign
you and your daughters, and your wife (a worthy woman but alas! united
to that sad worldly man!) to damnation. The clergyman who partakes of
the muffins and bohea before mentioned will very possibly preach sermons
against you from the pulpit: this was not done at Portstewart to my
knowledge, but I have had the pleasure of sitting under a minister in
Ireland who insulted the very patron who gave him his living,
discoursing upon the sinfulness of partridge-shooting, and threatening
hell-fire as the last "meet" for fox-hunters; until the- squire, one of
the best and most charitable resident landlords in Ireland, was
absolutely driven out of the church where his fathers had worshipped for
hundreds of years, by the insults of this howling evangelical
inquisitor.

So much as this I did not hear at Portstewart; but I was told that at
yonder neat-looking bath-house a dying woman was denied a bath on a
Sunday. By a clause of the lease by which the bath-owner rents his
establishment, he is forbidden to give baths to any one on the Sunday.
The landlord of the inn, forsooth, shuts his gates on the same day, and
his conscience on week days will not allow him to supply his guests with
whiskey or ardent spirits. I was told by my friend, that because he
refused to subscribe for some fancy charity, he received a letter to
state that "he spent more in one dinner than in charity in the course of
the year." My worthy friend did not care to contradict the statement, as
why should a man deign to meddle with such a lie? But think how all the
fishes, and all the pieces of meat, and all the people who went in and
out of his snug cottage by the sea-side must have been watched by the
serious round about! The sea is not more constant roaring there, than
scandal is whispering. How happy I felt, while hearing these histories
(demure heads in crimped caps peeping over the blinds at us as we walked
on the beach), to think I am a Cockney, and don't know the name of the
man who lives next door to me!

I have heard various stories, of course from persons of various ways of
thinking, charging their opponents with hypocrisy, and proving the
charge by statements clearly showing that the priests, the preachers, or
the professing religionists in question, belied their professions
woefully by their practice. But in matters of religion, hypocrisy is so
awful a charge to make against a man, that I think it is almost unfair
to mention even the cases in which it is proven, and which,--as, pray
they are but exceptional,--a person should be very careful of
mentioning, lest they be considered to apply generally. *Tartuffe* has
been always a disgusting play to me to see, in spite of its sense and
its wit: and so, instead of printing, here or else-where, a few stories
of the Tartuffe kind which I have heard in Ireland, the best way will be
to try and forget them. It is an awful thing to say of any man walking
under God's sun by the side of us, "You are a hypocrite, lying as you
use the Most Sacred Name, knowing that you lie while you use it." Let it
be the privilege of any sect that is so minded, to imagine that there is
perdition in store for all the rest of God's creatures who do not think
with them: but the easy countercharge of hypocrisy, which the world has
been in the habit of making in its turn, is surely just as fatal and
bigoted an accusations as any that the sects make against the world.

What has this disquisition to do apropos of a walk on toe beach at
Portstewart? Why, it may be made here as well as in other parts of
Ireland, or elsewhere as well, perhaps, as here. It is the most
priest-ridden of countries; Catholic clergymen lord it over their ragged
flocks, as Protestant preachers, lay and clerical, over their more
genteel co-religionist. Bound to inculcate peace and good-will, their
whole life is one of enmity and distrust.

Walking away from the little bay and the disquisition which has somehow
been raging there, we went across some wild dreary highlands to the
neighbouring little town of Portrush, where is a neat town and houses,
and a harbour, and a new church too, so like the last-named place that I
thought for a moment we had only made a round, and were back again at
Portstewart. Some gentlemen of the place, and my guide, who had a
neighbourly liking for it, showed me the new church, and seemed to be
well pleased with the edifice; which is, indeed, a neat and convenient
one, of a rather irregular Gothic. The best thing about the church, I
think, was the history of it. The old church had lain some miles off, in
the most inconvenient part of the parish, whereupon the clergyman and
some of the gentry had raised a subscription in order to build the
present church. The expenses had exceeded the estimates, or the
subscriptions had fallen short of the sums necessary; and the church, in
consequence, was opened with a debt on it, which the rector and two more
of the gentry had taken on their shoulders. The living is a small one,
the other two gentlemen going bail for the edifice not so rich as to
think light of the payment of a couple of hundred pounds beyond their
previous subscriptions--the lists are therefore still open; and the
clergyman expressed himself perfectly satisfied either that he would be
reimbursed one day or other, or that he would be able to make out the
payment of the money for which he stood engaged. Most of the Roman
Catholic churches that I have seen through the country have been built
in this way,--begun when money enough was levied for constructing the
foundation, elevated by degrees as fresh subscriptions came in, and
finished--by the way, I don't think I have seen one finished; but there
is something noble in the spirit (however certain economists may cavil
at it) that leads people to commence these pious undertakings with the
firm trust that " Heaven will provide."

<span id="img_59"></span> ![](img/59.jpg)

Eastward from Portrush, we came upon a beautiful level sand which leads
to the White Rocks, a famous place of resort for the frequenters of the
neighbouring watering-places. Here are caves, and for a considerable
distance a view of the wild and gloomy Antrim coast as far as Bengore.
Midway, jutting into the sea (and I was glad it was so far off), was the
Causeway; and nearer, the grey towers of Dunluce.

Looking north, were the blue Scotch hills and the neighbouring Raghery
Island. Nearer Portrush there were two rocky islands, called the
Skerries, of which a sportsman of our party vaunted the capabilities,
regretting that my stay was not longer, so that I might land and shoot a
few ducks there. This unlucky lateness of the season struck me also as a
most afflicting circumstance. He said also that fish were caught off the
island--not fish good to eat, but very strong at pulling, eager of
biting, and affording a great deal of sport. And so we turned our backs
once more upon the Giant's Causeway, and the grim coast on which it
lies; and as my taste in life leads me to prefer looking at the smiling
fresh face of a young cheerful beauty, rather than at the fierce
countenance and high features of a dishevelled Meg Merrilies, I must say
agaip that I was glad to turn my back on thls severe part of the Antrim
coast, and my steps towards Derry.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Peg of Limavaddy](isb30.md)
