[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](isb27)  [Next](isb29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Belfast to the Causeway.

 

The Lough of Belfast has a reputation for beauty almost as great as that
of the Bay of Dublin; but though, on the day I left Belfast for Lame,
the morning was fine, and the sky clear and blue above, an envious mist
lay on the water, which hid all its beauties from the dozen of
passengers on the Lame coach. All we could see were ghostly-looking
silhouettes of ships gliding here and there through the clouds; and I am
sure the coachman's remark was quite correct, that it was a pity the day
was so misty. I found myself before I was aware, entrapped into a
theological controversy with two grave gentlemen outside the
coach-another fog, which did not subside much before we reached
Carrickfergus. The road from the Ulster capital to that little town
seemed meanwhile to be extremely lively: cars and omnibuses passed
thickly peopled. For some miles along the road is a string of handsome
country-houses, belonging to the rich citizens of the town; and we
passed by neat-looking churches and chapels, factories and rows of
cottages clustered round them, like villages of old at the foot of
feudal castles. Furthermore it was hard to see, for the mist which lay
on the water had enveloped the mountains too, and we only had a glimpse
or two of smiling comfortable fields and gardens,

Carrickfergus rejoices in a real romantic-looking castle jutting bravely
into the sea, and famous as a background for picture. It is of use for
little else now, luckily; nor has it been put to any real warlike
purposes since the day when honest Thurot stormed, took, and evacuated
it. Let any romancer who is in want of a hero peruse the second volume
or it may be the third, of the "Annual Register" where the adventures of
that gallant fellow are related. He was a gentleman, a genius, and, to
crown all, a smuggler. He lived for some time in Ireland, and in
England, in disguise, he had love-passages and romantic adventures he
landed a body of his countrymen on these shores, and died in the third
volume after a battle gallantly fought on both sides but in which
victory rested with the British arms. What can a novelist want more?
William III also landed here, and as for the rest, "M'Skimin, the
accurate and laborious historian of the town informs us that the
founding of the castle is lost in the depth of antiquity." It is
pleasant to give a little historic glance at a place as one passes
through. The above facts may be relied on as coming from Messrs. Curry's
excellent new Guide-book; with the exception of the history of Mons.
Thurot which is "private information," drawn years ago from the scarce
work previously mentioned. By the way, another excellent companion to
the traveller in Ireland is the collection of the "Irish Penny
Magazine," which may be purchased for a guinea, and contains a mass of
information regarding the customs and places of the country. Willis's
works is amusing as everything is, written by that lively author, and
the engravings accompanying it as unfaithful as any ever made.

<span id="img_56"></span> ![](img/56.jpg)

Meanwhile asking pardon for this double digression, which has been made
while the guard-coachman is delivering his mail-bags--while the landlady
stands looking on in the sun, her hands folded a little below the
waist--while a company of tall burly troops from the castle has passed
by, "surrounded" by a very mean, mean-faced, uneasy-looking little
subaltern--while the poor epileptic idiot of the town, wallowing and
grinning in the road, and snorting out supplications for a halfpenny,
has tottered away in possession of the coin -meanwhile, fresh horses are
brought out, and the small boy who acts behind the coach makes an
unequal and disagreeable tootooing on a horn kept to warn sleepy Carmen
and celebrate triumphal entries into and exits from cities. As the mist
clears up, the country shows round about wild but friendly: at one place
we passed a village where a crowd of well-dressed people were collected
at an auction of farm-furniture, and many more figures might be seen
coming over the fields and issuing from the mist. The owner of the carts
and machines is going to emigrate to America. Presently we come to the
demesne of Red Hall, "through which is a pretty drive of upwards of a
mile in length: it contains a rocky glen, the bed of a mountain
stream--which is perfectly dry, except in winter-and the woods about it
are picturesque, and it is occasionally the resort of summer-parties of
pleasure." Nothing can be more just than the first part of the
description, and there is very little doubt that the latter paragraph is
equally faithful;--with which we come to Lame, a "most thriving town,"
the same authority says, but a most dirty and narrow-streeted and
ill-built one. Some of the houses reminded one of the south. A
benevolent fellow-passenger said that the window was "a convenience."
And here, after a drive of 19 miles upon a comfortable coach, we were
transferred with the mail-bags to a comfortable car that makes the
journey to Ballycastle. There is no harm in saying that there was a very
pretty smiling buxom young lass for a travelling companion; and somehow,
to a lonely person, the landscape always looks prettier in such society.
The" Antrim coast-road," which we now, after a few miles, begin to
follow, besides being one of the most noble and gallant works of art
that is to be seen in any country, is likewise a route highly
picturesque and romantic; the sea spreading wide before the spectator's
eyes upon one side of the route, the tall cliffs of limestone rising
abruptly above him on the other. There are in the map of Curry's
'Guide-book points indicating castles and abbey ruins in the vicinity of
Glenarm; and the little place looked so comfortable, as we abruptly came
upon it, round a rock, that I was glad to have an excuse for staying,
and felt an extreme curiosity with regard to the abbey and the castle.

<span id="img_55"></span> ![](img/55.jpg)

The abbey only exists in the unromantic shape of a wall; the castle,
however, far from being a ruin, is an antique in the most complete
order-an old castle repaired so as to look like new, and increased by
modern wings, towers, gables, and terraces, so extremely old that the
whole forms a grand and imposing-looking baronial edifice, towering
above the little town which it seems to protect, and with which it is
connected by a bridge and a severe-looking armed tower and gate. In the
town is a town-house, with a campanile in the Italian taste, and a
school or chapel opposite in the early English; so that the inhabitants
can enjoy a considerable architectural variety. A grave-looking church,
with a beautiful steeple, stands amid some trees hard by a second
handsome bridge and the little quay; and here, too, was perched a poor
little wandering theatre (gallery 1*d*., pit 2*d*.), and proposing that
night to play "Bombastes Furioso, and the Comic Bally of Glenarm in an
Uproar." I heard the thumping of the drum in the evening; but, as at
Roundwood, nobody patronised the poor players. At nine o'clock there was
not a single taper lighted under their awning, and my heart (perhaps it
is too susceptible) bled for Fusbos.

The severe gate of the castle was opened by a kind, good-natured old
porteress, instead of a rough gallowglass with a battle-axe and yellow
shirt (more fitting guardian of so stern a postern), and the old dame
insisted upon my making an application to see the grounds of the castle,
which request was very kindly granted, and afforded a delightful
half-hour's walk. The grounds are beautiful, and excellently kept; the
trees in their autumn livery of red! yellow, and brown, except some
stout ones that keep to their green summer clothes, and the laurels and
their like, who wear pretty much the same dress all the year round. The
birds were singing with the most astonishing vehemence in the dark
glistening shrubberies; but the only sound in the walks was that of the
rakes pulling together the falling leaves. There was of these walks one
especially, flanked towards the river by a turreted wall covered with
ivy, and having on the one side a row of lime-trees that had turned
quite yellow, while opposite them was a green slope, and a quaint
terrace-stair, and a long range of fantastic gables, towers, and
chimneys;-there was, I say, one of these walks which Mr. Cattermole
would hit off with a few strokes of his gallant pencil, and which I
could fancy to be frequented by some of those long-trained, tender,
gentle-looking young beauties whom Mr. Stone loves to design. Here they
come, talking of love in a tone that is between a sigh and a whisper,
and gliding in rustling shot silks over the fallen leaves.

There seemed to be a good deal of stir in the little port, where, says
the Guide-book, a couple of hundred vessels take in cargoes annually of
the produce of the district. Stone and lime are the chief articles
exported, of which the cliffs for miles give an unfailing supply; and,
as one travels the mountains at night, the kilns may be seen lighted in
in the lonely places, and flaring red in the darkness.

If the road from Larne to Glenarm is beautiful, the Coast route from the
latter place to Cushendall is still more so; and, except peerless
Westport, I have seen nothing in Ireland so picturesque as this noble
line of Coast scenery. The new road luckily, is not yet completed, and
the lover of natural beauties had better hasten to the spot in time, ere
by flattening and improving the road, and leading it along the
sea-shore, half the magnificent prospects are shut out, now visible from
along the mountainous old road; which according to the good old fashion,
gallantly takes all the hills in its course, disdaining to turn them. At
three miles' distance, near the village of Cairlough, Glenarm looks more
beautiful than when you are close upon it; and, as the car travels on to
the stupendous Garron Head, the traveller, looking back, has a view of
the whole line of coast southward as far as Isle Magee, with its bays
and white villages, and tall precipitous cliffs, green, white, and gray.
Eyes left, you may look with wonder at the mountains rising above, or
presently at the pretty park and grounds of Drumnasole.

Here, near the woods of Nappan, which are dressed in ten thousand
colours--ash-leaves turned yellow, nut-trees red, birch-leaves brown,
lime-leaves speckled over with black spots (marks of a disease which
they will never get over) stands a school-house that looks like a French
chateau, having probably been a villa in former days, and discharges as
we pass a cluster of fair-haired children, that begin running madly down
the hill, their fair hair streaming behind them. Down the hill goes the
car, madly too, and you wonder and bless your stars that the horse does
not fall, or crush the children that are running before, or you that are
sitting behind.

Every now and then, at a trip of the horse, a disguised lady's-maid,
with a canary-bird in her lap and a vast anxiety about her best bonnet
in the bandbox, begins to scream: at which the car-boy grins, and
rattles down the hill only the quicker. The road, which almost always
skirts the hill-side, has been torn sheer through the rock here and
there an immense work of levelling, shovelling, picking, blasting,
filling, is going on along the whole line. As I was looking up a vast
cliff, decorated with patches of green here and there at its summit, and
at its base, where the sea had beaten until now, with long, thin, waving
grass, that I told a grocer, my neighbour, was like mermaid's hair
(though he did not in the least coincide in the simile)--as I was
looking up the hill, admiring two goats that were browsing on a little
patch of green, and two sheep perched yet higher (I had never seen such
agility in mutton)-as, I say once more, I was looking at these
phenomena, the grocer nudges me and says "*Look on this side--that's
Scotland yon*." If ever this book reaches a second edition a son net
shall be inserted in this place, describing the author's feelings on HIS
FIRST VIEW OF SCOTLAND. Meanwhile, the Scotch mountains remain
undisturbed, looking blue and solemn, far away in the placid sea.

Rounding Garron Head, we come upon the inlet which is called Red Bay,
the shores and sides of which are of a red clay, that has taken the
place of limestone, and towards which between two noble ranges of
mountains, stretches a long green' plain, forming, together with the
hills that protect it and the sea that washes it, one of the most
beautiful landscapes of this most beautiful country. A fair writer, whom
the Guide-book quotes, breaks out into strains of admiration in speaking
of this district; calls it " Switzerland in miniature" celebrates its
mountains of Glenariff and Lurgethan, and laflds, in terms of equal
admiration, the rivers, waterfalls, and other natural beauties that lie
within the glen.

The writer's enthusiasm regarding this tract of country is quite
warranted, nor can any praise in admiration of it be too high; but alas!
in calling a place " Switzerland in miniature do we describe it? In
joining together cataracts, valleys, rushing streams, and blue
mountains, with all the emphasis and picturesqueness of which type is
capable, we cannot get near to a copy of Nature's sublime countenance;
and the writer can't hope to describe such grand sights so as to make
them visible to the fireside reader, but can only, to the best of his
taste and experience, warn the future traveller where he may look out
for objects to admire. I think this sentiment has been repeated a score
of times in this journal; but it comes upon one at every new display of
beauty and magnificence, such as here the Almighty in his bounty has set
before us; and every such scene seems to warn one, that it is not made
to talk about too much, but to think of and love, and be grateful for.

Rounding this beautiful bay and valley, we passed by some caves that
penetrate deep into the red rock, and are inhabited--one by a
blacksmith, whose forge was blazing in the dark one by cattle; and one
by an old woman that has sold whiskey here for time out of mind. The
road then passes under an arch cut in the rock by the same spirited
individual who has cleared away many of the difficulties in the route to
Glenarm and beside a conical hill, where for some time previous have
been visible the ruins of the "ancient ould castle" of Red Bay. At a
distance, it looks very grand upon its height; but on coming close it
bas dwindled down to a mere wall, and not a high one. Hence quickly we
reached Cushendall, where the grocer's family are on the look-out for
him the driver begins to blow his little bugle, and the disguised
lady's-maid begins to smooth her bonnet arid hair.

At this place a good dinner of fresh whiting, broiled bacon, and small
beer was served up to me for the sum of eightpence, while the lady's
maid in question took her tea. "This town is full of Papists, said her
ladyship, with an extremely genteel air; and, either in consequence of
this, or because she ate up one of the fish, which she had clearly no
right to, a disagreement arose between its, and we did not exchange
another word for the rest of the journey. The road led us for 14 miles
by wild mountains, and across a fine aqueduct to Ballycastle; but it was
dark as we left Cushendall, and it was difficult to see more in the grey
evening but that the country was savage and lonely, except where the
kilns were lighted up here and there in the hills, and a shining river
might be seen winding in the dark ravines. Not far from Ballycastle lies
a little old ruin, called the Abbey of Bonamargy: by it the Margy river
runs into the sea, upon which you come suddenly; and on the shore are
some tall buildings and factories that looked as well in the moon-light
as if they had not been in ruins: and hence a fine avenue of limes leads
to Ballycastle. They must have been planted at the time recorded in the
Guide-book, when a mine was discovered near the town, and the works and
warehouses on the quay erected. At present, the place has little trade,
and half a dozen carts with apples, potatoes, dried fish, and turf, seem
to contain the commerce of the market.

A picturesque sort of vehicle is said to be going much out of fashion in
the country, the solid wheels giving place to those common to the rest
of Europe. A fine and edifying conversation took place between the
designer and the owner one of these. "Stand still for a minute, you and
the car, and I will give you twopence!" "What do you want to do with
it?" says the latter. "To draw it says he, with a wild look of surprise.
"And is it you'll draw it?" "I mean I want to take a picture of it: you
know what a picture is!" "No, I don't." "Here's one," says I, showing
him a book. "Oh, faith, sir," says the carman, drawing back rather
alarmed, "I'm no scholar!" And he concluded by saying, "*Will you buy
the turf or will you not?*" By which straightforward question he showed
himself to be a real practical man of sense; and, as he got an
unsatisfactory reply to this query, he forthwith gave a lash to his pony
and declined to wait a minute longer. As for the twopence, he certainly
accepted that handsome sum, and put it into his pocket but with an air
of extreme wonder at the transaction, and of contempt for the giver;
which very likely was perfectly justifiable. I have seen men despised in
genteel companies with not half so good a cause.

<span id="img_57"></span> ![](img/57.jpg)

In respect to the fine arts, I am bound to say that the people in the
South and west showed much more curiosity and interest with regard to a
sketch and its progress than has been shown by the *badauds* of the
North; the former looking on by dozens and exclaiming, "That's Frank
Mahony's house" or "Look at Biddy Mullins and the child!" or "He's
taking off the chimney now!" as the case may be; whereas, sketching in
the North, I have collected no such spectators, the people not taking
the slightest notice of the transaction.

The little town of Ballycastle does not contain much to occupy the
traveller: behind the church stands a ruined old mansion with round
turrets, that must have been a stately tower in former days. The town is
more modern but almost as dismal as the tower. A little street behind it
slides off into a potato-field--the peaceful barrier of the place; and
hence I could see the tall rock of Bengore, with the sea beyond it and a
pleasing landscape stretching towards it.

Dr. Hamilton's elegant and learned book has an awful picture of yonder
head of Bengore; and hard by it the Guide-book says is a coal-mine,
where Mr. Barrow found a globular stone hammer, which, he infers, was
used in the coal-mine before weapons of iron were invented. The former
writer insinuates that the mine must have been . worked more than a
thousand years ago, "before the turbulent chaos of events that succeeded
the 8th century. Shall I go and see a coal-mine that may have been
worked a thousand years since? Why go see it? says idleness. To be able
to say that I have seen it. Sheridan's advice to his son here came into
my mind; \["I want to go into a coal-mine," says Tom Sheridan, "in order
to say I have been there." "Well, then, say so," replied the admirable
father.\] and I shall reserve a description of the mine, and antiquarian
dissertation regarding it, for publication elsewhere.

Ballycastle must not be left without recording the fact that one of the
snuggest inns in the country is kept by the post-master there; who has
also a stable full of good horses for travellers who take his little inn
on the way to the Giant's Causeway.

The road to the Causeway is bleak, wild, and hilly. The cabins along the
road are scarcely better than those of Kerry, the inmates as ragged and
more fierce and dark-looking. I never was so pestered by juvenile
beggars in the dismal village of Ballintoy. A crowd of them rushed after
the car, calling for money in a fierce manner, as if it was their right:
dogs as fierce as the children came yelling after the vehicle; and the
faces which scowled out of the black cabins were not a whit more
good-humoured. We passed by one or two more clumps of cabins, with their
turf and corn-stacks lying together at the foot of the hills; placed
there for the convenience of the children, doubtless, who can thus
accompany the car either way, and shriek out their, "Bonny gantleman,
gi'e us a ha'p'ny." A couple of churches, one with a pair of its
pinnacles blown off, stood in the dismal open country, and a gentleman's
house here and there: there were no trees about them, but a brown grass
round about-hills rising and falling in front, and the sea beyond. The
occasional view of the coast was noble; wild Bengore towering eastwards
as we went along; Raghery Island before us, in the steep rocks and caves
of which Bruce took shelter when driven from yonder Scottish coast, that
one sees stretching blue in the north-east.

I think this wild gloomy tract through which one passes is a good
prelude for what is to be the great sight of the day, and got my mind to
a proper state of awe by the time we were near the journey's end.
Turning away shorewards by the fine house of Sir Francis Macnaghten, I
went towards a lone handsome inn, that stands close to the Causeway. The
landlord at Ballycastle had lent me Hamilton's book to read on the road;
but I had not time then to read more than half a dozen pages of it. They
described bow the author, a clergyman distinguished as a man of science,
had been thrust out of a friend's house by the frightened servants one
wild night, and butchered by some White-boys who were waiting outside
and called for his blood. I had been told at Belfast that there was a
corpse in the inn: was it there now? It had driven off, the car-boy
said, "in a handsome hearse and four to Dublin the whole way." It was
gone, but I thought the house looked as if the ghost were there. See
yonder are the black rocks stretching to Portrush: bow leaden and grey
the sea looks! how grey and leaden the sky! You hear the waters roaring
evermore, as they have done since the beginning of the world. The car
drives up with a dismal grinding noise of the wheels to the big lone
house there's no smoke in the chimneys; the doors are locked. Three
savage-looking men rush after the car: are they the men who took out Mr.
Hamilton--took him out and butchered him in the moonlight? Is everybody,
I wonder, dead in that big house? Will they let us in before those men
are up. Out comes a pretty smiling girl, with a curtsey, just as the
savages are at the car, and you are ushered into a very comfortable
room; and the men turn out to be guides. Well, thank heaven it's no
worse! I had £15 still left; and, when desperate, have no doubt should
fight like a lion.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant's Causeway--Coleraine--Portrush](isb29.md)
