[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cvmc09)  [Next](cvmc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Common-Sense View of the Mind Cure*, by Laura M. Westall, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### VIII

### THE ENVIRONMENT

LIFE is series of reactions upon environment. In other words, the
self-existent principle of life perpetuates itself by reacting upon
natural forces which play upon it.

Just as the life-principle in the plant reacts upon the chemical
elements of the soil, the air, sunshine, heat, and moisture, so the
life-principle in man reacts upon and thus assimilates food, drink, air,
light, heat, etc., which are elements of his environment. And man is as
dependent upon these natural elements as is every other living being. To
ignore it, to deny the part it plays in his existence, is to cut the
ground from under his feet.

For man is not an isolated fact of nature.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "He is as much a
part of the cosmos," says Huxley, "as the humblest weed"; and like the
seed sown upon stony ground which can not spring up and put forth, he
can not attain his best development amid unfavorable conditions.

Experience has taught him that certain elements are necessary to sustain
life: pure air, pure water, pure food, sunshine; and given these
constituents in proper proportion, there exists a sound basis for
health, as the automatic activity of the brain and nervous system
controls assimilation and nutrition.

But if through negligence, ignorance, poverty, or a wrong habit of life,
one or more of these elements are lacking or inferior in quality there
result impoverished blood and enfeebled vitality.

Now the common sense of every person should tell him that no mental
power can reinstate health if the environment is unfavorable or the laws
of hygiene are constantly

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

violated. Man is finite, not infinite; hence the human mind can work no
miracles. It works successfully only in harmony with nature's laws; but
the operation of those laws may be assisted by intelligent adaptation to
the environment.

This gives free play to that healing force of nature--called by medical
men *vis* *medicatrix naturæ-*-implanted in every living thing. Thus the
bruised plant, the sick or wounded animal, through its agency, regain
their normal state; the surgeon sets the broken bone, but nature
reunites the severed parts.

And this is a cosmic force, ever struggling to reinstate health and
preserve life; and in many cases it will do so, without other aid, if
the sufferer will *assist* nature by the exercise of intelligence and
self-control.

It must not be forgotten, however, that there is a mental as well as a
physical reaction upon external forces. Man is

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

a two-sided phenomenon, on the one side mental, on the other physical.
Both are important factors in the equation; both are essential to his
existence as a human being.

But while no amount of thinking will change impure air into wholesome
air, or avert its pernicious effect, or render adulterated food
nutritious, yet there are cases where the mental reaction is so poor
that even the best conditions fail to conserve health.

Take the "grouchy" man, for instance, who complains that his food is not
well cooked or else indigestible; who grumbles at the weather, at the
streets, at the transportation companies, at his neighbors, his family,
etc. Such a man would be neither well nor happy in the Garden of Eden,
for his mental reaction upon life is morbid and the effect of this upon
all physical processes vicious.

The fact is one may get such into a

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "state of mind" as
to pervert all of nature's processes and nullify not only the
spontaneous effort of nature to preserve life and health but every
hygienic and medical agency which can be employed.

And so, when all is said, we must conclude that the mental reaction is
as important as the physical. Life is a *double* reaction upon
nature--or a two-sided phenomenon; both sides are necessary to the
perfect whole.

But the real essentials of life on the physical side are few: air,
water, sunshine and food, shelter and clothing. Of these, the first
three are, generally speaking, the gifts of nature; and assuming that
they are within reach, then one may by intelligent effort so mold and
adapt himself to conditions, or so improve conditions, as to attain both
health and happiness. Some of the world's greatest leaders flowered from
poverty and squalor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](cvmc11)
