[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cvmc11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Common-Sense View of the Mind Cure*, by Laura M. Westall, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

### X

### A FEW PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS

HEADACHE.--This is usually due to nervous collapse (of the brain), and
this causes a derangement of the circulation. The blood congests or
stagnates in the membrane which lines the brain.

The obvious treatment is to stimulate the brain and bring the
circulation to the normal.

First, open the window, then lie down on the back, with the feet as high
as the head and relax the muscles; this takes the tension off the heart
and brain.

When the body is completely relaxed, begin to inhale long, deep breaths,
regularly, and suggest or *imagine* that the blood is passing out of the
head and to the feet;

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

follow the course of the blood in imagination.

The primary effect is to intensify the pain because more blood rushes to
the head; but if the treatment be persisted in for twenty to thirty
minutes, the circulation will be regulated; and no congestion, no
headache.

There should be continued relaxation and breathing for a half-hour or
less, during which one should stop thinking, and let the brain rest.

With intermittent headaches there should be a daily relaxation and
treatment until they are brought under control. If there is great
debility of the brain and sympathetic centers, this may take several
years; it depends upon the age and general condition.

As there is usually more or less derangement of the stomach and liver in
such cases, an excellent hygienic measure is to wash out the stomach
with hot water

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

on first rising and *whenever the stomach is empty*.

CONSTIPATION.--This requires local treatment. Concentrate the attention
upon the bowels, placing the hands upon them. Hold the mind steady and
affirm or imagine that nervous force is passing to the parts; that the
increased activity of the nerves will fill the blood-vessels with blood,
and that therefore the intestinal muscles will be stimulated to action;
that this will free the bowels and keep them free.

At first there will be a sensation of heat, and sometimes pain; but a
half-hour treatment, or in some cases less, for a week, will prove
efficacious, and if persisted in until tone has been restored to the
nerves will forever avert the use of cathartics.

As all the involuntary activity of the body is automatic, regulate
movements by the clock. Fix upon a certain hour and *expect* relief.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

After one has "got in practise" he will find it possible to stimulate
the action of the liver in the same way.

A hygienic measure is copious drafts of water. Children are rarely
constipated because of the free use of water. If a pint of water, hot or
cold, be drunk on first rising, and a glass or more every time the
stomach is empty, the intestinal canal will be "flushed" and the
membrane kept clean.

COLDS.--One "takes cold" only when the vitality is low. Anxiety, mental
strain, despondency, and fatigue are some of the causes of lowered
vitality. A sudden chill contracts the pores of the skin, stops
insensible perspiration, and through its action upon the sympathetic
center deranges the circulation, causing the blood to stagnate in the
membrane which lines the air-passages of the head and throat.

It should be arrested in its incipient stage. "An ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure."

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

As soon as the symptoms are perceived begin at once to take full, deep
breaths, and *keep it up*. This tends to hold the circulation normal,
and no congestion, no cold. Assist the circulation with the imagination
and *set the will against the cold*. An act of will stimulates the
brain, and increases the mental energy so that you have more strength to
fight the cold.

Open the bowels; if you drink hot water freely, it will tend to do this,
and also keep up the temperature.

Eat very little, if at all, until the cold is under control; one needs
all his vital force to conquer the cold, and a full stomach needs energy
with which to digest the food.

CATARRH.--This is a devitalized condition of the nerves (vasomotor) of
the mucous membrane which lines the air-passages of the head and throat,
due to numerous past colds. It becomes constitutional because of the
passing into the blood of the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

bacilli in the mucous matter secreted by the membrane. Treatment should
be inaugurated by taking a tonic for the blood prescribed by a
physician.

The psychophysical treatment is deep breathing of fresh air to build up
the brain and improve vitality, and concentration of attention upon the
mucous membrane. Stimulating the nerves will improve the circulation and
[eventually](errata.htm#1.md) restore tone to the membrane.

If the general condition is much below par, it will take several years
to effect a cure; otherwise, a decided gain will accrue in a few months.

NERVOUSNESS, NERVOUS EXHAUSTION, AND NEURASTHENIA.--These disorders are
due to a debilitated brain. The mind should be held calm, and care and
worry put aside; above all, fatigue should be avoided. Absolute rest is
demanded, mental and physical. Since the brain is the organ of mind, the
more one thinks the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

more one uses the brain; hence one should learn to *vegetate* "like the
cattle on a thousand hills."

Lie out of doors in the sunshine, with muscles relaxed and mind at rest,
and *breathe*, full and deep, hours at a time. Get control of the
circulation by imagination and send an excess supply of blood to the
brain.

The exercises already described may also be used to advantage.

INDIGESTION.--This is one of our commonest ailments, and those who
suffer from it will find by observation that worry, mental strain,
despondency, disappointment, and fatigue invariably increase the
discomfort. It is oftener the quantity, rather than the quality, of the
food which causes distress, and the mode of life is also of moment.

If it is to be overcome, the taint, sometimes hereditary, must be wiped
out of the mind and brain. Since it has a depressing

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

effect upon the mind, suggestion and will must be employed to throw off
the incubus. Diverting the mind at mealtime and after, cheerful society,
laughter, and fresh air, are valuable aids. "Brooding" is especially to
be avoided.

Also the brain and sympathetic nerves should be toned up by habitual
deep breathing.

For the local treatment: Direct the mind to the stomach, placing the
hands upon it. Take two or three long breaths and at the same time
*imagine* that the vital force is flowing to the part, kindling the
nerves to action. Suggest, if you like, that the blood-vessels are
filling with blood; that your stomach is strong and fully capable of
digesting the food you eat, etc.

If you concentrate your mind well, you will shortly perceive a sensation
of heat, and perhaps a quivering of the nerves. After a few moments, the
feeling of fulness, weight, and cold will pass off,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

and very probably gas, if there is fermentation.

This process will have to be repeated daily for an indefinite period to
effect a cure, but one can always modify distressing symptoms by such
measures.

It goes without saying that if one eats slowly and masticates
thoroughly, he will do much toward aiding the other forms of treatment.

RHEUMATISM AND NEURALGIA.--In chronic cases the blood contains an acid
for which medical treatment is demanded.

The low nervous state, as in gout, is due to the debility of the brain,
sometimes caused by organic changes. Both hygienic and mental treatment
should be added to the medical.

Deep breathing, sun-baths, and copious drafts of water are valuable in
toning up the brain and nervous system.

As no distinction can be made between a mental and a nervous pain, a
strenuous

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

attempt should be made to get control of the mind. Fear of the pain and
the "expectant attention " should be overcome. By means of suggestion,
daily practised, one may in a few months more or less mitigate the
receptivity of the brain (cortex) and the mental sensibility. If one
takes hold of it, mentally, when the first symptoms appear, he may by
proper suggestions succeed eventually in driving it off. It takes
practise, however.

FUNCTIONAL DISORDERS OF WOMEN.--Those incidental to middle life are
caused by organic changes taking place in the brain and sex-organism.
Nature alone can effect a cure, but the multitudinous discomforts may be
mitigated by hygienic and mental treatment.

Recreation will do much toward mitigating mental depression.

Sun-baths, riding and walking, and abundant sleep are hygienic
necessities. Water should be drunk freely, to keep

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the alimentary canal clean and the bowels open.

Deep breathing, more than any other agency, must be relied upon to keep
the blood vitalized and the nutrition of the brain normal.

Overwork, mental strain, anxiety, and all depressing emotions should be
avoided. A determined effort must be made to be cheerful; tho the
sufferer does not feel cheerful, if an attempt is made to *appear* so,
she will tend to become so by a psychological law.

Daily relaxation should be practised--lying on the back, stop thinking,
and rest . the brain.

If some new pursuit is taken up, like the study of art or music, botany
or floriculture, a new zest is given to life, and the physical ills may
be forgotten or relegated to second place.

As the ovaries are leading factors in the disturbances, all other
symptoms being

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

mainly reflex, local treatment should be used.

Fix the attention upon the ovaries, placing the hands thereon for a
short time daily, and by suggestion and imagination improve the
circulation. A beneficial effect upon the sympathetic centers will thus
be produced.

As much as possible the sufferer's mind should be diverted from herself.
She should stedfastly refuse to *talk* about her ailments; and when her
attention is called to herself, she will do well to form a mental
picture of herself as radiantly well.

FALLING HAIR.--This results from poor circulation in the scalp;
insufficient blood-supply deprives the hair-follicles of the elements of
nutrition. Daily concentration of attention upon the scalp will put an
end to this condition, and new hair may be grown if the hair-glands have
not been destroyed by bacilli.

Selected parts of the body may be built

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

up by the psychophysical process so often described.

It can not be dogmatically affirmed that new tissue can be added at will
to any part of the body; it is a matter which individual experiment
alone can determine. The conditions of life, the mode of life, the age,
and assimilative capacity may one or all prevent success.

LEANNESS.--This may be overcome, provided there is no malnutrition or
emaciating disease, by holding steadily in "the mind's eye" a picture of
what one wishes to become. The experimenter should fix upon the number
of pounds to be gained and see the figures as often as possible
mentally. If they are written or printed and placed where they may be
often seen, it will expedite the result, as will also deep breathing.

SUPERFLUOUS FLESH.--This may be sloughed off in the same manner in which
leanness is overcome. In this case, the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

experimenter should fix upon the number of pounds to be lost. He should
live with the mental picture which he creates by suggestion and
imagination.

In addition, there should be deep breathing to improve the
vitality--excessive flesh denotes an abnormal condition.

In such cases the energy generated by the brain is largely used in
converting the food eaten into flesh-forming products. The scholar, the
thinker, whose mental life is intensely active, is nearly always of
spare figure--the energy is consumed by his mental processes. The
restless, nervous person who is constantly turning from one form of
activity to another is also thin. The day-laborer, whose mind-action is
slight, consumes his energy in muscular exercise. But the good-natured,
easy-going individual, who takes life with a cheerful philosophy, and
exercises neither his mind nor his muscles to any great extent, is quite
sure to take on flesh. The accumulation

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

of fat about the heart, particularly if the vital organs are squeezed
together by tight clothing, obstructs the breathing and circulation,
hence the blood becomes poor. Many fleshy people have an anemic look.

So, then, the mental energy set free by the brain must be consumed by
exercise, mental or muscular, to keep the weight of the body normal.

Women especially need to cultivate deep breathing and take more open-air
exercise.

SLIGHT STRUCTURAL DEFECTS.--It is strongly probable that slight
structural defects like outstanding ears, round shoulders, or a
misshapen nose may be remedied by psychophysical treatment, provided
such work is undertaken before the age of thirty. The act of attention
improves nutrition, as has been shown, and imagination is a power which
we have hardly yet begun to reckon with.

MENTAL STRAIN.--One of the crying

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

evils of our time is a kind of nervous frenzy--the mad haste to get
somewhere or do something; the ambition to get rich, to break records,
to win championships, to do the maximum of work in the minimum of
time--in short, to compass the impossible.

As a consequence, nervousness, nervous exhaustion, and a long train of
ills afflict constantly increasing numbers.

This anxious haste puts a strain upon the mind, which reacts upon the
brain and nervous system with deadly effect. Few see it, but
nevertheless this mental strain consumes the vitality, exhausts the
brain, and if persisted in will finally leave its victim a nervous
wreck. Some of the "kings of finance" can not sleep or digest the
simplest food.

Many persons attack their daily work under this tension. The thought of
the work to be done, the unconscious fear that it may not all be
accomplished in the prescribed

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

time, puts the tension on the mind, and this keys up the brain. Ordinary
fatigue is thereby increased to exhaustion, and it is an exhaustion of
the brain, which frequently induced spells ultimate prostration.

The remedy is simple. One has but to realize the insanity of such a
course and calm his mind by an effort of will. A little common-sense
mental discipline will break the habit, and the gain in health,
self-control, and mental poise will be of lasting value.

"What doth it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own
soul?"

 

 

 

 
