[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cvmc07)  [Next](cvmc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Common-Sense View of the Mind Cure*, by Laura M. Westall, \[1908\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### VI

### THE ATTENTION

YOU are walking through the city street, thinking of nothing in
particular, watching the passing throng, glancing idly about. But
suddenly you stop short with your gaze riveted upon a shop
window--something therein has caught your *attention*.

Most of the time our minds drift. Tho there is a procession of images or
ideas passing constantly across the field of consciousness, we give no
heed to any one of them, but, like a leaf on the stream, float idly
along. However, we have the power to single out one of these ideas and
fix the whole mind upon it. And this is attention; it is holding one
idea in consciousness to the exclusion of other ideas.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

Now, thus to fix the mind wholly or concentrate attention upon a single
object of consciousness is to get a clearer idea of it. We see it in all
its details, a more distinct mental image of it appears to "the mind's
eye," and it takes a stronger hold upon the mind.

For instance: A friend has made a remark which has hurt your feelings.
If you fix your mind upon it--that is, think about it constantly--it
gains a stronger hold upon your mind and you suffer correspondingly. Or,
if you have a hole in your glove and fix your mind on it--keep thinking
of it and looking at it--it will look bigger and bigger to you, until
you think everybody you pass in the street is noticing it.

And the . same is true of sensations. Suppose you have a pain. If you
attend to it, think about it, and talk about it, it will grow worse,
until after a while you will not be able to think or talk of anything

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

else. As a matter of fact, the minds of many persons become unbalanced
by much thinking and talking about their ills. We call it hypochondria.

This brings us to a very curious and, to many, incredible fact. If one
fixes his attention upon some part of his body, he will in a short time
perceive uneasy sensations arising therein; if he continues to do so, he
may produce first pain and finally disease.

It has long been known that if the morbid attention becomes fixt upon
some part of the body, actual disease may be induced. The celebrated Dr.
Tuke, of England, said more than a century ago that "if the attention be
directed toward any bodily organ, abnormal sensations may be perceived
in it and disease may be developed."

We do not have to go far afield for the explanation; fear and
imagination color the mental energy which the act of attention sends
flying to the spot. Thus:

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You think of your
foot, and as the electric power-house sends the current along the wires
into your house, so the brain sends the mental current through the
nerves to your foot. Ten minutes more or less will suffice to incite
sensations. If there is pain in the foot, it will be augmented: or if
you *imagine* pain, you can excite pain. For the current is colored or
tinged by your state of mind; and if fearful imagination control your
mind, you may, by persistent direction of attention, induce disease in
your foot.

Says Dr. James Braid: "A strong direction of consciousness to any part
of the body, especially if attended with the *expectation* or *belief*
of something about to happen, is *sufficient to change the physical
action of the part*. Thus, every variety of feeling from an internal or
mental cause, such as heat or cold, pricking, creeping, tingling,
spasmodic contractions of the muscles, catalepsy, attraction or

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

repulsion, sights of every form or hue, colors, tastes, smells, etc.,
may be excited. Moreover, the oftener such impressions have been excited
the more readily may they be reproduced by the laws of habit and
association."

Quotations from many eminent men might be adduced to enforce this point,
but one from Dr. Carpenter must suffice: "The volitional direction of
consciousness to a part suffices to call forth sensations in it, which
seem to depend upon a change in its circulation; and if this state is
kept automatically by the attraction of the attention, the change may
become a source of modification not only in the *functional action*, but
in the *nutrition* of the part." And if such a change is *expected*, as
Dr. Braid suggests--that is, if the "expectant attention" is
aroused--the result is much more marked.

So if one is suffering from indigestion, and thinks he has eaten
something indigestible,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

he unconsciously directs his attention to his stomach, and watches for,
or expects, the symptoms. From what has just been said, it is easy to
see why he is unlikely to be disappointed!

Well, as with imagination, "it is a poor rule that won't work both
ways." If morbid attention and imagination can *cause* disease, then a
sane, intelligent use of them should *cure* disease.

Let us see how it works out.

In the chapter on the nervous system it was said that if the mental
energy or vital force was depleted or unequally distributed the weakest
spot would be the first to suffer.

Now, suppose that your stomach is your weak spot. The nerves in the
walls of your stomach (vasomotor) are unable to perform their functions
because of an insufficient supply of force, consequently the circulation
"lags superfluous"; there is not enough blood in the blood-vessels for

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the glands to secrete the gastric juice. Very well, then. By fixing your
attention upon your stomach, you send to the nerves an increased supply
of vital energy; this will set them at work; the blood-vessels will then
fill with blood, and the blood will bring to the cells sufficient
nutrient materials to cause the secretion of the gastric juice. Your
stomach will then begin to disgest the food, and if this be kept up for
twenty minutes, let us say, the sensation of fulness, weight, cold, and
the gas, caused by fermentation, will all pass off. If in addition to
attention you "suggest" that your stomach is strong or *imagine* that it
is, the result will be more satisfactory.

This is no idle dream or vagary of fancy. It is based upon well-known
laws of physiology and psychology, and repeated experiments have
demonstrated its practicability. That such a use of attention changes
the physical action of the part

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

involved we have scientific confirmation. Professor Gates, of the
Smithsonian Institution, says, in effect, that since the brain-centers
govern all parts of the body and are in direct or indirect control by
means of fibers with every cell of the body, one can by practise learn
to send a strong stimulus to any cell or collection of cells. This
stimulus is vital force or mental energy, and when it reaches its goal,
it causes a physical change; for it "alters the chemistry of the
secretions and excretions, and the thermic and lymphatic functions."

In other words, this action causes a change in nutrition, for if we
increase the supply of blood to any part, we offer it more nutrient
material with which to improve flagging function and rebuild wasted
tissues.

This makes it easy to see why, when the morbid attention is fixt upon
some organ, it is possible to develop disease in it. Fear and
imagination, as has been said, so color

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the vital force as to paralyze the nerves and that stops the
circulation, which of course interferes with nutrition.

The effect of an act of attention, it is evident, depends upon the
mental state. If the mind is morbid--that is, charged with fear,
anxiety, and disordered imagination--the effect is vicious; but if the
mind is sane--that is, under the control of reason--the effect is
salutary, particularly if the act of attention is charged with the
belief that good is going to result. And that result may be augmented
and expedited by painting a mental picture of the desired result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Nature of Pain](cvmc09)
