[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb00)  [Next](sb02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EDITOR'S PREFACE.

<span id="img_sep0"></span> ![](img/sep0.jpg)

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> preparing the manuscript of Solar
Biology for the press we have in many instances embodied the author's
idea in our own phraseology; and should diversity of style be observed,
it may be accounted for on that ground: we have also frequently carried
out his lines of thought to greater length, but strictly in conformity
with the basic principles of the science, which admits of an almost
unlimited expansion of details: we have also at times introduced
collateral matter, to the end of more fully illustrating the subject by
what seemed to us useful suggestions. The most extended additions of
this kind will be found on page [30](sb07.htm#page_30.md), commencing with
the third paragraph and extending to the first paragraph of page
[33](sb07.htm#page_33). Again, on page [83](sb10.htm#page_83.md) will be
found a chapter entitled "Courage and Consolation to All," which, though
not strictly essential to the work, we trust may be found to contain
interesting and profitable suggestions relative thereto.

We have also supplied an Appendix (see page [279](sb33.htm#page_279).md)
wherein we follow out a line of deductive thought suggested by the
subject-matter of page [41](sb07.htm#page_41.md), and therein endeavor to
throw light, from the focus of this science, on some of the most
momentous themes that have occupied and perplexed the ablest minds for
centuries, and we trust the suggestions in this department will prove of
service to all earnest thinkers.

In addition to the above explanation we wish to submit a few thoughts
regarding the work itself. It is an admitted scientific axiom that man
is a world in miniature; yea, more, an epitome and

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

image of the universe itself! This being so, man necessarily holds a
definite relation to all its parts, both near and remote. His immediate
dependence on the elements of this globe—earth, air, fire, and water—is
too obvious and familiar to require more than mention; but this planet,
earth, is but a single function of the solar system, which, in turn,
stands intimately related and dependent on other systems: thus the
material universe is bound together, and its various parts are
interdependent as virtually as the vital functions of the human system,
no one of which can be affected without reacting and influencing the
whole body. Man, therefore, is not a citizen of this world merely, but
of the solar system and the universe in all its parts, both visible and
invisible; consequently there is not a star that shines or a sun that
burns but what has expression in his being, either active or latent.

The philosophical truthfulness of this proposition we think must be
admitted by every reasoning mind; but the question arises, Can we trace
this relation, can we demonstrate this influence? To this, so far as the
immediate planets are concerned, Solar Biology answers, Yes!

The relations that the various elements of earth sustain to each other
have been ascertained only by careful and persistent observation and
experiment. The elaborate and exact results of science, chemistry, etc.,
have been reached by processes of investigation, until a vast amount of
experimental and useful knowledge has been acquired; nor is this line of
research, observation, and experiment limited to visible substance. We
cannot see electricity, but we know of its existence through its
manifestations, and have found means to utilize its force, not only for
the transmission of intelligence, but for the production of light, heat,
and power, and also as a remedial and chemical agent. But human
observation extends beyond the confines of the earth, and defines the
positions and movements of the heavenly bodies, even analyzing their
chemical and other constituents; also demonstrating

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

that they exert a decided influence over each other, the knowledge of
which has led to the discovery of additional planets.

In 1846 it was observed that Uranus (then recently discovered) when in
certain positions deviated from its course, which implied the existence
of a then unknown planet. Several astronomers brought their telescopes
to bear upon the indicated portion of the heavens, and Neptune was
discovered, and thus the cause of the eccentricity explained. The
attractive influence of the sun and moon in heaping up the waters and
causing the phenomena of the ocean tides is also well understood.

We can trace how the alchemy of the Middle Ages has been transformed
into the exact, elaborate, and useful science of chemistry, and a
corresponding progress has also been made in astronomy and other
branches; but have all lines of research been exhausted? is there
nothing more to learn? Far from it; our present knowledge is relatively
but as a drop in a bucket, and Solar Biology introduces a field of
research which, through observation and experiment, will come in time to
be recognized and appreciated as being as demonstrable as chemistry or
astronomy.

If the sun, moon, and planets exert an influence on the earth as a
whole, they must necessarily affect each thing in particular, and their
relation to man, and the nature he derives by virtue of their positions
is what Solar Biology undertakes to demonstrate. Conceding that they
exert an influence in a general way, is it not presumptuous to attempt
to draw the line, and say their relation to the nature and character of
man cannot be traced? We might as fittingly say that it is enough to
know that the sun gives light and heat; but it is found that the ray of
light can be analyzed, can be separated into its different colors, its
various vibrations ascertained, chemical action determined, and many
other wonderful and useful things demonstrated. Solar Biology, so to
speak, turns the spectrum of planetary influence upon the phenomena of
human life, and analyzes its significance.

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

We are constantly discovering in life and nature volumes of interior
meaning. The external senses merely perceive the surface facts: we place
an insect, a leaf, a drop of water beneath the microscope, and endless
wonders are revealed of organization within organization, cell within
cell, life within life. We bring the lens of the telescope to bear upon
the heavens: nebula is resolved into stars, and millions of shining orbs
stand out in the depths beyond the sphere of natural vision. In whatever
direction the human mind is turned, revelations await it deeper than the
surface sense perception; and this is true from centre to circumference,
from atoms to worlds.

For instance, we are in the habit of regarding the revolutions of the
earth around the sun as a mere arrangement for giving the changing
seasons of the year; but Solar Biology reveals another and highly
important use; viz., that the varying positions not only produce
different seasons and stages of fruitfulness, but different human types
and qualities, and that we are as dependent on its revolutions for one
as for the other, and that corresponding effects on character also
result from the changing positions of the planets.

The sun is in reciprocal relations with the shining orbs of space, and
is constantly receiving and imparting different magnetic and electric
qualities from and to the different quarters of the heavens, and the
earth and planets are correspondently affected while passing through
each of these four grand or twelve minor divisions or currents of the
zodiac, and are therefore for the time being immersed in a specific
vital or heavenly quality.

The fact of the heavens being possessed of twelve distinct natures or
functions was well understood by the ancients, who accordingly divided
the zodiac into twelve corresponding divisions or signs.

Intuitive perception almost invariably precedes scientific demonstration
or experimental proof, and there has evidently been

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

a period in the past when intuition was highly unfolded. Thus there
comes down to us as an heirloom from the early ages, the idea that the
zodiac of our solar system embraced in orderly arrangement the functions
of a Grand Man, and modern almanacs still preserve the figure of a man
with the twelve departments of the body each related to a distinct sign
of the zodiac; and thus we are led to realize that the *symbol* of the
universe from the least to the greatest is that of a MAN, and that
individual existence is evolved from the heavens by an orderly, exact,
and even mathematical process. Plato tells us that the Creator of the
earth and heavens "geometrizes" even to the minutest particle of matter.
He works by method and law; and man, being in his image and likeness, is
capable of perceiving and understanding his works and ways.

It is claimed that character is expressed in the countenance, embodied
in the cranium, even written in the hand; but Solar Biology introduces
the student into the grand workshop of the solar system, not only
defining character and function, but supplying the key to self-knowledge
and harmonious human relatedness; and, further, it opens up a knowledge
and understanding of the principles and laws by which human evolution is
being carried forward, and the infinite variety of forms and natures
brought into being on the planet earth.

We see that *twelve* embodies the fulness of the signs of the zodiac,
and consequently of the universal heavens. Is it not then significant
that in laying the biblical foundations for the regeneration of
humanity, the work should proceed with the *twelve* sons of Jacob, and
*twelve* tribes of Israel? Again, Christ surrounds himself with *twelve*
apostles. Revelation states that *twelve* thousand of each of the twelve
tribes or natures are to be sealed, thus signifying that the *order* and
*fulness* of the heavens is to be restored to earth and humanity.

JOHN LATHAM.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Author's Preface](sb02.md)
