[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb01)  [Next](sb03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

### AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

<span id="img_sep0"></span> ![](img/sep0.jpg)

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> author, who has devoted many years of
his life to scientific research and unfoldment of the higher or
intuitive faculties (a large portion of which time has relatively been
passed as a recluse), has had but one general object in view; viz., to
be of the greatest possible service to the world in which he lives.

From external and intuitive research he is satisfied that this science
was well known in the golden age of the world, when religion and science
walked hand in hand in a most divine harmony, as counterparts in one
grand whole. He finds in it the foundation principles, not only of the
Hebraic and Christian Bible, but of all the sacred books of the great
religions of antiquity. Traces of it are found in the great pyramid
Cheops of Egypt, and also in the sacred temples of India, and wherever
temple relics of the great religions of antiquity are found.

The importance of this system can scarcely be appreciated without years
of careful critical study and experiment. It demonstrates the fact that
all are members of one great body, and that each are members in
particular; and, as use is the supreme law of God which determines all
qualities whether good or evil, therefore every member of the body of
humanity is useful to a greater or less degree to the rest of the body,
and the great confusion that now exists in the world arises wholly from
the ignorance of persons as to their true nature and real sphere of use.

There are two general causes for failure and inharmony. First, parents
often educate their children in a calling for which they

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

have no adaptability, and many times leave them a fortune with which to
carry on that calling, and, as they have no adaptation to it, they soon
lose their money, and, after frequent efforts to rise again, they get
discouraged and become vagabonds on the earth.

The second cause of inharmony is misunderstanding of each other's
motives. This. system, when applied according to the rules given in this
book, will obviate these two great evils, also many others; for by it
parents will not only be enabled to understand each other's nature, but
can know what care their children should have whilst young, and what
their strong and weak points are, both vitally and mentally, thereby
saving the lives of thousands of little ones who would otherwise go
prematurely into eternity.

It will enable parents to know just what business their children are
best adapted for, and how to educate them, and is also a guide to all
persons in the preservation of health and strength, and an important aid
to success, and to the attainment of the great object in life, viz.,
usefulness and happiness; for the one cannot obtain without the other.
It also aids in prolonging the life of old and young. *It is of especial
importance to physicians*. Several prominent practitioners who have
taken lessons in this system have, we think, wisely prophesied that the
time would come when a physician would not be considered qualified to
receive a diploma without a thorough knowledge of this science. It is
well known to physicians that what will cure one will kill another, even
when the symptoms appear the same, and medical students do not now have
any scientific method of accounting for this difference, or determining
wherein it consists. This system supplies the deficiency, showing the
different innate functions and centre of the life forces, as determined
by the signs in which the persons are born and polarized, thus revealing
different degrees of sensitiveness, and indicating the portion of the
system through which remedial agents will take most direct effect.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

The physicians who have made the greatest attainments have been those
whose intuitive judgment in matters of character, constitution, and
vital conditions has been most accurate; and the author has frequently
been surprised on giving delineations and advice to persons who have
been under the care of physicians of great prominence, to hear them say,
"That is the same advice that such and such a physician gave me," thus
confirming the fact that this science is in harmony with the hest
judgment of the 'most skilled and intuitive natures.

By means of this system physicians of even ordinary ability can attain
great success through having in their possession a certain key to
knowledge concerning the nature and peculiarities of their patients,
such as heretofore has been available only to those few that were
possessed of rare intuitive discernment.

Heads of families and individuals may also gain important insight into
the peculiar characteristics of themselves and others, and thus
understand the causes of the varied sensations, emotions, appetites, and
passions of those with whom they have to do. In short, it lifts the veil
from the mysterious realm of causation, and reveals to man much
concerning the interior or cause world in its orderly and systematic
methods of operation and influence over the evolution and control of
human life. Yet it is necessarily far from complete, as the combinations
and consequent effects upon different organisms are so multifarious,
arising as they do from so many different polarities and planetary
conditions, that we are obliged to generalize to a very great extent, as
it would take many volumes to spread out all the minutiæ; but having
given the general principles of the science and the rules governing
their application, the deduction and details can be carried out *ad
infinitum* by any intelligent possessor of the work.

This book is but one of a series of seven sevens, or forty-nine stages,
of earthly development which may each be embodied in a distinct work.
This is brought out first, being the one most suited

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

to the present mental and business needs of the people, but stands as
number three in the above series, and the author is most happy to submit
it to the intelligent, thoughtful, and educated public, for their
consideration and use, believing that it will prove of greater value
than any system of science the world now possesses.

<span class="small">HIRAM ERASTUS BUTLER.</span>

<span id="img_sep0"></span> ![](img/sep0.jpg)

EDITOR'S NOTE.

As students of Solar Biology are naturally stimulated to locate,
measure, and classify their friends and acquaintances in accordance with
the principles of the science, and as readers become in a degree
acquainted with an author through his work, some of them may
consequently desire to locate and classify Prof. Butler by the rules he
has laid down for measuring others. For the benefit of such, we would
state that he was born July 29, 1841; and should any of them desire to
look up his nativity after the system of ancient astrology, we give the
hour of birth, 4 A.M.

<span class="small">J. L.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sb03)
