[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb09)  [Next](sb11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### CHAPTER V.

#### COURAGE AND CONSOLATION FOR ALL.

<span class="smallcaps">Before</span> proceeding with the polarities of
the moon, It may be well to observe that some of the positions of
nativity and polarities of the life forces are apparently not as
favorable as others for the promotion of a peaceful, happy, and
prosperous career. These, however, may be greatly modified and improved
by planetary conditions, and to judge correctly of a nature all of these
facts and conditions must be taken into consideration.

It is obvious that some are born with physical conditions involving them
in greater trial, temptation, and struggle than others; but the merit
and virtue of life is expressed in one's disposition and ability to
surmount obstacles and to resist temptations; and consequently that
which seems their serious misfortune may become the occasion of their
greatest triumph. Therefore let all take courage when they find
themselves possessed of inharmonies of character which predispose them
to trials, mistakes, and temptations, for it should not be assumed that
any of the polarities and planetary conditions are bad in themselves,
though relatively and seemingly so from the standpoint of present
earthly conditions; for the worst is capable of becoming the best,
through the cultivation of the higher and the subjugation of the lower
propensities of the nature.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Let us keep in mind that man has in his nature that which adapts him for
a life higher and grander than his present conditions and environments,
and that in such degree as he evolves or incorporates the elements of a
higher rationality and wisdom, does he cast down or subjugate the
imperfections of present being, indrawing the solar and celestial forces
that give self-control, and law, and order to life. Thus, foundation
qualities and polarities that seemed a tissue of evil, become basic
energies of usefulness and power, when regulated and dignified by the
inner and higher degrees of nature.

This science illustrates and enforces the biblical declaration that
man's nature is threefold; but at the present time we are living almost
wholly in the physical and material degree of being, and feeding
(intellectually and affectionally) mainly on the husks of creation;
hence the delineation of one's nature and character, as set forth by
Solar Biology, has reference to solar and planetary influence on mankind
in their present stage of general enfoldment, without regard to the
effects which discipline and culture may have had on individuals, in
opening or unfolding the inner and higher departments or degrees of
their being; yet even with a moderate degree of observation one may
readily trace the basic qualities and tendencies of his own or
an-other's nature, as defined by this science, and especially may this
be recognized in the spontaneous and involuntary impulses of the person;
but it does not necessarily follow that they will act them out, or be
governed by them in all particulars, but the root, so to speak, will be
found there all the same.

Most, if not all, are familiar with the fact that superior

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

fruit may be produced by inserting the right kind of graft into a wild
and unprofitable stalk. Thus we may have apples and pears from the
quince-stalk, and wild fruit-trees of all kinds can be made to send
their energies through grafts, which yield luscious fruit. The same
principle is not without its application to the human nature; new
thoughts and purposes become the grafts, by virtue of which the natural
basic forces of the system are brought into new and superior
fruitfulness. So whatever may be your foundation quality or polarity,
remember that you are, in more senses than one, an heir to the excellent
things of the universe.

In the mechanism of Solar Biology we have given the signs of the zodiac
after the order of the birth of the twelve sons of Jacob, commencing
with ♎ (Libra). It is evident that the biblical historians had a reason
for beginning with this sign, as Libra is the head of the <span
class="smallcaps">reproductive trinity</span>, and the generation of new
life commences with this function, and moves in a circle through the
entire twelve signs, back to the starting-point. The fœtus in the womb
is nurtured and developed upon this principle, lying in a circle, the
head and feet together, strictly in accordance with the order and
arrangement of the signs of the zodiac, and we may regard the entire
solar system as a womb, in which natural life is being evolved in
accordance with this law; therefore, even the most highly unfolded
beings upon this, or any other earth of the system, are relatively but
as children in the womb of creation. With the introduction of the
atmosphere to the lungs of the new-born child comes the first effort at
conscious,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

individualized existence; and conscious existence, in its larger and
more perfect sense, is only attained as man comes, with his interior
lungs, or spiritual and mental powers, to inspire the higher and purer
atmospheres of the universe, and this he is privileged to do, even in
the present earth life, in a degree far beyond general comprehension.

#### THE POWER AND IMPORTANCE OF BREATH.

Breath is the most important thing we have; it is the symbol of life
itself. In Genesis ii. 7 we find, "And the Lord God formed man of the
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,
and man became a living soul." We have but slight, if any, *direct*
control over the action of the heart and other internal functions; our
voluntary hold on life seems to be seated in the lungs and in our power
of breath. Breath is *ours*, with power to inspire deeply, and by this
means we are enabled to strengthen and vitalize every portion of the
system. There is a spiritual as well as a mental and physical breath.
Man, so to speak, is a tree whose roots are in the atmosphere, and
therefrom may he inspire life in a threefold sense. Who that has visited
a mountain-top but what has felt that he was inspiring the breath of the
gods?

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Ye who have climbed a mountain peak,  
 And heard its godly presence speak,  
 Can understand how glory shone  
 O’er Sinai, as Jehovah's throne,  
 When unto Moses there was given,  
 The lasting law of earth and heaven.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Who thus hath felt the kindling fire  
 Which mountain-climbing doth inspire,  
 Can understand how ancient Greek  
 Should oracle Olympia's peak;  
 And why a mount should ever stand  
 To symbol God in every land."</span>

</div>

We might with profit dwell upon the power and importance of the breath,
not only in its relation to physical health, but in its bearing upon
mental and spiritual unfoldment and exaltation as well; but we judge
that this brief allusion will be sufficient for our present purpose, and
that in consideration of its importance will not be deemed out of place.

Reference having been made to the signs of the zodiac after the order
given in Genesis, and still further elaborated in the chapter on the
Mechanism of Solar Biology, we now proceed with the 144 polarities of
the moon, commencing with ♈ (Aries) as a matter of convenience for
reference, as we are in the habit of thinking and counting from the head
downward, and for that reason the more elaborate explanation of the
nature and functions of the twelve signs has already been given in that
order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Twelve Polarities of Aries](sb11.md)
