[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb19)  [Next](sb21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

### CHAPTER XV.

#### THE TWELVE POLARITIES OF CAPRICORN.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♈ (*Aries*).

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> shows that the parents’ minds were
intensely interested in some business speculation where high attainments
were expected and a determined will was active in its accomplishment.

It usually produces a child of fine organic quality; an active brain,
full of speculative ideas and plans, and a very tenacious mind to carry
them out.

It increases the pride and aspiration of Capricorn; and, if properly
balanced, gives great ability in making plans, and persistence in
carrying them out, and a disposition to be coercive. They are very
tenacious in the belief that their ideas are right, and are inclined to
force them into operation. Their ideas of intellectual attainment are
high, and they have a good deal of egotism in every department of life.

They are quite incapable of working out the minutiæ of things, but have
an unbending will in whatever direction their mind may be led. They are
quite materialistic in their tendencies. This polarity increases the
musical talent and ideality, and gives aversion to being bound by law,
rule, or custom, further than inclination sanctions; also tenacity in
everything they undertake.

This polarity would indicate tendency to nerve and brain difficulties.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This polarity is usually due to high parental aspirations toward the
medical profession. It gives the child a very persistent mind, with
conservative ideas of church principles and social customs. It gives
sanguine and ardent feelings, and inclination and adaptation to a
medical course of study. They are very sensitive to the mental
conditions of others, and have good perceptions of future events, and
will have spiritualistic tendencies unless planetary or other conditions
prevent.

They incline to follow their feelings, and usually lack proper sexual
control. When the mental nature predominates, they are apt to be earnest
and zealous in educational interests and everything relating to the
elevation of humanity, with tendencies to found institutions making new
departures in the culture of mind and body.

This polarity gives tendency to affections of the lymphatic system.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This indicates that the parents’ mind was exalted through attainments in
educational or oratorical directions, and gives the child a very
studious and intensely active mind. It contributes to the love of
science, literature, and oratory, and sets the Capricorn nature at work
organizing and laying plans in those directions. It often creates ideals
beyond their capability of execution and sometimes what would be called
air-castles.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

It gives good language and increases their ability for public speaking,
and aids largely in musical attainments, but inclines them to
dissatisfaction in the domestic circle.

This polarity indicates a tendency to nerve and bronchial affections.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This polarity arises from high aspirations and encouraging prospects on
the part, of the parents regarding the attainment of elegance and
grandeur in their home life and surroundings. It turns the mind of the
child into similar channels, giving high aspirations for beauty,
elegance, and grandeur in their domestic life, and brilliant
accomplishments in their companion and children.

It increases the economical tendencies, sometimes inclining to
parsimoniousness, but always imparting a prudential and somewhat selfish
regard for self, home, and family. It aids Capricorn in the minutiæ of
business life and trade. It increases the susceptibilities of the sex
nature, and if planetary conditions are strong in that direction, will
frequently lead to sexual abuses. Parents should therefore use great
care in properly warning and instructing these children. It adds to the
mechanical abilities, and in some cases in connection with planetary
influence it so changes the Capricorn nature that it appears more like
Cancer.

There is indicated by this polarity some liability to diseases of the
stomach and lungs.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This polarity comes from the parents’ high ideals of success, with
inclination to gratify the appetites and

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

passions, but sometimes from zealous religious convictions or devoted
love on the part of the negative parent. It turns the child's mind into
an ideal world, and inclines them to be led by the feelings, appetites,
and passions in all directions, and to be restless under control or
self-restraint. They are spontaneous in their actions, and ardent and
zealous in everything they do, unless counterbalanced by planetary
conditions.

Parents should exercise the greatest vigilance over children of this
polarity, and instruct and guard them in every way, especially
impressing them with the sacredness of the sex function.

When this nature is brought under intellectual restraints or aided by
planetary conditions, it gives a bright, kind, and philanthropic person,
zealous in good works, and full of plans for the protection of the poor
and needy; they are apt to be too liberal with their money for their own
good. They have adaptation to the ministry, with great zeal and devotion
to their calling.

This polarity affects the circulatory system and somewhat the digestive
organs.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This usually results from the parents’ mind being elated over musical
success or attainments.

It endows the child with great love of harmony, beauty, and elegance, so
that they are apt to live in an ideal world, far beyond the average
attainment in this; yet they love to sit in quiet meditation and commune
with this ideal.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

They are apt to be unhappy in marriage from failing to realize the love,
harmony, and happiness they have ideally pictured themselves. The
polarity weakens the sexual nature, but increases its activity when this
inclination is dominant. The four leading characteristics of this
nature, which are determined by planetary conditions, are: first, sex
inclination; second, intuition; third, harmony; fourth, discrimination.

These persons are fine judges of the qualities of things, and also have
poetic and artistic tendencies and abilities, and sometimes incline to
novel-writing. If planetary conditions predispose to educational
pursuits, they will have excellent analytical and mathematical
abilities, and often fitness for the study and practice of medicine.

This polarity indicates a tendency to weakness of the digestive organs.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This results from an elated feeling on the part of the positive parent,
whose mind from some cause had been turned into the interior and
spiritual to interrogate the future.

It produces a child with the usual active brain of Capricorn, and turns
all that activity into the interior and intuitive faculties.

Their plans and arrangements are usually very practical and carefully
balanced, so as to make them successful.

They are quick and bright in their intuitions, thorough in business, and
kind and gentle in domestic

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

life. It adapts one to literary pursuits, public speaking, or holding
office under government, corporations, etc. They have a great deal of
foresight, and are natural adherents to metaphysical and spiritual
thoughts, and often discern events before they happen.

It gives adaptability in any direction in which the mind may be turned.

This polarity indicates some tendency to diseases of liver and kidneys.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This polarity comes from the parents’ minds being turned in the
direction of literary attainments or matters of public policy, and gives
the child a positive tendency of nature.

It intensifies anger, so that when they are once offended with persons
they want nothing more to do with them; yet have great power to hide
their [feelings](errata.htm#8.md) and use them well.

It gives dignity of character, with more inclination to write their
thoughts than to speak them. It increases the sexual inclination, and
contributes to conventionalism, and is apt to develop a commanding
positiveness and hardness in the person's character.

It increases the innate aversion of Capricorn to manual labor, and gives
a concealed pride of person and ability.

This polarity does not indicate any special tendency to disease other
than, perhaps, to gout.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This comes from parental conditions of great energy of mind and body.

The child will have great mental activity and incline to act on the
first thought, constantly executing the ideas of Capricorn without
maturing them or making them practical; consequently their life is apt
to be one of business failure and mistake.

Because of their love of grandeur and elegance they will be very
extravagant and lack due appreciation of the value of money.

If such persons had millions of dollars at their command, they would
quickly squander it, and be poor, unless they had a rigid drill while
young in economy and utilitarian habits. Parents should make industry
and economy the most prominent ideas in the education of such children,
otherwise they will be full of wild, speculative plans that will amount
to nothing.

It gives love of music, musical talent, and oratory. It makes them kind
and full of good works, yet they like to have those works known and
appreciated. It gives great activity to the sexual nature, and
liabilities to abuse in that direction, also restlessness and
dissatisfaction in the domestic relations.

They are inclined to be boss, ever seeking to command rather than to
serve. Their liability to disease is mainly a tendency to affections of
the muscular system.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This polarity comes from well-regulated, successful, and all-absorbing
business pursuits on the part of the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

parents. It gives the child a clear, active brain and continuity of
purpose to carry forward whatever they begin. They are not adapted to
physical labor, as the sign depends upon the head, and adapts them to
general business plans, management, etc. It gives great love of order,
harmony, and elegance, and qualifications to maintain such surroundings.
It makes them very independent, and indisposed to confidential or
intimate friendships: they are like a star standing alone and shining
from its own apparently self-generated light, which is wholly turned
upon business and educational subjects. It gives power of self-control
in sexual and all other directions. Family life with such is a secondary
consideration, yet they are disposed to make things harmonious in that
direction: but ladies of this polarity would do well not to marry unless
they can marry wealthy; for unless greatly aided by favorable planetary
conditions, they would not be satisfied with the duties of domestic
life.

This nature is favorably inclined toward the church and accepted
religious opinions, but is disposed to oppose progressive religious
ideas. They partake in a general way of the nature as described in
Capricorn, and are not especially inclined to disease unless it be
affections of the joints.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This results from the parents’ political or other attainments or
successes in a public sphere, and gives an active, restless nature to
the child, with pride of personal appearance, and adapts them for
dealing with

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the many. Such could not be satisfied with a country or lonely life, and
ladies would be dissatisfied with the domestic sphere.

It gives keen perceptions as to what would please or displease the
public, adaptation for wholesale and retail mercantile pursuits, and for
organizing corporative interests, societies, etc. It also gives some
taste for political economy. It turns the thoughts away from domestic
life, yet there is love of having a home and family; but unless their
home can be fashionable or aristocratic in its pertainings, it would not
satisfy. It would be better for ladies of this polarity not to marry,
but to engage in whatever sphere of public life the planets may
indicate. Special drill is necessary for young ladies in regard to
chastity, and great care should be taken to impress upon their minds the
use and sacredness of the sex function; otherwise there is much danger
of their being inclined to promiscuity.

This polarity indicates increased tendency to rheumatic difficulties.

♑ (*Capricorn*), *with the Moon in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This comes from a tenacious, industrious mental condition on the part of
the parents, and produces a child of very persevering and industrious
habits; studious and economical, loving science and general knowledge,
but over-anxious about success in life. It counteracts much of. the
tendency of Capricorn to generalize, and largely binds the whole
character down to special uses.

Ladies are apt to be dissatisfied and restless in the marital relation,
being disposed to be independent in

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

character and action. It aids mechanical genius, and gives beauty and
elegance to the fruits of such labor. It makes a good general
superintendent in any kind of business.

In some cases it would lead to penuriousness, and often they feel that
the more they have, the more they want. It favors professional life in
whatever way planetary conditions indicate.

This polarity gives tendency to brain and nerve difficulties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Twelve Polarities of Aquarius](sb21.md)
