[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb20)  [Next](sb22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

### CHAPTER XVI.

#### THE TWELVE POLARITIES OF AQUARIUS.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♈ (*Aries*).

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> polarity indicates that the parents
were very persistent in prosecuting some business. It produces in the
child a very decided character, being disposed to push any issue to the
greatest extreme. It makes a stubborn, quiet nature, indisposed to
communicate their plans and ideas to others, and inclined to control in
whatever sphere they are in.

Ladies are disposed to lead in the home and domestic life, or else have
their own sphere of business occupation. It gives great self-control in
every department of life, especially in the sexual nature.

This polarity indicates a tendency to neuralgic and brain difficulties.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This results from the parents’ strong admiration of nature in its varied
forms, and creates in the child a love of farming and agricultural
interests, love of animals, and a disposition to deal in stock, as they
will be good judges of cattle and horses.

If planetary conditions take them into the professions, they incline to
the medical, and enjoy a medical course of study.

It makes one exceedingly sensitive to physical and mental surroundings,
and gives unparalleled ability to

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

judge of human and animal nature. They are very active and practical in
business, and industrious in all the minutiae of life. They are loving
and harmonious companions, and very faithful and devoted wives,
overanxious about those under their care and about having abundant
supplies for the needs of life.

It increases the liabilities to rheumatic and nerve difficulties, also
to indigestion.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This polarity shows that the parents were very active in business life,
tending to intellectual uses. This gives the child a love of
intellectual pursuits, good language, and inclination toward public
speaking. They will be interested in educational matters and political
affairs; will have mechanical skill and love to excel in whatever they
undertake. As students they are quick to comprehend, but not apt to
adopt a confining literary profession.

Ladies of this polarity are very industrious and economical housewives,
carrying their neatness and care to inconvenient extremes. They are
adapted to the pursuit of millinery, dressmaking, trade in fancy goods,
and similar occupations, having refinement and order in all they do.

The polarity increases the nervous tendencies of Aquarius.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This comes from the parents’ over-anxiety and care for the maintenance
of home and family. It produces

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

a child very nervous and sensitive. Great care has to be taken of such
children, in order to raise them. They ought not to be nursed by old
people, or by persons of a lower or grosser nature than the parents.
They are very susceptible to the diseased conditions of others, and will
be through life.

They will be very industrious and economical, carrying their economy
into the very smallest things, and hoarding up and saving everything. It
weakens self-control in the sexual nature, so that they are liable to be
led by associates into abuses and excesses in that direction. They have
great firmness, yet are easily led if their inclinations coincide.
Ladies make over-devoted wives, especially in the direction of
economizing and providing. It contributes to the love of knowledge in
whatever direction the planets may indicate or lead the mind.

This polarity gives some tendency to diseases of the chest, tumorous
affections, etc.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This polarity comes from the parents’ deep and spontaneous love nature.
It produces a child of great kindness and sympathy, having a devotion
amounting almost to worship in the love relations; very zealous in
religion; best adapted for country and farm life, as they are too
tender-hearted for city dealing.

They are liable to be deceived and misled in love affairs, and to have
their lives blighted by infidelity in others. It gives activity to their
love nature, either in conjugality or promiscuity. They are liable to
make

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

mistakes from being over-zealous, and will be in danger of nervous
dyspepsia, palpitation and rheumatism of the heart, and other cardiac
difficulties.

Such persons are easily led by associates, and are susceptible to
psychological control, and are liable to extremes, being at times very
positive in having their own way, and then again easily led by others,
and especially if their own inclination should partially coincide.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This polarity shows that the minds of the parents were turned to the
consideration and study of hygiene and of nature. It gives the child a
clear, logical mind; faithfulness in service; pride of personal
abilities; sensitiveness in regard to the opinions of others; fine
mechanical abilities; adaptation to trade; love of farming, with
kindness to animals.

The polarity also gives a tendency to the study of anatomy, physiology,
and hygiene, and carefulness in their diet and habits. Their handwriting
inclines to be clear and plain, using but few words, yet making those
few express a great deal. They are also disposed to make critical and
clear points in their arguments and reasonings. They have large
ideality, good mathematical talents, are economical and saving, and
sometimes penurious. Under some circumstances they might incline to
epicurean habits.

They have a strong sex nature, but great power of self-control, and make
faithful husbands and wives.

Parents should, so far as practicable, avoid the punishment of such
children; teach them the right course

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

of life, in a kind and sympathetic manner, and they will rarely depart
from it.

This polarity inclines to the practical uses of life in every
department. It gives great vitativeness; but when the vitality is
depleted, they are liable to nervous diseases of the digestive system.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This polarity indicates that the parents were quick and good judges of
character, with a disposition to look into and judge of the future. The
child will be keen, quick, accurate, and discriminative in weights,
measures, qualities, and conditions; and being governed by intuition,
will exhibit superior mental qualities. Such will have ability and
foresight in whatever pursuit they may engage in; also natural occult or
spiritualistic powers and frequent visions of things to come.

This polarity indicates a tendency to diseases of the reproductive
organs, liver, and reins.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This polarity indicates that the paternal mind was hard, tenacious, and
active in business. It gives the child special adaptation to trade, with
an aptitude to drive bargains without much feeling in the matter,
imparting a good degree of selfishness to their business nature, with
quick, strong temper when aroused, and a tendency to remember injuries
received, and to be somewhat revengeful therefor. Unless well
disciplined, they will be disposed to overreaching and dishonesty.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

The polarity inclines one to be somewhat hard and unaccommodating in
family life, and weakens their self-control in sexual directions, but
counteracts much of the sensitiveness of the Aquarius nature. It aids in
literary, educational, or public life, if planetary conditions are
favorable to such pursuits: it also strengthens the conservative
inclinations.

This polarity adds no special liability to disease, only as it may
affect the heart and circulatory system.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This polarity results from the minds of the parents being much occupied
in the executive part of their nature, and engaged or interested in
matters pertaining to public meetings, speaking, etc. It makes the child
intensely active in physical or mental pursuits, and leads them to speak
and act without due thought or preparation; in short, to be too hasty
and premature for their own good, and very liable to overdo whatever
they undertake. They have a keen conventional sense of right and wrong;
an active religious nature, and adaptation to public speaking and the
ministry; are also predisposed toward political economy: it gives fine
mechanical abilities and assists in the sphere of art.

This nature will be industrious in whatever department they engage, but
incline more to be executive than studious. They have great
concentrativeness and intense excitability, which extends to
combativeness and the sex activities. It increases the love of home and
family. and gives a desire to be loved, cared for, and caressed. It
makes devoted wives, neat and orderly in everything they do.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

Parents should exercise a careful restraint over the activities of these
children, establishing a rule of life and drill to secure regular
periods of rest, the observance of which should be rigidly enforced.
They should be taught to control their hasty speech, and to consider
more carefully their language and abrupt manner, and to be more
self-containing, restrained, and conservative of their energies which
they are so prone to waste in excessive and ill-considered action,—often
to the extent of their own destruction. They should be especially
instructed and impressed regarding the terrible consequences of the
abuse of the sex function; and great method and persistency must be
employed to induce and encourage them to study, otherwise they are apt
to fail in the acquisition of even an ordinary education.

The polarity indicates a tendency, to rheumatic and muscular diseases.

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This polarity indicates that the parents were deeply interested or
engaged in the endeavor to bring some musical or other general interest
or business idea before the people. It makes the child active, nervous,
and excitable in both brain and body. It gives inclination and
adaptability for public and political life; also fitness for mercantile
pursuits, with a preference for wholesale and large general
transactions. Such persons, whether men or women, would be uneasy and
dissatisfied, unless in some sphere affording opportunities for great
activity of both mind and body.

The polarity gives a tendency to nervous and rheumatic difficulties.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

♒ (*Aquarius*), *with the Moon in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This polarity indicates that the minds of the parents were very active
and well disciplined in some public capacity or business pursuit. It
gives the child an active, prompt, and positive mind, with clear
perceptions as to a definite business or public career. They will be
independent, but frank and expressive, and display great discretion and
wisdom.

Being polarized in their native sign or innate quality, it intensifies
and harmonizes the Aquarius nature, causing their character to stand out
clear, bright, and independent, making them good representatives of this
sign of the zodiac. They are apt to select and confine themselves to
some particular pursuit in life, usually some branch of trade that
brings them into intimate relations with the people.

This polarity lessens the liability to the diseases specially
characterized by the sign Aquarius.

♒ (Aquarius), with the Moon in ♓ (Pisces).

This polarity comes from the mental qualifications and studious
tendencies of the parents, from their great desire for knowledge; also
from great carefulness and perplexities in business matters. It gives
the child great perseverance, activity, and carefulness, adapting them
to mental rather than physical labor. They will love books and incline
to literary pursuits. It gives a high sense of honor and integrity of
character, but imparts a degree of anxiety concerning their career and
success in life; yet with unfavorable planetary

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

conditions, some of the above indications may be reversed, leading them
to intrigue and dishonesty.

This polarity leads the mind into the minutiæ and details of things,
giving inclination to manufacturing and mechanics. It usually gives a
sense and habit of economy; but if inverted or obstructed in its natural
expression, it may lead to recklessness of character.

This polarity indicates a tendency to nervous debility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. The Twelve Polarities of Pisces](sb22)
