[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb21)  [Next](sb23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

#### THE TWELVE POLARITIES OF PISCES.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♈ (*Aries*).

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> polarity is the result of determined
but somewhat inharmonious conditions on the part of the parents. It
produces an active, restless, but very determined nature in the child,
who will be self-willed, headstrong, positive, and hard to govern; can
be coaxed more easily than driven.

This polarity adds somewhat to the love of knowledge common to Pisces,
gives strength, self-reliance, and self-control; yet there is danger of
overdoing and weakening the nervous system, on account of the high
tension of this nature; and especially is this true of females. Parents
should restrain such children, and while very young train them to habits
of moderation, and also impress upon their minds the importance of
taking care of the body.

This polarity increases the liability of brain difficulties and uterine
displacements.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This polarity springs from a combative disposition on the part of the
parents where there is external conformity and submission caused by an
internal desire to do what is right. It produces a child who appears
externally

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

quiet and easy, yet who is interiorly active, with strong desires and
feelings, intense love of nature, and adaptation to the medical
profession and natural sciences. It intensifies the natural honor and
integrity of the Pisces nature, making them considerate of the welfare
of others as well as of their own. It gives adaptation to agricultural
and floral pursuits; makes them very persistent in all things, with an
intellectual bias of mind. They are hygienic by nature, but subject at
times to melancholy.

Parents should give such children every opportunity for reasonable
enjoyment, and encourage them in social exercise, as they are inclined
to be old men and women while yet young; therefore parents should strive
to counteract that tendency in order to promote their physical growth
and preserve them in the spontaneity and joyousness of childhood.

They are very sensitive to the spheres of others and to surrounding
conditions, and on that account often isolate themselves from the world,
choosing some quiet occupation where they can remain in obscurity,
finding their chief pleasure in quiet musings and the study of nature
and books.

These persons might easily incline to the idea and study of alchemy as
entertained by the ancients. They are not apt to marry, yet have great
love of the T opposite sex, and would be kind and sympathetic if
harmoniously mated. Their mind is turned to the interior of self and
nature.

This polarity indicates good vitativeness, with some liability to
diseases of the lymphatic system.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This polarity comes from a measure of inharmony on the part of the
parents, which is largely on account of an over-devotion to
investigation and study. It creates in the child a great love of
knowledge and disposition to usefulness, giving mechanical ability; also
a tendency to the arts and sciences, and an inclination to public
speaking. It intensifies the activities of the Pisces nature, and, if
they are restrained, they are liable to melancholy, morbid broodings and
dyspepsia. It lessens their continuity, and increases the anxious,
worrying nature.

Such children should have as complete an education as it is in the power
of the parents to give them, also a special education in the pursuit to
which they are best adapted, as indicated by planetary conditions; they
should likewise be taught to look on the bright side of things, and
encouraged in the cultivation of a joyous, happy spirit. Impress them
with the fact that it is weak and unworthy to indulge in forebodings and
morbid imaginings, and thus counteract some of the unfavorable
tendencies with which they have been endowed. If they have strong sex
proclivities, exercise great care in duly impressing them with the
[disasterous](errata.htm#9) consequences of abuses in that direction. In
all things keep the bright side of life before them.

This polarity indicates liability to brain difficulties and abnormal
nervous restlessness.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This polarity results from inharmony between the parents concerning the
maintenance of home and family. The child will have a very sensitive
nature, and a disposition to excessive industry, that will lead them to
overtax their strength. They will also be inclined to penuriousness.
They have great love of knowledge, with a desire for the prosperity of
educational institutions, and for all facilities essential for the
education of the family and the improvement of home interests.

They tend to generalize rather than enter into the minutiæ of things,
but will have fitness for mechanical and manufacturing interests, and
possibly to agricultural pursuits. They have a strong and persistent
will, and are disinclined to work under others, but choose rather to
carry on business for themselves.

It makes them very sensitive to the influence of the opposite sex, and
this should be guarded against.

This polarity gives a clear, deductive mind, and in many cases
adaptation to scientific pursuits and professional life. It gives some
liability to inflammation of the digestive organs, tumorous affection;
also to neuralgia and nervous diseases.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This polarity springs from inharmony between the parents, mainly on
account of the lack of a due expression of love on the part of one or
both. It usually gives the child an abundance of sex power, and
consequently

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

great vitality, and greater inclination to conjugality than sex
relations. They will have a high ideal of unity, love, and harmony, and
strong disposition towards a soul union. If this is realized, it will
give them great intellectual and spiritual power, and a disposition to
work for the elevation of humanity, and to promote the common good in
all ways.

They are studious and incline to Oriental and metaphysical philosophies,
and to the occult sciences in general. They are, however, liable to
mistakes in the bestowal of their love and friendship, being
kindhearted, fraternal, and confiding, and disappointments in this
direction, and also in financial matters, may invert their good
qualities, making them penurious, excitable, and morbidly sensitive,
getting easily irritated or angry at opposition and failure. The selfish
and grasping side of their nature then becomes dominant.

This nature inclines somewhat to isolation and to extremes in directions
governed by unfavorable planetary conditions.

There would be in this polarity some tendency to dissipation on account
of discouragement. They would also be liable to diseases of the heart.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This polarity usually results from disagreement between the parents in
matters pertaining to the treatment of the sick, methods of cooking, or
from lack of discrimination and order.

This gives the child a love for mathematical problems and abstruse
subjects in general. They are inclined to

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

be positive and exacting, and are very difficult to please. They have
clear, logical minds, and incline to the natural sciences, and if
planetary conditions are favorable, it gives them adaptation to the
medical profession. They have a tendency to agriculture and fine
intuitions relative to the raising of children, domestic animals, etc.:
other things being favorable, it adds inspirational power.

Such children should have special care in their education, and be
trained to that occupation to which they are best suited, as indicated
by planetary conditions. They should be warned against selfishness, and
impressed with the importance of rendering their home life harmonious
and happy.

Planetary conditions may aid them in artistic and musical attainments or
lead them into sexual excesses. Their liability as relates to disease
would be a tendency to dyspepsia.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This polarity is often the result of a protracted illness on the part of
the mother, the mind of the father being turned to the interior in
hopeful watchfulness, and waiting for such changes as time may bring.

This creates in the child (if a male) a deep, quiet, thoughtfulness,
with foresight, carefulness, and forethought for everything, and an
indisposition to take counsel from any one. Their life will be mainly
under control of planetary conditions, the influence of which will be
manifest in the direction which their intuitions take. They possess
considerable interior nature, and incline to poetic and literary
pursuits.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

If the child is a female, it turns the nature into the exterior, and
gives more of a masculine than feminine mind, making them positive,
active, and frequently very expressive. Such persons love new ideas; are
close students, and persistent in thought, reason, and investigation;
are inclined to philosophy, largely materialistic, but bordering on
spirituality. They are better adapted to business than domestic life.

This polarity in the male indicates a tendency to torpidity of the liver
and disease of the generative system; in the female, liability to
uterine displacements, kidney difficulties, and inflammation of the
bowels. These persons must avoid nervous excitement, overdoing, and
worriment of the mind.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This polarity results from parental inharmony caused by the father's
mind being unduly engrossed in the externals of public or business life,
somewhat to the neglect of the care of home and family.

It gives the child a quiet and somewhat of a sullen temper;
conventionality, selfishness, and pride of personal abilities; love of
great attainments in education, and adaptation to journalism. Such are
not [harmonious](errata.htm#10) in family life, but incline to be hard,
positive, and jealous, lacking conjugality, and having their love nature
turned into a desire for self-gratification; but this can be radically
changed or modified by planetary conditions. They are usually good and
faithful citizens, and tenacious supporters of established systems and
institutions. They incline to political and public life.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

Ladies of this sign are apt to be morbid, restless, and dissatisfied
companions and housewives. They have strong sex endowments, and there is
danger of their being injudicious in this direction. Mothers should
exercise great care with daughters of this nature, cultivating the
sentiment of conjugality, and impressing upon them the vital importance
of chastity, and care in domestic matters. The children of this sign
should have the advantages of a thorough education.

This polarity indicates a tendency to nervous exhaustion through mental
and sex activity.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This polarity comes from intensified combativeness, or a strong will and
determination to improve or change their conditions, on the part of the
parents.

It produces in the child a very active, restless nature, tending to
extremes in every direction. They incline to he excitable, and even
irritable, yet they have, considerable power of self-control. They have
good mechanical ability, also art tendencies, and an inclination to
religious thought and life. They incline to be very industrious, and on
account of their great activity are apt to overtax their physical
strength, and thus impair their health. Ladies of this polarity are apt
to strain themselves and bring on female weakness. This nature gives
inclination to the public service, and some disposition and fitness to
public speaking. It increases the activity of the sex nature and the
liability to its abuse.

Parents should train these children to be thoughtful and careful in
their speech and action, and to avoid

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

extremes in everything; also to keep their own secrets, to be careful of
their bodies, and especially to be just in all departments of life,
respecting the rights and feelings of others.

This polarity indicates liability to weakness of the digestive organs,
pleuritic pains, and weakness of the lungs.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This polarity arises from inharmony or difference of opinion, on the
part of the parents, relative to some business idea or enterprise.

This gives the child decided business talent, with inclination to plan
and speculate, and entertain more business schemes than can be brought
to maturity, as they are disposed to deal with general principles rather
than to outwork the minutiæ, and consequently come short in many of
their undertakings.

With favoring planetary conditions, it gives love of music and the fine
arts. Their love of knowledge inclines to that which pertains to
business, and adapts them to be superintendents and managers, as they
are disinclined to work with the hands.

This polarity indicates some tendency to inflammatory rheumatism.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This polarity springs from parental inharmony, arising from undue love
of politics or society life.

This turns the mind of the child away from domestic life, and
counteracts somewhat the studious tendency

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

of the Pisces nature. It gives them a bright, cheery habit of mind: they
form acquaintances and make friends quickly, but are somewhat lacking in
fidelity to friends. They are adapted to all kinds of mercantile
pursuits, or business that brings them before the public. They make good
business agents and travelling salesmen. Their inhabitativeness is
small, and their home is wherever they chance to be. Under some
planetary conditions they would incline to professional life. Ladies of
this nature do not take kindly to the confinement of domestic duties.

This polarity indicates a tendency to nervous and rheumatic
difficulties.

♓ (*Pisces*), *with the Moon in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This arises either from a restless, struggling condition on the part of
the father, or from his entire indifference to the opposition of the
wife; or vice versa.

This polarity causes the Pisces nature to stand out distinctly, but
largely shut up within its own sphere. It somewhat increases the morbid,
anxious tendencies of Pisces, and gives a disinclination to launch out
into new ventures. It gives activity and perseverance in whatever is
undertaken, but lack of confidence in their own powers and abilities.
The pursuits to which they are best adapted would be determined by
planetary conditions.

This polarity frequently gives morbid sex inclinations, and parents
should have a care to warn such children of the serious consequences
which always follow the abuse of this function. They should also have

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

a thorough business education in the direction indicated by planetary
conditions.

Their liabilities to disease arise more through melancholy and fear of
disease and death, than from any other cause. They are inclined to be
troubled with dyspepsia, derangement of the liver and spleen, neuralgia,
and pleuritic; but these are mainly produced by melancholic imaginings.
They should cultivate hope and cheerfulness, which will add much to the
comfort of the many years they are likely to spend on earth, as they
frequently live to a great age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Planets](sb23)
