[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb23)  [Next](sb25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### CHAPTER XIX.

#### THE TWELVE POSITIONS OF MERCURY.

☿ (*Mercury*)*: its Function*.

<span class="smallcaps">Mercury</span>, the youngest planet that we
consider, is nearest the sun, and more physical in its nature and
effects than any other. It adds physical strength to whatever sign or
function it may be in.

Its qualities are: first, those of the conserved sexual or reproductive
elements; second, physical strength; third, its mental characteristics,
which are materialistic. Mercury controls all that pertains to sex
desire, and many marriages occur through the attractions of this,
planet. For instance, a person having Mercury in the sign in which one
of the opposite sex was born, will be liable to strong sex attraction in
that direction. Again, if a person had Mercury in Scorpio, they would
perceive those of the opposite sex born in that sign as liable to be
attracted to them. The sex impulses often lay hold of and carry the love
nature captive, and thus many marriages are consummated; but love of
this kind is not apt to be lasting, and therefore these marriages are
seldom harmonious and happy ones. This law of attraction would hold good
in whatever sign Mercury might be at the time of birth, giving sex
attraction to those born in the same sign.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♈ (*Aries*).

This gives very strong brain power and great endurance in thought and
study; but in children it is apt to contribute morbid ideas concerning
sexuality, and should they be led into excesses in that direction, it
would give liability to insanity. Insanity might also result from lack
of vitality.

It gives strong materialistic tendencies to the person; consequently a
disinclination to recognize anything that does not come within the scope
of the five senses. It gives special qualifications for a general
business life, because it holds the mind down to a practical
money-getting, bread-and-butter interest.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This contributes to physical strength and to strong feelings and
emotions, and also increases ideality in sex directions; gives
inclination to sensual pleasures, and fear of pain; many times inclines
to sensational indulgence far beyond the endurance of the body; and is
apt to create a hazy and illogical mental condition.

In case of a good degree of mental harmony, it will take control of the
baser principles of the Mercury nature, and give power and efficiency to
the brain, counteracting the undesirable qualities given above.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This gives inclination to physical labor, strengthens the vocal organs,
tends to avert diseases of the throat and bronchial tubes, and aids in
quieting nervous and

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

restless tendencies. It makes a strong, studious mind, inclined to
scientific and collegiate studies, especially mathematics and whatever
relates to physical uses. It turns the balance of its power against
chastity and exerts a strong influence to bind the person down to menial
service.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This position of Mercury gives strong lungs and voice, and obviates the
liability to consumption. It adds health, strength, and vigor to the
body, frequently giving broad shoulders and full chest. It increases the
sex love and desire for children, but somewhat lowers the idea of
chastity. It gives, however, strong parental love and especial care in
matters of providing for and protection of offspring.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This gives a very strong and intense love nature; also a positive will,
strong impulses, feelings, and emotions, strong love of the opposite
sex, and a feeling almost amounting to dependence upon their society. It
is hard for such to live a single life. If intensifies conjugality, and
makes one kind and sympathetic.

In this position it has control of the whole body and all its functions
to express itself according to its nature; therefore we may safely look
for its most natural expression through the sex inclination if not well
guarded or in any function of the body or mind where it can find
expression harmonious with its nature.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This gives strong digestion and aids in building up a large, strong
body; gives great physical endurance, and obviates the liability, to
derangements of the digestive function. It relates the intuitive
faculties to pure nature, mainly of a physical character. It weakens
conjugality and self-control in sex directions. It frequently gives to
children morbid imaginations and liability to self-abuse. Parents should
carefully guard such children against these habits.

It gives a strong appetite and desire for rich food and stimulating
drinks, and is thus apt to tax digestion and cause dyspeptic
difficulties.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This gives physical strength to the body, and frequently adds to its
length. (A long body always indicates great vitality and usually an
inclination to sedentary habits.) It gives especial strength to the
reins, and strength and activity to the sex nature, with some
inclination to excesses. It is liable to produce female weaknesses where
girls did not have proper opportunity to develop the muscles of the body
by exercise and play. It gives power to the perceptive faculties, and
frequently materialistic tendencies. Such persons are apt to reason from
externalities unless otherwise counteracted.

This being Mercury's native and home position, it therefore exerts its
full normal power over the system.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This position of Mercury gives great vitality and strength of the
reproductive system. It adds no particular incentive to indulgence, but
gives power and endurance and strength and vivacity to the whole body,
obviating liability to weakness or disease of the reproductive organs,
though there is liability through activity of this function of
exhausting the vitality of the system and thus bringing on general
debility, and often a special weakness of the innate function
corresponding to the sign in which they were born.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This gives strength to the muscles and motor nerves, and intensifies the
activity of the whole body; also gives inclination to the use of the
muscular system in some active pursuit. It makes them vigorous in all
their executive tendencies, and counteracts liability to rheumatic and
nerve difficulties. It increases the combative nature and the ardor and
zeal of life, giving them strong sex attractions and inclinations, and
also adding strength to the muscular system.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This gives great activity to the body, love of locomotion, travel, etc.
It tends strongly to the sex passion, and consequently lessens the
purity and sacredness of the domestic relations. It gives strong
economical business tendencies, with love of labor and its rewards, and
usually makes a practical business character. It -obviates the liability
to disease of the lower limbs.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This strengthens the general nerve system, and also militates against
conjugality, and inclines to license-rather than restraint. Parents
should take great care to impress upon the minds of such children the
sacredness of the sex function.

It gives pride of external appearance and show, and great restlessness
and activity. It strengthens the sensatory nerves, gives strong business
qualities, tendency to physical labor, and active bodily habits.

☿ (*Mercury*) *in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This gives great love of activity and inclination to walk and be on the
feet a great deal. Children as soon as they learn to walk are apt to run
away from home. They are very liable to overdo in running and walking
and to lack continuity and endurance. It increases the activity of the
sex nature and detracts from its sacredness. These persons are apt to
have large feet. It decreases inhabitativeness and gives love of travel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Twelve Positions of Venus](sb25)
