[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb25)  [Next](sb27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

### CHAPTER XXI.

#### THE TWELVE POSITIONS OF MARS.

♂ (*Mars*)*: its Function*.

<span class="smallcaps">Mars</span> expresses the principles of parental
love, and must be considered in its effects upon the natural instincts
connected with this love, as manifested in all forms of animate life. In
the animal nature it is entirely selfish, combative, and tyrannical,
destroying others for the preservation of its own young; and in man,
where it is allowed to rule without reason it will manifest the same
phases as in the brute creation; so that while it embodies and expresses
the elements of love, carefulness, and maternal protection and
preservation, it also manifests hatred, combativeness, and antagonism
when its interests are disturbed or threatened. So, whenever we find it
in parts of the body whose phenomena are wholly instinctive, it must be
considered as acting in conjunction with either the spiritual or the
animal nature, according to the predominance of the higher or the lower
faculties in the individual.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♈ (*Aries*).

Here Mars contributes all its qualities to the intellect, giving a high
ideal of family life, and a desire to instruct and elevate children,
often requiring too much

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

of them intellectually, or trying to put "old heads on young shoulders,"
as it is often expressed.

It gives carefulness, neatness, and economy in domestic and business
life. It gives much the same mental tendencies as though the person was
born in the sign Cancer; gives vague imaginings of evil, and frequently
cruel and combative tendencies.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

Here the characteristics of Mars are contributed in the strongest and
most direct manner to the feelings and emotions; and while giving a
strong love for their own children, such love will be largely
characterized by the animal instincts. It gives courage in combat, and
makes one very sensitive concerning the treatment their own children
receive from others.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

In this case the family love is changed to love of knowledge. It gives
adaptation for school-teaching, general education, and the care of
children. It also gives love of beauty, culture, and refinement in
children, and love of scientific knowledge in the direction of home and
domestic uses, and sometimes is extended to scientific pursuits.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This is its native home, where it gives the strongest parental love, and
love of children in general. It greatly increases the domestic
qualities, and often overpowers other strong tendencies, subjugating
them to the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

domestic life; and, if the nature is fine, it will modify and elevate
the lower animal tendencies associated with it. It gives love of
agricultural life and stock-raising.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This makes the parental love deep, strong, and enduring, and, in case of
the death of a child, is apt to affect the parents’ health. Such parents
are apt to be over-indulgent with their children, and should heed the
words of Solomon in this matter. It turns the ideal of a family life
into the love channels and awakens all the finer sensibilities, and thus
may be caused to contribute its nature to whatever leading
characteristics the nativity may possess.

Being feminine in quality, it will add fineness to the male nature. It
gives some tendency to the occult sciences and to spirituality.

It often causes irritable and combative tendencies, and in organisms
where these conditions are dominant it will find its fullest expression
in that direction. It will frequently cause a feeling of restlessness
and dissatisfaction in one's nature, and in many cases contribute to
cause dyspeptic and other difficulties, according to the innate nature
or sign in which the person is born.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

Here it is found as an enemy to the digestive function, causing frequent
derangement and necessitating great care in diet and habits. Such
persons need to have their food prepared in their own homes, or by
persons with whom they are in sympathy. It tends to lessen conjugality
and increase the general love of the

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

opposite sex. It also injures their discriminative ability and intuitive
faculties, and is apt to make them materialistic, positive, and in some
cases pretentious and deceptive; but this applies mainly to outside
interests, as their intuitions and sympathies would remain active and
clear in matters pertaining to their own home and family.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This position imparts its nature to the perceptive faculties, both
physical and mental. It inclines the person to be very materialistic. It
gives increased tendencies and intuitions in the direction of acquiring
wealth, self-preservation, and protection, and to care of family. It
contributes to the powers of foresight and foreknowledge of events that
will affect those under their care, especially family and children. It
fixes their eyes upon the things of this world, and imparts energy and
activity in the pursuit of business interests.

It affects the sexual nature so that in some cases it makes the
magnetism so antagonistic, that it will produce disease and death in the
husband or wife. This only occurs when companions are incompatible, and
where the planetary conditions are such as to give Mars the controlling
influence; and this may be known by the complexion and physiognomy. In
man it will produce a pale, beardless face, velvety voice, and extremely
sanguine temperament. In woman, the same temperament and pale face, and
a voice which appears to start deep down in the body.

This position of Mars gives peculiar extremes to the

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

temper, which is apparently kind and gentle, but easily ruffled, though
it is shown only by occasional cutting and unpleasant insinuations. The
parental affections incline to the plane of the animal loves, and the
sex inclinations are quite selfish.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This gives one a positive tendency, and an inclination to be the
controlling power in the household. It gives a strong family love, and a
tendency to adhere closely to the uses of the sexual nature, but a
greater love for this relation than for the care of children, or for the
higher phases of conjugality. The person will incline to
self-gratification and pride of family appearances and possessions. The
general tendencies are toward a public life rather than a domestic one.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

Mars is an adversary in this sign if the innate nature is one of the
sensitive signs, as it then makes them liable to extremes in action and
feeling, and sometimes to conditions resembling obsession; but it
usually gives an inclination to make everything conserve the uses of
home and family.

When there are other conditions that aid in increasing the family loves,
it makes one a servant to their own children; but they are apt to
neglect their education; and if acquisitiveness is large, require them
to work to increase the store of this world's goods when they ought to
be at school. This position, as a rule, inclines parents to be too
impatient, exacting and severe with

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

their children and to use the rod too frequently. Lessons in the
recognition of the rights of child life should be impressed upon this
nature while young, not only by precept, but by example, in showing that
their own desires and rights are respected and encouraged in all
reasonable matters, thus establishing in the child's mind precedents for
their guidance at maturity. Mars, in this sign, contributes a great deal
of the law nature and disposition; so these persons will be apt to stand
up for their rights: they also incline to be governed by rule and law in
mechanical matters, in which they are apt to have good abilities, with a
tendency to the manufacture of domestic goods.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This gives a great love for the care of children, with special
adaptation for teaching; and, if a female, for the position of a matron
of an asylum or other institution for the young. It often enslaves
parents to their children, giving an inclination to serve them
altogether too much. It also gives some inclination to domestic science
and love of education.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This gives a love for the motto, "The world is my family." It turns the
loves largely away from the family to the public, militating against
conjugality, giving a love of travel and inclination for meeting
strangers and associating familiarly with them.

If other conditions have produced family love, it will give great pride
of appearance and show in one's children;

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

also regard for external personal appearance, custom, and
conventionality.

♂ (*Mars*) *in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This gives a restless dissatisfaction, and often creates antagonism in
domestic life, through peculiar tendencies and exacting requirements; so
that such lives frequently becomes burdensome and their homes broken up,
though the person may in other matters be naturally kind and loving. It
gives uncertainty of feeling, with disinclination to marriage, yet a
disposition to yield to and serve a companion, but liability to be
attracted to those who are more or less antagonistic. (In such cases we
often find small lines running parallel with the life-line, extending
partly around the thumb; which are expressive of the above domestic
conditions.) It ordinarily gives fidelity in marriage; but when
inverted, uses its power in the opposite direction.

It gives faithfulness to children, but turns the family love largely
into channels of knowledge, giving studious tendencies and some
adaptation to writing: it also gives love of travel, with liability to
periods of melancholy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. The Twelve Positions of Jupiter](sb27.md)
