[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb27)  [Next](sb29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII.

#### THE TWELVE POSITIONS OF SATURN.

♄ (*Saturn*)*: its Function*.

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> planet is the embodiment of all that
belongs to the science (or language) of *form* in art or nature, that
being its function in the grand solar body; and it imparts its quality
to the human organism mainly through the nerve fluid. Its function has
to do with the scientific and religious principles which it embodies and
expresses in a degree far in excess of our present intellectual ability
to comprehend.

During the author's investigation into the nature and quality of Saturn,
he became convinced that it was the grandest and most perfect planet in
our solar system, and that its rings were spirit-zones, luminous with
Divine life, having come into perfect harmony with the same. We shall
not attempt to prove this, but find it is in accordance with all its
expressions through human intelligence, as revealed by this system. It
is shaped like a triune magic circle, in compliance with which formula
all the magicians of antiquity executed their wonderful feats. Even the
temple of Jerusalem was built on that plan, only with the circle
squared.

In dealing with a planet embodying such an elevated class of attributes,
it is difficult to find words for expressing its exact influence in the
different functions of the human organism, and in the different innate
natures

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

of the twelve signs; therefore, much depends on the organic quality of
the person, for its complete expression; yet it never can be fully
expressed by any one individual on this planet, but will always create
in the human family aspirations for the embodiment of its lofty and
grand qualities, which from their nature exert their strongest effects
in the mental and intuitive faculties.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♈ (*Aries*).

This position gives order, harmony, and clearness to the thought,
greatly facilitating the expression of ideas, giving keen perception of
form and use; fine mechanical intuitions, and general ability for any or
all pursuits: and the general character may be given as possessing the
higher qualities and finer abilities essential in all branches of
intellectual effort, with a special fitness to scientific thought and
research; and where mechanism is the dominant quality, imparting the
highest order of inventive genius. It somewhat obviates the liability to
difficulties of the brain, insanity, etc.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

In this position Saturn adds of its characteristics to the entire
nature, giving order and harmony so far as the innate nature will admit;
also peculiar intuitions and intuitional guidance to success in life, so
that such persons, though frequently extravagant and sometimes
eccentric, will scarcely ever come to want. It gives beauty and elegance
to writing, art, composition, or poetry, and kindness and benevolence to
the character. It enters into the sensations, making a very sensitive

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

person, judging of character by the feelings which the states of others
communicate. It also imparts spiritual sight, discernment of things to
come, intuitive and psychometric power, and often strong intuitive likes
and dislikes, having quick discernment as to the nature and character of
people at sight.

This position of Saturn throws the scientific and religious tendencies
into their feelings and senses, and may be controlled intellectually or
otherwise.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

In this position it contributes its nature to intellectual and
scientific uses, and usually controls the business inclination in that
direction.

It gives great love of scientific knowledge, and a desire to make it
practical and useful to the world. It gives artistic and mechanical
abilities, and sometimes, when the organism is not well balanced, it
makes eccentric characters.

It is apt to give a childlike simplicity in appearance, and creates a
restless activity in the brain, and a constant desire to know. It
sometimes gives very fine intuitions and inventive genius; also studious
mind with high aspirations.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This turns the nature of Saturn in the direction of domestic life; and
if the intellect controls the person, the mind will be largely occupied
with ideas of domestic and social sciences and reforms, frequently
subjugating all the faculties to those purposes. If these conditions

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

are counteracted by other planetary influences, it will take the form of
neatness and order in home life, with great love of harmony and peace.

It sometimes adds love of music, and usually creates dissatisfaction
with old conditions and relations of home life. It causes a person to
love the intellectual and scientific in others, and to look up to and
respect those who possess such talents. It adds strength and often
breadth to the chest, contributes to the sensations, and refines and
intensifies the sexual desires.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This creates in the affections an ardent longing and aspiration toward
the attributes embodied by Saturn, entering into and characterizing the
feelings, emotions, and even passions; creating an ardent and ideal love
nature, and a constant reaching out for something grander and higher
than that already realized. It imparts its higher nature to the whole
person, and to the mind an unsatisfied and aspiring condition. While it
makes persons true, loving, and confiding, they usually over-estimate
the object of their affection; and when they discover their mistake,
they feel the disappointment keenly, and turn away, thus seeming to be
unreliable. It is apt to turn the mind into an ideal and dream state,
making it hard for a person to come down to the realities of this world.
Where such a condition exists, the parents should carefully instruct
children regarding the practical realities of life, letting them
experience and learn something of the cold, hard facts of existence
while still young, and it will be the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

means of saving them from mistakes and disappointments in after-years.

This position gives adaptation to poetry and novel-writing, but,
perverted, or improperly educated, gives liability to prevarication.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This strengthens the digestive function, gives too great love for
refined and tasty food, yet a strong inclination toward hygienic diet.

It refines the intuitions, and gives spiritual tendencies; clear
spiritual vision; foresight in business, or in whatever direction the
mind may lead.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This is quite a harmonious position, and contributes spiritual and
intuitive power, inclining to visions, which are usually symbolic forms
represented by the nature of men, birds, beasts, reptiles, insects,
earth, air, water, and all forms of nature expressive of quality and
use. It also contributes to every department of mechanical genius; gives
expression to the eye and strength to the vocal and sexual organs. In
the higher order of humanity it gives intuitions concerning a nobler
state of social and domestic life; but when confined in lower
conditions, it gives inclination to licentiousness: it contributes order
and harmony to the mental faculties in general.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

As Scorpio is the generator of life and mental power in the organism,
Saturn contributes here some of its

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

general characteristics to every function of the mind, but in a very
limited degree, especially while this function is kept on the lower
plane of generation and sensual gratification; and when found in this
sphere, it will only be enabled to contribute a natural tact to please
the public and conform to the conventionality of this sign; but in those
persons who are trying to rise above the influence of the passions, its
contributions are carried up, and result in harmonizing the whole body
and mind, finding expression through all the faculties that may be
called into use in that direction, and creating strong soul aspirations
toward its qualities.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

As this is mainly a mechanical sign, Saturn is here largely dependent
upon the mechanical powers for expression, wherein it gives elegance and
refinement, and frequently great attainments in art. It aids in music,
and where language is in the innate nature, it will give elegance,
harmony, and beauty to the expression. It finds ready embodiment in the
ministerial and spiritual tendency of Sagittarius.

Sagittarius being in the muscular system, this position of Saturn gives
order and harmony to muscular action. To all parts of the body below
this sign it gives love of science, and tact, efficiency, and elegance,
in their executive work.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This gives adaptation for religious and scientific professions. It
controls the business department of one's

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

life, and conforms it to the nature of Saturn as far as possible.

If other conditions lead toward trade, it will give inclination to deal
in fine goods, with good judgment as to quality of the same; also
neatness, elegance, and order in all they do. It makes them sensitive to
anything coarse, gross, or sensual.

It creates a love of the spiritual, with aspirations toward the same. It
frequently gives special endowment for mechanical pursuits, intuitive
musical power, and great inventive genius pertaining to the finer
principles and elements of nature.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

Herein it affects the nerves of sense, and gives love of activity and
motion; love of beauty and elegance in the same; love for the theatre
and adaptation to the stage; large approbativeness; pride of personal
appearance; and power to please others. It creates fine sensibilities,
and where the innate nature is sensitive, sometimes even inclines one to
shrink away from the world.

It readily unites with other conditions in adapting one for public
service in all directions, and harmonizes with all that belongs to art,
elegance, and beauty. It endows the Aquarius nature with a somewhat
servile fear of public opinion.

♄ (*Saturn*) *in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This gives physical activity, love of travel, and sometimes tendency to
melancholy. In studious natures it increases their capabilities of
learning from teachers or

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

books. It adds to the mechanical abilities, and in scientific natures
contributes to their love of experiment and research.

This position of Saturn is somewhat remote from the vital functions, as
Pisces belongs to the understanding of the material world, and therefore
its expression would be dependent upon the materialistic mind; and .as
this planet embodies all the elements of order and harmony, which are
the two main attributes of life, health, and happiness, therefore it
follows that the person would lack this order and harmony, except so far
as the nature of Pisces is able to utilize it. We must constantly
remember, in delineating character, to give due regard to this principle
in the several uses of the different signs in which Saturn appears; for
the expression of its attributes will be dependent on the function of
the particular sign in which it is found. In this position it would
therefore contribute love of music, dancing, and the harmonious
movements and manifestations of nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. The Twelve Positions of Uranus, or Herschel](sb29)
