[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb29)  [Next](sb31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

### CHAPTER XXV.

#### PARENTAL CONDITIONS.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> practical part of this science is to
give us knowledge of our strong and weak points of character, so that we
may use our strong points in the sphere of their uses, and protect and
strengthen the weak ones, in our contact and combat with domestic,
social, and business life; to ward off disease; and also to know what
principles exist within ourselves, and others, that lead to antagonism:
for there are many persons who are conscious of unsatisfactory
conditions, but who know not where to place the trouble, and thus are
very prone to look for the cause in others, and not in themselves, and
even to blame others wrongfully. This system gives us to know what these
conditions are, and this knowledge always suggests to the intelligent
mind the methods of restraining and correcting them. It is therefore
necessary to give a few suggestions in that direction; for it would be
impossible, in a work like this, to give a complete review of the
multifarious conditions we find in human nature; for this system gives
us more than two hundred and thirty millions of distinct
characteristics, made up in the time of one cycle of the planet Uranus,
which is about eighty-four years, which when multiplied into the
different organic qualities and race conditions, gives us an almost
unlimited variety of human types.

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

The constant rapidity with which the thought formations are made by the
changing position of the sun, moon, and different planets, and
incarnated in human form, are beyond the possibility of ordinary
conception; yet the mechanism of this system is so simple that we can
read and know them, not only during the one cycle of Uranus, but during
all future cycles, within the space of 2152 years. The sun is a planet,
and our earth and all the other planets are satellites to it. The sun
has a zodiac, through which it travels about one degree every
seventy-one and two-thirds years. Therefore, every 2152 years it carries
the whole solar system into another sign, or astral atmosphere which
changes the character of all the solar signs every time the sun, with
its system, passes into a new sign. The sun is now two degrees in the
sign ♒ (Aquarius), or about 144 years in that sign; so that this system
will correctly read character for the space of 2008 years, after which
time it will have to be revised according to the sign Capricorn.

### CONFLICTING ATTRIBUTES OF CHARACTER.

To illustrate our views of parental conditions, take ♃ (Jupiter) in ♓
(Pisces): this gives great love of travel, and frequently a desire to do
business with the many, and indisposition to settle down to home life;
and at the same time we find that ♂ (Mars) is in ♋ (Cancer), which gives
the strongest possible love of home and family life. Now, if the person
was born in ♐ (Sagittarius), ♑ (Capricornus), or ♒ (Aquarius), or under
any executive conditions, these positions, and

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

their nature, would be antagonistic, one to the other. The strong point
in a business life would be in travelling; the strong opposition to that
would be in the great love for a home and family life. Now, a person
knowing that these two opposites exist in their nature, at once cast
around to see how the two can be best reconciled and made use of; and as
circumstances alter cases, then the circumstances surrounding the person
will control the methods of bringing this about. If the business. that
one has been educated to confines them to the farm, store, or office,
then that inclination to travel must be suppressed, so far as its
physical workings go, and must always be remembered as their weak point;
for such could be easily persuaded or induced to give up their business,
and travel. But this weak point could be utilized, should there be an
opening in a direction to transact business in various parts of the
world, through agencies, and they remain at home. In such a case the
business would be characterized by domestic uses. But polarization in ♐,
♑, or ♒ would generalize that business inclination, so as to create in
the person a mental condition that would express itself in the words,
"The world is my family." In this case the weak points of family life
would be strengthened, as they would unite their forces with the
principles of ♃ (Jupiter), and would give a familiar feeling with
strangers; thus the strong point would be strengthened by the weak one;
and the weak one would only be such when circumstances conspired to hold
such persons from their natural tendency to travel; and in such
cases—which would be more common to ladies than to gentlemen—it would be
apt to create in them a restless dissatisfaction

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

with everything around them, and a feeling that everybody and everything
was opposing them, thus nourishing antagonistic elements, and creating
melancholy; and this in many eases would be apt to produce diseases of a
varied character, and sometimes intemperance.

#### HOW TO CONTROL AND OVERCOME BAD HABITS.

We frequently meet with persons who have, and are conscious of having,
an inherited tendency to some vice, to some mental or moral deformity,
and also a desire to overcome such defect and rise into better, higher,
and more satisfactory conditions of life. Where there exists an
unhealthy bias in any direction, the remedy suggested would be to
cultivate the opposite, keeping that ever in mind, and ever thinking and
acting in the direction their intelligence teaches they should go. This
thought kept active while eating, and for one hour after, will have a
more potent effect on the system, mental and physical, than all the rest
of the time; therefore, if the vice pertains to self-indulgence, or
indulgence of the sensational nature, in whatever direction, the
discrimination as to what kinds and qualities of food they eat,
persistently rejecting all articles that are intended merely for the
gratification of the taste; or, in other words, by studying the laws of
dietetics and hygiene, and carrying out those laws most rigidly, will
lay a foundation so deep and broad, in the whole nature, that a habit
and structure of harmonious self-control will develop into a most
beautiful ultimate, almost without conscious volition on the part of the
person; or,

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

in other words, will develop a disposition, and even love, for the
restraint of all these proclivities.

At first thought, this may seem very easy of accomplishment; yet when we
sit down to table in company, many articles of food are placed before us
that are deleterious, but very tempting to the appetite: with that
temptation comes the solicitation of our friends to partake of this and
that: if we refuse, they may ridicule and call us "cranky." It always
requires determination to be able to say No! and rigidly carry out the
rules we have made,—a determination which must be adhered to without
deviation, in order to accomplish the desired result. We must remember
that the friends who would ridicule us for these moral and
self-improving habits would be the first to blame and ridicule us for
the vices we may be trying to conquer.

A course like the above is a most potent factor in making any and all
great attainments in life. And whoever practises it will soon find that
they have put the physical, mental, and moral nature under the control
of their will, or higher nature. This done, the battle is won. This
course would redeem the most dissipated drunkard. There are no prenatal
conditions of disease but play be conquered through the above, by the
practice of self-control, though it may sometimes be necessary to
enforce it in a more heroic manner, as follows:—

#### THE EFFICACY OF FASTING TO OVERCOME DISEASE.

First fast long enough to reduce the flesh to a very low point; then
feed up the body until the flesh is regained, or even a greater amount
than before; then, in

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

extreme cases, a repetition of the fast may be necessary. Thus we may
throw off the old body entirely, and create for ourselves a new one,
whose nature will be wholly that of the mental conditions that are
active during the process.

Now there is a method by which this course may be made easy. Having
gained control of one's self by the rigid dietetics above mentioned, it
would not be difficult for one to abstain from all food and drink,
except water, for forty-eight hours; after which time resume eating for
a week or ten days: then begin again, and fast for five days. On
breaking this latter fast, it would be well to begin eating with coarse
corn bread,—corn roasted until well carbonated: it could be ground fine
in an ordinary coffee-mill, and eaten with sugar. Any other granulated
grain food that is not susceptible of being reduced to paste by the
digestive process would answer the purpose. The object to be obtained is
this: the alimentary canal from the stomach down is filled with leaves,
like the leaves of a book, and by the constant use of glutinous food,
these leaves become pasted down and coated over with a thick slime, and
the lacteals, or absorbent glands, covered, so that the food taken does
not nourish the system. Frequently, in cases of weak digestion,
particles of the food remain under these leaves, and decay and ferment,
creating bad breath, etc. This is usually the condition of dyspeptics,
and this coarse granulated food serves to scrub off and carry away all
this coating, and will thoroughly cleanse the system.

It is well in connection with this granular food to use the juice of the
tomato, which is also a cleansing

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

article of food: fasting serves to strengthen the stomach rather than to
weaken it, and such a regime would cure very severe cases of dyspepsia.
If it should not at first make a cure, repeating the same formula after
the lapse of a month would complete the cure. This would be also
effectual in the case of scrofula or eczema; but in cases of a more
extreme character, after the person has gone through with the five days’
regime, they should wait one or two months, then fast about ten or
fourteen days; after which time the most stubborn diseases will be
entirely eradicated from the system.

The best time to begin a fast would be about the time of a person's
birthday; then during the fast the person should drink nothing but pure
cold water, and should put nothing into the mouth that would excite the
flow of gastric juice; for anything that would carry the gastric juice
to the stomach would create a gnawing sensation, and somewhat endanger
dissolving the particles of the stomach. If any person should transgress
this rule, or take into the stomach any fermented liquor, our advice
would be to immediately commence eating. Persons whose stomachs are not
very sensitive to the use of spices, peppers, etc. (the most sensitive
stomachs are those born in Virgo, or characterized by it), after fasting
five days, should take about a quarter of a tea spoonful of cayenne
pepper: it may be taken in a small quantity of milk, or mixed with a
small portion of flour and made into pills. Where the stomach is
sensitive, we will suggest the following: take a small pinch of
baking-soda dissolved in a tablespoonful of water, squeeze a lemon into
about three tablespoonfuls of water, then pour together, and drink while
effervescing.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This will soften
the remaining food in the alimentary canal, and work it off, obviating
all liability to hardening of the feces in the colon and difficulty of
passage.

Physicians should not give strong cathartics to persons born in the sign
♍ (Virgo). The author has known of persons born in this sign, having
good health otherwise, but suffering some slight derangement of the
stomach, having died from the effects of one dose of cathartic medicine.

Persons who are in a weak physical condition can restore the body to
health, strength, and vigor by this course of fasting, although great
care must be used under such circumstances.

It would hurt no person, unless *extremely* weak, to fast forty-eight
hours. This fast should be followed by the process above mentioned for
cleansing the stomach and alimentary canal; but if the stomach is so
weak that there is danger of the food fermenting, or if it should sour
during the process, the patient should eat a little salt fish—the richer
the fish the better. Fish will remove all the difficulty in that
direction, and nourish and strengthen the digestive organs; for it will
not, under any circumstances, ferment, and it will counteract
fermentation in the stomach at any time. Such persons should not resume
the fast for a longer period, until they have gained more vitality than
they had previous to the first fast, and all the organs appear to be in
good working order: then they can safely carry out the regime already
prescribed.

During the time of fasting, persons should banish all fear of injurious
results, keep mind and body active, avoiding excitement or great
exertion. It would be

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

well during that time to practise light gymnastics. The physical
movements belonging to the drill for voice culture as practised by the
Munroe School of Oratory is good exercise. The movements must be
practised in moderation, so as not to injure the body; and then they
will keep up a harmonious action all through the system, and avoid the
liability of any of the organs or muscles becoming inactive or flabby.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. Critical Periods in the Life of Woman](sb31.md)
