[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb30)  [Next](sb32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

### CHAPTER XXVI.

#### CRITICAL PERIODS IN THE LIFE OF WOMAN.

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> are two critical periods in the
life of woman one, at puberty; the other, at the menopause. On reaching
puberty there is a natural excitability of the sexual system, and unless
girls are properly instructed by their parents as to the care of
themselves, and the restraint of their impulses and passions, they are
led into. many dangers, and sometimes into self-abuse, thereby retarding
the true development of womanhood; for all. the life forces at that
period are needed for the development of their physical systems to fit
them for the performance of the maternal function; and if that
development is checked in consequence of abuse, then, as soon as they
are called upon to perform this most important function in woman's life,
they will suffer. from various weaknesses consequent upon this early
abuse, such as prolapsus, spinal weakness, nervous debility, etc., which
will render their whole life miserable, if not helpless, and perhaps
entail incalculable misery upon their offspring.

Another danger is, that the childish mind, on coming into this state of
excitability, has no idea of the evil of indulging that passion unless
instructed regarding the consequences. Their childish instincts cause
them to think this function is a natural one, and they often yield to
the solicitations of the opposite sex unless they have been properly
taught.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

At this period of life, and throughout childhood, abundance of out-door
exercise is especially necessary. Nature prompts all young creatures to
develop all the muscles of the body; therefore, they incline to run and
play, and be constantly active while awake. Parents too often take upon
themselves the task of overruling and suppressing this activity, thus
bringing men and women upon the stage of life less prepared for its uses
than the animal world is for theirs. Girls, especially, are restrained
in these natural muscular activities; and so, from lack of development,
the muscular supports of the womb and abdomen are lax and weak, and we
have in consequence a long list of uterine malpositions, lives. of
misery and nervous irritability, because of these suppressions of
nature's promptings to exercise. It becomes necessary, in giving a
correct measurement of physical and mental ability, to judge as to what
extent these suppressions have affected the system, and in what
directions.

#### THE SECOND PERIOD AND DANGER IN WOMAN'S LIFE.

At the menopause the ordinary periodical waste of the system ceases, the
forces are turned within, and the demand for food lessened; so, unless
the appetite is carefully restrained, there will be a clogging of the
system, or a surplus of vitality which may result in gout, heart
disease, paralysis, trembling palsy, and many other diseases or
derangements, according to the function or sign in which they were born.
In reality, they have simply completed the first or natural cycle of the
generative forces which has relation to the procreation

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

of other beings; and if they have lived harmonious lives, they will
still possess a life force that will enable them to live longer than
they have already lived; and that, in health and vivacity, if they but
regulate their diet and control their appetite,—for their system is
coming under new conditions,—it is resting from its natural generative
uses, and entering upon a stage of higher spiritual being, in which
their life forces are building up their interior spiritual and soul
nature,—which work may go on even to the renewal of their physical
bodies and the restoration of natural potency upon a higher plane; and
instances are on record of the renewal of sight, hearing, and youth to
all the senses, a return of the natural color to the hair, new teeth,
etc. Catharine, Countess of Desmond, in Ireland, lived to the age of one
hundred and forty years, and three times renewed her teeth; and many
cases might be cited of vigor and renewal of powers at an advanced age.

It must, however, be borne in mind that at this period the life forces
are seeking a new equilibrium, and the habits and appetites must be
adjusted to this new condition of the system. Many times ladies will
say, "I don't eat anything, yet am getting fat, and don't know what to
do: ’tisn't eating that makes me fat," etc. But it is a fixed law in
nature, too well-known to be disputed, that unless there is a food
supply, flesh will decrease; but in point of fact, these persons have
come into a condition where the waste is shut off, and they consequently
require less food, and must regulate their appetites accordingly if they
would enjoy their due measure of health and strength. Frequently where

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

ladies are in the kitchen much, they get almost nourishment enough from
the aroma of the food, to supply nearly all the demands of the body. In
such cases, it is only necessary . to give the stomach something to work
on; therefore, a little rice, or graham mush, or fruit once a day will
be sufficient.

#### CAUSES OF INHARMONY IN MARRIED LIFE.

First, misunderstandings; second, incompatibility of chemical and
magnetic interchanges; third, excess in sexual indulgence.
Misunderstandings arise from difference in thoughts, sensations, and
emotions. Being born in different zodiacal or solar signs, they sensate
from different parts of the body corresponding to their signs; so that
what gives pleasure to one, may give pain to the other, even though the
best possible motives prompted the effort. Again, two opposites are
usually attracted together by the law of generation.

One acting entirely from the intuitive nature is incapable of giving a
reason for any course of action. Such persons cannot make themselves
pliable to the wishes of others; for intuition is master, and not
servant. Another is governed by reason, which is the law nature; and
when those of the latter class attempt to dominate, they are apt to
demand of the former class reasons for their course of action; and those
who are guided by intuition—though they know they are right—are not
often ready with a reason. This is apt to arouse combativeness and
produce inharmony.

Second, incompatibility of chemical and magnetic elements. Where the
husband and wife are too much

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

alike in the chemical and magnetic combinations of their physical
bodies, both being positive, or both negative, there is no renewal of
life in their systems from mutual association.

There are two laws in nature: one of growth or nourishment, where like
attracts like; as in the vegetable kingdom, and in food supplies for the
body. The other is the law of creation, which is generation, where
opposites are attracted which chemically combine to form a new organism.

Vital chemistry, though in advance of inorganic chemistry, is governed
by the same general law. The nourishment taken into the body to supply
the life principle used in mental and physical action does not
immediately become life, but only a force like that of the body,
positive or negative.

The positive or centrifugal force, which is electric, corresponds to the
male; and when in excess, in very positive persons, it causes a
restless, irritable, strained, and combative state, and is apt to
over-strain and weaken that part of the body corresponding to the sign
in which they were born, thus inducing disease. A positive man takes
food into the body, and attracts that which is like himself,—which is
electric and centrifugal,—and may be compared to the elements of
tempests and cyclones in nature.

The negative or centripetal force, which is magnetic and concentrative,
corresponds to the female; and when in excess, concentrates in the body
as a suffocating fulness. Ladies will often fall insensible from its
effects; the food ceases to digest properly, causing loss of appetite,
morbid imagination, dissatisfaction, and often

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

general debility. But when these two opposite forces come together,
where there is a proper magnetic and electric interchange between the
male and female, a new life essence or element is born within their
systems.

There are two methods of generation. In the generation of children, the
seed is not the life, but the life is *in* the seed. It is that subtile
principle which animates the seed germ, and when the positive and
negative forces unite under proper conditions, a child is the result. If
there be a suitable blending of opposites, the offspring will be
healthy; but if the parents are too similar in their natures, the child
will be imperfect and unhealthy. We call the life force magnetism, and
in the interchange between man and woman new life is born in the body
when the seed is not wasted. In procreation the seed is not all thrown
off, and the portion retained in the body is transmuted, and becomes a
new life element in proportion to the amount retained.

There is an interchange of fine magnetic and electric elements between
the male and the female, sometimes sufficient to gratify all sexual
desires simply by sleeping in the same bed, without further contact, and
often by mere association.

Persons differ greatly from each other in their elemental combinations,
and association between the sexes produces varied sensations and mental
conditions, according to the result of the chemical combination of the
two qualities. If there is perfect physical and mental adaptation, the
result will be strengthening to the body and illuminating to the mind in
its normal functions; but if the combination is not adapted, the

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

magnetic life generated will be inharmonious, and produce abnormal
thoughts and actions, such as melancholy, hatred, intensified passions,
worriment, irritability, and an innumerable catalogue of unpleasant
conditions that are the cause of very much domestic inharmony; each
blaming the other for having changed in feelings and disposition since
marriage, when really all the difficulty may have arisen from chemical
changes in the system. Sometimes the new magnetism thus generated
poisons the life forces so that sickness and death may result from it.
When the magnetisms are too nearly alike, instead of generating life in
the body, it creates a morbid craving for sexual relations where it is
fancied the required magnetism can be obtained; and frequently men and
women, under the starved conditions of the generative system, seek
satisfaction in illegal directions, and when they do, the varied
chemical conditions with which they are brought in contact invariably
create great confusion in themselves, which may lead them to monstrous
extremes in every conceivable direction.

The multifarious chemical combinations produced by continued promiscuity
is the cause of the various forms of venereal disease.

#### SEXUAL EXCESSES.

In young ladies who are taught by their parents to restrain all sexual
passion, and live a chaste life till marriage, these special life forces
are depolarized and turned towards the brain, so that they cease to have
any desires in the other direction, though they may have great sexual
power. Young men are not often

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

thus instructed, and their sexual passions being unrestrained, are
constantly active; thus, after marriage, the husband being injudicious,
and not understanding the condition of the wife in regard to her latent
or inactive sexual nature, forces his own abnormally excited sex
activities upon her finer sensibilities, until a surfeit and revulsion
occurs before her magnetic forces have time to be turned in that
direction; and this revulsion may be so strong that her forces may never
be thus turned, and a repulsion to all the approaches of the husband is
the result.

The pure-minded woman wants love,—not passion,—and in many cases only
love will succeed in turning the forces so as to create any demand in
that direction. In some cases, where man's powers in this direction are
much stronger than woman's, the same result occurs. Also where the woman
is weakened by child-bearing or sickness, this surfeit may occur, so
that she will cease to have any desires in this department of her being.

It sometimes happens that woman is the strongest or most active
sexually, and this may produce greater harmony, unless the woman is very
gross; for woman would be considered a monster should she seek to compel
man to respond to this desire in herself, and man is no less a monster
when he seeks to compel woman to gratify these desires on his part.

We have heard good women say that the sound of their husband's feet
corning towards the door filled them with horror, and their hearts would
sink within them from sadness; all caused by the injudicious conduct of
the husband, though kind-hearted and having good intentions. No pen can
portray the miseries at

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

present existing in the world from this cause, which might be prevented
by a little consideration and knowledge of the laws of life.

Love is life in motion, and the sex desires are like the demands for
food; and when the want is supplied, the appetite ceases. And to force a
person to eat, after this, would be torture, and tenfold greater torture
is produced by forced sex relations. Nor does the evil stop here; for
the mental conditions of parents at conception enter into the nature of
the child, who becomes an embodiment of the parents’ thought at and just
previous to conception.

In regard to the magnetic life which is generated in the systems of the
parents, we may say, that if there is antagonism existing between them
when they come together in these relations, antagonistic thought will be
generated in their systems, producing many forms of disease; and as the
life force thus generated in the system controls the work of rebuilding
the body, abnormal formations frequently result from these conflicting
conditions of the life forces. Where there is anger or hatred existing
at the time of such contact, demoniacal conditions are generated, often
resulting in insanity in its various forms, or spirits of demons are
born into the organism by this means, so that, in the words of Jesus,
they are "possessed of devils."

At other times tumors, cancers, and cancerous conditions are produced.
These malformations which are generated in the system are not always
from physical sex contact. The sex nature has little discriminative
power in regard to the attraction of opposite magnetism, and if the
demands of this nature are not met and

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

satisfied, they will draw the opposite magnetism or electricity from
persons living in the same house, though they are repulsive and even
hateful to them, and it will produce the same results in the line of
malformations, only in less degree.

Those who live a perfectly chaste life may, through sympathy, draw
sufficient life from persons, or even from higher mental and spiritual
surroundings, to largely supply the demands of the regenerative
processes in their own life; for the course of life is a constant
exhaust and regeneration.

The very atmosphere in which we live is filled with positive and
negative emanations from man and from all animate and inanimate nature;
and the solar fluid, that belongs to the immediate cause realm of this
world, is positive and negative in its essence. It alone is pure and
free from all vicious sensuality, being an emanation from the Infinite
Spirit of the universe; and persons may, by the law of sympathy directed
by the will, draw from this higher fountain of life, and thus be united
to the eternal source of *all* things,—the divine Father or Mother.

This idea will be further elaborated in a forthcoming work on Theosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. Direction for Reading Character by the System of
Solar Biology](sb32.md)
