[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](awa08)  [Next](awa10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Women

Regarding Native marriage, I should mention that a female child is
betrothed, in her infancy, to some native of another family, necessarily
very many years older than herself. He watches over her jealously, and
she goes to live with him as soon as she feels inclined. If she
possesses personal charms she has anything but a happy young womanhood,
for even if she gives no sort of encouragement whatever to her admirers,
attempts are pretty nearly sure to be made to carry her off. Encounters
resulting, she is in considerable peril, for each

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

combatant orders her to follow him and throws a spear at her if she
refuses. The youth of a woman of any pretensions to good looks is thus
often full of wanderings and captures and wounds, not the least of which
latter are dealt her by the jealous wives of her abductors, who possibly
find little difficulty in persuading themselves that she must have given
their lords some encouragement. Lovely woman is given to this sort of
thing, both in the hovels of the poor and the palaces of kings.

To use the words of the author quoted above--"Rarely do you see a form
of unusual grace and elegance but it is marked and scarred by the
furrows of old wounds, and many a female wanders several hundred miles
from the home of her infancy."

From the nature of its food a black child needs very strong teeth; hence
the mother suckles them for two or even three years, and families seldom
exceed four or five in number.

Polygamy is general, and women are so highly valued to be very
frequently stolen. This is, however, chiefly because they perform all
the laborious work, and collect a great portion of the food.

Alas! woman's rights are shamefully neglected, and no one takes her part
whether innocent or guilty--the general principle being, "If I beat your
mother, then you beat mine; if I beat your wife, then you beat mine,"
and, so forth. Yet these poor wild creatures are not devoid of modesty.
Their rules as to seclusion correspond remarkably with the law of Moses,
as written in

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Leviticus (Chapters XII. and XV.), while another Mosaic law--that of
circumcision--is observed by the men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hunting and Gathering](awa10)
