[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou03)  [Next](hou05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# HISTORY OF UTAH.

### CHAPTER I. DISCOVERIES OF THE SPANIARDS. 1540-1777.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Francisco Vazquez De
Coronado at Cíbola—Expedition of Pedro De Tobar and Father Juan De
Padilla—They Hear of a Large River—García Lopez De Cárdenas Sent in
Search of It—The First Europeans to Approach Utah—Route of
Cárdenas—Mythical Maps—Part of the Northern Mystery—Journey of Dominguez
and Escalante—the Course They Followed—The Rivers They Crossed—the
Comanches—Region of the Great Lakes—Rivers Timpanogos, San Buenaventura,
and Others—the Country of the Yutas—Route From Santa Fé to Monterey—the
Friars Talk of the Lake Country—Return of the Spaniards to Zuñi and
March to Santa Fé.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">As</span> Francisco Vazquez de Coronado was
journeying from Culiacan to the north and east in 1540, he rested at
Cíbola, that is to say Zuñi, and while waiting for the main army to come
forward, expeditions were sent out in various directions. One of these,
consisting of twenty men under Pedro de Tobar, and attended by Father
Juan de Padilla, proceeded north-westward, and after five days reached
Tusayan, or the Moqui villages, which were quickly captured. Among other
matters of interest, information was here given of a large river yet
farther north, the people who lived upon its banks being likewise very
large.

    Returning to Cíbola, Tobar reported what had been said concerning
this river; whereupon Captain García Lopez de Cárdenas was sent with
twelve men to explore it, Pedro de Sotomayor accompanying to

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

chronicle the expedition. Obtaining at Tusayan, where he was well
received, guides and carriers, with an ample supply of provisions,
Cárdenas marched for twenty days, probably in a north-westerly
direction, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

through a desert country until he discovered the river, but from such
high banks that he could not reach it. It was the river called the
Tizon, and it flowed from the north-east toward the south-west. It
seemed to the Spaniards when they first descried it that they were on
mountains through which the river had cut

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

a chasm only a few feet wide, but which if they might believe the
natives was half a league across. In vain for several days, with their
faces toward the south and west, they sought to escape from the
mountains that environed them, and descend to the river, for they were
suffering from thirst. At length

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

one morning three of the lightest and most active of the party crept
over the brink and descended until they were out of sight. They did not
return till toward evening, when they reported their failure to reach
the bottom, saying that the river, and distances and objects, were all
much larger than they seemed to the beholder above, rocks apparently no
higher than a man being in fact larger than the cathedral at

<span id="img_00500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PROBABLE ROUTE OF
CÁRDENAS.](tn/00500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00500.jpg.md)  
PROBABLE ROUTE OF CÁRDENAS.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Seville. Compelled
by thirst they retired from the inhospitable stream, and finally
returned to Tusayan and Cíbola.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

It was not necessary in those days that a country should be discovered
in order to be mapped; even now we dogmatize most about what we know
least. It is a lonely sea indeed that cannot sport mermaids and
monsters; it were a pity to have so broad an extent of land without a
good wide sheet of water in it; so the *Conibas Regio cum Vicinis
Gentibvs* shows a large lake, called Conibas, connecting by a very wide

<span id="img_00600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP FROM MAGIN,
1611.](tn/00600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00600.jpg.md)  
MAP FROM MAGIN, 1611.  
</span>

river apparently with a northern sea. I give herewith another map
showing a lake large enough to swallow

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Utah and Idaho
combined, and discharging its waters by two great rivers into the
Pacific. This species of geography was doubtless entirely satisfactory
to the wise men of this world until they came to know better about it.
If the reader will look over the chapters on the Northern Mystery in my
*History of the* 

<span id="img_00700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP BY JOHN
HARRIS, 1705.](tn/00700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00700.jpg.md)  
MAP BY JOHN HARRIS, 1705.  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Northwest Coast*
he may learn further of absurdities in map-making.

 

    A more extended and pronounced exploration was that of two
Franciscan friars, one the *visitador comisario*

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of New Mexico, Francisco Atanasio Dominguez, and the other *ministro
doctrinero* of Zuñi, Silvestre Velez de Escalante, who set out from
Santa Fé July 29, 1776, for the purpose of discovering a direct route to
Monterey, on the seaboard of Alta California. New Mexico had now been
known nearly two and a half centuries; the city of Santa Fé had been
founded over a century and a half, Monterey had been occupied since
1770, and yet there had been opened no direct route westward with the
sea, communication between Mexico and Santa Fé being by land, the road
following the Rio Grande. In his memorial of March 1773, while in
Mexico, Father Junípero Serra had urged that two expeditions be made,
one from Sonora to California, which was carried out the following year
by Captain Anza, and one froth New Mexico to the sea, which Dominguez
and Escalante now proposed to undertake. Again in 1775 Anza made a
similar journey, this time leaving at the junction of the Colorado and
Gila Father Garcés who ascended the former stream to the Mojave country,
whence crossing to Mission San Gabriel he proceeded to the Tulare
Valley. There he heard from the natives of a great river coming in from
the east or northeast. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) Indeed it was
long the prevailing opinion that there existed such a stream in that
vicinity. From the Tulare country Garcés returned to San Gabriel and
Mojave, and thence proceeded to the villages of the Moquis. From this
place he probably wrote to Santa Fé concerning the rumor of this river;
for all through the journey of Dominguez and Escalante they were in
search of it. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

The party consisted in all of nine persons. Besides the two priests
there were Juan Pedro Cisneros, *alcalde mayor* of Zuñi, Bernardo Miera
y Pacheco, *capitan miliciano* of Santa Fé, and five soldiers. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) Having implored divine protection, on the
day before named they took the road to Abiquiú, passed on to the Rio
Chama, and on the 5th of August reached a point called Nieves, on the
San Juan River, three leagues below the junction of the Navajo. Thence
they passed down the north bank of the San Juan, crossing the several
branches, until on the 10th they found themselves on a branch of the
Mancos, some distance from the San Juan, and beyond the line of the
present state of Colorado. <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) The 12th
they camped on the north bank of the Rio Dolores, in latitude 38°
13´, <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) and were there joined by two
natives from Abiquiú, who had deserted their homes to follow the
expedition. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

    They now followed the general course of the Dolores <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) until the 23d, when they left the San Pedro,
which flows into the Dolores near La Sal, and crossed

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

over north-east to Rio San Francisco, <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md)
and again to the Rio San Javier <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) on
the 28th, their course being for some distance east of north.

Not far from their path was a ranchería of Yutas, which the Spaniards
visited, endeavoring to obtain guides to the land of the Timpanogos,
Timpangotzis, or Lagunas, where they had been told to look for

<span id="img_01000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ESCALANTE'S ROUTE
FROM SANTA FÉ TO UTAH LAKE](tn/01000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01000.jpg.md)  
ESCALANTE'S ROUTE FROM SANTA FÉ TO UTAH LAKE  
</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pueblo towns. A
Laguna guide was there, but the Yutas did all in their power to dissuade
the explorers

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

from proceeding, pretending ignorance of the country and danger from the
Comanches. But the 3d of September saw them again on their way. Pursuing
a north-west course, the second day they crossed and camped on the north
bank of the Rio San Rafael, or Colorado, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) in latitude 41° 4´. Their course thence
was north-westerly, and on the 9th they crossed a river called San
Clemente, <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) flowing west. Signs of
buffaloes were abundant, and on the 11th they killed one. Two days
afterward they crossed the Rio de San Buenaventura, <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) the boundary between the Yutas and the
Comanches, in latitude 41° 19´, at a place which the priests call Santa
Cruz. Here were six large black poplars, on one of which they left an
inscription. After resting two days they took the course of the San
Buenaventura south-west ten leagues, and from a hill saw the junction of
the San Clemente. Descending a little farther they found a river flowing
in from the west, following which they reached a branch the 17th, naming
it the San Cosme. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)

    From this point they proceeded westward, following up the Uintah,
across the Duchesne, and over the mountains, with no small difficulty,
to a river which they called Purísima, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) and which they followed till on the 23d
they came in sight of the lake which the natives called Timpanogos, but
which is known now as Utah Lake.

 

    Several reasons combined to bring the Spaniards so far to the north
of what would be a direct road

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

from Santa Fé to Monterey. First, Escalante entertained a theory that a
better route to the Pacific could be found northward than toward the
south. Then there was always a fascination attending this region, with
its great and perpetual Northern Mystery; perhaps the Arctic Ocean came
down hereabout, or at least an arm of the Anian Strait might be found;
nor were forgotten the rivers spoken of by different persons on
different occasions as flowing hence into the Pacific. And last of all
it may be that the rumor of Pueblo villages in this quarter carried the
explorers further north than otherwise they would have gone.

    However this may have been, they were now of opinion that they had
penetrated far enough in a northerly direction, and from this point must
take a southerly course. There were here no town builders like the
Moquis and Zuñis, as the priests had been led to suppose, but there were
wild Indians, and the first they had seen in this vicinity. At first
these savages manifested fear, but when assured that the strangers had
not come to harm them, and were in no way leagued with the dreaded
Comanches, they welcomed them kindly and gave them food. They were
simple-minded and inoffensive, these native Yutas, very ready to guide
the travellers whithersoever they would go; but they begged them to
return and establish a mission in their midst; in token of which, and of
their desire to adopt the Christian faith, they gave the priests a kind
of hieroglyphic painting on deerskin. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md)

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

    Then the Spaniards talk of the country, and of the people about
them. They are in the valley and by the lake of Nuestra Señora de la
Merced de los

<span id="img_01300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TIMPANOGOS
VALLEY.](tn/01300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01300.jpg.md)  
TIMPANOGOS VALLEY.  
</span>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Timpanogos, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) and north of the river San Buenaventura
are the mountains which they have just crossed, extending north-east and
south-west some seventy leagues, and having a width of forty leagues.
From the surrounding heights flow four rivers of medium size,
discharging their waters into the lake, where thrive fish and wild fowl.
The valley which surrounds this lake extends from south-east to
north-west sixteen Spanish leagues; it is quite level, and has a width
of ten or twelve leagues. Except the marshes on the lake borders the
land is good for agriculture. Of the four rivers which water the valley
the southernmost, which they call Aguas Calientes, passes through rich
meadows capable of supporting two large towns. The second, three leagues
from the first, flowing northerly, and which they call the San Nicolás,
fertilizes enough good land to support one large town or two smaller
ones. Before reaching the lake it divides into two branches, on the
banks of which grow tall poplars and alders. The third river, which is
three and a half leagues to the north-east, and which they call the San
Antonio de Padua, carries more water than the others, and from its rich
banks, which would easily support three large towns, spring groves of
larger trees. Santa Ana, they call the fourth river, which is north-west
of the San Antonio, and not inferior to the others <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)—so they are told, for they do not visit
it. Besides these rivers, there are good springs of water both on plain
and mountain-side; pasture lands are abundant, and in parts the fertile
soil yields such quantities of flax and hemp that it seems they must
have been planted there by man. On the San Buenaventura the Spaniards
had been

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

troubled by the cold; but here the climate is so delightful, the air so
balmy, that it is a pleasure to breathe it, by day and by night. In the
vicinity are other valleys equally delightful. Besides the products of
the lake the Yutas hunt hares, and gather seeds from which they make
*atole*. They might capture some buffaloes in the north-north-west but
for the troublesome Comanches. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) They
dwell in huts of osier, of which, likewise, many of their utensils are
made; some of them wear clothes, the best of which are of the skins of
rabbits and antelopes. There are in this region many people, of whom he
who would know more may consult the *Native Races.*

    The Spaniards are further told by the Yutas of a large and wonderful
body of water toward the northwest, and this is what Father Escalante
reports of it. "The other lake, with which this communicates," he says,
"occupies, as they told us, many leagues, and its waters are injurious
and extremely salt; because the Timpanois <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) assure us that he who wets any part of
his body with this water, immediately feels an itching in the wet part.
We were told that in the circuit of this lake there live a numerous and
quiet nation, called Puaguampe, which means in our language Sorcerers;
they speak the Comanche language, feed on herbs, and drink from various
fountains or springs of good water which are about the lake; and they
have their little houses of grass and earth, which latter forms the
roof. They are not, so they intimated, enemies of those living on this
lake, but since a certain time when the people there approached and
killed a man, they do not consider them as neutral as before.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On this occasion
they entered by the last pass of the Sierra Blanca de los Timpanogos,
which is the same in which they are, by a route north one fourth
north-west, and by that same way they say the Comanches make their
raids, which do not seem to be very frequent." <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)

    Continuing their journey the 26th of September with two guides, the
Spaniards bend their course south-westwardly in the direction of
Monterey, through the Sevier lake and river region, which stream they
call Santa Isabel. The 8th of October they are in latitude 38° 3´ with
Beaver River behind them. Passing on into what is now Escalante Valley
they question the natives regarding a route to the sea, and as to their
knowledge of Spaniards in that direction. The savages know nothing of
either. Meanwhile winter is approaching, provisions are becoming low,
the way to the sea must be long and difficult; therefore the friars
resolve to abandon the attempt; they will continue south, turning
perhaps to the east until they come to the Colorado, when they will
return to Santa Fé by way of the Moqui and Zuñi villages.

    Some of the party object to this abandonment of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

purpose. They have come far; they can surely find a way: why turn back?
To determine the matter prayers are made and lots cast, the decision
being against Monterey. As they turn eastward, the 11th, in latitude 36°
52´, they are obliged to make bread of seeds purchased from the natives,
for their supplies are wholly exhausted. Reaching the Colorado the 26th,
twelve days are passed in searching for a ford, which they find at last
in latitude 37°, the line dividing Utah from Arizona. Their course is
now south-east, and the 16th of November they reach Oraybi, as they call
the residence of the Moquis. There they are kindly received; but when
for food and shelter they offer presents and religious instruction the
natives refuse. Next day the Spaniards visit Xongopabi, and the day
after Gualpi, at which latter place they call a meeting and propose to
the natives temporal and spiritual submission. The Moquis will be
friendly they say, but the further proposals they promptly decline.
Thereupon the friars continue their way, reaching Zuñi November 24th and
Santa Fé the 2d of January 1777. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](hou04.htm#fr_0.md) I say probably, though in
my own mind there is little doubt. The Spaniards were exploring
northward. They had lately traversed the region to their south-west, and
instead of wishing to retrace their steps they would be likely to keep
up well away from their former track. It is true that one narrative
gives the direction as west; but then the same writer places Tusan, or
Tusayan, west of Cíbola, which if the latter be Zuñi, and the former
Moqui, is incorrect. Then, if their direction from the Moqui towns was
the same as this writer declares it to have been in travelling to that
place, the Spaniards at this time certainly struck the Colorado within
the limits of the present Utah. Escalante, *Carta de 28 Oct. 1775*, MS.,
placed Moqui west of Zuñi, but a little north of west, with the Yutas
their neighbor on the north. It is sufficiently plain that Cíbola was
Zuñi, and Tusayan Moqui, and as a matter of fact the latter is in a
north-westerly direction from the former. That they went due west and
crossed the Little Colorado without any mention of that stream is not
likely; because, first, it is not twenty days distant from the Moquis,
and the stream when reached does not answer to their description. It was
the great river they wished to find, and a northwest course would be the
most direct. Further than this, it is stated plainly that the point at
which they discovered the river was much nearer its source than where
the Spaniards had previously seen it. Upon the direction then taken
hangs the question as to the first Europeans to enter Utah. I deem the
matter of sufficient importance to give both the originals and the
translations of two of the most complete and reliable narratives of the
expedition. The first and fullest we find in the *Relation de Castañeda*
of Coronado's expedition, *Ternaux-Compans*, série i. tom. ix. 61-5,
which reads as follows:

    'Comme don Pédro de Tobar avait rempli sa mission, il revint sur ses
pas et rendit compte au général de ce qu’il avait vu. Celui-ci fit
partir sur-le-champ don Garci-Lopez de Cardenas et douze autres
personnes pour aller visiter cette rivière; cet officier fur très-bien
reçu et parfaitement traité par les indiens de Tusayan, qui lui
donnèrent des guides pour continuer sa route. Nos soldats partirent
chargés de vivres, les indiens les ayant avertis qu’il fallait traverser
un désert de vingt journées de long avant d’entrer dans un pays habité.
Après ces vingt journées de marche ils arrivérent en effet á cette
rivière, dent les bords sont tellement élevés qu’ils croyaient être á
trois ou quatre lieues en l’air. Le pays est couvert de pins bas et
rabougris; il est exposé au nord, et le froid y est si violent, que,
quoique l’on fût en été, ou pouvait á peine le supporter. Les Espagnols
marchèrent pendant trois jours le long de ces montagnes, espérant
toujours trouver une descente pour arriver ne paraissait pas avoir plus
d’une brasse de large, la rivière qui, d’en haut, et qui, selon les
Indiens, avait plus d’une demi-lieue; mais il fut impossible de s’y
rendre. étant parvenus deux ou trois jours après dans un endroit où la
descente leur parut plus facile, le capitaine Melgosa, Juan Galeras et
un soldat qui étaient les plus légers de la bande, résolurent de faire
une tentative. Ils descendirent jusqu’á ce que ceux qui étaient restés
en haut les eussent perdus de ven. Ils revinrent vers les quatre heures
du soir, disant qu’ils avaient trouvé tant des difficultés, qu’ils
n’avaient pu arriver jusqu’en bas; car ce qui d’en haut semblait facile,
ne l’était pas du tout quand en approchait. Ils ajoutèrent qu’ils
étaient parvenus á environ un tiers de la descente, et que de là, la
rivière paraissait déjà très grande, ce qui confirmait ce que les
indiens avaient dit. Ils assurèrent que quelques rochers que l’on voyait
d’en haut, et qui paraissait à peine de la hauteur d’un homme étaient
plus hauts que la tour de la cathédrale de Séville. Les Espagnols
cessèrent <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> de suivre les rochers qui
bordent la rivière, parce qu’on y manquait d’eau. Jusque-là ils avaient
été obligés chaque soir de s’avancer une lieue ou deux dans l’intérieur
pour en trouver. Quand ils eurent marché pendant trois ou passaient
cette route, ils emmenaient avec eux des femmes chargées de calebasses
remplies d’eau, et qu’ils en enterraient une partie pour les retrouver
au retour; que d’ailleurs ils parcouraient en un jour autant de chemin
que les Espagnols en deux. Cette rivière était celle del Tizon. On
arriva beaucoup plus près de sa source que de l’endroit oú Melchior Diaz
et ses gens l’avaient traversée, et l’on sut plus tard que les Indiens
dont on avant parlé taitent de la même nation que ceux que Diaz avait
vus. Les Espagnols revinrent donc sur leurs pas, et cette expédition
n’eut pas d’autre résultat. Pendant la marche, ils arrivèrent à une
cascade qui tombait d’un rocher. Los guides dirent que les cristaux
blancs qui pendaient à l’entour étaient du sel. On en recueillit une
quantité que l’on emports, et qu’on distribua à Cíbola, où l’on rendit
compte par crit au général de tout ce que l’on avait vu. Garci-Lopez
avait emmené avec lui un certain Pédro de Sotomayor, qui était
chroniqueur de l’expédition. Tous les villages de cette province sont
restés nos alliés, mais on ne les a pas visités depuis, et l’on n’a
tenté aucune découverte de ce côté.'

    As soon as Don Pédro de Tobar had fulfilled his mission, he returned
and gave the general an account of what he had seen. The latter
immediately ordered Don Garci-Lopez de Cárdenas, and 12 other persons,
to go and visit that river; this officer was well received and politely
treated by the Indians of Tusayan, who furnished him with guides to
continue his journey. Our soldiers departed loaded with provisions, the
Indians having notified them that it was necessary to travel 20 days
through a desert before entering any inhabited country. After this 20
days march, they arrived at that river whose banks are of such a height
that it seemed to them that they were three or four leagues up in the
air. The country is covered with low and stunted pines, exposed to the
north, and the cold is so violent that, although it was summer, one
could hardly endure it. The Spaniards during three days skirted those
mountains, always in the hope of finding a descent to reach the river,
which from above appeared to be no more than a fathom in width, and
which, according to the Indians, was more than half a league wide; but
all their efforts were vain. Two or three days later, they arrived at a
place where the descent seemed easier; Captain Melgosa Juan Galeras and
a soldier who were the lightest men of the band, resolved to make an
attmept. They descended until those who had remained on the top had lost
sight of them. They returned at about four o'clock in the afternoon,
saying they had found so many difficulties that they could not reach the
bottom; for, what seemed easy from above was not at all so when
approaching the water. They added that they came down about one third of
the descent, and that even from there the river seemed very large. This
statement confirmed what the Indians had said. The three men affirmed
that some rocks seen from above and which appeared to he of the height
of a man, were higher than the tower of the cathedral of Seville. The
Spaniards stopped following the rocks that bordered the river on account
of the lack of water. Until then, they had been obliged to advance one
or two leagues in the interior to find <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>
some. When they had marched during three or four days, the guides
declared to them that it was impossible to go further, that water would
not be found before four days; that when the Indians travelled on this
road, they took with them women who carried calabashes filled with
water, and they buried a certain part, so that they might find it when
returning; and besides they made in one day as many miles as the
Spaniards would in two. This was the river del Tizon. They arrived much
nearer to its source than the place Where Melchor Diaz anti his people
had crossed, and it was known later that the Indians spoken of belonged
to the same nation as those seen by Diaz. The Spaniards therefore came
back, and the expedition had no other result. While marching, they
arrived at a cascade falling from a rock. The guides affirmed that the
white crystals hanging around were salt. A quantity of it was gathered,
carried away, and distributed at Cíbola, where a written account of all
that had been seen was sent to the general. Garci-Lopez had taken with
him a certain Pedro de Sotomayor, who was the chronicler of the
expedition. All the villages of this province have remained our allies,
but they have not been visited since, and no attempt at discovery has
been made in that direction.

    The other is from a relation by an unknown author, found in the
archives of the Indies, and printed in *Pacheco* and *Cárdenas, Col.
Doc*., xiv. 321-3, under title of *Relacion del suceso de la Jornada que
Francisco Vazquez hizo en el descubrimiento de Cíbola*, and from which I
give the extract covering the same incident:

    'Vuelto D. Pedro de Tobar, é dada relacion de aqueños pueblos, luego
despachó á D. García Lopez de Cárdenas, maestre de campo, por el mesmo
camino que habia venido D. Pedro, é que pasase de aquella provincia de
Tuzan, al Poniente, é para ida é vuelta de la jornada é descobrimiento,
le señalo ochenta dias de término de ida é vuelta, el qual fué echado
adelante de Tuzan con guias de los naturales que decian que habia
adelante, poblado, aunque lejos, andadas cincuenta leguas de Tuzan al
Poniente, é ochenta de Cíbola, halló una barranca de un rio que fué
imposible por una parte ni otra hallarle baxada para caballo, ni aun
para pié, sino por una parte muy traba-xosa, por donde tenia casi dos
leguas de baxada. Estaba la barranca tan scantillada de peñas, que
apenas podian ver el rio, el cual, aunque es segun dicen, tanto ó mucho
mayor que el de Sevilla, de arriba aparescia un arroyo; pot manera que
aunque con harta diligencia se buscó pasada, é por muchas partes no se
halla, en la cual estuvieron artos dias con mucha necesidad de agua, que
no la hallaban, é la del rio no se podian aprovechar della aunque la
vian; é á esta causa le fué forzado á don Garcia Lopez volverse á donde
hallaron; este rio venia del Nordeste é volvia al Sur Sudueste, por
manera que sin falta ninguna es aquel donde Ilegó Melchor Diaz.'

    Don Pedro de Tobar having returned, and having made a report
concerning those towns, D. García Lopez de Cárdenas, maestre de campo,
was ordered to take the same route by which Don Pedro had come, and to
go on from the province of Tuzan to the westward. He was given 80 days
in which to make the journey, from his departure until his return. He
went on beyond Tuzan, accompanied by Indian guides, who told him that
farther on there was a settlement. Having gone 50 leagues to the
westward of Tuzan, and 80 from Cíbola, he came to the cañon of a river
adown the side of which there was no descent practicable for home, nor
even for those on foot, except <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> by a way
full of difficulties, and nearly two leagues in length. The side of the
cañon was of rock so steep that the river was barely discernible,
although, according to report, it is as great as the river of Seville,
or greater; and from above appeared a brook. During many days, and in
many places, a way by which to pass the river was sought in vain. During
this time there was much suffering from a lack of water, for although
that of the river was in view, it was unattainable. For this reason Don
García Lopez was forced to return. This river comes from the north-east,
and makes a bend to the south-south-eastward; hence, beyond a doubt, it
must be that reached by Melchor Diaz.

    Thus the reader will be able to determine the matter for himself as
clearly as may be. For details on Coronado's expedition see the
following authorities, <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> though
comparatively few of them make mention of the adventures of Captain
Cárdenas on the Colorado: *Ramusio, Viaggi,* iii. 359-63; *Hakluyt's
Voy*., iii. 373-9; *Mota-Padilla, Conq. N. Gal*., iii. 14, 158-69;
*Torquemada*, i. 609-10; *Herrera*, dec. vi. lib. ix. cap. xi.-xii.;
*Beaumont, Hist. Mich*., MS., 407-22, 482-546, 624-5; *Oviedo*, iv. 19;
*Villagrd, Hist. N. Mex*., 19 et seq.; *Gomara, Hist. Ind*., 272-4;
*Bernal Diaz, Hist. Verdad*., 235; *Benzoni, Hist. Mundo Nuovo*, 107;
*Ribas, Hist. Triumphos*, 26-7; *Venegas, Not. Cal*., i. 167-9;
*Clavigero, Storia Cal.*, 153; *Alegre, Hist. Comp. Jesus*, i. 233-8;
Salmeron, in *Doc. Hist. Mex*., 3d ser. pt. iv. 7-9; *Noticias*, in
*Id*., 671-2; *Cavo, Tres Siglos*, i. 127-9; Lorenzana, in *Cortés,
Hist. Mex*., 325. These might be followed by a long list of modem
writers, for which I will refer the reader to *Hist. North Mexican
States*, this series.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[8:2](hou04.htm#fr_1.md) On Father Font's map, 1777,
are laid down two rivers entering the region of the Tulare lakes from
the north-east, one the *Rio de San Phelipe*, and the other called the
*Rio de que se Viene Noticia por el P. Garces*. See *Font's Journal*,
MS.; *Serra, Memorial*, March 1773, MS.; *Garcés, Diario*, 246-348;
*Forbes' Hist. Cal*., 157-62; *Arch. Cal., Prov. Rec*., MS., i. 47-8,
vi. 59; *Palou, Not*., ii. 281-2; *Hist. Cal.; Hist..New Mew.; Hist.
North Mex. States*, this series.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[8:3](hou04.htm#fr_2.md) Probably it was the San
Joaquin, or the Sacramento, of which they heard. Concerning a route from
New Mexico to California Humboldt says: 'En considerant les voyages
hardis des premiers conquerans espagnols au <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> Mexique, an Pérou, et sur la rivière des Amazones, on est
étonné de voir que depuis deux sièclcs cette même nation n’a pas su
trouver un chemin de terre dans la Nouvelle-Espagne, depuis Taos au port
de Monterey.' Essai Pol., i. 317.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[9:4](hou04.htm#fr_3.md) Don Joaquin Lain, vecino de
la misma villa, Lorenzo Olivares de la villa del Paso, Lucrecio Muñiz,
Andrés Muñiz, Juan de Aguilar y Simon Lucero.' *Diario*, in *Doc. Hist.
Mex.*, ser. ii. tom. i. 378.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[9:5](hou04.htm#fr_4.md) At the beginning of the
journey their route was identical with what was later known as the old
Spanish trail from Santa Fé to Los Angeles. Their course was at first
north-west, but shortly after passing Abiquiú it pointed due north into
Colorado, then west, and again north-west into Utah, being about the
same as was later called the old Spanish trail from Santa Fé to Great
Salt Lake. Captain J. N. Macomb of the topographical engineers has
surveyed and mapped essentially the same trail.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[9:6](hou04.htm#fr_5.md) Probably not so far north
by some 40´.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:7](hou04.htm#fr_6.md) Esta tarde nos alcanzaron
un coyote y un genízaro de Abiquiú, nombrados el primero Felipe y el
segundo Juan Domingo; por vagar entre los gentiles, se huyeron sin
permiso de sus superiores del dicho pueblo, pretestando querer
acompañarnos. No necesitábamos de ellos; mas por evitar las culpas, que
ó por su ignorancia ó por su malicia podian cometer andando mas tiempo
solos entre los yutas, si intentabamos que regresasen, los admitimos por
compañeros.' *Disrio, Doc. Hist. Mex*., ser. ii. tom. i. 392.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[9:8](hou04.htm#fr_7.md) These streams are doubtless
those emptying into the Colorado not far from its junction with the
Bunkara: Latitude 39° 13´ is here given, but that must be too high.
Philip Harry, in *Simpson's Explor*., 490, says that up to the point
first touched on the Dolores the priests' path and Macomb's survey are
identical, but that they here diverge.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[10:9](hou04.htm#fr_8.md) An affluent of the San
Javier, or Grand River.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10:10](hou04.htm#fr_9.md) Called by the Yutas
*Tomiche*; to-day Grand River. It may here be observed that the route
toward this region had been visited by Spaniards before, notably by Juan
María de Ribera in 1761, and Spanish names had been given to places,
though the present Utah was probably not entered by him. Escalante
states that the San Javier is formed by four small streams coming in
above the point at which he crossed, and these, says Harry, *Simpson's
Explor*., 490, correspond 'remarkably with the Uncompagre River, Grand
River, Smith's Fork, and another large fork…It seems evident that after
crossing the San Xavier he follows up stream a different fork from what
we call Grand River, but which fork he calls the main river, or San
Xavier.' Gunnison maps his explorations, showing the mouth of this last
named stream. In *Simpson's Explor*., 489, is given a map of the present
expedition, but it does not conform in every particular to Escalante's
text.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11:11](hou04.htm#fr_10.md) Grand River; but the
latitude given was about 1° 30´ too high.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11:12](hou04.htm#fr_11.md) White River, the point
of crossing being near the Utah line.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[11:13](hou04.htm#fr_12.md) Green River. The
latitude given is at least 50´ too high. The crossing was above the
junctions of White River and the Uintah with Green River. See Rep. Fr.
Alonso de Posada, custodio de N. Mex., in *Doc. Hist. Mex.*, i. 439.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[11:14](hou04.htm#fr_13.md) This is the north
branch of the Uintah. Indeed the narrative of the explorers makes their
route in this vicinity unmistakable.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[11:15](hou04.htm#fr_14.md) Now the Timpanogos.
'Proseguimos al noroeste media legua, pasamos á la otra bands del rio,
subimos una corta cuesta y divisamos la laguna y dila-tado valle de
Nuestra Señora de la Merced de los Timpanogotzis—así lo nom-bramos desde
aquí.' Diario, *Doc. Hist. Mex.*, série ii. tom. i. 454.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[12:16](hou04.htm#fr_15.md) The Spaniards asked
from them some token to show that they wished them to return, and the
day after they brought them one; 'pero al traer la seña vió un
compañero, que no sabia el órden dado, á las figuras de ella, y
rnostrándole la cruz del rosario, les dió á entender, que la pintasen
sobre una de las figuras, y entonces la volvieron á llevar, y sobre cada
una pintaron una cruz pequeña; lo demas quedó como antes y nos la dieron
diciendo que la figura que per uno y otro lade tenia mas almagre, ó como
ellos decian, sangre, representaba al capitan mayor, porque en las
batalias con los cumanches habia recibido mas heridas: las otras dos que
no estaban tan ensangren-tadas, a los otros dos capitanes inferiores al
primero, y la que no tenia sangre ninguna, á uno que no era capitan de
guerra, pero era, do autoridad entre <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
ellos. Estas cuatro figuras de hombres estaban rudamente pintadas con
tierra y almagre en un corto pedazo de gamuza.' *Diario, Doc. Hist.
Mex*.. série ii. tom. i. 462-3.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[14:17](hou04.htm#fr_16.md) Or, as it was also
called, Timpagtzis, Timpanoautzis, ó Come Pescado. *Doc. Hist. Mex*.,
série ii. tom. i. 464.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[14:18](hou04.htm#fr_17.md) There is no difficulty
in recognizing these land-marks, the Uintah Mountains, the San
Buenaventura, or Green River; and in the four streams of the valley,
their Aguas Calientes is Currant Creek; the second, their San Nicolás,
though more than three leagues from the first, and not corresponding in
every other particular, is the Spanish River; the San Antonio is the
Provo; and the Santa Aria, the River Jordan.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[15:19](hou04.htm#fr_18.md) This is directly
opposite the direction in which we would expect to find the Comanches of
to-day; but the Utes applied the term *comanche* to all hostile Indians.
Buffaloes were common in aboriginal times in Cache and Powder River
valleys as well as in eastern Oregon and Boisé valley.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[15:20](hou04.htm#fr_19.md) Yet another form for
the name *Timpanogos*, as indeed before the end of the following page we
have '*Timpanosis*,' 'Timpanogotzis,' and 'Timpanogo.' See note 17 this
chapter. On Froisett's map, published at Salt Lake City in 1875, is the
'Provo, or Timponayas' river.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[16:21](hou04.htm#fr_20.md) As this is the first
account we have of the Great Salt Lake and its people I will give the
original entire: 'La otra laguna con quien esta se cominica, ocupa,
segun nos informaron, muchas leguas y sus aguas son nocivas ó
estre-madamente saladas; porque nos aseguran los timpanois que el que se
mojaba alguna parle del cuerpo con ellas, al punto sentia mucha comenzon
en la parte mojada. En su circuito nos dijeron habita una nacion
numerosa y quieta, que se nombra Puaguampe, que en nuestro vulgar dice
hechiceros; la cual usa el idioma cumanche; se alimenta de las yervas,
bebe de varias fuentes ú ojos de buena agua, qne están en el circuito de
la laguna, y tienen sus casitas de zacate y tierra, que era et techo de
ellas. No son enemigos de los lagunas, segun insinuaron, pero desde
cierta ocasion que se acercaron y les mataron un hombre, no los tienen
por tan neutrales como antes. En esta ocasion entraron por la puerta
final de la Sierra Blanca de los Timpanosis, que es la misma en que
están, por el norte cuarta al noroeste, y por aquí mismo dicen hacer sus
entradas los cumanches, las que no parecieron ser muy frecuentes.'
*Diario, Doc. Hist. Mex.*, série ii. tom. i. 468.

    Mr Harry is evidently not very thoroughly versed in the Spanish
language, or his manuscript copy of Escalante's journey is defective.
For example he translates *echizeros*—which being old Spanish he could
not find in his modern dictionary—'throwers or slingers' when the word
"witches,' or rather 'sorcerers' is clearly implied. Again he queries
*sacate*, not knowing its meaning—a common enough Mexican word, formerly
written *zacate*, and signifying hay or grass. For further inaccuracies
see his summary in *Simpson's Explor*., 494. Warren, *Pacific Railroad
Report*, xi. 35, examined the same copy of Escalante's narrative, then
in the Peter Force library, which was used by Harry.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[17:22](hou04.htm#fr_21.md) The journey into Utah
of Dominguez and Escalante, as given in *Doc. Hist. Mex*., série ii.
tom. i. 375-558, under title of *Diario y derrotero de los R. R. PP. Fr.
Francisco Atanasio Dominguez y Fr. Silvestre Velez de Escalante, para
descubrir el camino desde el Presidio de Santa Fé del Nuevo Mexico, al
de Monterey, en la California Septentrional*, is full and clear as to
route and information regarding the country and its inhabitants. As must
be expected in all such narratives it is tull of trivial detail which is
tiresome, but which we can readily excuse for the worth of the
remainder. The priests were close and intelligent observers, and have
much to say regarding configuration, soil, climate, plants, minerals,
animals, and people. A summary is given in *Simpson's Explor*., app. R
by Philip Harry, from a manuscript copy of the original in the archives
in the city of Mexico which answers the purpose therein required, but is
not sufficiently reliable or exact for historical purposes. The map
accompanying the summary is better, being for the most part correct. Of
the two padres and what riley saw Humboldt says, *Essai Pol*.: 'Ce
terrain est la continuation de la Cordillère des Gruës, qui se prolonge
vers la Sierra Verde et vers le lac de Timpanogos, célèbre dans
l'histoire mexicaine. Le Rio S. Rafaël et le Rio S. Xavier sont les
sources principales du fleuve Zaguananas, qui, avec le Rio de Nabajoa,
forme le Rio Colorado: ce dernir a son embouchure dans le golfe de
Californie. Ces régions abondantes en sel gemme out été examinees, en
1777, par deux voyageurs remplis de zéle et d'intrépidité, moines de
l'order de S. Francois, le père Escalante et le pere Antonio Velez.'
From the last clause it is clear that Humboldt was confused as to names,
Velez and Escalante belonging to the same person. Simpson, *Explor*.,
13, enters upon a long dissertation over a simple and very transparent
mistake. See also *Hist. North Mex. States; Hist. New Mex.*; and *Hist.
Cal*., this series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Advent of Trappers and Travellers. 1778-1846.](hou05.md)
