[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou04)  [Next](hou06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### CHAPTER II. ADVENT OF TRAPPERS AND TRAVELLERS. 1778-1846.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Invasion By Fur
Hunters—Baron La Hontan and His Fables—the Popular Geographic
Idea—Discovery of the Great Salt Lake—James Bridger Deciding a Bet—He
Determines the Course of Bear River and Comes Upon the Great Lake—Henry,
Ashley, Green, and Beckwourth on the Ground—Fort Built at Utah
Lake—Peter Skeen Ogden—Journey of Jedediah S. Smith—a Strange
Country—Pegleg Smith—Wolfskill, Yount, and Burton Traverse the
Country—Walker's Visit to California—Some Old Maps—the Bartleson
Company—Statements of Bidwell and Belden Compared—Whitman and
Lovejoy—Frémont—Pacific Coast Immigrations of 1845 and 1846—Origin of
the Name Utah.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">Half</span> a century passes, and we find
United States fur hunters standing on the border of the Great Salt Lake,
tasting its brackish waters, and wondering if it is an arm of the
sea. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

    First among these, confining ourselves to authentic records, was
James Bridger, to whom belongs the honor of discovery. It happened in
this wise. During the winter of 1824-5 a party of trappers, who had
ascended the Missouri with Henry and Ashley, found

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

themselves on Bear River, in Cache, or Willow Valley. A discussion arose
as to the probable course of Bear River, which flowed on both sides of
them. A wager was made, and Bridger sent to ascertain the truth.
Following the river through the mountains the first view of the great
lake fell upon him, and when he went to the margin and tasted the water
he found that it was salt. Then he returned and reported to his
companions. All were interested to know if there emptied into this sheet
other streams on which they might find beavers, and if there was an
outlet; hence in the spring of 1826 four men explored the lake in skin
boats. <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23.md)

    During this memorable year of 1825, when Peter

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Skeen Ogden with
his party of Hudson's Bay Company trappers was on Humboldt River, and
James P. Beckwourth was pursuing his daring adventures, and the region
round the great lakes of Utah first became familiar to American
trappers, William H. Ashley, of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, at the
head of one hundred and twenty men and a train of well packed horses,
came out from St Louis, through the South Pass and down by Great Salt
Lake to Lake Utah. There he built a fort, and two years later brought
from St Louis a six-pounder which thereafter graced its court. Ashley
was a brave man, shrewd and honest; he was prosperous and commanded the
respect of his men. Nor may we impute to him lack of intelligence, or of
common geographical knowledge, when we find him seriously considering
the project of descending the Colorado in boats, by means of which he
would eventually reach St Louis, Mr Green, who gave his name to Green
River, had been with Ashley the previous year; and now for three years
after the establishing of Fort Ashley at Utah Lake, Green with his
trappers occupied the country to the west and north. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24.md)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

    From Great Salt Lake in August, 1826, Jedediah S. Smith sets out on
a trapping and exploring tour with fifteen men. Proceeding southward he
traverses Utah Lake, called for a time Ashley Lake, <span
id="fr_25"></span>[4](#fn_25.md) and after ascending Ashley River, which,
as he remarks, flows into the lake through the country of the
Sam-patches, he bends his course to the west of south, passes over some
mountains running south-east and northwest, and crosses a river which he
calls Adams, <span id="fr_26"></span>[5](#fn_26.md) in

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

honor of the president. After ten days' march, still in a south-westerly
direction, through the country of the Pah Utes, he recrosses the same
stream, and after two days comes to the junction of the Adams with what
he calls the Seedskeeder, or Siskadee, river, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[6](#fn_27.md) a stream full of shallows and rapids and
flowing through a sterile country. Then he reaches a fertile wooded
valley which belongs to the Amajabes, or Mojaves, where the party rests
fifteen days, meeting with the kindest treatment from the natives, who
provide food and horses. Thence they are guided by two neophytes
westward through a desert country, and reach the mission of San Gabriel
in December, their appearance causing no small commotion in California.
After many strange adventures, fully narrated in my *History of
California*, Smith works his way northward up the San Joaquin Valley,
and in May 1827 crosses the Sierra Nevada and returns eastward to Great
Salt Lake. With Jedediah Smith, during some part of his stay in Utah,
was Thomas L. Smith, whom we must immortalize in history as Pegleg
Smith. He did not possess a very estimable character, as, I am sorry to
say, few of his class did in those days. The leaders of American fur
companies, however, were exceptions, and in points of intelligence,
integrity, and daring were in no wise behind their British
brethren. <span id="fr_28"></span>[7](#fn_28.md)

 

    From south-east to north-west a portion of Utah was traversed in the
autumn of 1830 by a trapping party under William Wolfskill. The company
was fitted out in New Mexico, and the great valley of California was
their objective point. Wolfskill had been a partner of Ewing Young, who
was then in California. Leaving Taos in September they struck

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

north-westerly, crossing the Colorado, Grande, Green, and Sevier rivers,
and then turned south to the Rio Virgen, all the time trapping on the
way. Then passing down by the Mojaves they reached Los Angeles in
February 1831. George C. Yount and Louis Burton were of the party. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[8](#fn_29.md)

<span id="img_02400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![GREEN RIVER
COUNTRY.](tn/02400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02400.jpg.md)  
GREEN RIVER COUNTRY.  
</span>

    During the winter of 1832-3 B. L. E Bonneville made his camp on
Salmon River, and in July following was at the Green River
rendezvous. <span id="fr_30"></span>[9](#fn_30.md) Among the several
trapping parties sent by him in various directions

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

was one under Joseph Walker, who with some thirty-six men, among them
Joe Meek, went to trap on the streams falling into the Great Salt Lake.

    Bonneville affirms that Walker's intention was to pass round the
Great Salt Lake and explore its borders; but George Nidever who was of
Walker's company, and at the rendezvous while preparations were made,
says nothing of such purpose, and it was probably not thought of by
Bonneville until afterward. Nidover had suffered severely from the cold
during the previous winter, and had come to the Green River rendezvous
that season for the express purpose of joining some party for California
or of forming such a party himself, having been informed that the
climate there was milder than in the mountains where he had been. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[10](#fn_31.md)

    If the intention was, as Bonneville asserts, that this party should
pass round the great lake, in their endeavor they presently found
themselves in the midst of desolation, between wide sandy wastes and
broad brackish waters; and to quench their thirst; they hastened
westward where bright snowy mountains promised cooling streams. The
Ogden River <span id="fr_32"></span>[11](#fn_32.md) region being to them so
new, and the thought of California so fascinating, they permitted
themselves to stray from original intentions, and cross the Sierra
Nevada to Monterey. All that is known of their doings before reaching
the Snowy Range is given in my *History of Nevada*, and their exploits
after reaching California are fully narrated in that part of this series
devoted to the history of the latter country. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[12](#fn_33.md)

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

    In Winterbotham's history published in New York in 1795 is given a
map of North America showing an enormous nameless inland sea above
latitude 42° with small streams running into it, and south of said
parallel and east of the meridian of the inland sea is a smaller body of
water with quite a large stream flowing in from the west, besides three
smaller ones from the south and north. As both of these bodies of

<span id="img_02600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BONNEVILLE'S MAP,
1837.](tn/02600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02600.jpg.md)  
BONNEVILLE'S MAP, 1837.  
</span>

water were laid down from the imaginations of white men, or from vague
and traditionary reports of the natives, it may be that only the one
Great Salt Lake was originally referred to, or it may be that the
original description was applied to two lakes or inland seas. The native
village on one of the southern tributaries, Taguayo, refers to the
habitations of the Timpanogos, and may have been derived from the
Spaniards; but more probably the information was obtained through

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

natives who themselves had received it from other natives.

<span id="img_02700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/02700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02700.jpg.md)</span>

    In the map of William Rector, a surveyor in the service of the
general government, Utah has open and easy communication with the sea by
way of the

<span id="img_02701"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![RECTOR'S MAP,
1818.](tn/02701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02701.jpg.md)  
RECTOR'S MAP, 1818.  
</span>

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

valley of the Willamette River, whose tributaries drain the whole of
Nevada and Utah.

    Mr Finley in his map of North America claimed to have included all
the late geographical discoveries, which claim we may readily allow, and
also accredit him with much not yet and never to be discovered. The
mountains are artistically placed, the streams made to run with
remarkable regularity and directness, and they are placed in positions
affording the best

<span id="img_02800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FINLEY'S MAP,
1826.](tn/02800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02800.jpg.md)  
FINLEY'S MAP, 1826.  
</span>

facilities for commerce. The lakes and rivers Timpanogos, Salado, and
Buenaventura, by their position, not to say existence, show the hopeless
confusion of the author's mind.

    A brief glance at the later visits of white men to Utah is all that
is necessary in this place. The early emigrants to Oregon did not touch
this territory, and those to California *via* Fort Bridger for the most
part merely passed through leaving no mark. the emigrants to Oregon and
California in 1841 came together by the usual route up the Platte, along
the Sweet-water, and through the South Pass to Bear River Valley. When
near Soda Springs those for Oregon

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

went north to Fort Hall, while those for California followed Bear River
southward until within ten miles of Great Salt Lake, when they turned
westward to find Ogden River. Of the latter party were J. Bartleson, C.
M. Weber, Talbot H. Green, John Bidwell, Josiah Belden, and twenty-seven
others. Their adventures while in Utah were not startling. Little was
known of the Salt Lake region, <span id="fr_34"></span>[13](#fn_34.md)
particularly of the country to the west of it.

    Mr Belden in his *Historical Statement*, which I number among my
most valuable manuscripts, says: "We struck Bear River some distance
below where the town of Evanston now is, where the coal mines are, and
the railroad passes, and followed the river down. It maked a long bend
to the north there, and comes down to Salt Lake. We arrived at Soda
Springs, on Bear River, and there we separated from the company of
missionaries, who were going off towards Snake River or Columbia. There
we lost the services of the guide Fitzpatrick. Several of our party who
had started to go with us to California also left us there, having
decided to go with the missionaries. Fitzpatrick advised us to give up
our expedition and go with them to Fort Hall, one of the Hudson's Bay
stations, as there was no road for us to follow, nothing was known of
the country, and we had nothing to guide us, and so he advised us to
give up the California project. He thought it was doubtful if we ever
got there, we might get caught in the snow of the mountains and perish
there, and he considered it very hazardous to attempt it. Some four or
five of our party withdrew and went with the missionaries.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

    About thirty-one of us adhered to our original intention and
declined to give up our expedition."

    While the party were slowly descending Bear River four of them rode
over to Fort Hall to obtain if possible a "pilot to conduct us to the
gap in the California Mountains, or at least to the head of Mary's
River," and to make inquiries of Mr Grant, then in charge. No guide
could be found, and Grant was not able greatly to enlighten them. The
fur-trader could have told them much concerning the route to Oregon, but
this way to California as an emigrant road had hardly yet been thought
of.

    "As we approached Salt Lake," writes Bidwell, <span
id="fr_35"></span>[14](#fn_35.md) "we were misled quite often by the
mirage. The country too was obscured by smoke. The water in Bear River
became too salt for use. The sage brush on the small hillocks of the
almost level plain became so magnified as to look like trees. Hoping to
find water, and supposing these imaginary trees to be growing on some
stream, and knowing nothing about the distance to Salt Lake, we kept
pushing ahead mile after mile. Our animals almost perished for want of
water while we were travelling over this salt plain, which grew softer
and softer till our wagons cut into the ground five or six inches, and
it became impossible to haul them. We still thought we saw timber but a
short distance ahead, when the fact; really was there was no timber, and
we were driving straight for the Great Salt Lake."

    The truth is they had wandered from their course; they had passed
Cache Valley where they intended to rest and hunt; they were frequently
obliged to leave

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the river, turned aside by the hills. It was past mid-summer, and the
sun's rays beat heavily on the white salted plain. The signal fires of
the Shoshones illuminated the hills at night. "In our desperation we
turned north of east a little and struck Bear River again a few miles
from its mouth. the water here was too salt to quench thirst; our
animals would scarcely taste it, yet we had no other." The green
fresh-looking grass was stiffened with salt. Mr Belden says: "After
separating from the missionaries we followed Bear River down nearly to
where it enters Salt Lake, about where Corinne is now. We had some
knowledge of the lake from some of the trappers who had been there. We
turned off more to the west and went round the northerly end of Salt
Lake. There we found a great difficulty in getting water for several
days, all the water near the lake being very brackish. We had to make it
into strong coffee to drink it."

    On the 20th of August the company rested while two of their number
went out to explore. They found themselves encamped ten miles from the
mouth of the river. Thence next day, Sunday, they took a north-west
course, crossing their track of the Thursday previous; on the 23d they
were in full view of Salt Lake. Men and animals were almost dying of
thirst, and "in our trouble," says Bidwell, "we turned directly north
toward some high mountains, and in the afternoon of the next day found
springs of good water and plenty of grass." This was the 27th, and here
the company remained while two of their number again advanced and
discovered a route to Ogden River. What befell them further on their way
across to the mountains the reader will find in my *History of
Nevada*. <span id="fr_36"></span>[15](#fn_36.md)

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

    In 1842 Marcus Whitman and A. L. Lovejoy, on their way from Oregon
to the United States, passed through Utah from Fort Hall, by way of
Uintah, Taos, and Santa Fé. For further information concerning them, and
the object of their journey, I would refer the reader to my *History of
Oregon*.

    In 1843 John C. Frémont followed the emigrant trail through the
south pass, and on the 6th of September stood upon an elevated peninsula
on the east side of Great Salt Lake, a little north of Weber River,
beside which stream his party had encamped the previous night. Frémont
likens himself to Balboa discovering the Pacific; but no one else would
think of doing so. He was in no sense a discoverer; and though he says
he was the first to embark on that inland sea, he is again in error,
trappers in skin boats having performed that feat while the pathfinder
was still studying his arithmetic, as I have before mentioned. It is
certainly a pleasing sight to any one, coming upon it from either side,
from the cover of rolling mountains or the sands of desert plains, and
under almost any circumstance the heart of the beholder is stirred
within him. A number of large islands raised their rocky front out of
dense sullen waters whose limit the eye could not reach, while myriads
of wild fowl boat the air, making a noise "like distant thunder."

    Black clouds gathered in the west, and soon were pouring their
floods upon the explorers. Camping sonic distance above the mouth on
Weber River, they made a corral for the animals, and threw up a small
fort for their own protection. Provisions being scarce, seven of the
party under Francois Lajeunesse were sent to Fort Hall, which place they
reached with

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

difficulty, after separation from each other and several days'
wanderings.

    Leaving three men in camp, with four others, including Kit Carson
who was present, Frémont on the 8th embarked in a rubber boat and
dropped down to the mouth of the stream, which the party found shallow
and unnavigable. Next morning they were out on the lake, fearful every
moment lest their air-blown boat should collapse and let them into the
saline but beautiful transparent liquid. At noon they reached one of the
low near islands and landed. They found there, washed up by the waves, a
dark brown bank, ten or twenty feet in breadth, composed of the skins of
worms, about the size of oats, while the rocky cliffs were whitened by
incrustations of salt. Ascending to the highest point attainable they
took a surrounding view, and called the place Disappointment
Island, <span id="fr_37"></span>[16](#fn_37.md) because they had failed to
find the fertile lands and game hoped for. Then they descended to the
edge of the water, constructed lodges of drift-wood, built fires, and
spent the night there, returning next day in a rough sea to their
mainland camp. Thence they proceeded north to Bear River, and Fort Hall,
and on to Oregon. <span id="fr_38"></span>[17](#fn_38.md) On his return by
way of Klamath and Pyramid lakes, Frémont crossed the Sierra to Sutter
Fort, proceeded up the San Joaquin into Southern California, and taking
the old Spanish trail to the Rio Vírgen followed the Wahsatch Mountains
to Utah Lake.

    There was a party under Frémont in Utah also in 1845. Leaving Bent
Fort in August they ascended the Arkansas, passed on to Green River,
followed its left bank to the Duchesne branch, and thence crossed to the
head-waters of the Timpanogos, down which stream they went to Utah Lake.
Thence

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

they passed on to Great Salt Lake, made camp near where Great Salt Lake
City is situated, crossed to Antelope Island, and examined the southern
portion of the lake. After this they passed by way of Pilot Peak into
Nevada. <span id="fr_39"></span>[18](#fn_39.md)

    Of the six companies comprising the California immigration of 1845,
numbering in all about one hundred and fifty, five touched either Utah
or Nevada, the other being from Oregon. But even these it is not
necessary to follow in this connection, Utah along the emigrant road
being by this time well known to travellers and others. With some it was
a question while on the way whether they should go to Oregon or
California. Tustin, who came from Illinois in 1845, with his wife and
child and an ox team, says in his manuscript Recollections: "My
intention all the way across the plains was to go on to Oregon; but when
I reached the summit of the Rocky Mountains where the trail divides, I
threw my lash across the near ox and struck off on the road to
California."

    For the Oregon and California emigrations of 1846, except when they
exercised some influence on Utah, or Utah affairs, I would refer the
reader to the volumes of this series treating on those states. An
account of the exploration for a route from southern Oregon, over the
Cascade Mountains, and by way of Klamath and Goose lakes to the Humboldt
River, and thence on to the region of the Great Salt Lake by Scott and
the Applegates in 1846, is given in both the History of Oregon, and the
History of Nevada, to which volumes of this series the reader is
referred. <span id="fr_40"></span>[19](#fn_40.md)

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[18:1](hou05.htm#fr_22.md) There are those who
soberly refer to the Baron la Hontan and his prodigious falsehoods of
1689 for the first information of Great Salt Lake. Because among the
many fabulous wonders reported he somewhere on the western side of the
continent placed a body of bad-tasting water, Stansbury, *Exped*., 151,
does not hesitate to affirm 'that the existence of a large lake of salt
water somewhere amid the wilds west of the Rocky Mountains seems to have
been known vaguely as long as 150 years since.' Perhaps it was salt, and
not silver that the Winnebagoes reported to Carver, *Travels*, 33-6, as
coming down in caravans from the mountains lying near the heads of the
Colorado River.' Warren, in *Pacific Railroad Report*, xi. 34, repeats
and refutes the La Hontan myth. He says, 'the story of La Hontan excited
much speculation, and received various additions in his day; and the
lake finally became represented on the published English maps'. Long
before this date, however, reliable information had been received by the
Spaniards, and the same may have come to English trappers; so that by
1826 reports of the existence of such a sheet may have reached
civilization. It is needless to say that neither La Hontan nor Carver
ever received information from the natives, or elsewhere, sufficient to
justify map-makers in placing a large lake in that vicinity. In Gordon's
*Historical and Geographical Memoir of the North American Continent*,
published in Dublin in 1820, it is written: 'Concerning the lakes and
rivers of this as yet imperfectly explored region we have little to say.
Of the former <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> we have no certain
account. Two have been noticed in the western parts, a salt lake about
the thirty-ninth degree of latitude, the western limits of which are
unknown, and the lake of Timpanogos, about the forty-first degree, of
great but unascertained extent.'

<span id="img_01900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP OF UTAH,
1826.](tn/01900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01900.jpg.md)  
MAP OF UTAH, 1826.  
</span>

    In a report submitted to congress May 15, 1826, by Mr Baylies it is
stated that 'many geographies have placed the Lake Timpanogos in
latitude 40, but they have obviously confounded it with the Lake
Theguayo, which extends from 39° 40´ to 41°, and from which it appears
separated by a neck or peninsula; the two lakes approaching in one
direction as near as 20 miles.' *19th Cong., 1st Sess., House Rept. No.
213*. Such statements as this amount to nothing—the honorable gentleman,
with all due respect, not knowing what he was writing about—except as
going to show the vague and imperfect impression of the popular mind
concerning this region at that time.

    I will give for what it is worth a claim, set up in this same
congressional <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> report, by one Samuel
Adams Ruddock, that in the year 1821 he journeyed from Council Bluff to
Santa Fé, and thence with a trading party proceeded by way of Great Salt
Lake to Oregon. The report says: 'On the 9th of June this party crossed
the Rio del Norte, and pursuing a north-west direction on the north bank
of the river Chamas, and over the mountains, reached Lake Trinidad; and
then pursuing the same direction across the upper branches of the Rio
Colorado of California, reached Lake Timpanagos, which is intersected by
the 42d parallel of latitude, the boundary between the United States of
America anti the United States of Mexico. This take is the principal
source of the river Timpanagos, and the Multnomah of Lewis and Clarke.
They then followed the course of this river to its junction with the
Columbia, and reached the mouth of the Columbia on the first day of
August, completing the journey from the Council Bluffs in seventy-nine
days.'

<span id="fn_23"></span>[20:2](hou05.htm#fr_23.md) This, upon the testimony
of Robert Campbell, *Pac. R. Rept*., xi. 35, who was there at the time
'and found the party just returned from the exploration of the lake, and
recollect their report that it was without any outlet.' Bridger's story
of his discovery was corroborated by Samuel Tullock in Campbell's
counting-room in St Louis at a later date. Campbell pronounces them both
'men of the strictest integrity and truthfulness.' Likewise Ogden's
trappers met Bridger's party in the summer of 1825 and were told of the
discovery. See *Hist. Nevada*, this series. Irving, *Bonneville's Adv*.,
186, says it was probably Sublette who sent out the four men in the skin
canoe in 1826. Bonneville professes to doubt this exploration because
the men reported that they suffered severely from thirst, when in fact
several fine streams flow into the lake; but Bonneville desired to
attach to his name the honor of an early survey, and detract from those
entitled to it. the trappers in their canoes did not pretend to make a
thorough survey, and as for scarcity of fresh water in places Stansbury
says, *Exped*., 103, that during his explorations he frequently was
obliged to send fifty miles for water. Other claimants appear prior to
Bridger's discovery. W. M. Anderson writing to the *National
Intelligencer* under date of Feb. 26, 1860, says that Provost trapped in
this vicinity in 1820, and that Ashley was there before Bridger. Then it
was said by Seth Grant that his partner, Vazquez, discovered the great
inland sea, calling it an arm of the ocean because the water was salt.
That no white man ever saw the Great Salt Lake before Bridger cannot be
proven; but his being the only well authenticated account, history must
rest there until it finds a better one.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[21:3](hou05.htm#fr_24.md) See *Hist. Northwest
Coast*, ii. 447-8, this series. T. D. Bonner in his *Life and Adventures
of James P. Beckwourth*, 71-3, gives what purports to be an account of
Ashley's descent of Green River to Great Salt Lake on a certain occasion
in Ashley's own language. There may be some truth in it all, though
Beckwourth is far astray in his dates, as he places the occurrence in
1822. Beckwourth goes on to say that one day in June a beautiful Indian
girl offered him a pair of moccasins if he would shoot for her an
antelope and bring her the brains, that with them she might dress a
deer-skin. Beckwourth started out, but failing to secure an antelope,
and seeing as he supposed an Indian coming, he thought he would shoot
the Indian and take his brains to the girl, who would not know the
difference. Just as he was about to fire he discovered the supposed
Indian to be Ashley, who thereupon told him of his adventures down Green
River and through the carton to Great Salt Lake. I have no doubt it is
three fourths fiction, and what there is of fact must be placed forward
four years. 'We had a very dangerous passage down the river,' said
Ashley to Beckwourth, 'and suffered more than I ever wish to see men
suffer again. You are aware that we took but little provision with us,
not expecting that the cation extended so far. In passing over the
rapids, where we lost two boats and three guns, we made use of ropes in
letting down our boats over the most dangerous places. Our provisions
soon gave out. We found plenty of beaver in the cation for some miles,
and, expecting to find them in as great plenty all the way, we saved
none of their carcasses, which constituted our food. As we proceeded,
however, they became more and more scarce, until there were none to be
seen, and we were entirely out of provisions. To trace the river was
impossible, and to ascend the perpendicular <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> cliffs, which hemmed us in on either side, was equally
impossible. Our only alternative was to go ahead. After passing six days
without food, the only men were weak and dishearted. I listened to all
their murmurings and heart-rending complaints. They often spoke of home
and friends, declaring they would never see them more. Some spoke of
wives and children whom they dearly loved, and who must shortly become
widows and orphans. They had toiled, they said, through every
difficulty; had risked their lives among wild beasts and hostile Indians
in the wilderness, all of which they were willing to undergo; but who
could bear up against actual starvation? I encouraged them all in my
power, telling them that I bore an equal part in their sufferings; that
I too was toiling for those I loved, and whom I yet hoped to see again;
that we should all endeavor to keep up our courage, and not add to our
misfortunes by giving way to despondency. Another night was passed amid
the barren rocks. The next morning the fearful proposition was made by
some of the party for the company to cast lots, to see which should be
sacrificed to afford food for the others, without which they must
inevitably perish. My feelings at such a proposition cannot be
described. I begged of them to wait one day more, and make all the way
they could meanwhile. By doing so, I said, we must come to a break in
the cañon, where we could escape. They consented, and moving down the
river as fast as the current would carry us, to our inexpressible joy we
found a break, and a camp of trappers therein. All now rejoiced that
they had not carried their fearful proposition into effect. We had
fallen into good hands, and slowly recruited ourselves with the party,
which was under the charge of one Provo, a man with whom I was well
acquainted. By his advice we left the river and proceeded in a
north-westerly direction. Provo was well provided with provisions and
horses, and he supplied us with both. We remained with his party until
we arrived at the Great Salt Lake. Here I fell in with a large company
of trappers, composed of Canadians and Iroquois Indians, under the
command of Peter Ogden, in the service of the Northwest Fur Company.
With this party I made a very good bargain, as you will see when they
arrive at our camp, having purchased all their peltry on very reasonable
terms.'

<span id="fn_25"></span>[22:4](hou05.htm#fr_25.md) Jedediah Smith in 1826
calls the lake Utah, and the stream flowing into it from the south
Ashley River. 'Je traversai le petit lac Utâ, et je remontai le cours de
l’Ashley qu’il recoit.' Extrait d'une lettre, in *Nouvelles An. des
Voy*., xxxvii. 208. For an account of this journey see *Hist. Cal*.,
this series, where are fully discussed the several conflicting
authorities. *Warner's Rem*., MS., 21-9, dates the journey 1824, and
carries the company from Green River, south of Salt Lake, and over the
mountains near Walker Pass. Accounts in *Cruise's Nat. Wealth Cal.;
Hutchings’ Mag*., v. 351-2; *S. F. Times*, June 14, 1867; *Randolph's
Oration*, 313-14; *Tuthill's Hist. Cal*., 124-5; *Frignet, La
Californie*, 58-60; *Douglas' Private Papers*, MS., 2d ser. i.;
*Victor's River of the West*, 34; *Hines' Voy*., 110, are mentioned.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[22:5](hou05.htm#fr_26.md) The Sevier; or possibly
he crossed from the Sevier to the Virgen and supposed them to be one
stream.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[23:6](hou05.htm#fr_27.md) The Adams now is clearly
the Rio Virgen, and the Seedskeeder, or Siskadee, the Colorado. See
*Hist. Northwest Coast*, ii. 583, this series.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[23:7](hou05.htm#fr_28.md) P. W. Crawford, *Nar*.,
MS., 27, says he saw Pegleg Smith in 1847 on Ham Fork, in a beautiful
valley of the Bear River Mountains, where he then lived with his native
wife and a few savage retainers.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[24:8](hou05.htm#fr_29.md) There was little of
importance to Utah history in this expedition, for full particulars of
which see *Hist. Cal*., this series.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[24:9](hou05.htm#fr_30.md) For an account of
Bonneville and his several excursions see *Hist. Northwest Coast*, ii.
chap. xxv.; *Hist. Cal*., and *Hist. Nevada*, this series.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[25:10](hou05.htm#fr_31.md) Such being the case he
would hardly have joined Walker's expedition had it been understood that
the exploration of Salt Lake was intended. See *Nidever's Life and Adv:,
MS*., 58.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[25:11](hou05.htm#fr_32.md) Previously called the
Mary River, and now the Humboldt. See *Hist. Nevada*; *Hist. Northwest
Coast*; and *Hist. Cal*., this series.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[25:12](hou05.htm#fr_33.md) See *Nidever's Life and
Adv*., MS.; *Warner's Mem*., in *Pac. R. Report*, xi. pt. i. 31-4. In
giving his dictation to Irving, Bonneville professed great interest in
the exploration of Great Salt Lake though he had done nothing to speak
of in that direction. Irving, however, humored the captain, whose vanity
prompted him to give his own name to the lake, although he had not a
shadow of title to that distinction.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[29:13](hou05.htm#fr_34.md) 'Previous to setting
out,' says Bidwell, *California, 1841-8*, MS., 24-5, 'I consulted maps
so as to learn as much as possible about the country…As for Salt Lake,
there was a large lake marked in that region, but it was several hundred
miles long from north to south, with two large rivers running from
either end, diverging as they ran west, and entering the Pacific Ocean.'
it was Finley's map of North America, 1826, herein reproduced, which he
alludes to. 'My friends in Missouri advised me to bring tools, and in
case we could not get through with our wagons to build canoes and go
down one of these rivers.' The region to the west of Salt Lake was
indeed a *terra incognita* to these explorers.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[30:14](hou05.htm#fr_35.md) *California, 1841-8*,
MS., 33—4. The author, then little more than boy, being but 21, has a
long story to tell about straying from camp one day in company witch a
comrade, James John, bent on a visit to the adjacent heights for a
handful of snow; and how they slept in the mountains in a bear's nest,
and reached next day their company, some of whom had spent the night in
search. They had been given up as slain by the Blackfeet; and there were
those so ungracious as to say that it would have served them right had
it been so.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[31:15](hou05.htm#fr_36.md) The expedition entire
is given in *Hist. Cal.*, this series. See also *Belden's Hist.
Statement*, MS.; *Hopper's Narrative*, MS.; *Taylor's Dis. and
Founders,* i. No. 7; *Satter Co. Hist*., 17; *S. F. Bulletin*, July 27,
1868; *S. F. Alta*, Aug. 5, 1856, and Sept 1868; *Santa Cruz Sentinel*,
Aug. 29, 1868; *Los Angeles News*, Sept. 1, 1868; *San Diego Union*,
Jan. 16, 1869; *San José Pioneer*, <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> Feb.
1877; *Shuck's Scrap Book*, 182-4; *Petaluma Crescent*, Sept. 10, 1872;
*Santa Clara News*, Feb. 6, 1869; *Hayes’ Scrap Books, Cal. Notes*, iii.
171; *Napa Reporter*, March 23, Sept. 21, 1872; *S. F. Bulletin*, July
19, 1860; *Shuck's Rep. Men*, 920-1.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[33:16](hou05.htm#fr_37.md) Now Castle Island, or
as some call it Frémont Island.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[33:17](hou05.htm#fr_38.md) For an account of
Frémont's Oregon adventures see *Hist. Oregon*.; and for his doings in
California see *Hist. Cal.*, this series. We also meet with him again in
our *History of Nevada*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[34:18](hou05.htm#fr_39.md) *Frémont's Expl. Ex*.,
151-60. *Warner* in *Pac. R. Rep*., xi. 49-50.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[34:19](hou05.htm#fr_40.md) The word Utah
originated with the people inhabiting that region. Early in the 17th
century. when New Mexico was first much talked of by the Spaniards, the
principal nations of frequent mention as inhabiting the several sides of
the locality about that time occupied were the Navajos, the Yutas, the
Apaches, and the Comanches. Of the Utah nation, which belongs to the
Shoshone family, there were many tribes. See *Native Races*, i. 422,
463-8, <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> this series. There were the Pah
Utes, or Pyutes, the Pi Edes, the Gosh Utes, or Goshutes, the Uinta
Utes, the Yam Pah Utes, and many others. *Pah* signifies water; *pah
guampe*, salt water, or salt lake; *Pah Utes*, Indians that live about
the water. The early orthography of the word Utah is varied. Escalante,
prior to his journey to Utah Lake, *Carts de 23 Oct. 1775*, MS., finds
the 'Yutas' inhabiting the region north of the Moquis. This was a common
spelling by the early Spaniards, and might be called the proper one,
Later we have 'Youta,' 'Eutaw,' 'Utaw,' and 'Utah.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Story of Mormonism. 1820-1830.](hou06.md)
