[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou06)  [Next](hou08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### CHAPTER IV. THE STORY OF MORMONISM. 1830-1835.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Parley Pratt's
Conversion—Mission to the Lamanites—the Missionaries at
Kirtland—Conversion of Sidney Rigdon—Mormon Success at Kirtland—the
Missionaries in Missouri—Rigdon Visits Smith Edward Partridge—the
Melchisedec Priesthood Given—Smith and Rigdon Journey to Missouri Bible
Translation Smith's Second Visit to Missouri—Unexampled
Prosperity—Causes of Persecutions—Mobocracy—the Saints Are Driven From
Jackson County—Treachery of Boggs—Military Organization at Kirtland—the
Name Latter-Day Saints—March to Missouri.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">One</span> evening as Hyrum Smith was
driving cows along the road toward his father's house, he was overtaken
by a stranger, who inquired for Joseph Smith, translator of the book of
Mormon. "He is now residing in Pennsylvania, a hundred miles away," was
the reply.

    "And the father of Joseph?"

    "He also is absent on a journey. That is his house yonder, and I am
his son.'

    The stranger then said that he was a preacher of the word; that he
had just seen for the first time a copy of the wonderful book; that once
it was in his hands he could not lay it down until he had devoured it,
for the spirit of the Lord was upon him as he read, and he knew that it
was true; the spirit of the Lord had directed him thither, and his heart
was full of joy.

    Hyrum gazed at him in amazement; for converts of this quality, and
after this fashion, were not common in those days of poverty and sore
trial. He was little more than a boy, being but twenty-three,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and of that fresh, fair innocence which sits only on a youthful face
beaming with high enthusiasm. But it was more than a boy's soul that was
seen through those eyes of deep and solemn earnestness; it was more than
a boy's strength of endurance that was indicated by the broad chest and
comely, compact limbs; and more than a boy's intelligence and powers of
reasoning that the massive brow betokened.

    Hyrum took the stranger to the house, and they passed the night in
discourse, sleeping little. The convert's name was Parley P. Pratt. He
was a native of Burlington, New York, and born April 12, 1807. His
father was a farmer of limited means and education, and though not a
member of any religious society, had a respect for all. the boy had a
passion for books; the bible especially he read over and over again with
deep interest and enthusiasm. He early manifested strong religious
feeling; mind and soul seemed all on fire as he read of the patriarchs
and kings of the old testament, and of Christ and his apostles of the
new. In winter at. school, and in summer at work, his life passed until
he was sixteen, when he went west with his father William, some two
hundred miles on foot, to Oswego, two miles from which town they
bargained for a thickly wooded tract of seventy acres, at four dollars
an acre, paying some seventy dollars in cash. After a summer's work for
wages back near the old home, and a winter's work clearing the forest
farm, the place was lost through failure to meet the remaining payments.
Another attempt to make a forest home, this time in Ohio, thirty miles
west of Cleveland, was more successful; and after much tell and many
hardships, he found himself; in 1827, comfortably established there,
with Thankful Halsey as his wife.

    Meanwhile religion ran riot through his brain. His mind, however,
was of a reasoning, logical caste. "Why this difference," he argued,
"between the ancient and modern Christians, their doctrines and their

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

practice? Had I lived and believed in the days of the apostles, and had
so desired, they would have said, 'Repent, be baptized, and receive the
holy ghost.' The scriptures are the same now as then; why should not
results be the same?" In the absence of anything better, he joined the
baptists, and was immersed; but he was not satisfied. In 1829 Sidney
Rigdon, of whom more hereafter, preached in his neighborhood; he heard
him and was refreshed. It was the ancient gospel revived—repentance,
baptism, the gift of the holy ghost. And yet there was something
lacking—the authority to minister; the power which should accompany the
form of apostleship. At length he and others, who had heard Rigdon,
organized a society on the basis of his teachings, and Parley began to
preach. The spirit working in him finally compelled him to abandon his
farm and go forth to meet his destiny, he knew not whither. In this
frame of mind he wandered eastward, and while his family were visiting
friends, he came upon the book of Mormon and Hyrum Smith. Now did his
soul find rest. Here was inspiration and revelation as of old; here was
a new dispensation with attendant signs and miracles.

    As he left Smith's house the following morning, having an
appointment to preach some thirty miles distant, Hyrum gave him a copy
of the sacred book. Travelling on foot, and stopping now and then to
rest, he read at intervals, and found to his great joy that soon after
his ascension Christ had appeared in his glorified body to the remnant
of the tribe of Joseph in America, that he had administered in person to
the ten lost tribes, that the gospel had been revealed and written among
nations unknown to the apostles, and that thus preserved it had escaped
the corruptions of the great and abominable church.

    Returning to Smith's house, Parley demanded of Hyrum baptism. They
went to Whitmer's, where they were warmly welcomed by a little branch of
the church there assembled. The new convert was baptized

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

by Cowdery, and was ordained an elder. He continued to preach in those
parts with great power. Congregations were moved to tears, and many
heads of families came forward and accepted the faith. Then he went to
his old home. His father, mother, and some of the neighbors believed
only in part; but his brother Orson, nineteen years of age, embraced
with eagerness the new religion, and preached it from that time forth.
Returning to Manchester, Parley for the first time met Joseph Smith, who
received him warmly, and asked him to preach on Sunday, which he did,
Joseph following with a discourse.

    Revelations continued, now in the way of command, and now in the
spirit of prophecy. In Harmony, to the first elder it was spoken:
"Magnify thine office; and after thou hast sowed thy fields and secured
them, go speedily unto the churches which are in Colesville, Fayette,
and Manchester, and they shall support thee; and I will bless them, both
spiritually and temporally; but if they receive thee not, I will send on
them a cursing instead of a blessing, and thou shalt shake the dust off
thy feet against them as a testimony, and wipe thy feet by the wayside."
And to Cowdery, thus: "Oliver shall continue in bearing lily name before
the world, and also to the church; and he shall take neither purse nor
scrip, neither staves nor even two coats." To Emma, wife of Joseph: "Thy
sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady, whom I have called;
and thou shalt comfort thy husband, my servant Joseph, and shalt go with
him, and be unto him as a scribe in the absence of my servant Oliver,
and he shall support thee." Emma was also further directed to make a
selection of hymns to be used in church. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

    In the presence of six elders, at Fayette, in September 1880, came
the voice of Jesus Christ, promising them every blessing, while the
wicked should be destroyed. The millennium should come; but first dire
destruction should fall upon the earth, and the great and abominable
church should be cast down. Hiram Page renounced his stone. David
Whitmer was ordered to his father's house, there to await further
instructions. Peter Whitmer junior, Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson
were directed to go with Oliver and assist him in preaching the gospel
to the Lamanites, that is to say, to the Indians in the west, the
remnant of the tribe of Joseph. Thomas B. Marsh was promised that he
should begin to preach. Miracles were limited to casting out devils and
healing the sick. Wine for sacramental purposes must not be bought, but
made at home. <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md)

    Taking with them a copy of the revelation assigning to them this
work, these first appointed missionaries set out, and continued their
journey, preaching in the villages through which they passed, and
stopping at Buffalo to instruct the Indians as to their ancestry, until
they came to Kirtland, Ohio. There they remained some time, as many came
forward and embraced their faith, among others Sidney Rigdon, a
preaching elder in the reformed baptist church, who presided over a
congregation there, a large portion of whom likewise became interested
in the latter-day church. <span id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68.md)

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

    Rigdon was a native of Pennsylvania, and was now thirty-seven years
of age. He worked on his father's farm until he was twenty-six, when he
went to live with the Rev. Andrew Clark, and the same year, 1819, was
licensed to preach. Thence he went to Warren, Ohio, and married; and
after preaching for a time he was called to take charge of a church at
Pittsburgh, where he met with success, and soon became very popular. But
his mind was perplexed over the doctrines he was required to promulgate,
and in 1824 he retired from his ministry. There were two friends who had
likewise withdrawn from their respective churches, and with whom he
conferred freely, Alexander Campbell, of his own congregation, and one
Walter Scott, of the Scandinavian church of that city. Campbell had
formerly lived at Bethany, Virginia, where was issued under his auspices
a monthly journal called the Christian Baptist. Out of this friendship
and association arose a new church, called the Campbellites, its
doctrines having been published by Campbell in his paper. During the
next two years Rigdon was obliged to work in a tannery to support his
family; then he removed to Bainbridge, Ohio, where he again began to
preach, confining himself to no creed, but leaning toward that of the
Campbellites. Crowds flocked to hear him, and a church was established
in a neighboring town through his instrumentality. After a year of this
work he accepted a call to Mentor, thirty miles distant. Slanderous
reports followed him, and a storm of persecution set in against him; but
by his surpassing eloquence and deep reasoning it was not only soon
allayed, but greater multitudes than ever waited on his ministrations.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

    Rigdon was a cogent speaker of imposing mien and impassioned
address. As a man, however, his character seems to have had a tinge of
insincerity. He was fickle, now and then petulant, irascible, and
sometimes domineering. Later, Joseph Smith took occasion more than once
to rebuke him sharply, fearing that he might assume the supremacy.

    Upon hearing the arguments of Pratt and Cowdery, and investigating
the book of Mormon, Rigdon was convinced that he had not been legally
ordained, and that his present; ministry was without the divine
authority. In regard to the revival of the old dispensation, he argued
thus: "If we have not familiarity enough with our creator to ask of him
a sign, we are no Christians; if God will not give his creatures one, he
is no better than Juggernaut." The result was, that he and others
accepted the book and its teachings, <span id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_69.md)
received baptism and the gift of the holy ghost, and were ordained to
preach.

    On one occasion Cowdery preached, followed by Rigdon. After service
they went to the Chagrin River to baptize. Rigdon stood in the stream
and poured forth his exhortations with eloquent fervor. One after
another stepped forward until thirty had been baptized. Present upon the
bank was a hard-headed lawyer, Varnem J. Card, who as he listened grew
pale with emotion. Suddenly he seized the arm of a friend and whispered,
Quick, take me away, or in a moment more I shall be in that water!" One
hundred and twenty-seven converts at once, the number

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

afterward increasing to a thousand, were here gathered into the
fold. <span id="fr_70"></span>[5](#fn_70.md)

    After adding to their number one Frederic G. Williams, the
missionaries continued on their way, arriving first at Sandusky, where
they gave instructions to the Indians in regard to their forefathers, as
they had done at Buffalo, and thence proceeded to Cincinnati and St
Louis. In passing by his old forest home, Pratt was arrested on some
trivial charge, but made his escape. The winter was very severe, and it
was some time before they could continue their journey. At length they
set out again, wading in snow knee-deep, carrying their few effects on
their backs, and having to eat corn bread and frozen raw pork; and after
travelling in all fifteen hundred miles, most of the way on foot,
preaching to tens of thousands by the way, and organizing hundreds into
churches, they reached Independence, Missouri, in the early part of
1831. There Whitmer and Peterson went to work as tailors, while Pratt
and Cowdery passed over the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

border, crossed the Kansas River, and began their work among the
Lamanites, or Indians, thereabout.

    The chief of the Delawares was sachem of ten tribes. He received the
missionaries with courtesy, and set food before them. When they asked
him to call a council before which they might expound their doctrines,
he at first declined, then assented; whereupon Cowdery gave them an
account of their ancestors, as contained in the wonderful book, a copy
of which he left with the chief on taking his departure, which soon
occurred; for when it was known upon the border settlements what the
missionaries were doing, they were ordered out of the Indian country as
disturbers of the peace. <span id="fr_71"></span>[6](#fn_71.md) After
preaching a short time in Missouri, the five brethren thought it best
that one of their number should return east and report. The choice fell
on Pratt. Starting out on foot, he reached St Louis, three hundred miles
distant, in nine days. Thence he proceeded by steamer to Cincinnati, and
from that point journeyed on foot to Strongville, forty miles from
Kirtland. Overcome by fatigue and illness, he was forced to remain at
this place some ten days, when he continued his journey on horseback. He
was welcomed at Kirtland by hundreds of the saints, Joseph Smith himself
being present.

    In December 1830 comes Sidney Rigdon to Joseph Smith at Manchester,
and with him Edward Partridge, to inquire of the Lord; and they are told
what they shall do; they shall preach thereabout, and also on the
Ohio. <span id="fr_72"></span>[7](#fn_72.md)

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

    The year 1831 opens with flattering prospects. On the 2d of January
a conference is held at Fayette, attended by revelations and prophecy.
James Colville, a baptist minister, accepts the faith, but shortly
recants, being tempted of Satan, and in fear of persecution. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[8](#fn_73.md) Smith and his wife go with Rigdon and

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Partridge to
Kirtland, arriving there early in February, and taking up their
residence with N. K. Whitney, who shows them great kindness. Among the
hundred believers there at the time, certain false doctrines have crept
in; these are quickly overcome, and a plan for community of goods which
the family of saints had adopted is abolished. Commandment comes by
revelation that a house shall be built for Joseph; that Sidney shall
live as seems to him good, for his heart is pure; that Edward Partridge
shall be ordained a bishop; <span id="fr_74"></span>[9](#fn_74.md) that all
but Joseph and Sidney shall go forth, two by two, into the regions
westward and preach the gospel. <span id="fr_75"></span>[10](#fn_75.md)

    "And now, behold, I speak unto the church: thou shalt not kill; thou
shalt not steal; thou shalt not lie; thou shalt love thy wife, cleaving
unto her and to none else; thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt
not speak evil of thy neighbor, nor do him any harm. Thou knowest my
laws, given in my scriptures; he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be
east out. And behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy
properties for their support, laying the same before the bishop of my
church, the residue not to be taken back, but to be used by the church
in buying lands and building houses of worship, for I will consecrate of
the riches of those who embrace my gospel among the gentiles unto the
poor of my people who are of the house of Israel. Let him that goeth to

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

the east tell them that shall be converted to flee to the west. And
again, thou shalt not be proud; let thy garments be plain, the work of
thine own hand, and cleanly. Thou shalt not be idle. And whosoever among
you is sick, and has faith, shall be healed; and if he has not faith to
be healed, but believe, he shall be nourished with all tenderness. If
thou wilt ask, thou shalt receive revelation and knowledge. Whosoever
hath faith sufficient shall never taste death. Ye shall live together in
love; that whether ye live ye may live in me, or if ye die ye may die in
me. So saith the Lord."

 

    Edward Partridge was born at Pittsfield, Massachusetts, August 27,
1793. At the age of sixteen he was apprenticed to a hatter. His was an
earnest, thoughtful nature, and his mind much troubled about religion.
In 1828 he entered Sidney Rigdon's Campbellite church, and in that faith
remained until met by the missionaries Pratt, Cowdery, and the others,
when he accepted the new revelation, and was subsequently baptized by
Joseph in the Seneca River. He had a profitable business at the time;
but when it was revealed that he should leave his merchandise and devote
his whole time to the church, he obeyed without a murmur.

    Joseph and Sidney were much together now in their revelations and
rulings. A woman attempted prophesying and was rebuked. Sarcasm was
employed, and scurrilous stories were printed in the newspapers; an
account of a great Asiatic earthquake was headed "Mormonism in China."
Revelations during March were frequent. In one of them John Whitmer was
appointed church historian; and it was revealed that he should keep the
church records, write and keep a regular history, and act as secretary
to Joseph, as had Oliver Cowdery formerly. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[11](#fn_76.md) Lands might be bought

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

for immediate necessity; but remember the city to be presently built,
and be prudent. <span id="fr_77"></span>[12](#fn_77.md) And now from the
shaking quakers came one Lemon Copley and accepted the gospel, though
not in its fullness, as he retained

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

somewhat of his former faith; whereupon a revelation ordered him to go
with Parley P. Pratt and preach to the shakers, not according to his old
ideas, but as Parley should direct.

    "And again, I say unto you that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not
ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man; wherefore it
is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one
flesh. Beware of false spirits. Given May 1831."

    The saints from New York began to come in numbers, and Bishop
Partridge was ordered to look after them and attend to their
requirements. It was ordered that if any had more than they required,
let them give to the church; if any had less, let the church relieve
their necessities. The 6th of June a conference of elders was held at
Kirtland, and several received the authority of the Melchisedec
priesthood. The next conference should be held in Missouri, whither
Joseph and Sidney should proceed at once, and there it would be told
them what to do. And to the same place others should go, two by two,
each couple taking different routes and preaching by the way. Among
those who went forth were Lyman Wight and John Corrill, John Murdock and
Hyrum Smith by the way of Detroit, Thomas B. Marsh and Selah J. Griffin,
Isaac Morley and Ezra Booth, David Whitmer and Harvey Whitlock, Parley
P. Pratt and Orson Pratt, Solomon Hancock and Simeon Carter, Edson
Fuller and Jacob Scott, Levi Hancock and Zebedee Coltrin, Reynolds
Cahoon and Samuel H. Smith, Wheeler Baldwin and William Carter, Joseph
Wakefield and Solomon Humphrey. With Joseph and Sidney were to go Martin
Harris and Edward Partridge, taking with them a letter of recommendation
from the church. <span id="fr_78"></span>[13](#fn_78.md) "And thus, even as
I have

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

said, if ye are faithful, ye shall assemble yourselves together to
rejoice upon the land of Missouri, which is the land of your
inheritance, which is now the land of your enemies. Behold, I the Lord
will hasten the city in its time, and will crown the faithful with joy
and with rejoicing. Behold I am Jesus Christ the son of God, and I will
lift them up at the last day. Amen."

 

    While preparing for the journey to Missouri, a letter was received
from Oliver Cowdery, reporting on his missionary work, and speaking of
another tribe of Lamanites, living three hundred miles west of Santa Fé,
called the Navarhoes (Navajoes), who had large flocks of sheep and
cattle, and who made blankets. W. W. Phelps, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[14](#fn_79.md) with his family joining the society, was
commissioned to assist Oliver Cowdery in selecting, writing, and
printing books for schools. Thus the move from Ohio to Missouri was
begun, Joseph and his party starting from Kirtland the 19th of June,
going by wagon, canal-boat, and stage to Cincinnati, by steamer to St
Louis, and thence on foot to Independence, arriving about the middle of
July.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

    "Harken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have
assembled yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this
land, which is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have
appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints; wherefore
this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. And
thus saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom.
Behold the place which is now called Independence is the centre place,
and the spot for the temple is lying westward upon a lot which is not
far from the court-house: wherefore it is wisdom that the land should be
purchased by the saints; and also every tract lying westward, even unto
the line running directly between jew and gentile; and also every tract
bordering by the prairies, inasmuch as my disciples are enabled to buy
lands."

    Further, Sidney Gilbert was made church agent, to receive money and
buy lands; he was also directed to establish a store. Partridge was to
partition the lands purchased among the people; Phelps was made church
printer. But the last two becoming a little headstrong on entering upon
their new duties, Joseph found it necessary to reprimand and warn them.
Harris was held up as an example to emulate, for he had given much to
the church. It was ordered that an agent be appointed to raise money in
Ohio to buy lands in Missouri, and Rigdon was commissioned to write a
description of the new land of Zion for the same purpose. Ziba Peterson
was dispossessed of his lands, and made to work for others, in
punishment for his misdemeanors.

    Thus the latter-day saints had come to the border line of
civilization, and looking over it into the west they thought here to
establish themselves forever. Here was to be the temple of God; here the
city of refuge; here the second advent of the savior. Meanwhile their
headquarters were to be at the town of Independence.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

    In Kaw township, twelve miles west of Independence, the Colesville
branch of the church built a log house; the visible head of the church,
on the 2d of August, laying the first log, brought thither by twelve
men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. Next day the ground for
the temple, situated a little west of Independence, <span
id="fr_80"></span>[15](#fn_80.md) was dedicated, and the day following was
held the first conference in the land of Zion. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[16](#fn_81.md)

    It was now commanded that Smith, Rigdon, Cowdery, and others should
return east, and make more proselytes, money for the purpose to be
furnished them out of the general fund. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[17](#fn_82.md) Accordingly on the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 9th Joseph and ten
elders started down the river in sixteen canoes, the leaders arriving at
Kirtland the 27th, <span id="fr_83"></span>[18](#fn_83.md) after having
suffered hardship and mortification through disaffection among the
elders. Titus Billings, who had charge of the church property there, was
ordered to dispose of the lands, and prepare to remove to Missouri in
the following spring, together with part of the people, and such money
as could be raised. It was provided that those wishing to buy land in
Zion could do so by forwarding the purchase-money. The account of the
new country written by Sidney Rigdon did not please Joseph, and he was
ordered to write another; if that should not prove satisfactory, he was
to be deprived of office. <span id="fr_84"></span>[19](#fn_84.md)

    On the 12th of September Joseph removed to the town of Hiram, thirty
miles away, and prepared to begin again the translation of the bible,
with Rigdon as scribe. The farm of Isaac Morley was ordered sold, while
Frederic G. Williams should retain his, for it was desirable to keep a
footing at Kirtland yet for

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

five years. The store kept by Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert should
likewise be continued. A system of tithes should be established. Ezra
Booth apostatized, and wrote letters against the church. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[20](#fn_85.md) Orson Hyde, clerk in Gilbert and
Whitney's store, was baptized, and later make an elder. Phelps was told
to buy at Cincinnati a printing-press and type, and start a monthly
paper at Independence, to be called the *Evening and Morning Star*,
which was done. Oliver Cowdery was instructed in November to return to
Missouri, and with him John Whitmer, the latter to visit the several
stations, and gather further materials for church history. Newel K.
Whitney

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

was appointed bishop, to receive and account for church funds collected
by the various elders. Many of the eiders who went to Missouri were by
this time at work in different parts of the east and the west. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[21](#fn_86.md)

    On the 16th of February, 1832, while Smith and Rigdon were
translating the gospel of St John, they were favored by a glorious
vision from the Lord, <span id="fr_87"></span>[22](#fn_87.md) which gave
them great comfort and encouragement. The revelations about this time
were frequent and lengthy, their purport being in great part to direct
the movements of missionaries. Simonds Rider and Eli, Edward, and John
Johnson now apostatized.

    On the night of the 25th of March, Smith and Rigdon were seized by a
mob, composed partly of the Campbellites, methodists, and baptists of
Hiram, twelve or fifteen being apostate Mormons. The captives were
roughly treated, and expected to be killed; but after they had been
stripped, beaten, and well covered with tar and feathers, they were
released. Smith preached and baptized as usual the next day, Sunday, but
Rigdon was delirious for some time afterward. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[23](#fn_88.md) This broke up for the present the
translation

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

of the bible; Rigdon went to Kirtland, and on the 2d of April, in
obedience to a revelation, Smith started for Missouri, having for his
companions Whitney, Peter Whitmer, and Gause. The spirit of mobocracy
was aroused throughout the entire country. Joseph even feared to go to
Kirtland, and escaped by way of Warren, where he was joined by Rigdon,
whence the two proceeded to Cincinnati and St Louis by way of Wheeling,
Virginia, a mob following them a good part of the way. The brethren at
Independence and vicinity welcomed their leaders warmly, but the
unbelievers there as elsewhere hourly threatened violence. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[24](#fn_89.md) In May the first edition of the *Book of
Commandments* <span id="fr_90"></span>[25](#fn_90.md) was ordered printed;
the following month, published

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

in connection with the *Upper Missiouri Advertiser*, appeared the first
number of the *Evening and Morning Star*, under the auspices of W. W.
Phelps, whose printing-press was the only one within a hundred and
twenty miles of Independence. On the 6th of May Smith, Rigdon, and
Whitney again set out on their return to Kirtland. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[26](#fn_91.md) On the way Whitney broke his leg. Smith
was poisoned, and that so badly that he dislocated his jaw in vomiting,
and the hair upon his head became loosened; Whitney, however, laid his
hands on him, and administered in the name of the Lord, and he was
healed in an instant. <span id="fr_92"></span>[27](#fn_92.md)

    Some three or four hundred saints being now gathered in Missouri,
most of them settled on their own inheritances in this land of Zion,
besides many others scattered abroad throughout the land, who were yet
to come hither, it was deemed best to give the matter of schools some
attention. Parley P. Pratt was laboring in Illinois. Newel K. Whitney
was directed in September to leave his business in other hands, visit

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the churches, collect money, and administer to the wants of the poor.
The new translation of the bible was again taken up and continued
through the winter, the new testament being completed and sealed up, not
to be opened till it reached Zion. <span id="fr_93"></span>[28](#fn_93.md)

 

    On January 23, 1833, the ceremony of washing feet is instituted
after John's gospel. Each elder washes his own feet first, after which
Joseph girds himself with a towel and washes the feet of them all.
"Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, in consequence of evils
and designs, which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in
the last days, I have warned you, and forewarned you, by giving unto you
this word of wisdom by revelation, that inasmuch as any man drinketh
wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good, nor meet in the
sight of your father. And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither
for the belly, and it is not good for man. And again, hot drinks are not
for the body or belly."

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

    The first presidency is organized on the 8th of March, Sidney Rigdon
and Frederick G. Williams being Smith's councillors. Money flows in, and
a council of high priests, March 23d, orders the purchasing for $11,100
of three farms at Kirtland, upon which the saints may build a stake, or
support, in Zion, <span id="fr_94"></span>[29](#fn_94.md) and the
foundations of the temple are laid, for here they will remain for five
years and make money until the western Zion shall be made ready and a
temple built there also. On the land is a valuable quarry of stone, and
good clay for bricks; they also buy a tannery. In April the school of
the prophets closes, to reopen in the autumn. Shederlaomach is made by
revelation a member of the united firm. It is not the will of the Lord
to print any of the new translation in the *Star*; but when it is
published, it will all go to the world together, in a volume by itself,
and the new testament and the book of Mormon will be printed together.
Those preparing to go to Zion should organize.

    Commandment comes to lay at Kirtland the foundation of the city of
the stake in Zion, with a house of the Lord, a school-house for the
instruction of elders, a house for the presidency, a house of worship
and for the school of the prophets, an endowment house with a room for
the school of apostles, and a house in which to print the translation of
the scriptures. A church is established in Medina county,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ohio, by Sidney
Rigdon, who sometimes proves himself unruly. Dr Hurlbut is tried before
the bishop's council of high priests on a charge of unchristian-like
conduct with the female sex, and condemned, but on confession is
pardoned. <span id="fr_95"></span>[30](#fn_95.md)

    Temples are ordered built in the city of Zion, in Missouri, as
follow: a house of the Lord for the presidency of the high and most holy
priesthood after the order of Melchisedec; the sacred apostolic
repository,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

for the use of the bishop; the holy evangelical house, for the high
priesthood of the holy order of God; house of the Lord for the elders of
Zion; house of the Lord for the presidency of the high priesthood; house
of the Lord for the high priesthood after the order of Aaron; house of
the Lord for the teachers in Zion; house of the Lord for the deacons in
Zion; and others. There are also to be farms, barns, and dwellings. The
ground secured for the purpose is a mile square, and will accommodate
fifteen or twenty thousand people. <span id="fr_96"></span>[31](#fn_96.md)

 

    Affairs in Missouri were very prosperous. "Immigration had poured
into the county of Jackson in great numbers," says Parley P. Pratt, "and
the church

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

in that county now numbered upward of one thousand souls. These had all
purchased lands and paid for them, and most of them were improving in
buildings and in cultivation. Peace and plenty had crowned their labors,
and the wilderness became a fruitful field, and the solitary place began
to bud and blossom as the rose. They lived in peace and quiet, no
lawsuits with each other or with the world; few or no debts were
contracted, few promises broken; there were no thieves, robbers, or
murderers; few or no idlers; all seemed to worship God with a ready
heart. On Sundays the people assembled to preach, pray, sing, and
receive, the ordinances of God. Other days all seemed busy in the
various pursuits of industry. In short, there has seldom, if ever, been
a happier people upon the earth than the church of the saints now were."
They were for the most part small farmers, tradesmen, and mechanics, and
were not without shrewdness in the management of their secular affairs.

    But all this must now be changed. The saints of God must be tried as
by fire. Persecutions such as never before were witnessed in these
latter days, and the coming of which were foretold by Joseph, are upon
them; they shall be buffeted for five years, and the end is not yet.
"Political demagogues were afraid we should rule the country," says
Parley, "and religious priests and bigots felt that we were powerful
rivals." <span id="fr_97"></span>[32](#fn_97.md) Moreover, there is no
doubt that they were indiscreet; they were blinded by their prosperity;
already the kingdom of God and the kingdom of this world had come unto
them; now let the gentiles tremble! <span id="fr_98"></span>[33](#fn_98.md)

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

    And the gentiles did tremble, as they saw so rapidly increasing
their unwelcome neighbors, whose compact organization gave them a
strength disproportionate to their numbers. Since there was no law to
stop their coming, they determined to face the issue without law. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[34](#fn_99.md)

    In April the people held consultations as to the best way of
disposing of the Mormons; and again about the middle of July three
hundred persons met at Independence to form a plan for driving them out.
A declaration, in substance as follows, was drawn up and signed by
nearly all present. The citizens of Jackson county fear the effect upon
society of a pretended religious sect, fanatics or knaves, settling
among them, and mean to get rid of them at any hazard, and for the
following reasons: They blasphemously pretend to personal intercourse
with the deity, to revelations, miracles, healing the sick, casting out
devils, and other delusions; they are the dregs of society, held
together by the acts of designing leaders, and are idle and vicious.
They are poor. They tamper with the slaves and free negroes. They
declare the Indian region to be theirs by heavenly inheritance.

    In answer, Parley P. Pratt asks if their supernatural pretensions
are more extravagant than those of the old and new testament; if it is
anywhere written that there shall be no more spiritual manifestations as
of old; does the word of God or the law of man make poverty a crime? and
have they not paid for all the land they occupy? They are no more dregs
than their neighbors, and the charge of fraternizing with the blacks is
not true; neither is that of vice or crime, as

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the county records will show. In regard to the lands of the Indians, no
violence or injustice is contemplated; and if it were, what record of
robbery, murder, and treacherous betrayal could excel that already made
by the people of Missouri and others in the United States for our
example? <span id="fr_100"></span>[35](#fn_100.md)

    On the 20th the people again met according to appointment. The old
charges were reiterated, and the old resolutions renewed, with some
additions. <span id="fr_101"></span>[36](#fn_101.md) To put them into
action the men of Jackson county

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

sallied forth for the office of the *Star*, <span
id="fr_102"></span>[37](#fn_102.md) and demanded that the publication be
discontinued. Compliance being refused, Phelps' house, containing the
printing-office, was torn down, materials and paper destroyed, <span
id="fr_103"></span>[38](#fn_103.md) and Bishop Partridge and Elder Allen
were tarred and feathered. <span id="fr_104"></span>[39](#fn_104.md)
Meanwhile, clergymen of other denominations, and officers of the state
and county, looked on, saying, "Mormons are the common enemies of
mankind, and ought to be destroyed," and "You now know what our Jackson
boys can do, and you must leave the country." <span
id="fr_105"></span>[40](#fn_105.md)

    Again the mob appeared on the morning of the 23d, bearing a red
flag, and demanding the departure of the Mormons. Seeing no way of
escape, the elders entered into treaty with the assailants, and promised
to leave the county within a certain time. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[41](#fn_106.md) Cowdery

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

was despatched to Kirtland to consult as to what was best to be done.
Meanwhile, incendiary articles appeared in the *Western Monitor*,
printed at Fayette, Missouri. "Two years ago," said that journal, "some
two or three of this people made their appearance on the upper Missouri,
and they now number some twelve hundred souls in this county." They look
at the land as theirs to inherit, by either fair means or foul; and when
the officers of law and government shall be Mormon, we must go. "One of
the means resorted to by them, in order to drive us to emigrate, is an
indirect invitation to the free brethren of color in Illinois to come up
like the rest to the land of Zion." True, they deny this, but that is
only subterfuge. So it is resolved that no more Mormons shall be
permitted to come; that those here must go within a reasonable time; and
that the *Star* printing-office shall be declared confiscated.

    An appeal was made to the governor, Daniel Dunklin, for redress, and
while awaiting the answer matters were continued much in the usual way.
The brethren were instructed by their elders not to retaliate, but to
bear all with meekness and patience. At length a letter came from the
governor, assuring them of his protection, and advising them to resort
to the courts for damages. The church leaders ordered that none should
leave Independence except those who had signed an agreement to that
effect. Four lawyers were engaged for one thousand dollars to carry the
matter into the courts. No sooner was this known than the whole country
rose in arms and made war upon the Mormons. On the nights of October
30th, 31st, and November 1st, armed men attacked branches of the church
west of Big Blue, and at the prairie unreeled the houses and beat the
men. Almost simultaneously attacks were made at other points. Stones
flew freely in Independence, and houses were destroyed and the inmates
wounded. Gilbert's store was broken open, and the goods scattered

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

in the streets. On November 2d thirty saints retired with their families
and effects to a point half a mile from town. Next day four of the
brethren went to Lexington for a peace warrant, but the circuit judge
refused to issue one through fear of the mob. "You had better fight it
out and kill the outlaws if they come upon you," said the judge. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[42](#fn_107.md) The saints then armed, and on the 4th
there was a fight, in which two gentiles and one Mormon were killed, and
several on both sides wounded. One of the store-breakers was brought
before the court, and during the trial the populace became so furious
that Gilbert, Morley, and Corrill were thrust into jail for protection.
The morning of the 5th broke with signs of yet more bloody determination
on both sides. The militia were called out to preserve the peace, but
this only made matters worse. The lieutenant-governor, Boggs, pretending
friendship, got possession of the Mormons’ arms, and seized a number to
be tried for murder. <span id="fr_108"></span>[43](#fn_108.md) Further and
yet more violent attacks were made; hope was abandoned; the now
defenceless saints were forced to fly in every direction, some out into
the open prairie, some up and some down the river. "The struggle was
over," writes Pratt, "our liberties were gone!" On the 7th both banks
were lined with men, women, and children, with wagons, provisions, and
personal effects. Cold weather came on with wind and rain, to which most
of the fugitives were exposed, few of them having tents. Some took
refuge in Clay county, some in Lafayette county, and elsewhere. <span
id="fr_109"></span>[44](#fn_109.md)

    Throughout all these trying scenes, Governor

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dunklin endeavored
to uphold the law, but Boggs, lieutenant-governor, was with the
assailants. Wells, attorney-general, wrote to the council for the
church, the 21st, saying that if they wished to replace their houses in
Jackson county the governor would send them an adequate force, and if
they would organize themselves into companies, he would supply them with
arms. Application was made accordingly. "It is a disgrace to the state,"
writes Judge Ryland, "for such acts to happen within its limits, and the
disgrace will attach to our official characters if we neglect to take
proper means to insure the punishment due such offenders." In view of
this advice from the state authorities, the saints resolved to return to
their homes as soon as protection should be afforded them, and it was
ordered by revelation that they should do so, but with circumspection
and not in haste. <span id="fr_110"></span>[45](#fn_110.md)

    All this time President Joseph Smith was at Kirtland, harassed with
anxiety over affairs in Missouri, still pursuing the usual tenor of his
way, and not knowing what moment like evils might befall him and his
fold there. <span id="fr_111"></span>[46](#fn_111.md) It was resolved by
the first presidency that the *Star* should be published at Kirtland

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

until it could be reinstated in Missouri; another journal, the
*Latter-day Saints’ Messenger and Advocate*, was also established at
Kirtland, and a mission organized for Canada. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[47](#fn_112.md)

 

    The work of proselyting continued east and west without abatement
through the year 1834. Two by two and singly the elders went forth:
Lyman Johnson and Milton Holmes to Canada, also Zebedee Coltrin and
Henry Harriman; John S. Carter and Jesse Smith should go eastward
together, also James Durfee and Edward Marvin. Elders Oliver Granger,
Martin Harris, and Brigham Young preferred to travel alone. To redeem
the farm on which stood the house of the Lord, elders Orson Hyde and
Orson Pratt were sent east to solicit funds. The movements of many
others of the brethren are given. Parley Pratt and Lyman Wight were
instructed not to return to Missouri until men were organized into
companies of

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

ten, twenty, fifty, or one hundred. Thereupon these and others went out
in various directions to raise men and means for a religio-military
expedition to Missouri. There were churches now in every direction, and
the brethren were scattered over a broad area.

    Several appeals for redress were made by the saints at Independence
to the governor of Missouri, and to the president of the United States.
The president said it was a matter for the governor to regulate, and the
governor did not see what could be done except through the courts. A
court of inquiry was instituted, which decided, but to little purpose,
that there was no insurrection on the 5th of November, 1833, and
therefore the arms taken by the militia from the Mormons on that
occasion must be restored to them. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[48](#fn_113.md) "And now a commandment I give unto you
concerning Zion, that you shall no longer be bound as an united order to
your brethren of Zion, only in this wise; after you are organized you
shall be called the united order of this stake of Zion, the city of
Shinehah, <span id="fr_114"></span>[49](#fn_114.md) and your brethren,
after they are organized, shall be called the united order of the city
of Zion."

    On the 7th of May, 1834, a military company was organized at
Kirtland under the name of Zion's camp, consisting of one hundred and
fifty brethren, mostly young men, elders, priests, teachers, and
deacons, with

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> F. G. Williams
paymaster and Zerubbabel Snow commissary general. They had twenty wagons
loaded with arms and effects, and next day set out for Missouri,
President Smith joining them, leaving Rigdon and Cowdery to look after
matters in Ohio. They passed through Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois,
reaching Missouri <span id="fr_115"></span>[50](#fn_115.md) in June, Pratt
and others still continuing

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

their efforts en route as recruiting officers. It was an army of the
Lord; they would not be known as Mormons, which was a name they hated;
moreover, they would be incognito; and the better to accomplish all
these purposes, three days before they started, Sidney Rigdon proposed
in conference that the name by which hereafter they would call
themselves should be The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
which proposal was adopted. <span id="fr_116"></span>[51](#fn_116.md) On
the way the brethren

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

learned of the outrages which had again occurred in Jackson county.

    Just before his arrival in Clay county, Missouri, a committee of
citizens waited on President Smith and proposed the purchase of the
lands in Jackson county from which the Mormons had been driven. The
offer was declined, the president and council making the following
proposal in return: Let each side choose six men, and let the twelve
determine the amount of damages due to the Mormons, and also the value
of the possessions of all those who do not wish to live near them in
peace, and the money shall be paid within a year. The offer was not
accepted. <span id="fr_117"></span>[52](#fn_117.md)

    On the 3d of July a high council of twelve was organized by the head
of the church, with David Whitmer as president and W. W. Phelps and John
Whitmer as assistant presidents. The twelve were: Simeon Carter, Parley
P. Pratt, Wm E. McLellan, Calvin Beebe, Levi Jackman, Solomon Hancock,
Christian Whitmer, Newel Knight, Orson Pratt, Lyman Wight, Thomas B.
Marsh, and John Murdock. Later Phelps became president of the church in
Missouri. In company with his brother Hyrum, F. G. Williams, and W. E.
McLellan, President Joseph returned to Kirtland, arriving about the 1st
of August.

    "Now, that the world may know that our faith in the work and word of
the Lord is firm and unshaken, and to shew all nations, kindreds,
tongues, and peoples that our object is good, for the good of all, we
come before the great family of mankind for peace, and ask their
hospitality and assurance for our comfort, and the preservation

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

of our persons and property, and solicit their charity for the great
cause of God. We are well aware that many slanderous reports and
ridiculous stories are in circulation against our religion and society;
but as wise men will hear both sides and then judge, we sincerely hope
and trust that the still small voice of truth will be heard, and our
great revelations read and candidly compared with the prophecies of the
bible, that the great cause of our redeemer may be supported by a
liberal share of public opinion, as well as the unseen power of God. The
faith and religion of the latter-day saints are founded upon the old
scriptures, the book of Mormon, and direct revelation from God."

    Thus far have I given the History of Joseph Smith, in substance as
written by himself in his journal, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[53](#fn_118.md) and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

printed in the *Times and Seasons*, which ends here. It is taken up in
the *Millennial Star*, in diary form, beginning with volume xv. and
continuing to the day of his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[74:1](hou07.htm#fr_66.md) The hymn-book of Emma
Smith does not appear to have been published, but a little book
containing hymns selected by Brigham Young passed through eight editions
up to 1849, the eighth being published in Liverpool in that year.
*Smucker's Hist. of Mor*., 57-61; *Millenial Star*, iv. 150-1. The
preface to the first edition was signed by Brigham Young, Parley P.
Pratt, and John <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> Taylor. The preface to
the ninth edition, published at Liverpool and London in 1851, is by
Franklin D. Richards, who states that 54,000 copies of the several
editions have been sold in the European missions alone within eleven
years. Several editions have since been published in Europe and America.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[75:2](hou07.htm#fr_67.md) Smith says: 'In order to
prepare for this (confirmation) I set out to go to procure some wine for
the occasion, but had gone only a short distance when I was met by a
heavenly messenger, and received the revelation.' *Millennial Star*, iv.
151; *Times and Seasons*, iv. 117-18.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[75:3](hou07.htm#fr_68.md) At the town of Kirtland,
two miles from Rigdon's residence, was a number of the members of his
church who lived together, and had all things in common, from which
circumstance, Smith says, the idea arose that this was the case with the
Mormon believers. To these people the missionaries repaired and preached
with some success, gathering in seventeen on the first occasion. Rigdon
after spending some time in the study of the book of Mormon <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> concluded to accept its doctrines, and
together with his wife was baptized into the church, which now numbered
about twenty in this section. *Millennial Star*, iv. 181-4; v. 4-7, 17;
*Times and Seasons*, iv. 177, 193-4. Rigdon had for nearly three years
already taught the literal interpretation of scripture prophecies, the
gathering of the Israelites to receive the second coming, the literal
reign of the saints on earth, and the use of miraculous gifts in the
church. *Gunnison's Mormons*, 101.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[77:4](hou07.htm#fr_69.md) Howe intimates that
Rigdon knew more of the book and the people than he pretended. Of the
proselytes made in his church he says: 'Near the residence of Rigdon, in
Kirtland, there had been for some time previous a few families belonging
to his congregation, who had formed themselves into a common stock
society, and had become considerably fanatical, and were daily looking
for some wonderful event to take place in the world. Their minds had
become fully prepared to embrace Mormonism, or any other mysteriousism
that should first, present itself. Seventeen in number of these persons
readily believed the whole story of Cowdery about the finding of the
golden plates and the spectacles. They were all reimmersed in one night
by Cowdery.' *Mormonism Unveiled,* 103.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[78:5](hou07.htm#fr_70.md) Speaking of the doings
at Kirtland after the departure of the Lamanite mission, Mr Howe says:
'Scenes of the most wild, frantic, and horrible fanaticism ensued. They
pretended that the power of miracles was about to be given to all those
who embraced the new faith, and commenced communicating the holy spirit
by laying their hands upon the heads of the converts, which operation at
first produced an instantaneous prostration of body and mind. Many would
fall upon the floor, where they would lie for a long time apparently
lifeless. They thus continued these enthusiastic exhibitions for several
weeks. The fits usually came on during or after their prayer meetings,
which were held nearly every evening. The young men and women were more
particularly subject to this delirium. They would exhibit all the apish
actions imaginable, making the most ridiculous grimaces, creeping upon
their hands and feet, rolling upon the frozen ground, go through with
all the Indian modes of warfare, such as knocking down, scalping,
ripping open and tearing out the bowels. At other times they would run
through the fields, get upon stumps, preach to imaginary congregations,
enter the water and perform all the ceremony of baptizing, etc. Many
would have fits of speaking all the different Indian dialects, which
none could understand. Again, at the dead hour of night the young men
might be seen running over the fields and hills in pursuit, as they
said, of the balls of fire, light, etc., which they saw moving through
the atmosphere…On the arrival of Smith in Kirtland he appeared
astonished at the wild enthusiasm and scalping performances of his
proselytes there. He told them that he had inquired of the Lord
concerning the matter, and had been informed that it was all the work of
the devil, as heretofore related. The disturbance therefore ceased.'
*Mormonism Unveiled*, 104, 116.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[79:6](hou07.htm#fr_71.md) 'One of their leading
articles of faith is, that the Indians of North America, in a very few
years, will be converted to Mormonism, and through rivers of blood will
again take possession of their ancient inheritance.' *Howe's Mormonism
Unveiled*, 145.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[79:7](hou07.htm#fr_72.md) 'We before had Moses and
Aaron in the persons of Smith and Cowdery, and we now have John the
Baptist, in the person of Sidney Rigdon. Their plans of deception appear
to have been more fully matured and developed after the meeting of Smith
and Rigdon. The latter being found very intimate with the scriptures, a
close reasoner, and as fully competent to make <span id="page_80">p.
80</span> white appear black and black white as any other man; and at
all times prepared to establish, to the satisfaction of great numbers of
people, the negative or affirmative of any and every question from
scripture, he was forthwith appointed to promulgate all the absurdities
and ridiculous pretensions of Mormonism, and call on the holy prophets
to prove all the words of Smith. But the miraculous powers conferred
upon him we do not learn have yet been put in requisition. It seems that
the spirit had not, before the arrival of Rigdon, told Smith anything
about the promised land, or his removal to Ohio. It is therefore very
questionable what manner of spirit it was which dictated most of the
after movements of the prophet. The spirit of Rigdon, it must be
presumed, however, generally held sway; for a revelation was soon had
that Kirtland, the residence of Rigdon and his brethren, was to be the
eastern border of the promised land, and from thence to the Pacific
Ocean· On this land the New Jerusalem, the city of refuge, was to be
built. Upon it all true Mormons were to assemble, to escape the
destruction of the world which was so soon to take place.' *Howe's
Mormonism Unveiled*, 109-10. Tucker, *Origin and Prog. Mor*., 76-8, thus
speaks of the first appearance of this first regular Mormon preacher
before a Palmyra congregation: 'Rigdon introduced himself as the
messenger of God, declaring that he was commanded from above to proclaim
the Mormon revelation. After going through with a ceremonious form of
prayer, in which he expressed his grateful sense of the blessings of the
glorious gospel dispensation now opening to the world, and the
miraculous light from heaven to be displayed through the instrumentality
of the chosen revelator, Joseph Smith Jr,…he announced his text as
follows: First book of Nephi, chapter iv.—"And the angel spoke unto me,
saying, These last records which thou hast seen among the gentiles shall
establish the truth of the first, which is of the twelve apostles of the
lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been
taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and
people that the lamb of God is the son of the eternal father and saviour
of the world; and that all men must come unto him or they cannot be
saved." The preacher assumed to establish the theory that the book of
Mormon and the old bible were one in inspiration and importance, and
that the precious things now revealed had for wise purposes been
withheld from the book first promulgated to the world, and were
necessary to establish its truth. In the course of his argument he
applied various quotations from the two books to prove his position.
Holding the book of Mormon in his right hand, and the bible in his left
hand, he brought them together in a manner corresponding to the emphatic
declaration made by him, that they were both equally the word of God;
that neither was perfect without the other; and that they were
inseparably necessary to complete the everlasting gospel of the saviour
Jesus Christ.' It is said that Rigdon, after his return to Kirtland from
his visit to Smith, in one of his eloquent discourses on the new faith,
'gave a challenge to the world to disprove the new bible, and the
pretensions of its authors.' Rigdon's old friend, Thomas Campbell,
hearing of it, wrote him from Mentor accepting, at the same time
enclosing an outline of what his line of argument would be. There the
matter dropped.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[80:8](hou07.htm#fr_73.md) See *Millennial Star*,
v. 33-5; *Times and Seasons*, iv. 352-4. Mather, in *Lippincott's Mag*.,
Aug. 1880, states that to escape persecution sixty believers <span
id="page_81">p. 81</span> abandoned their homes in the Susquehanna
valley and moved westward. 'Some of the followers,' he says, 'were moved
by a spirit of adventure, while others placed their property in the
common lot and determined to accompany the prophet to his earthly as
well as to his heavenly kingdom. Smith Baker was one of the teamsters,
and reports that the train consisted of three baggage and eleven
passenger wagons. The exodus was along the old state road, north of
Binghamton, to Ithaca, and thence across Cayuga Lake to Palmra.'

<span id="fn_74"></span>[81:9](hou07.htm#fr_74.md) 'Smith had appointed as
his bishop one Edward Partridge, a very honest and industrious hatter of
Painesville, Ohio, who had withal a comfortable stock of the good things
of the world. He was stationed at Independence, and had the sole control
of all the temporal and spiritual affairs of the colony, always
obedient, however, to the revelations promulgated by Smith.'

<span id="fn_75"></span>[81:10](hou07.htm#fr_75.md) 'Some of the members
pretended to receive parchment commissions miraculously, which vanished
from their sight as soon as they had been copied.' For a copy of one of
these, with seal attached, see *Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 107;
*Kidder's Mormonism*, 73.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[82:11](hou07.htm#fr_76.md) 'Since the organization
of the church on the sixth day of April, 1830, there has been a record
kept in our church of its general transactions, of its <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> persecutions and general history. The one in
charge of this duty is called by us "the historian and general church
recorder. The first who occupied this position was John Whitmer, until
1838, when he was excommunicated from the church for transgression, and
took portions of the church records with him.' *Richards’ Bibliography
of Utah*, MS., 2. 'The earliest clerk service rendered the prophet
Joseph, of which there is any account, was by Martin Harris; Joseph's
wife, Emma, then Oliver Cowdery, who, as is claimed, wrote the greater
portion of the original manuscript of the *Book of Mormon*, as he
translated it from the gold plates by the urim and thummim which he
obtained with the plates. In March 1831 John Whitmer was appointed to
keep the church record and history continually, Oliver having been
appointed to other labors. Whitmer was assisted, temporarily, on
occasions of absence or illness by Warren Parrish. At a meeting of high
council at Kirtland, Sept. 14, 1835, it was decided that "Oliver Cowdery
be appointed, and that he act hereafter as recorder for the church,"
Whitmer having just been called to be editor of the *Messenger and
Advocate*. At a general conference held in Far West April 6, 1838, John
Corrill and Elias Higbee were appointed historians, and George W.
Robinson "general church recorder and clerk for the first presidency."
On the death of Elder Robert B. Thompson, which occurred at Nauvoo on
the twenty-seventh of August 1841, in his obituary it is stated: "Nearly
two years past he had officiated as scribe to President Joseph Smith and
clerk for the church, which important stations he filled with that
dignity and honor befitting a man of God." During the expulsion from
Missouri, and the early settlement of Nauvoo, James Mulholland, William
Clayton, and perhaps others rendered temporary service in this line
until the 13th of December, 1841 when Willard Richards was appointed
recorder, general clerk, and private secretary to the prophet, which
offices he occupied until his death, in March 1854, when he was
succeeded by George A. Smith, who held it until his death on the first
of September, 1875, with Wilford Woodruff as his assistant. Soon after,
Orson Pratt succeeded to the office, retaining Woodruff as his
assistant, until his demise on the third of October, 1881. Directly
after President Woodruff was appointed to the office, and in January
1884, Apostle Franklin D. Richards was appointed his assistant.' See
*Times and Seasons*, v. 401; *Millennial Star*, v. 82; *Richards’
Narrative*, MS., 94-8.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[83:12](hou07.htm#fr_77.md) Of the future of this
city there were many revelations and many conjectures. 'It was said that
it would in a few years exceed in splendor everything known in ancient
times. Its streets were to be paved with gold; all that escaped the
general destruction which was soon to take place would there assemble
with all their wealth; the ten lost tribes of Israel had been discovered
in their retreat in the vicinity of the north pole, where the had for
ages been secluded by immense barriers of ice, anti became vastly rich;
the ice in a few years was to be melted away, when those tribes, with St
John and some of the Nephites, which the book of Mormon bad
immortalized, would be seen making their appearance in the new city,
loaded with immense quantities of gold and silver. Whether the prophet
himself ever declared nat these things bad been revealed to him, or that
he had seen them through his magic stone or silver spectacles, we will
not say; but that such stories and hundreds of others equally absurd
were told by those who were in daily Intercourse with him, as being
events which would probably take place, are susceptible of proof.'
*Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 127-8. 'Kirtland was never intended to be
the metropolis of Mormonism; it was selected as a temporary abiding
place, to make money in reference to a removal farther west.' *Ferris’
Utah and the Mormons*, 72.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[84:13](hou07.htm#fr_78.md) 'From this point in the
history of this delusion,' says Howe, 'it began to spread with
considerable rapidity. Nearly all of their male converts, however
ignorant and worthless, were forthwith transformed into elders, and sent
forth to proclaim, with all their wild enthusiasm, the wonders and
mysteries of Mormonism. All those having a taste for the marvellous and
delighting <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> in novelties flocked to hear
them. Many travelled fifty and a hundred miles to the throne of the
prophet in Kirtland, to hear from his own mouth the certainty of his
excavating a bible and spectacles. Many, even in the New England states,
after hearing the frantic story of some of these elders, would forthwith
place their all into a wagon, and wend their way to the promised land,
in order, as they supposed, to escape the judgments of heaven, which
were soon to be poured out upon the land. The state of New York, they
were privately told, would most probably be sunk, unless the people
thereof believed in the pretensions of Smith.' *Mormonism Unveiled*,
115-16.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[85:14](hou07.htm#fr_79.md) Howe writes thus of
Phelps: 'Before the rise of Mormonism he was an avowed infidel; having a
remarkable propensity for fame and eminence, he was supercilious,
haughty, and egotistical. His great ambition was to embark in some
speculation where he could shine preëminent. He took an active part for
several years in the political contests of New York, and made no little
display as an editor of a partisan newspaper, and after being foiled in
his desires to become a candidate for lieutenant-governor of that state,
his attention was suddenly diverted by the prospects which were held out
to him in the gold-bible speculation. In this he was sure of becoming a
great man, and made the dupes believe he was master of fourteen
different languages, of which they frequently boasted. But he soon found
that the prophet would suffer no growing rivalships, whose sagacity he
had not well calculated, until he was met by a revelation which informed
him that he could rise no higher than a printer.' *Mormonism Unveiled*,
274.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[87:15](hou07.htm#fr_80.md) Of Independence one of
them says: 'It is a new town, containing a court-house built of brick,
two or three merchants' stores, and 15 or 20 dwelling-houses built
mostly of logs hewed on both sides; and is situated on a handsome rise
of ground about three miles south of Missouri River, and about 12 miles
east of the dividing line between the United States and the Indian
reserve, and is the county scat of Jackson county.' Booth's letter in
*Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 196. On the south side of the Missouri,
Parley Pratt says, *Autobiography*, 78, some families were entirely
dressed in skins, without any other clothing, including ladies young and
old. Buildings were generally without glass windows, and the door open
in winter for a light.'

<span id="fn_81"></span>[87:16](hou07.htm#fr_81.md) Booth, in *Howe's
Mormonism Unveiled*, 196-9, says: 'The designation of the site where the
city of Zion was to begin was attended with considerable parade and an
ostentatious display of talents, both by Rigdon and Cowdery. And the
next day the ground for the temple was consecrated, Smith claiming the
honor of laying the corner-stone himself. The location of the stone was
marked by a sapling from which the bark was removed on the north and
east sides: on the south side a letter T was cut, which stood for
temple, and on the east side Zom., for Zomas; which Smith said is the
original word for Zion. This stone was placed near the foot of the
sapling and covered with bushes cut for the purpose; the spot being on
an elevation half a mile from Independence.' 'The Colesville branch was
among the first organized by Joseph Smith, and constituted the first
settlers of the members of the church in Missouri. They had arrived late
in the summer and cut some hay for their cattle, sowed a little grain,
prepared some ground for cultivation, and were engaged during the fall
and winter in building log cabins, etc. The winter was cold, and for
some time about 10 families lived in one cabin, which was open and
unfinished, while the frozen ground served for a floor. Our food
consisted of beef, and a little bread made of corn which had been grated
into coarse meal by rubbing the ears on a tin grater.' *Pratt's
Autobiography*, 76. See also *Millennial Star*, v. 131. It was revealed
through Joseph the seer that the property of the Colesville branch
should be held in common, and that Partridge (its bishop) have charge
and distribute from the community storehouse according to the needs of
each. *Smith's Doctrine and Covenants* (1876), 187-8 Smith in the
beginning of the church attempted establish communism, each giving their
all to the bishop, and only drawing out of the office sufficient to live
upon. This was found to be impracticable, and it was silently permitted
to glide into the payment of tithing. *Hyde's Mormonism*, 37.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[87:17](hou07.htm#fr_82.md) 'This year, 1831,
passed off with a gradual increase, and considerable wealth was drawn
in, so that they began to boast of a capital stock of ten or <span
id="page_88">p. 88</span> fifteen thousand dollars. Their common-stock
principles appear to be somewhat similar to those of the shakers.'
*Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 128-9.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[88:18](hou07.htm#fr_83.md) Booth intimates that
Smith and Rigdon preferred living in Ohio to enduring the hardships of
Missouri. 'Before they went to Missouri their language was, "We shall
winter in Ohio but one winter more;" and when in Missouri, "It will be
many years before we come here, for the lord has a great work for us to
do in Ohio." And the great work is to make a thorough alteration of the
bible, and invent new revelations, and these are to be sent to Missouri
in order to be printed.' Letter in *Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 199.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[88:19](hou07.htm#fr_84.md) 'Some dispute, of which
the nature is not clearly known, appears to have arisen between Joseph
and his friend Sidney Rigdon before their return. It is probable, from
the course of subsequent events, that Sidney, even at this time, aspired
to greater power in the church than suited the prophet,… who saw fit to
rebuke him by a revelation accusing him of "being exalted in his heart,
and despising the counsel of the lord. They afterward became
reconciled."' *Smucker's Mormons*, 75-6, confirmed by *Millennial Star*,
v. 149; *Times and Seasons*, v. 467. From this time till January 1832,
Joseph continued preaching in various parts of the United States, making
converts with great rapidity. He found it necessary, however, further to
check the presumption of some new and indiscreet converts who also had
revelations from the Lord, which they endeavored to palm off upon the
public. Among others, one W. E. McLellan was rebuked for endeavoring to
'write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's.'
*Mackay's Mormons*, 67-8. See anecdote of 'The Swamp Angel;' also
account of raising the dead by Smith, about this time. *Ward's Mormon
Wife*, 10-11, 15-24. For text of rebuke, where the name of the offender
is given William E. M’Lellin, see *Millennial Star*, v. 185-6; *Times
and Seasons*, v. 496.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[89:20](hou07.htm#fr_85.md) Booth's letters were
first printed at Ravenna, in the *Ohio Star*, and afterward by E. D.
Howe in his book, *Mormonism Unveiled*, 175-221. They are nine in
number, and are full of general denunciation and sorrow over his past
blindness, and an account of the hardships and disappointments attending
his journey to and from Missouri. I quote the more pertinent points.
When I embraced Mormonism I conscientiously believed it to be of God.'
'The relation in which Smith stands to the church is that of a prophet,
seer, revealer, and translator; and when he speaks by the spirit, or
says he knows a thing by the communication of the spirit, it is received
as coming directly from the mouth of the Lord.' 'This system, to some,
carries the force of plausibility, and appears under an imposing form.
It claims the bible for its patron, and proffers the restoration of the
apostolic church, with all the gifts and graces with which the primitive
saints were endowed.' 'Many of them have been ordained to the high
priesthood, or the order of Melchisedec, and profess to be endowed with
the same power as the ancient apostles were. But they have been hitherto
unsuccessful in finding the lame, the halt, and the blind who had. the
faith sufficient to become the subjects of their miracles, and it is now
concluded that this work must be postponed until they get to Missouri;
for the Lord will not show those signs to this wicked and adulterous
generation. In the commandment given to the churches in the state of New
York to remove to the state of Ohio, they were assured that these
miracles should be wrought in the state of Ohio; but now they must be
deferred until they are settled in Missouri.' 'Everything in the church
is done by commandment; and yet it is said to be done by the voice of
rite church. For instance. Smith gets a commandment that he shall be the
head of the church, or that he shall rule the conference, or that the
church shall build him an elegant house and give him 1,000 dollars. For
this the members of the church must vote, or they will be cast off for
rebelling against the commandments of the Lord.' 'Smith describes an
angel as having the appearance of a tall, slim, well built, handsome
man, with a bright pillar upon his head.' The bishop's 'business is to
superintend the secular concerns of the church. He holds a deed el the
lands; and the members receive a writing from him signifying that they
are to possess the land as their own so long as they are obedient to
Smith's commandments.' 'The Lord's storehouse is to be furnished with
goods suited to the Indian trade, and persons are to obtain license from
the government to dispose of them to the Indians in their own territory;
at the Same time they are to disseminate the principles of Mormonism
among them.'

<span id="fn_86"></span>[90:21](hou07.htm#fr_86.md) 'Thirty or forty elders
were sent off in various directlens in pursuit of proselytes, and the
year passed off with a gradual increase.' *Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*,
128-9. The men, after baptism, are elders, and are empowered to perform
the ceremony upon others. *Carvalho's Incidents of Travel*, 148. For
names of apostates at this time, see *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 77. For
instances of young women induced to unite with the sect about this time,
see *Ward's Mormon Wife*, 42-81. Mackay erroneously states that the
number of saints in Kirtland at this time, including women and children,
was but 150. *The Mormons*, 71-2.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[90:22](hou07.htm#fr_87.md) In January it was
revealed that the work of translating should be proceeded with by Smith
and Rigdon until finished; and that several of the elders, among whom
was Orson Hyde, a recent convert, should go forth in various directions
in pairs as before, and preach. Smith and some of the elders attended a
conference at Amherst, Loraine Co., after returning from which both
himself and Rigdon were shown the devil in a vision, and had the
revelation of St John explained to them. In March it was revealed that
steps should be taken to regulate and establish storehouses for the
benefit of the poor, both at Kirtland and at Zion. More missionaries
were sent out, and word was received that the emigrants had safely
reached Missouri. *Times and Seasons*, v. 576-7, 592-6, 608-9.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[90:23](hou07.htm#fr_88.md) *Times and Seasons*, v.
611-12. *Mackay, Mormons*, 68-71, erroneously dates the outrage Jan.
25th. One account says aqua-fortis was poured into Smith's mouth.
*Deseret News* Aug. 6, 1862. Smith says 'they tried to force a vial into
my mouth, and broke it in my teeth.' One reason assigned for this
treatment was that they were attempting to establish communism and <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> dishonorable dealing, forgery, and swindling.
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 672. Smith merely says that Rigdon was
mad; but his mother asserts that he counterfeited the madness in order
to mislead the saints into the belief that the keys of the kingdom had
been taken from the church, and would not be restored, as he said, until
they had built him a new house. This, she says, gave rise to great
scandal, which Joseph however succeeded in silencing. Rigdon repented
and was forgiven. He stated that as a punishment for his fault, the
devil had three times thrown him out of his bed in one night. *Remy's
Journey to Great Salt Lake*, i. 283 (note).

<span id="fn_89"></span>[91:24](hou07.htm#fr_89.md) The 26th of April Smith
called a general council, which acknowledged him as president of the
high priesthood, to which he had been ordained at the Amherst conference
in January, and Bishop Partridge and Rigdon, who had quarrelled, were
reconciled, probably by Smith, as Rigdon was supposed to be at Kirtland
at the time. This greatly rejoiced Smith; and he immediately received a
revelation, in which it was announced that the stakes must be
strengthened, and all property was to be held in common. *Times and
Seasons*, v. 624-5; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 71.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91:25](hou07.htm#fr_90.md) The first edition of
*Doctrine and Covenants* presents the following title page: *A Book of
Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ organized
according to law on the 6th of April, 1830. Zion: Published by W. W.
Phelps & Co., 1833*. This edition contains the revelations given up to
September, 1831. There were 3,000 copies printed of this edition. Then
there was The *Book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-Day Saints; Selected from the Revelations of God. By
Joseph Smith, President. First European Edition, Liverpool*, no date.
The preface, however, by Thomas Ward, is dated Liverpool, June 14, 1845.
There are two principal divisions and an appendix. The first consists of
seven lectures on faith, delivered by Sidney Rigdon before a class of
elders at Kirtland; the second is called Covenants and Commandments, and
consists chiefly of revelations given 1830-42, to Joseph Smith, the same
for the most part that are also printed in *Times and Seasons*, under
title of History of Joseph Smith. There are also rules, minutes of
council, visions, and expositions. The appendix contains rules on
marriage, a dissertation on government and laws, and a brief account of
Joseph and Hyrum Smith. 'The book of Mormon, although most known, is not
the chief book of the sect. *The Book of Teachings and Covenants*,
containing some of the revelations which Smith pretended to have re
ceived from heaven, is regarded by his disciples as a book of the law
which God <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> has given this generation.
Smith also published other revelations, which are contained in a little
book called *The Pearl of Great Price*.' *De Smet's Western Missions*,
393. 'This book abounds in grammatical inaccuracies, even to a greater
extent than the book of Mormon.' *Mackay's The Mormons*, 43. A bungling
statement is made by Mather, *Lippincott's Mag*., Aug. 1880, to the
effect that in 1835 'Rigdon's *Book of Doctrine and Covenants* and his
*Lectures on Faith* were adopted.'

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92:26](hou07.htm#fr_91.md) Arrangements were early
made for the establishment of a store. *Ferris’ Utah and Mormons*, 75.
When the printing press was bought—see *Deseret News*, June 30, 1869—a
supply of goods was purchased; and arrangements were made at the May
council to keep up the supply, which, with few exceptions, were
considered satisfactory. On April 27th considerable business was
transacted 'for the salvation of the saints who were settling among a
ferocious set of mobbers, like lambs among wolves.' On the 28th and 29th
Smith visited the settlement above Big Blue River in Kaw township, 12
miles west of Independence, including the Colesville branch, and
returned on the 30th, when it was revealed that all minors should be
supported by their parents, but after becoming of age 'they had claims
upon the church, or in other words, the Lord's storehouse,' as was also
the case with widows left destitute. *Times and Seasons*, v. 625-6.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[92:27](hou07.htm#fr_92.md) On May 6th, leaving
affairs as he supposed in a flourishing condition, Smith started for
Kirtland to look after the mill, store, and farm in that neighborhood,
but owing to an accident which resulted in the breaking of Whitney's
leg, Smith was delayed 4 weeks en route. Rigdon, who was also of the
party, proceeded through without stopping, and the other two arrived
some time in June. The season was passed by Smith in his work of
translating the scriptures, and in attending to business affairs. *Times
and Seasons*, v. 626.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[93:28](hou07.htm#fr_93.md) Hardly had President
Smith turned his back upon Zion, when dissensions broke out among the
saints there. He corresponded regularly with the *Star*, giving advice
and warning, but matters apparently grew worse, for in January 1833 a
conference of twelve high priests was held at Kirtland, or Kirtland
Mills, as they now called their settlement, at which Orson Hyde and
Hyrum Smith were appointed to write an epistle to the brotherhood of
Zion. The document was dated Jan. 14th, and began: 'From a conference of
12 high priests to the bishop, his council, and the inhabitants of
Zion.' After premising that Smith and certain others had written on this
all-important subject, and that the replies received had not given
satisfactory assurances of confession and repentance, charges were made
that old grievances, supposed to be settled, had been again brought up
in a censorious spirit, and that they had accused Brother Smith of
seeking after monarchical power and authority. This complaint was made
by Carroll in a letter dated June 2d. Again, Brother Gilbert, on Dec.
10th, wrote a letter which contained 'low, dark, and blind insinuations,
which they declined to entertain, though the writer's claims and
pretensions to holiness were great.' Brother Phelps, Dec. 15th, Wrote a
letter betraying 'a lightness of spirit that ill becomes a man placed in
the important and responsible station that he is placed in.' To a
request that Smith should come to Zion, made by Phelps in a previous
letter, it was answered that 'Brother Smith will not settle in Zion
until she repent and purify herself…and remember the commandments that
have been given her to do them as well as say them.' Finally, it was
threatened that unless these disturbances should cease, they should all
be cut off, and the Lord would seek another place. Brother Ziba Peterson
was delivered 'over to the buffetings of Satan, in the name of the Lord,
that he may learn not to transgress the commandments of God.' *Times and
Seasons*, v. 801.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[94:29](hou07.htm#fr_94.md) 'The church that was to
be established in Jackson county was called Zion, the centre of
gathering, and those established by revelation in other places were
called stakes of Zion, or stakes; hence the stake at Kirtland, the stake
at Far West, etc. Each stake was to have a presidency, consisting of
three high priests, chosen and set apart for that purpose, whose
jurisdiction was confined to the limits of the stake over which they
took the watch care.' *Kidder's Mormonism*, 121-2. A stake of Zion is an
organization comprising a presidency, high priests, and its council of
12 high priests. The latter is a tribunal for the trial of brethren. It
is a court of appeal from the bishops, and has also jurisdiction in
spiritual matters. *Richards’ Narrative*, MS., 55. For origin of name,
see *Doctrine and Convenants* (1876), 263. 'The next year, 1833,
commenced with something like a change of operations. Instead of selling
their possessions in Ohio, they again began to buy up improved land,
mills, and water privileges. It would seem that the Missouri country
began to look rather dreary to the prophet and his head men, supposing
that they could not enjoy their power there as well as in Ohio.' *Howe's
Mormonism Unveiled*, 130.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[95:30](hou07.htm#fr_95.md) Four years after the
first printing of the *Book of Mormon*, at Palmyra, New York, was issued
in Ohio the following work: *Mormonism Unveiled: or, A faithful account
of that singular Imposition and Delusion, from its rise to the present
time. With sketches of the characters of its Propagators, and a full
detail of the manner in which the famous Golden Bible was brought before
the World. To which are added inquiries into the probability that the
historical part of the said bible was written by one Solomon Spaulding,
more than twenty years ago, and by him intended to have been published
as a romance. By E. D. Howe. Painesville, Printed and Published by the
Author, 1834*. 12mo, 290 pages. Painesville is situated but a short
distance from Kirtland, then the headquarters of Mormonism, where about
that time was ordained the first quorum of the twelve apostles, and
Sidney Rigdon was delivering Joseph Smith's famous lectures on faith,
subsequently printed in *Doctrine and Covenants*, already noticed. Here
also, shortly afterward, the first Mormon temple was dedicated. Great
excitement prevailed throughout that section regarding religion, and the
book was widely circulated. It was a powerful weapon, and promptly and
skillfully handled; yet it seems to have been no serious barrier to the
dissemination of the new doctrines. The work is well written; and while
not vehement in its denunciations, it brings forward a large mass of
evidence to prove, as he says, 'the depths of folly, degradation, and
superstition to which human nature can be carried.' He observes that
'the difficulty of procuring, or arriving at the whole truth, in
relation to a religious imposition which has from its birth been so
studiously veiled in secrecy, and generally under a belief that the
judgments of God would follow any disclosures of what its votaries had
seen or heard, will be readily discovered.' The author begins with some
account of the Smith family. Their thoughts turned greatly toward
gaining possession of hidden treasures. Young Joseph 'had become very
expert in the arts of necromancy, juggling, the use of the divining rod,
and looking into what they termed a peep-stone, by which means he soon
collected about him a gang of idle, credulous young men, to perform the
labor of digging into the hills and mountains, and other lonely places
in that vicinity in search of gold.' After comments on Cowdery, Harris,
and Whitmer, Mr Howe gives a commentary on the golden bible. Some 63
pages are devoted to this, and to observations on the credibility of the
three and the eight witnesses. Sarcasm is the weapon employed, and
generally with effect; the exposition in regard to contradictions and
historical inaccuries might apply with equal force to the bible, the
koran, or any other sacred book. Mention is next made of Pratt's
conversion, which, he intimates, was not accidental, followed by an
account of the expedition to the Lamanites. Thus the line of events is
followed by Mr Howe to the time of the publication of his book, at the
end of which are given letters amid testimonials to disprove the
statements and doctrines of the Mormons, and also to prove that the book
of Mormon was the work of Spaulding. On the whole, besides being the
first book published in opposition to the Mormons, it is also one of the
most ably written, the most original, and the most respectable.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[96:31](hou07.htm#fr_96.md) A plan and
specifications for the new city of Zion were sent out from Kirtland. The
plot was one mile square, drawn to a scale of 660 feet to one inch. Each
square was to contain ten acres, or 660 feet fronts. Lots were to be
laid out alternately in the squares; in one, fronting north or south; in
the next east or west; each lot extending to the centre line of its
square, with a frontage of 66 feet and a depth of 330 feet, or half an
acre. By this arrangement in one square the houses would stand on one
street, and in the square opposite on another street. Through the middle
of the plot ran a range of blocks 660 feet by 990 feet set apart for the
public buildings, and in these the lots were all laid off north and
south, the greatest length of the blocks being from east to west: thus
making all the lots equal in size. The whole plot was supposed to be
sufficient for the accommodation of from 15,000 to 20,000 people. All
stables, barns, etc., were to be built north or south of the plot, none
being permitted in the city among the houses. Sufficient adjoining
ground on all sides was to be reserved for supplying the city with
vegetables, etc. All streets were to be 132 feet (8 perches) wide, and a
like width was to be laid off between the temple and its surrounding
streets. But one house was to be built on a lot, and that must front on
a line 25 feet from the street, the space in front to be set out with
trees, shrubs, etc., according to the builder's taste. All houses to be
of either brick or stone. The house of the Lord for the presidency was
to be 61 feet by 87 feet, 10 feet of the length for a stairway. The
interior was so arranged as to permit its division into 4 parts by
curtains. At the east and west ends were to be pulpits arranged for the
several grades of president and council, bishop and council, high
priests and elders, at the west; and the lesser priesthood, comprising
presidency, priests, teachers, and deacons, at the east. Provision was
also made to seat visiting officers according to their grades. The pews
were fitted with sliding seats, so that the audience could face either
pulpit as required. There was to be no gallery, but the house was to be
divided into 2 stories of 14 feet each. A bell of very large size was
also ordered. Finally, on each public building must be written, Holiness
to the Lord. When this plot was settled, another was to be laid out, and
so on. *Times and Seasons*, vi. 785-7, 800. Zion City—its prototype in
Enoch's City. *Young's History of the Seventies*, 9-15, no. 10, in
*Mormon Pamphlets*. It was revealed to Smith that the waters of the gulf
of Mexico covered the site of a prehistoric city, built by and named for
Enoch; and that it was translated because its inhabitants had become so
far advanced that further earthly residence was unnecessary. Zion,
Smith's ideal city, was finally to reach a like state of perfection.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[97:32](hou07.htm#fr_97.md) *Autobiography*, 103.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[97:33](hou07.htm#fr_98.md) 'Their prophet had
declared that Zion should be established, and should put down her
enemies under her feet. Why, then, should they hesitate to proclaim
their anticipations? They boasted openly that they should soon possess
the whole country, and that the unbelievers should be rooted out from
the land.' *Edinburgh Review*, April 1854. 'We have been, credibly
informed that Rigdon has given it as his opinion that the Mormons will
be able to elect a member of congress in five years, and that in three
years they would take the offices in the town of Kirtland. They say that
when they get the <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> secular power into
their hands, everything will be performed by immediate revelations from
God. We shall then have Pope Joseph the First and his hierarchy.'
*Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 145.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[98:34](hou07.htm#fr_99.md) 'So early as April
1832, the saints were made to feel themselves unwelcome sojourners in
Jackson co. Stones and brickbats were thrown through the windows of
their houses, and they were otherwise annoyed and insulted. Meetings
were held during that year and the early part of 1833, at which
resolutions were sometimes passed, and sometimes the assembly indulged
in a fight among its members; but nothing more serious resulted. Stoning
houses, however, was resumed in the early summer of the last-mentioned
year.' *Times and Season*, i. 17; vi. 851.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[99:35](hou07.htm#fr_100.md) *Persecution of the
Saints*, 21-8. Mackay, *The Mormons*, 72-4, says 'the manner in which
the Mormons behaved in their Zion was not calculated to make friends.
The superiority they assumed gave offense, and the rumors that were
spread by some false friends, who had been turned out of the church for
misconduct, excited against them an intense feeling of alarm and hatred.
They were accused of communism, and not simply a community of goods and
chattels, but of wives…Joined to the odium unjustly cast upon them for
these reasons, they talked so imprudently of their determination to
possess the whole state of Missouri, and to suffer no one to live in it
who would not conform to their faith, that a party was secretly formed
against them, of which the object was nothing less than their total and
immediate expulsion from their promised Zion…The anti-Mormon press
contained at the same time an article entitled "Beware of false
prophets," written by a person whom Joseph called a black rod in the
hand of Satan. This article was distributed from house to house in
Independence and its neighborhood, and contained many false charges
against Smith and his associates, reiterating the calumny about the
community of goods and wives.' Smith calls this man 'one Pixley,' and
says he was sent by the missionary society, to civilize and christianize
the heathen of the west, and that he was not only a black red, but 'a
poisoned shaft in the power of our foes, to spread lies and
falsehoods'…It is also probable that the more indolent Missourians gazed
with jealous eyes as the new-comers exhibited that agricultural thrift
which has always characterized them as a people; for we find the twelve
high priests, through Hyde and Hyrum Smith, reprimanding Brother Phelps
as follows: "If you have fat beef and potatoes, eat them in singleness
of heart, and boast not yourselves in these things."' *Times and
Seasons*, v. 721; vi. 816. 'It was conjectured by the inhabitants of
Jackson county that the Mormonites as a body are wealthy, and many of
them entertain fears that next December, when the list of land is
exposed for sale, they will outbid others, and establish themselves as
the most powerful body in the county.' Booth, in *Howe's Mormonism
Unveiled*, 195.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[99:36](hou07.htm#fr_101.md) It was further
declared: '1st, That no Mormon shall in future move and settle in this
county. 2d, That those nowhere, who shall give a definite pledge of
their intention, within a reasonable time, to remove out of the county,
shall be allowed to remain unmolested until they shall have sufficient
time to sell their property and close their business without any
sacrifice. 3d, That the editor of the Star be required forthwith to
close his office, and discontinue the business of printing in this
county; and as to all other stores and shops belonging to the sect,
their owners must in every case comply with the terms strictly agreeably
to the 2d article of this declaration; and upon failure, prompt and
efficient measures will be taken to close the same. 4th, That the Mormon
leaders here are required to use their influence in preventing any
further emigration of their distant brethren to this county, and <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> counsel and advise their brethren to comply
with the above requisitions. 5th, That those who fail to comply with the
above requisitions be referred to those of their brethren who have the
gift of tongues, to inform them of the lot that awaits them.' *Howe's
Mormonism Unveiled*, 141.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[100:37](hou07.htm#fr_102.md) 'Six of the
principal elders met the mob's committee. The latter demanded that the
printing-office, the shops, and the store, be closed forthwith, and that
the society leave the county immediately. The elders asked for three
months' delay, which was refused; then for ten days, which was also
refused; the latter refusal being accompanied with a notification that
fifteen minutes was the longest time that could be granted. Each elder
having declined to accede to the terms, one of the mob remarked on
leaving that he was sorry, for, said he, "the work of destruction will
commence immediately."' *Times and Seasons*, i. 18. Phelps, the editor,
Partridge, the bishop, and Gilbert, the store-keeper, are mentioned.
*Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 89.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[100:38](hou07.htm#fr_103.md) 'In a short time
time hundreds of the mob gathered around the printing-office (a
two-story brick building), which they soon threw down. The press was
thrown from the upper story, and all the books, stock, and material
scattered through the streets. After destroying the printing house, they
proceeded to Gilbert and Whitney's store for the same purpose, but
Gilbert agreeing to shut it, and box the goods soon, they concluded to
let it alone.' *Times and Seasons*, i. 18; *Pratt's Persecution of the
Saints*, 29.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[100:39](hou07.htm#fr_104.md) 'A number more were
taken, but succeeded in escaping through the over-anxiety of their
keepers, who crowded forward to enjoy the sport.' *Times and Seasons*,
i. 18. Phelps the editor was one. *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 89. Partridge
says the mob was led by George Simpson. *Times and Seasons*, vi. 819.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[100:40](hou07.htm#fr_105.md) Spoken by Lilburn W.
Boggs, lieutenant-governor, a man who thenceforward appears to have
persecuted the Mormons with unrelenting hostility. He 'was in the
immediate neighborhood of the riot, but declined to take any part in
preserving the peace.' *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 89-90; *Times and
Seasons*, vi. 819.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[100:41](hou07.htm#fr_106.md) Six persons signed
the agreement that one half of the Mormons should leave in January and
one half in April 1834, the publication of the paper to be discontinued.
*Mackay's The Mormons*, 76; *Pratt's Persecution*, 30.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[102:42](hou07.htm#fr_107.md) *Pratt's
Autobiography*, 105; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 77-8; *Pratt's
Persecution*, 31-6.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[102:43](hou07.htm#fr_108.md) In a memorial to the
legislature of Missouri, dated Far West, Dec. 10, 1838, and signed by
nine prominent Mormons, is this statement: 'A battle took place in which
some two or three of the mob and one of our people were killed. This
raised, as it were, the whole county in arms, and nothing could satisfy
them but an immediate surrender of the arms of our people, and they
forthwith had to leave the county. Fifty-one guns were given up, which
have never been returned or paid for to this day.'

<span id="fn_109"></span>[102:44](hou07.htm#fr_109.md) 'About 1,500 people
were expelled from Jackson co. in Nov. 1833, and about 300 of their
houses burned.' Geo. A. Smith, in *Deseret News*, June 30, 1869, 247.
'Several women thus driven from their homes gave birth to children in
the woods and on the prairies.' *Greene's Facts*, 18. Pratt says 203
houses were burned, according to the estimate of the enemy.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[103:45](hou07.htm#fr_110.md) On Dec. 15th, Phelps
writes to Smith from Clay co.: 'The situation of the saints, as
scattered, is dubious, and affords a gloomy prospect…We are in Clay,
Ray, Lafayette, Jackson, Van Buren, etc. \[countres\], and cannot hear
from each other oftener than we do from you…The governor is willing to
restore us, but as the constitution gives him no power to guard us when
back, we are not willing to go. The mob swear if we come we shall die!
Our people fare very well, and when they are discreet, little or no
persecution is felt. The militia in the upper counties is in readiness
at a moment's warning, having been ordered out by the governor, to guard
a court-martial and court of inquiry etc., but we cannot attend a court
of inquiry on account of the expense, until we are restored and
protected.' *Times and Seasons*, vi. 944.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[103:46](hou07.htm#fr_111.md) Smith wrote to the
saints about this time that he had heard they had surrendered their arms
and fled across the river. If this report was true, he advised them not
to recommence hostilities; but if they were still in possession, they
should 'maintain the ground as long as there is a man left.' They were
also advised to prosecute to the extent of the law; but must not look
for pecuniary assistance from Kirtland, for matters there were by no
means in a flourishing condition. It was recommended that a tract of
land be purchased in Clay co. for present necessaries. *Times and
Seasons*, vi. 914-15.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[104:47](hou07.htm#fr_112.md) 'Concerning our
means of diffusing the principles we profess, we have used the art of
printing almost from the beginning of our work. At Independence,
Missouri in 1832-3-4 two volumes of the *Evening and Morning Star* were
issued by William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery. This was a monthly
octavo of 16 pages, devoted to the faith and doctrines of the church,
and was continued from Independence from June 1832 until July 1833, when
its publication was transferred to Kirtland, Ohio, from whence it was
continued until September 1834, when it gave place to the *Latter-day
Saints’ Messenger and Advocate*, which continued to cheer the prospectus
saints until August 1837, when there appeared in its columns a
prospectus for a new paper to be published at Kirtland, called the
*Elders’ Journal of the Church of Latter-day Saints*, also a monthly,
the first number of which bore date October 1837. The gathering of the
people from Kirtland to Far West in Missouri transferred the publication
of the journal also to that place, from whence it issued until stopped
by the persecution and extermination of the saints in the fall and
winter of 1838 from the state of Missouri. The first number of the
*Millennial Star* was issued at Liverpool in May 1840, at first a
monthly, then fortnightly, and for many years a weekly, with at one time
a circulation of 22,000 copies, edited and published variously by elders
appointed and sent to edit the paper, manage the emigration, and preside
over the work generally in the European countries. This work is still
issued weekly, and greatly aids the cause in Europe. The *Skandinaviens’
Stjerne* has been published in Copenhagen nearly thirty years in the
Danish language, edited by those who have from time to time presided
over the Scandinavian missions. The first number was issued in 1851, and
is well supported, being a great aid in the missionary service in
northern Europe. For several years a periodical entitled the *Udgorn
Seion* was published at Merthyr Tydfil, and was continued until the
number of saints in the Welsh mission was so reduced by emigration as to
render its further publication impracticable.' *Richards’ Bibliography
of Utah*, MS., 7-9.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[105:48](hou07.htm#fr_113.md) 'About this time a
court of inquiry held at Liberty for the purpose of investigating the
action of Col Pitcher in connection with the expulsion of the saints
from Jackson co., found sufficient evidence against that officer to
result in his being placed in arrest for trial by court-martial. The
plant of the printing-office was given by the citizens to Davis & Kelly,
who removed it to Liberty, where they commenced the publication of a
weekly paper called the *Missouri Enquirer*.' 'The citizens also paid
$300 on the $1,000 note given by the elders to their lawyers, thus
acknowledging their action had been wrong.' *Times and Seasons*, vi.
961. 'The governor also ordered them to restore our arms which they had
taken from us, but they never were restored.' *Pratt's Persecution*, 52.
See also *Tayler's Mormons*, xliii.-xlvi.; *Deseret News*, Dec. 27,
1851, and June 30, 1860; *Utah Tracts*, no. 4, 56-64; *Millennial Star*,
xxv. 535-6, 550-2; *Gunnison's Mormons*, 104-14; *Ferris’ Utah and
Mormons*, 87-8.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[105:49](hou07.htm#fr_114.md) They 'called their
Kirtland colony Shinahar.' *Gunnison's Mormons*, 167.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[106:50](hou07.htm#fr_115.md) 'They were trying
times, requiring the combined wisdom of the prophet and his head men…But
the prophet more readily discovered the new advantages that would
ultimately accrue to his cause by a little perseverance. He well knew
that the laws could not continue to be violated in our country for any
length of time, and that he and his followers would, in the end, be the
greatest gainers by the cry of persecution which they could raise…A
revelation was printed in the form of a handbill. it was taken up by all
their priests and carried to all their congregations, some of which were
actually sold for one dollar per copy. Preparations immediately began to
be made for a crusade to their holy land to drive out the infidels…Old
muskets, rifles, pistols, rusty swords, and butcher knives were soon put
in a state of repair and scoured up. Some were borrowed and some were
bought, on a credit if possible, and others were manufactured by their
own mechanics…About the first of May the grand army of fanatics
commenced its march in small detachments from the different places of
concentration. On the 3d the prophet, with a life guard of about 80 men,
the elite of his army, left his quarters in Kirtland with a few baggage
wagons, containing their arms, ammunition, stores, etc. …On arriving at
Salt Creek, Illinois, they were joined by Lyman Wight and Hyrum Smith,
brother of the prophet, with a reinforcement of twenty men, which they
had picked up on the way. Here the grand army, which being fully
completed, encamped for the space of three days. the whole number was
now estimated at 220, rank and file. During their stay here the troops
were kept under a constant drill of manual exercise with guns and
swords, and their arms put in a state of repair; the prophet became very
expert with a sword, and felt himself equal to his prototype Coriantumr.
He had the best sword in the army; probably a true model of Laban's, if
not the identical one itself, an elegant brace of pistols, which were
purchased on a credit of six months, a rifle, and four horses. Wight was
appointed second in command, or fighting general, who, together with the
prophet, had an armor-bearer appointed, selected from among the most
expert tacticians, whose duty it was to be in constant attendance upon
their masters with their arms.' *Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 147-59. '
Cholera broke out in his camp on the 24th of June, and Joseph attempted
to cure it by laying on of hands and prayer…Joseph lost thirteen of his
band by the ravages of the disease… He arrived in Clay co. on the 2d,
and started back for Kirtland on the 9th… Short as was the time he
stayed, he did not depart without organizing and encouraging the main
body…and establishing the community in Clay co. on a better footing than
when he arrived.' *Mackay's The Mormons*, 85. Churches were visited in
New York, Pennsylvania, and the New England States, about 100 recruits
obtained, and 50 more in the vicinity of Kirtland. the first detachment,
about 160 strong, left Kirtland May 5th, and by the next Sunday about 60
more had joined, part from Ohio and part from the east. The body was
organized in companies of tens, each being furnished with camp equipage.
Messes for cooking purposes were formed, and guards mounted at night.
*Deseret News*, Oct. 10, 1869. These men were well armed. A detachment
of twenty men had preceded them as an advanced guard. *Remy's Journey*,
i. 297. They were divided into companies of 12, consisting of 2 cooks, 2
fire-men, 2 tent-makers, 2 watermen, one runner or scout, one
commissary, and 2 <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> wagoners. 20 wagons
accompanied them, and they had fire-arms and all sorts of munitions of
war of the most portable kind for self-defence. *Smucker's Hist. Mor*.,
95; *Times and Seasons*, vi. 1074. On June 3d, when in camp on the
Illinois River, Smith had a mound opened and took out a skeleton,
between whose ribs an arrow was sticking. A revelation followed, in
which the prophet was informed that the bones were those of a white
Lamanite, a warrior named Zelph, who served under the great prophet
Omandagus. *Times and Seasons*, vi. 1076; *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 95-6;
*Remy's Journey*, i. 297; *Ferris’ Utah and the Mormons*, 83-4. June 4th
to 6th was occupied in crossing the Mississippi, there being but one
boat. The company now consisted of 205 men and 25 wagons, with 2 or 3
horses each. The company camped on Rush Creek, Clay co., on June 23d,
and on the night of the 24th the cholera broke out among them, causing
several deaths. On the 25th Smith broke up his command, and the men were
scattered among their neighbors. *Times and Seasons*, vi. 1076, 1088,
1105-6; *Deseret News*, Oct. 19, 1864. Up to June 22d, Smith had
travelled incognito, apparently fearing assassination. *Times and
Seasons*, vi. 1104. A list of the members of Zion's camp will be found
in Deseret News, Oct. 19, 1864, and those living in 1876 in *Id*., Apr.
26, 1876. Smith disbanded his forces in obedience to a revelation.
*Doctrine and Covenants*, 345-9. As the prophet approached Missouri he
selected a body-guard of 20 men, appointing his brother Hyrum as their
captain, and another brother, George, his armor-bearer. He also
appointed a general, who daily inspected the army and drilled them.
*Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 99. On April 10, 1834, the president was again
petitioned from Liberty, Mo. (a petition had been sent on in October
1833); the persecutions were recounted, it was related that an
unavailing appeal had been made to the state executive, and it was asked
that they be restored to the lands in Jackson co. they had purchased
from the U.S. For text of correspondence, etc., see *Times and Seasons*,
vi. 1041-2, 1056-9, 1071-8, 1088-92, 1103, 1107-9, 1120-4. On the march
Pratt still acted as recruiting officer, and visited the churches in
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri, obtaining men and money which he
forwarded to the main betty from time to time. *Pratt's Autobiog*.,
122-3. The band finally numbered 205 in all. *Utah Pioneers, 33d
Anniversary*, 17. The march to Clay co., Mo., occupied 46 days, 9 of
which were spent in camp. During the existence of the body 2 deserted
because they could not fight the mob, and one left without a discharge;
the rest remained faithful. *Deseret News*, Oct. 19, 1864. Further
details of the march will be found in *Mackay's Mormons*, 80-5;
*Kidder's Mormonism*, 111-167 *Howe's Mormonism Unveiled*, 156-63.
Campbell and others who threatened to attack Smith were drowned by the
upsetting of a boat whilst attempting to cross the Missouri. Campell's
vow, and what became of it. *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 100. When the
prophet returned to Kirtland, in August, the council met and proeeeded
to investigate charges against Smith and others on this march. *Deseret
News*, Nov. 15 and 29, 1851.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[107:51](hou07.htm#fr_116.md) The society never
styled themselves Mormons; it is a name popularly attached to them. The
true name is Latter-day Saints. *Pratt's Persecution*, 21. <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> Hyde, *Mormonism*, 202, states that the sect
was first called The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by
Sidney Rigdon at a convention at Kirtland May 4, 1834. See chap. iii.,
note 22.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[108:52](hou07.htm#fr_117.md) When the camp
arrived near Salt River, Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt were despatched
to Jefferson City to request military aid from Gov. Dunklin, in
repossessing the saints of their lands in Jackson co., which aid was
refused. *Pratt's Autobiog*., 123-4. Upon the approach of Smith and his
party the people of Jackson co. held a meeting and sent a committee to
Smith with proposals to buy all the Mormon property in the county. The
offer was declined, and the Mormons in turn offered to buy out the
Missourians. See correspondence in *Howe's Mormonism*, 164-76.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[109:53](hou07.htm#fr_118.md) The most complete
history of the early Mormon church is the *Journal of Joseph Smith*,
extracts from which were made by himself, so as to form a consecutive
narrative, under title of *History of Joseph Smith*, and published in
*Times and Seasons*, beginning with vol. iii. no. 10, March 15, 1842,
and ending Feb. 15, 1846, after the prophet's death. The narrative would
fill a good-sized 12mo volume. It is composed largely of revelations,
which, save in the one point of commandment which it was the purpose
specially to give, are all quite similar. Publication of the *Times and
Seasons* was begun at Commerce, afterward called Nauvoo, Illinois, Nov.
1839, and issued monthly. The number for May 1840 was dated Nauvoo.
Later it was published semi-monthly, and was so continued till Feb.
1846. It is filled with church proceedings, movements of officers,
correspondence of missionaries, history, and general information, with
some poetry. To write a complete history of the Mormons down to 1846
without these volumes would not be possible. The names of E. Robinson
and D. C. Smith first appear as publishers, then Robinson alone, then D.
C. Smith, then E. Robinson and G. Hills, next Joseph Smith, and finally
John Taylor. The organ of that branch of the church which remained in
Iowa was the *Frontier Guardian*, published by Orson Hyde at
Potawatamie, or Kanesville, 1849-52, and of the church in Utah the
*Deseret News*, which was first issued at Salt Lake City in June 1850.

    'At the organization of this church, the Lord commanded Joseph the
prophet to keep a record of his doings in the great and important work
that he was commencing to perform. It thus became a duty imperative.
After John Whitmer anti others had purloined the records in 1838, the
persecution and expulsion from Missouri soon followed. When again
located, now in Nauvoo, Illinois, and steamboat loads of emigrants were
arriving from England via New Orleans, the sound thereof awakened an
interest in the country that led Hon. John Wentworth of Chicago to write
to the prophet, Joseph Smith, making inquiries about the rise, progress,
persecution, and faith of the Latter-day Saints, the origin of this
work, the *Book of Mormon*, the plates from which the record was
translated, etc.; and it is the answer to this letter contained in
*Times and Seasons*, March 1, 1842, that precedes or prefaces the
present history of Joseph Smith, which is the history of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This request of Mr Wentworth's
seethed to forcibly remind the prophet of the importance of having the
history of his wonderful work restored to such a condition that correct
<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> information could be given to editors,
authors, publishers, and any or all classes of inquirers that might
apply, and be undertook with his clerks, recorder, and all available aid
from private journals, correspondence, and his own indelible memory, and
made it a labor to get his own history, which was indeed that of the
church in all the stages of its growth, while he remained with his
people, compiled and written up to date, which with his own current
journal enabled the historian to complete the history to the time of his
assassination, with the utmost fidelity to facts as they occurred. Our
method of verification, afar compilation and rough draft, was to read
the same before a session of the council, composed of the First
Presidency and Twelve Apostles, and there scan everything under
consideration.' *Richards’ Bibliography of Utah*, MS., 2-6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Story of Mormomism. 1835-1840.](hou08.md)
