[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou07)  [Next](hou09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### CHAPTER V. THE STORY OF MORMOMISM. 1835-1840.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">President Smith at
Kirtland—First Quorum of Twelve Apostles—the Kirtland Temple
Completed—Kirtland Safety Society Bank—in Zion Again—the Saints in
Missouri—Apostasy—Zeal and Indiscretion—Military Organization—the War
Opens—Depredations on Both Sides—Movements of Atchison, Parks, and
Doniphan—Attitude of Boggs—Wight and Gilliam—Death of Patten—Danite
Organization—Order Lodge—Haun Mill Tragedy—Mobs and Militia—the Tables
Turned—Boggs' Exterminating Order—Lucas and Clark at Far West—Surrender
of the Mormon's—Prisoners—Petitions and Memorials—Expulsion—Gathering at
Quincy—Opinions.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">Meanwhile</span>, although the frontier of
Zion was receiving such large accessions, the main body of the church
was still at Kirtland, where President Smith remained for some time.

    On the 14th of February, 1835, twelve apostles were chosen at
Kirtland, Brigham Young, Orson Hyde, and Heber C. Kimball being of the
number; likewise a little later Parley P. Pratt. Thence, the following
summer, they took their departure for the east, holding conferences and
ordaining and instructing elders in the churches throughout New York and
New England, and the organization of the first quorum of seventies was
begun. Classes for instruction, and a school of prophets were commenced,
and Sidney Rigdon delivered six lectures on faith, of which Joseph Smith
was author. <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) Preaching on the steps
of a

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Campbellite church
at Mentor, Parley P. Pratt was mobbed midst music and rotten eggs.

    The temple at Kirtland being finished, was dedicated on the 27th of
March, 1836, and on the 3d of April Joseph and Oliver had interviews
with the messiah, Moses, Elias, and Elijah, and received from them the
several keys of priesthood, which insured to their possessors power
unlimited in things temporal and spiritual for the accomplishment of the
labors assigned by them for him to perform. <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120.md) The building of this structure by a few
hundred persons, who, during the period between 1832 and 1836,
contributed voluntarily of their money, material, or labor, the women
knitting and spinning and making garments for the men who worked on the
temple, was regarded with wonder throughout all northern Ohio. It was 60
by 80 feet, occupied a commanding position, and cost $40,000.

    During its erection the saints incurred heavy debts for material and
labor. They bought farms at high prices, making part payments, and
afterward forfeiting them. They engaged in mercantile pursuits,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

buying merchandise in New York and elsewhere in excess of their ability
to pay. They built a steam-mill, which proved a source of loss, and
started a bank, but were unable to obtain a charter; they issued bills
without a charter, however, in consequence of which they could not
collect the money loaned, and after a brief struggle, and during a
period of great apostasy, the bank failed. It was called the Kirtland
Safety Society Bank, of which Rigdon was president and Smith cashier.
All this time, writes Corrill, "they suffered pride to arise in their
hearts, and became desirous of fine houses and fine clothes, and
indulged too much in these things, supposing for a few months that they
were very rich." Upon the failure of the bank in 1838, Smith and Rigdon
went to Missouri, leaving the business in the hands of others to wind
up. <span id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_121.md)

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

    An endowment meeting, or solemn assembly, held in 1836 in the temple
at Kirtland, is thus described by William Harris: "It was given out that
those who were in attendance at that meeting should receive an
endowment, or blessing, similar to that experienced by the disciples of
Christ on the day of pentecost.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

When the day arrived great numbers convened from the different churches
in the country. They spent the day in fasting and prayer, and in washing
and perfuming their bodies; they also washed their feet, and anointed
their heads with what they called holy oil, and pronounced blessings. In
the evening they met for the endowment. The fast was then broken."

    Midsummer of 1837 saw Parley P. Pratt in New York city, where he
printed the first edition of his *Voice of Warning*, <span
id="fr_122"></span>[4](#fn_122.md) and where he labored with great
earnestness, at first under many discouragements, later with signal
success. After that he went once more to Missouri. Others were going in
the same direction from Kirtland and elsewhere during the entire period
between 1831 and 1838. The *Messenger and Advocate* having been
discontinued, the *Elder's Journal* was started by Joseph Smith in
Kirtland in October 1837.

 

    After the émeutes which occurred in Jackson county in the autumn of
1833, as before related, the saints escaped as best they were able to
Clay county, where they were kindly received. Some took up their abode
in Lafayette and Van Buren counties, and a few in Ray and Clinton
counties. <span id="fr_123"></span>[5](#fn_123.md) For their lands, stock,
furniture, buildings, and other property destroyed in Jackson county,
they received little or no compensation; on the contrary, some who went
back for their effects were caught and beaten. <span
id="fr_124"></span>[6](#fn_124.md) Nevertheless, there

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

were three years of comparative rest for the people of God, the effect
of which soon appeared in Zion's wilderness.

    The men of Missouri were quite proud of what they had done; they
were satisfied on the whole with the results, and though their influence
was still felt, no further violence was offered till the summer of 1836.
Then the spirit of mobocracy again appeared. The Jackson-county boys had
served themselves well; why should they not help their neighbors? So
they crossed the river, in small squads at first, and began to stir up
enmity, often insulting and plundering their victims, until the people
of Clay county, fearing actions yet worse, held a meeting, and advised
the saints to seek another home. <span id="fr_125"></span>[7](#fn_125.md)

    For their unrelenting hostility toward the latter-day saints, for
the services rendered to their country in defying its laws and
encouraging the outrages upon citizens at Independence and elsewhere
during the first Mormon troubles in Missouri, Boggs was made governor of
that state, Lucas major-general, and Wilson brigadier-general. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[8](#fn_126.md) After his election, as before, Boggs did
not hesitate to let it be known that

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

any reports of misconduct, however exaggerated, would, if possible, be
accepted as reliable. Such reports were accordingly circulated, and
without much regard to truth. Right or wrong, law or no law, and whether
in accord with the letter or spirit of the constitution or government of
the United States or not, the people of Missouri had determined that
they would go any length before they would allow the saints to obtain
political ascendency in that quarter. It was well understood that war on
the Mormons, war on their civil, political, and religious rights, nay,
on their presence as members of the commonwealth, or if need be on their
lives, was part of the policy of the administration.

    Thereupon the Mormons petitioned the legislature to assign them a
place of residence, and the thinly populated region afterward known as
Caldwell county was designated. Moving there, they bought the claims of
most of the inhabitants, and entered several sections of government
lands. Almost every member of the society thus became a landholder, some
having eighty acres, and some forty. A town was laid out, called Far
West, which was made the county seat; they were allowed to organize the
government of the county, and to appoint from among their own people the
officers. <span id="fr_127"></span>[9](#fn_127.md) Again they found peace
for a season, during which their numbers increased, while settlements
were made in Daviess county, and elsewhere. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[10](#fn_128.md) Those in Daviess county were on terms
of amity with their gentile neighbors. Wight was there, and when Smith
and Rigdon arrived from the east they laid out a town named
Diahman, <span id="fr_129"></span>[11](#fn_129.md) which soon rivalled
Gallatin, and gradually the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

people of Daviess, like the rest, began to war upon the Mormons. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[12](#fn_130.md)

    To add to the ever-thickening troubles of the prophet, a schism
broke out in the church about this time, and there were apostates and
deserters, some because of disappointed ambition, and some from shame of
what they now regarded as a delusion, but all carrying away with them
vindictive feelings toward their former associates, whom they did not
hesitate to denounce as liars, thieves, counterfeiters, and everything
that is vile. Among these were Joseph's old friends Martin Harris,
Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer, the three witnesses to the book of
Mormon; Orson Hyde, Thomas B. Marsh, and W. W. Phelps also
seceding. <span id="fr_131"></span>[13](#fn_131.md)

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

    At Far West on the 4th of July, 1838, assemble from the surrounding
districts thousands of the saints, to lay the corner-stone of a temple
of God, and to declare their rights as citizens of the commonwealth to
safety and protection, as promised by the constitution. They are hated
and despised, though they break not the laws of God; they are hunted
down and killed, though they break not the laws of the land. To others
their faith is odious, their words are odious, their persons and their
actions are altogether detestable. They are not idlers, or drunkards, or
thieves, or murderers; they are diligent in business as well as fervent
in spirit, yet they are devils; they worship what they choose and in
their own way, like the dissenters in Germany, the quakers in
Pennsylvania, and the pilgrims from England, yet their spiritual father
is Satan. And now, though thus marked for painful oppression by their
fellow-citizens, they come together on the birthday of the nation to
raise the banner of the nation, and under it to declare their solemn
prerogative to the enjoyment of life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness, to the maintainance of which they stand ready to pledge their
lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor. This they do. They raise
the pole of liberty; they unfold the banner of liberty; they register
their vows. Is it all in irony? Is it all a mockery? Or is it the
displeasure of omnipotence, which is now displayed because of the rank
injustice wrought by the sons of belial under this sacred emblem? God
knoweth. We know only that out of heaven conics fire, blasting the
offering of the saints! <span id="fr_132"></span>[14](#fn_132.md)

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

    Sidney Rigdon delivered the oration on this occasion; and being an
American citizen, and one of the founders of an American religion, it
was perhaps natural for him to indulge in a little Fourth-of-July
oratory; it was natural, but under the circumstances it was exceedingly
impolitic. "We take God to witness," cries Sidney, "and the holy angels
to witness this day, that we warn all men, in the name of Jesus Christ,
to come on us no more forever. The man or the set of men who attempt it,
do it at the expense of their lives; and that mob that comes on us to
disturb us, there shall be between us and them a war of extermination,
for we will follow them till the last drop of their blood is spilled, or
else they will have to exterminate us; for we will carry the war to
their own houses, and their own families, and one party or the other
shall be utterly destroyed."

    On the 8th of July there was a revelation on tithing. Early in
August a conference was held at Diahman, and a military company, called
the Host of Israel, was organized after the manner of the priesthood,
including all males of eighteen years and over. There were captains of
ten, of fifty, and of a hundred; the organization included the entire
military force of the church, as had the Kirtland army previously a part
of it. <span id="fr_133"></span>[15](#fn_133.md)

    At length the storm burst. The state election of 1838 was held in
Daviess county at the town of Gallatin on the 6th of August. Soon after
the polls were opened, William Peniston, candidate for the legislature,
mounted a barrel and began to speak, attacking the Mormons with
degrading epithets, calling them horse-thieves and robbers, and swearing
they should not vote in that county. Samuel Brown, a Mormon, who stood
by, pronounced the charges untrue, and said that for one he should vote.
Immediately Brown was struck by one Weldin, whose arm, in attempting to
repeat the blow, was caught by

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

another Mormon, named Durfee. Thereupon eight or ten men, with clubs and
stones, fell upon Durfee, whose friends rallied to his assistance, and
the fight became general, but with indecisive results. The Mormons
voted, however, and the rest of the day passed quietly.

<span id="img_12100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE WAR IN
MISSOURI.](tn/12100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12100.jpg.md)  
THE WAR IN MISSOURI.  
</span>

    On the next day two or three of Peniston's party, in order it was
said to stir up the saints to violence, rode over to Far West, one after
another, and reported

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

a battle as having been fought at Gallatin, in which several of the
fraternity were killed. Considerable excitement followed the
announcement, and several parties went to Diahman to learn the truth of
the matter. Ascertaining the facts, and being desirous of preventing
further trouble, one of the brethren went to the magistrate, Adam Black,
and proposed bonds on both sides to keep the peace. the proposition was
accepted, Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight signing for the Mormons, and
Black for the gentiles. The Mormons then returned to Far West; but the
people of Daviess county, not approving the action of the magistrate,
disputed Black's right to bind them; whereupon, to appease them, Black
went to the circuit judge and obtained a writ for the arrest of Smith
and Wight on a charge of having forced him, by threats of violence, to
sign the agreement. Brought before Judge King at Gallatin, Smith and
Wight were released on their own recognizances.

    Nevertheless the excitement increased. In Daviess and adjacent
counties, three hundred gentiles met and armed. The Mormons say that the
gentiles made prisoners, and shot and stole cattle, and the gentiles say
that the Mormons did the same. <span id="fr_134"></span>[16](#fn_134.md)
Finally affairs became so alarming that Major-General Atchison concluded
to call out the militia of Ray and Clay counties, under command of
generals Doniphan and Parks, the latter being stationed in Daviess
county. <span id="fr_135"></span>[17](#fn_135.md) Their purposes in that
quarter being thus defeated, the men of Missouri threw themselves on a
small settlement of saints at Dewitt, where they were joined by a party
with a six-pounder from Jackson county. Setting fire

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

to the houses, they drove off the inmates and destroyed their property.
General Parks then moved his troops to Dewitt, but found the mob too
many for him. They openly defied him, would make no compromise, and
swore "they would drive the Mormons from Daviess to Caldwell, and from
Caldwell to hell." General Atchison then went to Dewitt and told the
Mormons that his men were so disaffected <span
id="fr_136"></span>[18](#fn_136.md) that they had better apply for
protection to Governor Boggs. This official returned answer that, as
they had brought the war upon themselves, they must fight their own
battles, and not look to him for help. Thereupon they abandoned the
place, and fled to Far West.

    In order to intercept the mob General Doniphan entered Daviess
county with two hundred men, and thence proceeded to Far West, where he
camped for the night. In consultation with the civil and military
officers of the place, who, though Mormons, were nevertheless
commissioned by the state, Doniphan advised them to arm and march to
Daviess county and defend their brethren there. Acting on this advice,
all armed, some going to Daviess county and some remaining at Far
West. <span id="fr_137"></span>[19](#fn_137.md) The former were met by
Parks, who inquired of them all particulars. Shortly afterward some
families came in from beyond Grand River, who stated that they had been
driven away and their houses burned by a party under C. Gilliam. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[20](#fn_138.md) Parks then ordered Colonel Wight, who
held a commission under him as commander of the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mormon militia, to
disperse the party, which was done, and the cannon in their possession
seized, without firing a shot. Spreading into other counties, Gilliam's
men raised everywhere the cry that the Mormons were killing people and
burning property.

    Soon afterward the Mormon militia returned from Daviess county to
Far West, where they learned that a large force under Samuel Bogart, a
methodist clergyman, was plundering and burning houses south of that
point, in Ray county, and had taken three men prisoners, one only of
whom was a Mormon. Elias Higbee, county judge, ordered the Mormon
militia under Captain Patten <span id="fr_139"></span>[21](#fn_139.md) to
retake the prisoners. In passing through a wood Patten came without
knowing it upon the encampment of Bogart, whose guard fired without
warning, killing one of Patten's men. Patten then attacked, routing
Bogart's force, but not preventing the shooting of the Mormon prisoner,
though he afterward recovered. In the charge one man was killed, and
Patten and one other were mortally wounded. The company captured forty
wagons. <span id="fr_140"></span>[22](#fn_140.md)

    About this time arose the mysterious and much dreaded band that
finally took the name of Danites, or sons of Dan, concerning which so
much has been said while so little is known, some of the Mormons even
denying its existence. But of this there is no question. Says Burton:
"The Danite band, a name of fear in the Mississippi Valley, is said by
anti-Mormons to consist of men between the ages of seventeen and
forty-nine. They were originally termed Daughters of Gideon, Destroying
Angels—the gentiles say devils—and, finally, Sons of Dan, or Danites,
from one of whom was prophesied he should be a serpent in the path. They
were organized about 1837 under

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> D. W. Patten,
popularly called Captain Fearnot, for the purpose of dealing as avengers
of blood with gentiles; in fact, they formed a kind of death society,
desperadoes, thugs, hashshashiyun—in plain English, assassins in the
name of the Lord. The Mormons declare categorically the whole and every
particular to be the calumnious invention of the impostor and arch
apostate, Mr John C. Bennett." <span id="fr_141"></span>[23](#fn_141.md)

    John Hyde, a seceder, states that the Danite band, or the United
Brothers of Gideon, was organized on the 4th of July, 1838, and was
placed under the command of the apostle David Patten, who for the
purpose assumed the name of Captain Fearnot. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[24](#fn_142.md)

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

    It is the opinion of some that the Danite band, or Destroying Angels
as again they are called, was organized at the recommendation of the
governor of Missouri as a means of self-defense against persecutions in
that state. <span id="fr_143"></span>[25](#fn_143.md) Thomas B. Marsh, late
president of the twelve apostles, and president of the church at Far
West, but now a dissenter, having "abandoned the faith of the Mormons
from a conviction of their immorality and impiety," testifies that in
October, 1838, they "had a meeting at Far West, at which they appointed
a company of twelve, by the name of the Destruction Company, for the
purpose of burning and destroying." <span
id="fr_144"></span>[26](#fn_144.md)

    The apostate Bennett gives a number of names by which the same
society, or divisions of it, were known, such as Daughter of Zion, Big
Fan, <span id="fr_145"></span>[27](#fn_145.md) "inasmuch as it fanned out
the chaff from the wheat," Brother of Gideon, Destructive, Flying Angel.
The explanation of Joseph, the prophet, was that one Doctor Sampson
Arvard, who after being a short time in the church, in order to add to
his importance and influence secretly initiated the order of Danites,
and held meetings

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

organizing his men into companies of tens and fifties, with captains.
Then he called the officers together and told them that they were to go
forth and spoil the gentiles; but they rejected the proposal, and Arvard
was cut off from the church. All the present leaders of the Mormon
church deny emphatically the existence of any such band or society as a
part of or having anything to do with their organization. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[28](#fn_146.md)

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

    Meanwhile was being matured the bloody tragedy which occurred on the
30th of October near Haun's <span id="fr_147"></span>[29](#fn_147.md) mill,
on Shoal creek, about twenty miles below Far West. Besides the Mormons
living there, were a number of emigrants awaiting the cessation of
hostilities before proceeding on their journey. It had been agreed
between the Mormons and Missourians of that locality that they would not
molest each other, but live together in peace. But the men of Caldwell
and Daviess counties would not have it so. Suddenly and without warning,
on the day above mentioned, mounted and to the number of two hundred and
forty, they fell upon the fated settlement. While the men were at their
work out of doors, the women in the house, and the children playing
about the yards, the crack of a hundred rifles was heard, and before the
firing ceased, eighteen of these unoffending people were stretched dead
upon the ground, while many more were wounded. I will not enter upon the
sickening details, which are copious and fully proven; suffice it to
say, that never in savage or other warfare was there perpetrated an act
more dastardly and brutal. <span id="fr_148"></span>[30](#fn_148.md)
Indeed, it was openly avowed by the men of Missouri that it was no worse
to shoot a Mormon than to shoot an Indian, and killing Indians was no
worse than killing wild beasts.

    A somewhat singular turn affairs take at this juncture. It appears
that Boggs, governor, and sworn enemy of the saints, does not like the
way the war is going on. Here are his own soldiers fighting his own
voters, the state forces killing the men who have put

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

him in office! This will not do. There is bad blundering somewhere. It
is the Mormons only that are to be killed and driven off, and not the
free and loyal American Boggs voters. Ho, there! Let the state arms be
turned against these damned saints! On what pretext? Any. Say that they
are robbing, and burning, and killing right and left, and that they
swear they will never stop until they have the country. Easy enough. No
doubt they do kill and burn; the men of Missouri are killing them and
burning; why should they not retaliate? No doubt there are thieves and
bad men among them, who take advantage of the time to practise their
vile calling. No doubt there are violent men among them, who swear
roundly at those who are hunting them to death, who swear that they will
drive them off their lands and kill them if they can. But this does not
make insurrectionists and traitors of the whole society. No matter; down
with the Mormons! And so Boggs, the governor, seats himself and coolly
writes off to his generals to drive out or exterminate the vermin. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[31](#fn_149.md)

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

    Thus it appears that the Missouri state militia, called out in the
first instance to assist the Mormon state militia in quelling a Missouri
mob, finally joins the mob against the Mormon militia. In none of their
acts had the saints placed themselves in an attitude of unlawful
opposition to the state authorities; on the other hand, they were doing
all in their power to defend themselves and support law and order, save
in the matter of retaliation.

    The first the saints of Caldwell county know of the new tactics is
the appearance, within half a mile of Far West, <span
id="fr_150"></span>[32](#fn_150.md) of three thousand armed men, under
General Lucas, generals Wilson and Doniphan being present, and General
Clark with another army being a few days’ march distant. General Lucas
states that the main business there is to obtain possession of three
individuals, whom he names, two of them not Mormons; and for the rest he
has only to inform the saints that it is his painful duty either wholly
to drive them from the state or to exterminate them. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[33](#fn_151.md) Gilliam and his comrades, who as
disguised Indians and white men had been fighting the Mormons, now that
the state espouses their cause, join Lucas. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[34](#fn_152.md) General Atchison was at Richmond, in
Ray county, when the governor's exterminating order was issued. "I will
have nothing to do with so infamous a proceeding," he said, and
immediately resigned.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

    The day following his arrival General Lucas orders George M.
Hinckle, colonel commanding the Mormon militia, to bring before him
Joseph Smith, junior, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P.
Pratt, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRae, which is done, though not
without charge of fraud and treachery on the part of Hinckle. A
court-martial is immediately held; the prisoners are all condemned, and
sentenced to be shot next morning at eight o'clock. "In the name of
humanity I protest against any such cold-blooded murder," says General
Doniphan who further threatens to withdraw his men if such a course is
persisted in; whereupon the sentence is not executed. All the Mormon
troops in Far West, however, are required to give up their arms and
consider themselves prisoners of war. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[35](#fn_153.md) They are further required to execute a
deed of trust pledging all Mormon property to the payment of the entire
cost of the war, and to give a promise to leave the state before the
coming spring.

    Thus in the name of law and justice the Mormon soldiery, whose chief
crime it would seem was that, in common with the rest of the militia,
they had assisted

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the state in putting down a mob, were forced at the point of the bayonet
to sign an obligation, binding not only themselves but the civilians
within their settlements to defray the entire expense of the war. This
proceeding was sufficiently peculiar; but, as a climax to their conduct,
some of the officers and men laid hands on the Mormons’ property
wherever they could find it, taking no thought of payment.

    General Clark <span id="fr_154"></span>[36](#fn_154.md) now comes
forward, and entering the town of Far West, collects the saints in the
public square, reads them a lecture, <span
id="fr_155"></span>[37](#fn_155.md) and selecting fifty of their number,
thrusts them into prison. Next day forty-six of the fifty are taken to
Richmond, <span id="fr_156"></span>[38](#fn_156.md) and after a fortnight's
confinement half are liberated, <span id="fr_157"></span>[39](#fn_157.md)

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

most of the remainder being set free a week later on giving bail.
Lucas <span id="fr_158"></span>[40](#fn_158.md) then retires with his
troops, leaving the country to be ravaged by armed squads that burn
houses, insult women, and drive off stock *ad libitum*. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[41](#fn_159.md) The faint pretext of justice on the
part of the state, attending forced sales and forced settlements, might
as well have been dispensed with, as it was but a cloak to cover
official iniquity. <span id="fr_160"></span>[42](#fn_160.md)

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

    It did not seem possible to a community convicted of no crime, and
living in the nineteenth century, under the flag of the world's foremost
republic, that such flagrant wrongs as the Boggs exterminating order,
and the enforced treaty under which they were deprived of their
property, could be carried into effect. They appealed, therefore, to the
legislature, <span id="fr_161"></span>[43](#fn_161.md) demanding justice.
But that body was too much with the people and with Boggs to think of
justice. To make a show of decency, a committee was appointed and sent
to Caldwell and Daviess counties, to look into the matter, but of course
did nothing. Another was appointed with like result. Debates continued
with more or less show of interest through the month of December. In
January, 1839, the Mormons were plainly told that they need expect no
redress at the hand of the legislature or other body of Missouri.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There was no help
for them; they must leave the state or be killed; of this they were
assured on all sides, publicly and privately.

    And now begins another painful march—painful in the thought of it,
painful in the telling of it. It is midwinter; whither can they go, and
how? They have homes, but they may not enjoy them; land which they have
bought, houses which they have built, and barns and cattle and food, but
hereabout they are hunted to death. Is it Russia or Tartary or
Hindostan, that people are thus forced to fly for opinion's sake? True,
the people of the United States do not like such opinions; they do not
like a religious sect that votes solid, or a class of men whom they look
upon as fools and fanatics talking about taking the country, claimed as
theirs by divine right; but in any event this was no way to settle the
difficulty. Here are men who have been stripped in a moment of the
results of years of toil—all that they have in the world gone; here are
women weighed down with work and care, some whose husbands are in
prison, and who are thus left to bear the heavy burden of this
infliction alone; here are little children, some comfortably clad,
others obliged to encounter the wind and frozen ground with bare heads
and bleeding feet.

    Whither can they go? There is a small following of the prophet at
Quincy, Illinois; some propose to go there, some start for other places.
But what if they are not welcome at Quincy, and what can they do with
such a multitude? There is no help for it, however, no other spot where
the outcasts can hope for refuge at the moment. Some have horses and
cattle and wagons; some have none. Some have tents and bedding; some
have none. But the start is made, and the march is slowly to the
eastward. In the months of February and March <span
id="fr_162"></span>[44](#fn_162.md)

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

over one hundred and thirty families are on the west bank of the
Mississippi unable to cross the river, which is full of floating ice.
There they wait and suffer; they scour the country for food and clothing
for the destitute; many sicken and die.

    Finally they reach Quincy, and are kindly received. Not only the
saints but others are there who have human hearts and human sympathies.
Indeed, upon the expulsion of the Mormons from Missouri the

<span id="img_13600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SETTLEMENTS IN
ILLINOIS.](tn/13600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13600.jpg.md)  
SETTLEMENTS IN ILLINOIS.  
</span>

people of Illinois took a stand in their favor. The citizens of Quincy,
in particular, offered their warmest sympathy and aid, on the ground of
humanity. A select committee, appointed to ascertain the facts in the
case, reported, on the 27th of February, 1839, "that the

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

strangers recently arrived here from the state of Missouri, known by the
name of latter-day saints, are entitled to our sympathy and kindest
regard." The working-men of the town should be informed "that these
people have no design to lower the wages of the laboring class, but to
procure something to save them from starving." Finally it was resolved:
"That we recommend to all the citizens of Quincy, in all their
intercourse with the strangers, that they use and observe a becoming
decorum and delicacy, and be particularly careful not to indulge in any
conversation or expressions calculated to wound their feelings, or in
any way to reflect upon those who, by every law of humanity, are
entitled to our sympathy and commiseration." <span
id="fr_163"></span>[45](#fn_163.md)

    How in regard to neighboring states? In case the people of Illinois
soon tire of them, what will they then do? From Commerce, Isaac Galland
writes to Robert Lucas, governor of Iowa, asking about it. The answer is
such as one would expect from the average American citizen—neither
better nor worse. It is such, however, as to condemn throughout all time
the conduct of the people of Missouri. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[46](#fn_164.md)

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

    During these trying times the prophet was moving about among his
people, doing everything in his power to protect and encourage thorn.
Late in September he was in the southern part of Caldwell county, whence
in October he passed into Carroll county, where he soon found himself
hemmed in by an enraged populace. He appealed to the people, he applied
to the governor, but all to no purpose. Afterward he went to Daviess
county, and then back to Far West, where he was arrested and
incarcerated with the others. Shortly afterward the prisoners, now

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

consisting of the prophet Joseph Smith, with Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith,
Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, Amass Lyman, and George W. Robinson, were
removed to Independence; why they did not know, but because it was the
hot-bed of mobocracy, they said, and peradventure they might luckily be
shot or hanged. A few days later they were taken to Richmond and put in
irons, and later to Liberty jail in Clay county, where they were kept
confined for four months. Habeas corpus was tried, and many petitions
were forwarded to the authorities on their behalf, but all to no
purpose. At length they obtained a hearing in the courts, with a change
of venue to Boone county where they were still to be incarcerated.
Rigdon had been previously released on habeas corpus, and one night,
when the guard was asleep, Smith and the others escaped and made their
way to Quincy.

    "I was in their hands as a prisoner," says Smith, "about six months;
but notwithstanding their determination to destroy me, with the rest of
my brethren who were with me, and although at three different times we
were sentenced to be shot without the least shadow of law, and had the
time and place appointed for that purpose, yet through the mercy of God,
in answer to the prayers of the saints, I have been preserved, and
delivered out of their hands." <span id="fr_165"></span>[47](#fn_165.md)

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

    Notwithstanding their enormous losses, and the extreme indigence of
many, the saints were not all as destitute of credit as they were of
ready means, if we may judge by their business transacted during the
year 1839. Bishop Knight bought for the church part of the town of
Keokuk, Iowa, situated on the west bank of the Mississippi, forty miles
above Quincy, Illinois. He also purchased the whole of another town-site
called Nashville, six miles above Keokuk. Four miles above Nashville was
a settlement called Montrose, part of which Knight bought, together with
thirty thousand acres of land. <span id="fr_166"></span>[48](#fn_166.md)

    Opposite Montrose, on the east bank of the Mississippi where was a
good landing, stood a village

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

called Commerce, where were some twenty houses. This was purchased by
the saints, with the lands surrounding, and a town laid out which was
named Nauvoo, "from the Hebrew, which signifies fair, very beautiful,
and it actually fills the definition of the word; for nature has not
formed a parallel on the banks of the Mississippi from New Orleans to
Galena." The post-office there was first called Commerce, after the
Mormons had purchased the village, but the name was changed to that of
Nauvoo in May, 1840. <span id="fr_167"></span>[49](#fn_167.md) The place
was started by a company from New York, but it was so sickly that when
the agent for the Mormons came they were glad to sell. The Mormons
drained it and made the place comparatively healthy.

    On his escape from prison, Smith visited Commerce among other
places, and seeing at once the advantages of its site, determined to
establish there the headquarters of the church. For so great had his
power now become, so extensive his following, that he might choose any
spot whereon to call into existence a city, had but to point his finger
and say the word to transform a wilderness into a garden. During the
winter of 1840 the church leaders applied to the legislature of Illinois
for several charters, one for the city of Nauvoo, one for agricultural
and manufacturing purposes, one for a university, and one for a military
body called the Nauvoo Legion. The privileges asked were very extensive,
but were readily granted; for the two great political parties were
pretty equal in numbers in Illinois at this time, and the leaders of the
party in office, perceiving what a political power these people were,
determined to secure them.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

    There were now saints everywhere, all over the United States,
particularly throughout the western portion; there were isolated
believers, and small clusters, and small and great congregations. There
were also many travelling preachers, men full of the holy ghost, or
believing themselves so, who travelled without purse or scrip, whom no
buffetings, insults, hunger, or blows could daunt, who feared nothing
that man could do, heaven's door being always open to them. See now the
effects of these persecutions in Missouri. Twelve thousand were driven
from their homes and set moving by Boggs and his generals; three fourths
of them found new homes at Quincy, Nauvoo, and elsewhere; but three
thousand, who, but for the persecutions, would have remained at home and
tilled their lands, were preaching and proselyting, making new converts
and establishing new churches wherever they went. One of their number,
William Smith, was a member of the Illinois legislature. In the very
midst of the war they were preaching in Jackson county, among their old
enemies and spoilers, striving with all their souls to win back their
Zion, their New Jerusalem. From New York, February 19, 1840, Brigham
Young, H. C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, and Parley P. Pratt indited a letter
to the saints at Commerce, speaking of the wonderful progress of the
faith, and of their own intended departure for England. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[50](#fn_168.md)

    Thus, despite persecution, the saints increased in number year by
year. Before the end of 1840 there were fifteen thousand souls at
Nauvoo, men, women, and children, not all of them exiles from Missouri,
but from every quarter, old believers and new converts from different
parts of the United States, from Canada, and from Europe; hither came
they to the city of their God, to the mountain of his holiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_119"></span>[111:1](hou08.htm#fr_119.md) They were printed and
bound in *Doctrine and Covenants*. See *Hyde's Mormonism*, 202; *Remy's
Journey*, 504; *Pratt's Auobiography*, 139. Mather, in *Lippincott's
Mag*., Aug. 1880, states that the twelve apostles started in May.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[112:2](hou08.htm#fr_120.md) 'A square mile was
laid out in half-acre lots, and a number of farms were bought, the
church farm being half a mile down one of the most beautiful valleys
which it is possible to conceive in a range of country so uniformly
level.' Mather, in *Lippincott's Mag*., Aug. 1880. In May 1833 it was
revealed that building should begin. Two houses 55 by 65 feet each were
ordered, one for the presidency, the other for printing. Hyrum Smith and
two others were presented with lots, and directions were sent to the
faithful to subscribe money to aid in building a temple at Kirtland.
*Times and Seasons*, vi. 769-70. Before its completion, private
assemblies were held at the houses of the faithful, frequently at
Smith's. When partly finished, schools were opened in several of the
apartments. It was begun in June 1833, and dedicated March 27, 1836. A
brief dcscription of the building, arrangement of interior, etc., and a
full account of the dedication and ordinary services are given in
*Tullidge's Women*; 76, 80-95, 99-101. Daniel Tyler, in *Juvenile
Intructor*, xiv. 283; *Busch, Gesch. der Morm*., 74; *Kidder's
Mormonism*, 124-6. Probably but little work was done on it in 1833, for
about the front entrances the gilded inscription, 'Built by the church
of Jesus Christ, 1834,' still shines bright as ever. *Salt Lake Herald*,
June 6, 1877. See also Smith's account in *Times and Seasons*, vi.
708-11, 723-6, and *Remy's Journey*, i. 302-4. For cuts of building, see
*Young's Hist. of the Seventies*, 8; *Juvenile Instructor*, xiv. 283;
*Pratt's Autobiog*., 140. When nearly finished there was a debt on the
building of from $15,000 to $20,000. *Kidder's Mormonism*, 124-6. Most
of the workmen were dependent upon their labor for their daily food,
which often consisted of corn meal alone, and that had been donated.
*Juvenile Instructor*, 283. Writing in 1880, Mather says: 'The
residences of Smith and Rigdon are almost under the eaves of the temple,
and the theological seminary is now occupied by the methodists for a
church.' *Lippincott's Mag*., Aug. 1880.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[113:3](hou08.htm#fr_121.md) 'They also suffered
jealousies to arise among them, and several persons dissented from the
church, and accused the leaders of the church with bad management,
selfishness, etc…On the other hand, the leaders of the church accused
the dissenters with dishonesty, want of faith and righteousness,…and
this strife or opposition arose to a great height, until Smith and
Rigdon were obliged to leave Kirtland.' Corrill, in *Kidder's
Mormonism*, 126-7. 'Subsequently they had a revelation,' another says,
'commanding them to establish a bank, which should swallow up all other
banks. This was soon got into operation on a pretended capital of four
millions of dollars, made up of real estate round about the temple.'
John Hyde, *Mormonism*, 201, says that the bank, a store, and. mill were
started in Aug. 1831. Before me is one of their bills, dated Jan. 17,
1837, payable to C. Scott, or bearer. Mather says, *Lippincott's Mag*.,
Aug. 1880: 'Richard Hilliard, a leading merchant of Cleveland, received
their bills for a few days, and then took possession of all their
available assets. They were also in debt for their farms, and for goods
bought in New York. The bubble burst, and many in the vicinity of
Kirtland were among the sufferers. Smith and Rigdon fled to Far West,
after having been tarred and feathered for their peculiar theories of
finance.' 'Chauneey G. Webb (father of Ann Eliza Young) assisted in
founding this bank, giving Smith all he possessed outside of his house
and simp toward completing the amount necessary for a capital on which
to start the new enterprise. With the failure of the bank Webb lost
everything.' *Young's Wife No. 19*, 33, 40-41; see account of formation
of bank in *Bennett's Mormonism*, 135-6. 'Smith had a sort of bank issue
on what was then called the wild-cat principle. His circulating medium
had no redeeming basis, and was worthless in the hands of the people.'
*Tucker's Mormonism*, 154-5. 'Smith had a revelation from the Lord, to
the effect that his bank would be a pattern of all the banks in the
United States, that it would speedily break, and that all the rest would
follow the example. The bank was closed the same day.' *Hall's
Mormonism*, 19. The bank failed in Nov. 1837. *Remy's Journey*, i. 504;
*Busch, Gesch. der Morm*., 84. 'By means of great activity and an actual
capital of about $5,000, they succeeded in setting afloat from $50,000
to $100,000. the concern was closed up after <span id="page_114">p.
114</span> flourishing 3 or 4 weeks.' *Kidder's Mormonism*, 128. The
building is now occupied by a private family. Salt Lake S. W. Herald,
June 6, 1877. 'In order to pay the debt on the temple, they concluded to
try mercantile business, and ran in debt in New York and elsewhere some
$30,000 for goods, and shortly after, $50,000 or $60,000 more. In
consequence of their ignorance of business and extravagance, the scheme
proved a failure.' *Kidder's Mormonism*, 126, 128; *Smucker's Hist.
Mor*., 76. 'Gilbert and Whitney's store is still used for original
purposes.' *Salt Lake Herald*, June 6, 1877. 'A poorly furnished country
store, where commerce looks starvation in the face.' *Id*., Nov. 17,
1877. 'Smith's store was seized and goods sold in Nov. 1839.' *Hyde's
Mormonism*, 203; *Bennett's Mormonism*, 135. They also spent some
thousands of dollars in building a steam-mill, which never profiled them
anything. *Kidder's Mormonism*, 126. 'The skeleton of a superannuated
engine and its contrivances half buried in a heap of ashes—the shed that
covered it having recently burned to the ground—marks the spot where
stood the ashery and its successor, the Mormon saw-mill, at the foot of
Temple hill.' *Salt Lake Herald*, Nov. 17, 1877. Heber C. Kimball, who
went to Nauvoo in 1839, built a pottery at Kirtland, the ruins of which
were to be seen in 1877. *Ibid*. 'After the temple was dedicated, the
Kirtland high school was taught in the attic story by H. M. Hawes, prof.
of Greek and Latin. There were from 130 to 140 students, divided into
three departments—the classic, where only languages were taught; the
English, where mathematics, common arithmetic, geography, English
grammar, and reading and writing were taught; and the juvenile
department. The last two departments were under assistant instructors.
The school was begun in Nov. 1836.' *Tullidge's Women*, 99. 'On the 3d
floor are a succession of small rooms containing crippled benches,
blackboards, ruined walls, and other paraphernalia, which indicated that
at some period of the temple's history this part had been used as a
primary school.' *Salt Lake S. W. Herald*, June 6, 1877. A Hebrew
professorship is also mentioned. *Remy's Journey*, i. 504. 'Immediately
after the closing of the bank, and before the news of its failure had
time to spread, Smith with some 4 or 5 terriers (understrappers in the
priesthood) went to Toronto, Canada, where he preached, whilst his
followers circulated the worthless notes of the defunct bank. Brigham
Young also succeeded in spreading about $10,000 of the paper through
several states.' *Hall's Mormonism*, 19-20. 'In January 1838 Smith and
Rigdon, being at Kirtland together, were both arrested on charges of
swindling in connection with their worthless paper bank,' etc. 'The
prisoners, however, escaped from the sheriff in the night and made their
way on horseback to Missouri.' *Tucker's Mormonism*, 155-6. Smith and
Rigdon ran away on the night of Jan. 12, 1838. *Hyde's Mormonism*, 203.
'A new year dawned upon the church at Kirtland,' writes Smith, 'in all
the bitterness of the spirit of apostate mobocracy, which continued to
rage anti grow hotter and hotter, until Elder Rigdon and myself were
obliged to flee from its deadly influence, as did the apostles and
prophets of old, anti as Jesus said, "When they persecute you in one
city, flee ye to another;" and on the evening of the 12th of January,
about ten o'clock, we left Kirtland on horseback to escape mob violence,
which was about to burst upon us, under the color of legal process to
cover their hellish designs and save themselves from the just judgment
of the law.'

<span id="fn_122"></span>[115:4](hou08.htm#fr_122.md) It consisted of 4,000
copies. The author states that 'it has since been published and
republished in America and Europe, till some 40,000 or 50,000 copies
have not been sufficient resupply the demand.' *Pratt's Autobiography*,
184.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[115:5](hou08.htm#fr_123.md) Most of these fled
into Clay co., where they were received with some degree of kindness,
and encamped on the banks of the Missouri. Those who went into Van Buren
and Lafayette counties were soon expelled, and had to move. *Pratt's
Persecution*, 51; *Mackay's Mormons*, 78; *Times and Seasons*, vi. 913.
The Missouri River bends to the east as it enters the state, and runs in
a generally east direction through the western counties. Jackson co. is
immediately south of Clay—the river being the dividing line—and Van
Buren lies next south of Jackson. All west of the state line was Indian
territory, as I have said. See map, p. 121 this vol.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[115:6](hou08.htm#fr_124.md) The Jackson co.
exiles being in a destitute condition, a conference was <span
id="page_116">p. 116</span> held at P. P. Pratt's house in Clay co. some
time during the winter of 1833-4—date not given), at which it was
resolved to appeal to Smith, at Kirtland, for aid and counsel; and P. P.
Pratt and Lyman Wight, having volunteered their services, were
despatched with the message. Starting from Liberty on Feb. 1, 1834, on
horseback, but penniless, on a journey of from 1,080 to 1,500 miles
through a country but partially settled, they arrives at their
destination early in the spring with plenty of money received from
friends along their route. *Pratt's Autobiog*., 114-161; *Utah Pioneers,
33d Aniversary*, 17; *Horne's Migrations*, MS., 3; *Young's Woman's
Experiences*, MS., 2.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[116:7](hou08.htm#fr_125.md) 'From threats, public
meetings were called, resolutions were passed, vengeance and destruction
were threatened, and affairs again assumed a fearful attitude.' *Cor.
Joseph Smith, etc*., 5. See also *Greene's Facts*, 12. 'A meeting of the
citizens was held at Liberty on the 29th of June, 1836, in which these
matters were taken into consideration. The Mormons were reminded of the
circumstances under which they were received, and requested to leave,
time being given them to harvest their crops and dispose of their
property. Fortunately for all concerned, the saints…agreed to leave on
the terms proposed, denying strenuously that they had ever tampered with
the slaves, or had any idea of exciting an Indian war.' *Ferris’ Utah
and the Mormons*, 82-3.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[116:8](hou08.htm#fr_126.md) These officers 'all
very readily received their commissions from their accomplice, Gov.
Boggs; and thus corruption, rebellion, and conspiracy had spread on
every side, being fostered and encouraged by a large majority of the
state; and thus treason became general.' *Pratt's Persecution*, 55-6.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[117:9](hou08.htm#fr_127.md) John Hyde,
*Mormonism*, 203, says that on their arrival in Missouri, Smith and
Rigdon began 'to scatter the saints in order to obtain political
ascendency in other counties.'

<span id="fn_128"></span>[117:10](hou08.htm#fr_128.md) Of the officers then
appointed, two of the judges, thirteen magistrates, all the military
officers, and the county clerk were Mormons. 'These steps were taken, be
it carefully observed, by the advice of the state legislature, and the
officers were appointed in the manner directed by law.' *Greene's
Facts*, 18. The gentiles murmur because of their being under Mormon
rule. *Hyde's Mormonism*, 203.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[117:11](hou08.htm#fr_129.md) 'Smith gave it the
name of Adamondiamon, which he said was formerly <span id="page_118">p.
118</span> given to a certain valley where Adam, previous to his death,
called his children together and blessed them.' *Corrill's Brief
History*, in *Kidder's Mormonism*, 131. 'The earth was divided,' says Mr
Richards, 'all the land being together and all the water. Adam dwelt
there with his people for some time previous to his death. Adam
constructed an altar there, and it was there that he bestowed his final
blessings upon his descendants.' The place was also called
Adam-On-Diahman, Adam-on-di-ahman, and again Diahman. The second of
these names appears to have been the one in use among the saints. After
the foundations of the temple at Far West were relaid, between midnight
of the 25th and dawn of the 26th of April, 1839, the quorum sang the
song which they called Adam-on-di-ahman. *Tullidge's Life of Brigham
Young*.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[118:12](hou08.htm#fr_130.md) They were afraid the
Mormons would 'rule the county, and they did not like to live under the
laws and administration of Jo Smith.' *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[118:13](hou08.htm#fr_131.md) The first three were
themselves accused of counterfeiting coin, and defaming Smith's
character; and others charged Smith with 'being accessory to several
murders and many thefts, and of designing to rule that part of the state
of Missouri, and eventually the whole republic.' *Hyde's Mormonism*,
204; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 86. 'At Independence, Rigdon publicly
charged Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer with being connected with a
gang of counterfeiters, etc. Cowdery was afterward arraigned before the
church, and found guilty of "disgracing the church by being connected
with the bogus business, as common report says."' *Tucker's Origin and
Prog. Mor*., 158-9. 'Brother Turley could not be surpassed at "*bogus*."
A press was prepared, and the money, composed of zinc, glass, etc.,
coated with silver, was executed in the best style. Imitations both of
gold and silver were in general circulation and very difficult to
detect. In fact, for a time, scarcely any other circulating medium was
to be found among them.' When leaving Illinois for Council Bluffs, Hall
carried in his wagon for some distance on the way a bogus press, which
was afterwards sold on credit in Missouri, but the seller never got his
money, being afraid to go for it. *Hall's Mor*., 20-1. Hall, who was a
Mormon from 1840 to 1847, mentions this counterfeiting in connection
with the Kirtland bank swindle, but does not state when the work was
begun. It may have originated in Kirtland, but probably was not carried
on to any great extent before the migration to Illinois. These rambling
and general charges should be received with every allowance. 'From some
<span id="page_119">p. 119</span> distant bank,' continued Hall, 'they
would buy quantities of its unsigned bank notes, which they took home,
and after having them signed by competent artists, placed in
circulation. In procuring these bills, no persons met. the package would
be left by a window of the bank, with a pane out, and the package taken
and its price left by the purchaser.'

<span id="fn_132"></span>[119:14](hou08.htm#fr_132.md) 'In a day or two
after these transactions, the thunder rolled in awful majesty over the
city of Far West, and the arrows of lightning fell from the clouds, and
shivered the liberty pole from top to bottom; thus manifesting to many
that there was an end to liberty and law in that state, and that our
little city strove in vain to maintain the liberties of a country which
was ruled by wickedness and rebellion.' *Pratt's Persecution*, 57.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[120:15](hou08.htm#fr_133.md) 'Every man obeyed
the call.' *Lee's Mormonism*, 57.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[122:16](hou08.htm#fr_134.md) In Daviess county
the saints killed between 100 and 200 hogs and a number of cattle, took
at least forty or fifty stands of honey, and at the same time destroyed
several fields of corn. The word was out that the Lord had consecrated
through the bishop the spoils unto his host. *Harris' Mormonism
Portrayed*, 30-1.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[122:17](hou08.htm#fr_135.md) 'One thousand men
were then ordered into service under the command of Major-General
Atchison and brigadier-generals Parks and Doniphan. These marched to
Daviess co., and remained in service thirty days. But judging from the
result, they had no intention of coming in contact with the mob, but
only to make a show of defending one neighborhood while the mob was
allowed to attack another.' *Pratt's Autobiography*, 191.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[123:18](hou08.htm#fr_136.md) 'At length the
general (Atchison) informed the citizens that his forces were so small,
and many of them so much in favor of the insurrectionists, that it was
useless to look any longer to theta for protection…After the evacuation
of Dewitt, when our citizens were officially notified that they must
protect themselves, they assembled in Far West to the number of one
thousand men, or thereabout, and resolved to defend their rights to the
last.' *Pratt's Autobiography*, 192-3.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[123:19](hou08.htm#fr_137.md) 'The Mormons in
Caldwell were the regular state militia for that county, and were at the
time acting under the legal authorities of the county.' *Greene's
Facts*, 20.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[123:20](hou08.htm#fr_138.md) 'A noted company of
banditti, under the command of Cornelius Gilliam, who had long infested
our borders and been notorious for their murders and daring robberies
anti who painted themselves as Indian warriors, came pouring in from the
west to strengthen the camp of the enemy.' *Pratt's Autobiography*, 202.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[124:21](hou08.htm#fr_139.md) Pratt,
*Persecution*, 68, says that the detachment was under the command of
Captain Durphey, aided by Patten.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[124:22](hou08.htm#fr_140.md) 'The enemy had left
their horses, saddles, camp, and baggage in the confusion of their
flight, which fell into our hands.' *Pratt's Persecutions*, 72. 'We
delivered the horses and spoils of the enemy to Col. Hinckle, the
commanding officer of the regiment.' *Id*., 74.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[125:23](hou08.htm#fr_141.md) John Corrill says
that some time in June a secret society was formed of a few individuals
who should be agreed in all things, and stand by each other, right or
wrong, under all circumstances. Next to God was the first presidency;
and they bound themselves by the most solemn covenants before the
almighty that the presidency should be obeyed. 'Who started this society
I know not,' writes Corrill; 'but Doctor Samson Arvard was the most
prominent leader and instructor, and was assisted by others. The first
presidency did not seem to have much to do with it,…but I thought they
stood as wire-workers behind the curtain.' 'Arvard was very forward and
indefatigable in accomplishing their purposes, for he devoted his whole
talents to it, and spared no pains; and, I thought, was as grand a
villain as his wit and ability would admit of…They ran into awful
extremes,' seeming to think that they were called upon to execute the
judgments of God on all their enemies. 'Dr Arvard received orders from
Smith, Rigdon, and company to destroy the paper containing the
constitution of the Danite society, as, if it should be discovered, it
would be considered treasonable. He did not, however, obey the orders,
but after he was made prisoner he handed it to General Clark.' *Kidder's
Mormonism*, 143. The constitution is published in *Bennett's Mormonism
Exposed*, 265. 'The oath by which the Danites were bound in Missouri was
altered in a secret council of the inquisition at Nauvoo so as to read:
"In the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, I do solemnly obligate
myself ever to regard the prophet and first presidency of the church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, as the supreme head of the church on
earth and to obey them in all things the same as the supreme God; that I
will stand by my brethren in danger or difficulty, and will uphold the
presidency, right or wrong; and that I will ever conceal, and never
reveal, the secret purposes of this society, called the Daughter of
Zion. Should I ever do the same, I hold my life as the forfeiture, in a
caldron of boiling oil."' *Id*., 267. The origin of the name Daughter of
Zion may be found in Micah iv. 13.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[125:24](hou08.htm#fr_142.md) *Hyde's Mormonism*,
104. In *Id*., 104-5, Hyde writes as follows: 'When the citizens of
Carroll and Daviess counties, Mo., began to threaten the Mormons with
expulsion in 1838, a death society was organized under the direction of
Sidney Rigdon, and with the sanction of Smith. Its first captain was
Captain Fearnot, alias David Patten an apostle. Its object was the
punishment of the obnoxious. Some time elapsed before finding a suitable
name. They desired one that should seem to combine spiritual authority
with a suitable stored. Micah iv. 13, furnished the first name. "Arise
and thresh, O daughter of Zion! for I will make thy horn iron, and thy
hoofs brass; and thou shall beat in pieces many people; and I will
consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord
of the whole earth." This furnished them with <span id="page_126">p.
126</span> a pretext; it accurately described their intentions, and they
called themselves the Daughters of Zion. Some ridicule was made at these
bearded and bloody daughters, and the name did not sit easily.
Destroying Angels came next; the Big Fan of the thresher that should
thoroughly purge the floor was tried and dropped. Genesis, xlix. 17,
furnished the name that they finally assumed. The verse is quite
significant: "Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path,
that biteth the horse's heels, so that his rider shall fall backward."
The sons of Dan was the style they adopted; and many have been the times
that they have been adders in the path, and many a man has fallen
backward, and has been seen no more.'

<span id="fn_143"></span>[126:25](hou08.htm#fr_143.md) See *Smucker's Hist.
Mor*., 108.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[126:26](hou08.htm#fr_144.md) 'The members of this
order were placed under the most sacred obligations that language could
invent…to stand by each other unto death, to sustain, protect, defend,
and obey the leaders of the church under any and all circumstances unto
death.' To divulge a Danite secret was death. There were signs and
tokens, the refusal to respect which was death. 'This signs or token of
distress is made by placing the right hand on the right side of the
face, with the points of the fingers upwards, shoving the hand upwards
until the ear is snug up between the thumb and forefinger.' *Lee's
Mormonism*, 57-8.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[126:27](hou08.htm#fr_145.md) 'The society was
instituted for the purpose of driving out from the holy land, their
earthly paradise, in Missouri, all apostates or dissenters…They make no
scruple whatever to commit perjury, when deemed requisite for the
welfare of their church…The number of Danites is now, 1842, about 2,000
or 2,500. From the élite of the Danites, or Daughters of Zion, twelve
men are selected, who are called Destructives, or Destroying Angels, or
Flying Angels.' *Mormonism Exposed*, 265-9.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[127:28](hou08.htm#fr_146.md) 'It was intended to
enable him,' Smith, 'more effectually to execute his clandestine
purposes.' '"Milking the gentiles" is a kind of vernacular term of the
Mormons, and signifies the obtaining of money or property from these who
are not members of the Mormon church.' *Id*., 272-8. 'In an examination
before Judge King Samuel (Samson?) Arvard testified that the first
object of the Danite band was to drive from the county of Caldwell all
those who dissented from the Mormon church, in which they succeeded
admirably…The prophet Joseph Smith, Jr, together with his two
counsellors Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon, were considered the supreme
head of the church, and the Danite band felt themselves as much bound to
obey them as to obey the supreme God.' John Corrill swore: 'I think the
original object of the Danite band was to operate on the dissenters; but
afterwards it grew into a system to carry out the designs of the
presidency, and if it was necessary, to use physical force to uphold the
kingdom of God.' John Cleminson said: 'Whoever opposed the presidency in
what they said or desired done should be expelled the county or have
their lives taken.' Wm W. Phelps, for a season an apostate, testified:
'If any person spoke against the presidency they would hand him over to
the hands of the Brothers of Gideon.' 'The object of the meeting seemed
to be to make persons confess and repent of their sins to God and the
presidency.' 'Wight asked Smith, Jr, twice if it had come to the point
now to resist the laws. Smith replied the time had come when he should
resist all law.' *Ferris’ Utah and the Mormons*, 92-3. Arvard 'swore
false concerning a constitution, as he said, that was introduced among
the Danites, and made many other lying statements in connection
therewith.' *Mem. to Leg*., in *Greene's Facts*, 32-3. Says John Corrill
in his *Brief History*, 'A company, called the Fur Company, was raised
for the purpose of procuring provisions, for pressing teams, and even
men sometimes, into the army in Caldwell.' Reed Peck testified that
small companies were sent out on various plundering expeditions; that he
'saw one of these companies on its return. It was called a fur company.
Some had one thing, some another; one had a feather-bed; another some
spun yarn, etc. This fur they were to take to the bishop's store, where
it was to be deposited, and if they failed to do this it would be
considered stealing.' *Kidder's Mormonism*, 147-8. Affidavit of the city
council, Nauvoo: 'We do further testify that there is no such thing as a
Danite society in this city, nor any combination other than the Masonic
of which we have any knowledge.' Signed by Wilson Law, John Taylor,
Wilford Woodruff, and 10 others. *Millennial Star*, xix. 614. References
to authorities speaking of the Danites: *Mackay's The Mormons*, 89-90,
116; *Lee's Mormonism*, 57-8, 156-60; *Olshausen, Gesch. d. Morm*., 48;
*Ferris’ Utah and the Mormons*, 89; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 389-90;
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 359; *Smucker's Hist. Mor*., 108-9;
*Young's Wife No 19*, 47-8, 268; *Busch, Gesch. der Morm*., 87;
*Marshall's Through Am*., 215-16; *Hyde's Mormonism*, 104-5; *Bennett's
Mormonism Exposed*, 263-72; *Miller's First Families*, 64-5; *Hickman's
Brigham's Destroying Angel*; *Hall's Mormonism*, 94-5; *E. M. Webb*, in
*Utah County Sketches*, MS., 49-50, the last named referring to the
rules and principles of the order of Enoch.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[128:29](hou08.htm#fr_147.md) Spelled also Hahn,
Hohn, Hawn.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[128:30](hou08.htm#fr_148.md) 'Immediately after
this, there came into the city a messenger from Haun's mill, bringing
the intelligence of an awful massacre of the people who were residing in
that place, and that a force of two or three hundred, detached from the
main body of the army, under the superior command of Col. Ashley, but
under the immediate command of Capt. Nehemiah Compstock, who, the day
previous, had promised them peace and protection, but on receiving a
copy of the governor's order to exterminate or to expel, from the hands
of Col. Ashley, he returned upon them the following day, and surprised
and massacred the whole population, and then came on to the town of Far
West, and entered into conjunction with the main body of the army.'
*Mackay's The Mormons*, 88-9.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[129:31](hou08.htm#fr_149.md) Several of them
write to Boggs: 'There is no crime, from treason down to petit larceny,
but these people, or a majority of them, have been guilty of; all, too,
under the counsel of Joseph Smith, Jr, the prophet. They have committed
treason, murder, arson, burglary, robbery, larceny, and perjury. They
have societies formed under the most binding covenants in form, and the
most horrid oaths, to circumvent the laws and put them at defiance; and
to plunder and burn and murder, and divide the spoils for the use of the
church.' *Tucker's Mormonism*, 164.

    And thus Boggs makes answer, Oct. 27th: 'Since the order of the
morning to you directing you to cause four hundred mounted men to be
raised within your division, I have received by Amos Rees, Esq., and
Wiley E. Williams, Esq., one of my aids, information of the most
appalling character, which changes entirely the face of things, and
places the Mormons in the attitude of an open and avowed defiance of the
laws, and of having made open war upon the people of this state. Your
orders are therefore to hasten your operations, and endeavor to reach
Richmond in Pray county, with all possible speed. The Mormons must be
treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the state if
necessary, for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all
description. If you can increase your force, you are authorized to do so
to any extent you may think necessary. I have just issued orders to
Maj.-Gen. Wollock of Marion county to raise 500 men, and to march them
to the northern part of Daviess, and there unite with Gen. Doniphan of
Clay, who has been ordered with 500 men to proceed to the same point for
the purpose of intercepting the retreat of the Mormons to the north.
They have been directed to communicate with you by express. You can also
communicate with them if you find it necessary. Instead, therefore, of
proceeding as at first directed, to reinstate the citizens of Daviess in
their homes, you will proceed <span id="page_130">p. 130</span>
immediately to Richmond and there operate against the Mormons.
Brig.-Gen. Parks of Ray has been ordered to have 400 men of his brigade
in readiness to join you at Richmond. The whole force will be placed
under your command.'

<span id="fn_150"></span>[130:32](hou08.htm#fr_150.md) 'The governor's
orders and these military movements were kept an entire secret from the
citizens of Caldwell and Daviess…even the mail was withheld from Far
West.' *Pratt's Autobiography*, 200.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[130:33](hou08.htm#fr_151.md) 'This letter of the
governor's was extremely unguarded, and seems to have been too literally
construed…Making all due allowance for the exasperated state of the
public mind, these threats of extermination sound a little too savage in
Anglo-Saxon ears…But they were impolitic, because they gave plausibility
to the idea that the saints were the victims of a cruel and unrelenting
religious persecution, and furnished them with one of the surest means
of future success.' *Ferris’ Utah and the Mormons*, 90-1.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[130:34](hou08.htm#fr_152.md) 'About the time that
Lucas came out to Far West, Smith assembled the Mormon troops, and said
that for every one they lacked in number of those who came out among
them, the Lord would send angels, who would fight for them, and they
should be victorious.' *Kidder's Mormonism*, 143.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[131:35](hou08.htm#fr_153.md) They were 'confined
to the limits of the town for about a week.' During this time much
property was destroyed, and women abused. The number of arms taken was
630, besides swords and pistols, worth between $12,000 and $15,000.
*Mem. to Leg*., in *Greene's Facts*, 15. 'General Lucas demanded the
Caldwell militia to give up their arms, which was done to the number of
upward of 500, the rest of the troops having fled during the night.
After the troops had surrendered, the city of Far West was surrounded by
the robbers, and all the men detained as prisoners, none being permitted
to pass out of the city, although their families were starving for want
of sustenance.' *Pratt's Persecution*, 84. 'We determined not to resist
anything in the shape of authority, however tyrannical or
unconstitutional might be the proceedings against us. 'With this request
(to surrender ourselves as prisoners we readily complied as soon as we
were assured by the pledge of the honor of the principal officers that
our lives should be safe…We were marched into camp, surrounded by
thousands of savage-looking beings, many of whom were painted like
Indian warriors. These all set up a constant yell, like so many
blood-hounds let loose on their prey…A hint was given us that the
general officers held a secret council…in which we were all sentenced to
be shot.' *Pratt's Persecution*, 80-2. 'If the vision of the infernal
regions could suddenly open to the mind, with thousands of malicious
fiends, all clamoring, exulting, deriding, blaspheming, mocking,
railing, raging, and foaming like a troubled sea, then could some idea
be formed of the hell which we had entered.' *Pratt's Autobiography*,
204. See *Young's Woman's Experience*, MS.; *Horne's Migrations*, MS.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[132:36](hou08.htm#fr_154.md) Pratt says that
Clark has been commended by some writers for his heroic merciful, and
prudent conduct toward the Mormons, but that the truth is that he openly
avowed his approval of all the proceedings of Gen. Lucas, and said that
he should not alter his decrees. *Autobiography*, 227-8.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[132:37](hou08.htm#fr_155.md) It runs as follows:
'Gentlemen, You whose names are not attached to this list of names will
now have the privilege of going to your fields to obtain corn for your
families, wood, etc. Those that are now taken will go from thence to
prison, to be tried, and receive the due demerit of their crimes, but
you are now at liberty, all but such as charges may be hereafter
preferred against. It now devolves upon you to fulfil the treaty that
you have entered into, the leading items of which I now lay before you.
The first of these you have already complied with, which is, that you
deliver up your leading men to be tried according to law. Second, that
you deliver up your arms; this has been attended to. The third is, that
you sign over your property to defray the expenses of the war; this you
have also done. Another thing yet remains for you to comply with, that
is, that you leave this state forthwith, and whatever your feelings
concerning this affair, whatever your innocence, it is nothing to me.
Gen. Lucas, who is equal in authority with me, has made this treaty with
you. I am determined to see it executed. The orders of the governor to
me were, that you should be exterminated, and not allowed to continue in
the state, and had your leaders not been given up and the treaty
complied with before this, you and your families would have been
destroyed, and your houses in ashes.'

<span id="fn_156"></span>[132:38](hou08.htm#fr_156.md) Pratt says in his
*Autobiography*, p. 210, that a revelation to Joseph Smith buoyed up
their spirits continually during their captivity. 'As we arose and
commenced our march on the morning of the 3d of November, Joseph Smith
spoke to me and the other prisoners in a low but cheerful and
confidential tone; said he, "Be of good cheer, brethren; the word of the
Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us, and that
whatever we may suffer during this captivity, not one of our lives
should be taken."' 'When we arrived in Richmond as prisoners there were
some fifty others, mostly heads of families, who had been marched from
Caldwell on foot, distance thirty miles, and were now penned up in a
cold, open, unfinished court-house, in which situation they remained for
some weeks, while their families were suffering severe privations.'
*Id*., 227.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[132:39](hou08.htm#fr_157.md) A court of inquiry
was instituted at Richmond before Judge Austin A. King, lasting from the
11th to 28th of November. Pratt says: 'The judge could not be prevailed
on to examine the conduct of the murderers and robbers <span
id="page_133">p. 133</span> who had desolated our society, nor would he
receive testimony except against us…The judge in open court, while
addressing a witness, proclaimed that if the members of the church
remained on their lands to put in another crop they should be destroyed
indiscriminately, and their bones be left to bleach on the plains
without a burial…Mr Doniphan, attorney for the defence, and since famed
as a general in the Mexican war, finally advised the prisoners to offer
no defence; "for," said he, "though a legion of angels from the opening
heavens should declare your innocence, the court and populace have
decreed your destruction." Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman
Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRay were committed to the jail of
Clay co. on charge of treason; and Morris Phelps, Lyman Gibbs, Darwin
Chase, Norman Shearer, and myself were committed to the jail of
Richmond, Ray co., for the alleged crime of murder, said to be committed
in the act of dispersing the bandit Bogart and his gang.' *Id*., 230-3.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[133:40](hou08.htm#fr_158.md) Ingloriously
conspicuous in the Missouri persecutions were generals Clark, Wilson,
and Lucas, Colonel Price, Captain Bogart, and Cornelius Gilliam, 'whose
zeal in the cause of oppression and injustice,' says Smith, 'was
unequalled, and whose delight has been to rob, murder, and spread
devastation among the saints…All the threats, murders, and robberies
which these officers have been guilty of are entirely ignored by the
executive of the state, who to hide his own iniquity must of course
shield and protect those whom he employed to carry into effect his
murderous purposes.' *Times and Seasons*, i. 7.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[133:41](hou08.htm#fr_159.md) Pages of evidence,
both Mormon and anti-Mormon, might be given, and can indeed at any time
be produced, to prove the commission of innumerable wrongs and revolting
atrocities on the part of the people of Missouri, while abetted therein
by state forces, commanded by state officers, and all under guidance of
the state governor.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[133:42](hou08.htm#fr_160.md) There is abundance
of testimony from disinterested sources, even from the opposers of
Mormonism themselves, to prove the persecution on the part of the people
of Missouri unjust and outrageous. I will quote only three from many
similar comments that have been made on this subject, and all, be it
remembered, emanating from the open and avowed enemies of this religion.

    Says Prof. Turner of Illinois college: 'Who began the quarrel? Was
it the Mormons? Is it not notorious, on the contrary, that they were
hunted like wild beasts, from county to county, before they made any
desperate resistance? Did they ever, as a body, refuse obedience to the
laws, when called upon to do so, until driven to desperation by repeated
threats and assaults from the mob? Did the state ever make one decent
effort to defend them as fellow-citizens in their rights, or to redress
their wrongs? Let the conduct of its governors, attorneys, and the fate
of their final petitions answer. Have any who plundered and openly
massacred the Mormons ever been brought to the punishment due to their
crimes? Let the boasting murderers of begging and helpless infancy
answer. Has the state ever remunerated even those known to be innocent,
for the loss of either their property or their arms? Did either the
pulpit or the press through the state raise a note of remonstrance or
alarm? Let the clergymen who abetted and the editors <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> who encouraged the mob answer.'
*Correspondence Joseph Smith*, 2. On the 16th of March, 1839, the editor
of the *Quincy Argus* wrote as follows: 'We have no language
sufficiently strong for the expression of our indignation and shame at
the recent transaction in a sister state, and that state Missouri, a
state of which we had long been proud, alike for her men and history,
but now so fallen that we could wish her star stricken out from the
bright constellation of the Union. We say we know of no language
sufficiently strong for the expression of our shame and abhorrence of
her recent conduct. She has written her own character in letters of
blood, and stained it by acts of merciless cruelty and brutality that
the waters of ages cannot efface. it will be observed that an organized
mob, aided by many of the civil and military officers of Missouri, with
Gov. Boggs at their head, have been the prominent actors in this
business, incited, too, it appears, against the Mormons by political
hatred, and by the additional motives of plunder and revenge. They have
but too well put in execution their threats of extermination and
expulsion, and fully wreaked their vengeance on a body of industrious
and enterprising men who had never wronged nor wished to wrong them, but
on the contrary had ever comported themselves as good and honest
citizens, living under the same laws, and having the same right with
themselves to the sacred immunities of life, liberty, and property.' 'By
enlightened people the Mormons were regarded as the victims of misguided
vengeance in Missouri. The ruffianly violence they encountered at the
hands of lawless mobs, in several instances eventuating in deliberate
murder, finds no extenuation in any alleged provocation. The due process
of law might have afforded adequate redress for the criminalities of
which they should be found guilty on legal trial. Such was the view of
the subject rightly taken by the people of Illinois and of the world,
though it may have been wrongfully applied in favor of the cause of the
persecuted.' *Tucker's Mormonism*, 166.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[134:43](hou08.htm#fr_161.md) A memorial was sent
to the legislature of Missouri, dated Far West, Dec. 10, 1838, setting
forth these facts, and praying that the governor's novel, unlawful,
tyrannical, and oppressive order be rescinded. It was signed by Edward
Partridge, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Theodore Turley, Brigham
Young, Isaac Morley, George W. Harris, John Murdock, John M. Burk.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[135:44](hou08.htm#fr_162.md) 'On the 20th of
April, 1839, the last of the society departed from Far West. Thus had a
whole people, variously estimated at from ten to fifteen <span
id="page_136">p. 136</span> thousand souls, been driven from houses and
lands and reduced to poverty, and had removed to another state, daring
one short winter and part of a spring. The sacrifice of property was
immense.' *Pratt's Autobiography*, 245.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[137:45](hou08.htm#fr_163.md) *Pratt's Persecution
of the Saints*, 185.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[137:46](hou08.htm#fr_164.md) 'On my return to
this city,' writes Lucas from the executive office at Burlington, Iowa,
'after a few weeks' absence in the interior of the territory, I received
your letter of the 25th ult. \[Feb. 1839\], in which you give a short
account of the sufferings of the people called Mormons, and ask whether
they could be permitted to purchase lands and settle upon them in the
territory of Iowa, and there worship Almighty God according to the
dictates of their own consciences, secure from oppression, etc. In
answer to your inquiry, I would say that I know of no authority that can
constitutionally deprive them of this right. They are citizens of the
United States, and are all entitled to all the rights and privileges of
other citizens. The 2d section of the 4th article of the constitution of
the United States (which all are solemnly bound to support) declares
that "the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all the privileges
and immunities of citizens in the several states;" this privilege
extends in full force to the territories of the United States. The first
amendment to the constitution of the United States declares that
"congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof." The ordinances of congress of
the 13th July, 1787, for the government of the territory north-west of
the river Ohio, secures to the citizens of said territory and the
citizens of the states thereafter to be formed therein, certain
privileges which were by the late act of congress organizing the
territory of Iowa extended to the citizens of this territory. The first
fundamental article in that ordinance, which is <span id="page_138">p.
138</span> declared to be forever unalterable except by common consent,
reads as follows, to wit: No person demeaning himself in a peaceable and
orderly manner shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship
or religious sentiments in said territory. These principles I trust will
ever be adhered to in the territory of Iowa. They make no distinction
between religious sects. They extend equal privileges and protection to
all; each must rest upon its own merits and will prosper in proportion
to the purity of its principles, and the fruit of holiness and piety
produced thereby. With regard to the peculiar people mentioned in your
letter, I know but little. They had a community in the northern part of
Ohio for several years, and I have no recollection of ever having heard
in that state of any complaint against them of violating the laws of the
country. Their religious opinions I conceive have nothing to do with our
political transactions. They are citizens of the United States, and are
entitled to the same political rights and legal protection that other
citizens are entitled to. The foregoing are briefly my views on the
subject of your inquiries.'

    In a memorial sent to Washington in the autumn of 1839, it was
claimed by the Mormons that their property destroyed in Jackson co. was
worth $120,000; that 12,000 souls were banished; that they purchased and
improved lands in Clay co., and in three years were obliged to leave
there with heavy loss; that they then purchased and improved lands in
Daviess and Carroll counties; that for the most part these counties were
wild and uncultivated; that they had converted them into large and well
improved farms, well stocked, which were rapidly advancing in
cultivation and wealth; and that they were finally compelled to fly from
these counties. In a petition presented by Sidney Rigdon to the state of
Pennsylvania, it is stated that 'Lilburn Boggs, governor of the state,
used his executive influence to have us all massacred or driven into
exile; and all this because we were not lawless and disobedient. For if
the laws had given them a sufficient guaranty against the evils
complained of…then would they bare had recourse to the laws. If we had
been transgressors of laws, our houses would not have been rifled, our
women ravished, our farms desolated, and our goods and chattels
destroyed, our men killed, our wives and children driven into the
prairies, and made to suffer all the indignities that the most brutal
barbarity could inflict; but would only have had to suffer that which
the laws would inflict, which were founded in justice, framed in
righteousness, and administered in humanity… Why, then, all this
cruelty? Answer: because the people had violated no law; and they could
not be restrained by law, nor prevented from exercising the rights
according to the laws, enjoyed, and had a right to be protected in, in
any state of file Union.' Mr Corrill remarks: 'My opinion is, that if
the Mormons had been let alone by the citizens, they would have divided
and subdivided, so as to have completely destroyed themselves and their
power as a people in a short time.'

<span id="fn_165"></span>[139:47](hou08.htm#fr_165.md) In 1839 Carlin was
governor of Illinois, and on him the governor of Missouri made a formal
demand for the surrender to the authorities of Smith and Rigdon, but
little attention was paid to it. One of the most complete documents
extant covering this period is, *Facts Relative to the Expulsion of the
Mormons, or Latter-day Saints, from the State of Missouri under the
Exterminating Order. By John P. Greene, an authorized representative of
the Mormons* (Cincinnati, 1839). The work consists of 43 8vo pages, and
was written for the purpose of showing to what wrongs the Mormons had
been subjected at the hands of the people and politicians of Missouri,
and also to obtain contributions for the destitute. The contents are
largely documentary, and if we allow for some intensity of feeling, bear
the impress of truth.

    Pointing in the same direction but less pretentious and less
important is *Correspondence between Joseph Smith, the prophet, and Col.
John Wentworth, editor of the 'Chicago Democrat,' and member of congress
from Illinois; General James Arlington Bennett, of Arlington House, Long
Island; and the Honorable John C. Calhoun, Senator from South Carolina,
in which is given a sketch of the life of Joseph Smith, Rise and
Progress of the Church of Latter-day Saints, and their persecution by
the state of Missouri; with the peculiar views of Joseph Smith in
relation to Political and Religious matters generally; to which is added
a concise account of the present state and prospects of the city of*
<span id="page_140">p. 140</span> *Nauvoo.* (New York, 1844). With a
title-page from which so much information is to be derived, we must not
expect too much from the book itself. A portion of this correspondence
was published in the *Times and Seasons.*

*    Late Persecution of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints. Ten thousand American citizens robbed, plundered, and banished;
others imprisoned, and others martyred for their Religion. With a sketch
of their Rise, Progress, and Doctrine. By P. P. Pratt, Minister of the
Gospel. Written in prison* (New York, 1840). This is a 16mo vol. of 215
pages, most of which is devoted to the Missouri persecutions, with but
little other history, except what is thrown in incidentally. All
appendix of 37 pages is made up mostly from *Greene's Facts.* Pratt
gives a graphic account of his life in prison, and of the means whereby,
with the coöperation of his wife, he rescued from jail the manuscript of
this book, which was written there. After mentioning them, he says:
'Thus, kind reader, was this little book providentially, and I may say
miraculously, preserved, and by this means you have it to read.' The
first edition was published at Detroit, Michigan, the book consisting
then of 84 pages.

    Full reference for the persecutions of the Mormons in 1831-39.
Memorial to Legislature Mass. in 1844, against such conduct, in *Times
and Seasons,* i. 17-20, 33-6, 49-56, 65-6, 81-6, 94, 97-104, 113-16,
128-34, 145-50, 161-7, 177; v. 514-19; *Pratt's Persecution of the
Saints,* 21-215; *Utah Tracts,* no. 4, 56-64; *Pratt's Autobiography,*
190-237, 311-22, 336-40; *Smucker's Hist. Mor.,* 86; *Deseret News,*
Dec. 27, 1851, Nov. 29 and Dec. 27, 1851, June 30, 1869; *Mackay's The
Mormons,* 106-14; *Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor.,* 160-6; *Howe's
Mormonism Unveiled,* 133-76; *Ferris’ Utah and the Mormons,* 87-8, 90;
*White's Ten Years in Or.,* 144; *Taylder's Mormon's Own Book,*
xliii.-xlvi.; *Gunnison's Mormons,* 104-14; *Millennial Star,* xxv.,
535-6, 550-2, 599-600, 614-16, 631; *Burnett's Rec.,* 56; *Beadle's Life
in Utah,* 60; *Lee's* *Mormonism,* 55-96; *Tullidge's Women*, 116-74;
*Richards’ Narrative,* MS., 6-9; *Young's* *Wife No. 19,* 43-53;
*Atlantic Monthly,* Dec. 1869; *Stenhouse, Les Mormons,* 154-71;
*Liberty Tribune; Margaret Smoot's Eperiences of a Mormon Wife*, MS.,
2-3: *Farnham's Travels Rocky Mts.,* 6; *Bertrand's Mem. Mor.,* 51;
*Busch, Gesch. der Mor.,* 85-7, 90-7; *Juvenile Instructor,* xv. 78;
*Kidder's Mormonism,* 133-5; *Iowa Frontier Guardian, M*arch 21, 1849;
*Rabbison's Growth of Towns,* MS, 2-5.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[140:48](hou08.htm#fr_166.md) 'Since their
expulsion from Missouri a portion of them, about one hundred families,
have settled in Lee county, Iowa Territory, and are generally considered
industrious, inoffensive, and worthy citizens.' *Letter from Robert
Lucas, governor of Iowa, to A. Ripley*, dated Jan. 4, 1840.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[141:49](hou08.htm#fr_167.md) 'Nauvoo was one of
the names of one of the numerous petty chiefs in British India.'
*Ferris’ The Mor*., 97. 'Nauvoo is a Hebrew word, and signifies a
beautiful habitation for man, carrying with it the idea of rest; it is
not, however, considered by the Mormons their final home, but a resting
place only; for they only intend to remain there until they have
gathered force sufficient to enable them to conquer Independence in
Jackson co., Missouri, which is one of the most fertile, pleasant, and
desirable countries on the face of the earth, possessing a soil
unsurpassed in any region. Independence they consider their Zion, and
there they intend to rear their great temple, the corner-stone of which
is already laid. There is to be the great gathering <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> place for all the saints, and in that
delightful country they *expect* to find their Eden, and build the New
Jerusalem.' *Bennett's Mormonism Exp*., 192-3.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[142:50](hou08.htm#fr_168.md) See J. D. Hunter's
letter of Dec. 26, 1839, from Jackson county, Ill., in *Times and
Seasons*, i. 59.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Story of Mormonism. 1840-1844.](hou09.md)
