[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou10)  [Next](hou12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

### CHAPTER VIII. EXPULSION FROM NAUVOO. 1845-1846.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">A Busy City—Meeting in the
Temple—Sacrifice of Property—Detachments Move Forward—a Singular
Exodus—the First Encampment—Cool Proposal From Brother Brannan—the
Journey—Courage and Good Cheer—Swelling of Their Numbers—the Remnant of
the Saints in Nauvoo—Attitude of the Gentiles—the Mormons
Attacked—Continued Hostilities—the Final Departures—the Poor Camp—a
Deserted City.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">The</span> holy city now presented an
exciting scene. Men were making ready their merchandise, and families
preparing to vacate their homes. Hundreds were making tents and wagon
covers out of cloth bought with anything they happened to have;
companies were organized and numbered, each of which had its own
wagon-shop, wheelwrights, carpenters, and cabinetmakers, who were all
busily employed. <span id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_253.md) Green timber was
prepared for spokes and felloes, some kiln-dried, and some boiled in
salt and water. it the Nauvoo house shops were established as well as at
the mason's hall and arsenal. Iron was brought from different parts of
the country, and blacksmiths were at work night and day. <span
id="fr_254"></span>[2](#fn_254.md)

    Some three years previous, the prophet Joseph had ordered that there
should not be another general conference

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

until it could be held in the temple. And now, on the 5th of October,
1845, five thousand persons assembled, and on the following day began
the great conference, which lasted three days. The saints, however, were
permitted but short enjoyment of their beautiful structure, a meagre
reward for all the tell and money expended. Holiness to the Lord was the
motto of it; and there was little else they could now carry hence; the
hewn stone, the wood-work, and the brass they must leave behind. This
building was to them as a temple "where the children of the last kingdom
could come together to praise the Lord." As they cast one last gaze on
their homes and the monuments reared to their faith, they asked, "Who is
the God of the gentiles? Can he be our God?" <span
id="fr_255"></span>[3](#fn_255.md)

    In the same number of the *Times and Seasons* in which appeared a
notice of this meeting was published a circular signed by Brigham Young,
and addressed to the brethren scattered abroad throughout America,
informing them of the impending change. "The exodus of the nations of
the only true Israel from these United States to a far distant region of
the west, where bigotry, intolerance, and insatiable oppression will
have lost its power over them, forms a new epoch, not only in the
history of the church, but of this nation." <span
id="fr_256"></span>[4](#fn_256.md)

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

    The arbitrary acts of the people of Illinois in forcing the
departure of the saints lays them open to the grave charge, among
others, of a desire to possess their property for less than its value.
Houses and lots, farms and merchandise, could not be turned into money,
or even into wagons and live-stock, in a moment, except at a ruinous
sacrifice. Granted that the hierarchy was opposed to American
institutions, that the Mormons wished to gain possession of the United
States and rule the world: no one feared the immediate consummation of
their pretentious hopes. Granted that among them were adulterers,
thieves, and murderers: the gentiles were the stronger, and had laws by
which to punish the guilty. It was not a noble sentiment which had
actuated the people of Missouri; it was not a noble sentiment which now
actuated the people of Illinois, thus to continue their persecutions
during the preparations for departure, and drive a whole cityful from
their homes out upon the bleak prairie in the dead of winter.

    In January 1846 the council ordered that a detachment should set
forth at once, and that the remainder of the saints should follow as
soon as possible. "Beloved brethren," said their leader, "it now remains
to be proven whether those of our family and friends who are necessarily
left behind for a season, to obtain an outfit through the sale of
property, shall be mobbed, burned, and driven away by force. Does any
American want the honor of doing it? or will any Americans suffer such
acts to be done, and the disgrace of them to remain on their character,
under existing circumstances. If they will, let the world know it."

    The world was soon to know it. Driven almost at the point of the
sword, a large number of the saints, soon afterward followed by the
president, the twelve, the high council, and other companies, gathered
on the eastern bank of the Mississippi early in February.

    There was but little money in circulation throughout

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the west at this time. Over vast wild sections skins were the only
currency, and at the settlements traffic for the most part assumed the
form of barter or exchange of labor. It was, therefore, exceedingly
difficult, as I have said, for the saints to get their property into
portable form, even after selling their lands at half or quarter their
value. The gentiles, of course, could pay what they pleased, being the
only buyers, and the saints being forced to sell. Moreover, there was
more property thrown upon the market than could be taken at once, and
the departure of so large and thrifty a portion of the population was of
itself sufficient to depreciate property. The best they could do was to
exchange their lands for wagons and horses and cattle, and this they did
to as large an extent as possible, scouring the country for a hundred
miles around in search of live-stock. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[5](#fn_257.md)

    And now, putting upon their animals and vehicles such of their
household effects as they could carry, in small detachments the
migratory saints began to leave Nauvoo. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[6](#fn_258.md) Before them was the ice-bound river, and
beyond that the wilderness.

    There is no parallel in the world's history to this migration from
Nauvoo. The exodus from Egypt was from a heathen land, a land of
idolaters, to a fertile region designated by the Lord for his chosen
people, the land of Canaan. The pilgrim fathers in flying to America
came from a bigoted and despotic people—a

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

people making few pretensions to civil or religious liberty. It was from
these same people who had fled from old-world persecutions that they
might enjoy liberty of conscience in the wilds of America, from their
descendants and associates, that other of their descendants, who claimed
the right to differ from them in opinion and practice, were now fleeing.
True, the Mormons in various ways had rendered themselves abominable to
their neighbors: so had the puritan fathers to their neighbors. Before
this the Mormons had been driven to the outskirts of civilization, where
they had built themselves a city; this they must now abandon, and throw
themselves upon the mercy of savages.

    The first teams crossed about the 10th, in flat boats, which were
rowed over, and which plied forth and back from early dawn until late
into the night, skiffs and other river craft being also used for
passengers and baggage. The cold increased. On the 16th snow fell
heavily; and the river was frozen over, so that the remainder of the
emigration crossed on the ice. Their first camp, the camp of the
congregation, was on Sugar Creek, a few miles from Nauvoo and almost
within sight of the city. <span id="fr_259"></span>[7](#fn_259.md) All
their movements were directed by Brigham, who with his family and a
quorum of the twelve, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Heber C. Kimball,
Willard Richards, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, and Amasa
Lyman, joined the brethren on Sugar Creek on the 15th. Wilford Woodruff,
who had been sent to preside over the mission to England, joined the
emigration later at Mount Pisgah.

    On the morning of the 17th, all the saints in camp being assembled
near the bridge to receive their leader's instructions, the president
stood upright in his wagon, and cried with a loud voice, "Attention! the

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

whole camp of Israel." <span id="fr_260"></span>[8](#fn_260.md) He then
went on to say that as the Lord had been with them in times past,
howsoever singular had been his method of proving his presence, so would
he be with them in the future. His empire, the empire of his people, was
established, and the powers of hell should not prevail against it. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[9](#fn_261.md)

    After this, with comparatively light hearts, they broke camp, and
slowly wending their way westward, disappeared at length beyond the
horizon, in pursuit once more of the ever-mocking phantom of home.
Whither they journeyed they were as yet uncertain. They knew only that
they were to search out, probably beyond the Rocky Mountains, if not
indeed among them, some isolated spot, where, far away from the land of
boasted freedom, the soil, the skies, and mind and manners were free. If
they were offensive to the laws, if the laws of the land were offensive
to them, they would go where they might have land and laws of their own.

    Considering their situation, and what they had been lately called to
undergo—ignominy, insult, the loss of property, the abandonment of
home—there was little complaint. It was among their opponents, and in
the midst of a general recital of their wrongs, that the saints were
accustomed to put on a long face and strike into a doleful strain. Among
themselves there were

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

few people more free from care, or more light-hearted and happy.

    In the present instance, though all were poor and some destitute,
and though man and beast were exposed to driving rain and hail, and the
chill blasts of a western winter often sweeping down upon them unchecked
from the limitless prairie, they made the best of it, and instead of
wasting time in useless repining, set themselves at work to make the
most of their joys and the least of their sorrows. On the night of March
1st, when the first camp was pitched beyond Sugar Creek, after prayer
they held a dance, and as the men of Iowa looked on they wondered how
these homeless outcasts from Christian civilization could thus praise
and make merry in view of their near abandoning of themselves to the
mercies of savages and wild beasts. <span
id="fr_262"></span>[10](#fn_262.md) Food and raiment were provided for all;
for shelter they had their tents and wagons, and after the weather had
spent somewhat of its ruggedness, no extreme hardships were suffered.
Without attempting long distances in a single day, they made camp rather
early, and after the usual manner of emigrants, the wagons in a circle
or semicircle round the camp-fire, placed so as best to shield them from
the wind and wild beasts and Indians, with the animals at a convenient
distance, some staked, and some running loose, but all carefully
guarded. The country through which they passed was much of it well
wooded; the land was fertile and afforded abundant pastures, the grass
in summer being from one to ten feet high. Provisions were cheap: corn
twelve cents and wheat twenty-five to thirty cents a bushel,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

beef two cents a pound, and all payable in labor at what was then
considered good wages, say forty or fifty cents a day.

    Into the wilderness they went, journeying day after day on toward
the setting sun, their hearts buoyant, their sinews strengthened by a
power not of this world. Forever fades the real before the imaginary.
There is nothing tougher than fanaticism. What cared they for wind and
rain, for comfortless couches or aching limbs?—the kingdom of the Lord
was with them. What cared they for insults and injustice when the worst
this world could do was to hasten heaven to them? So on toward the west
their long train of wagons rolled, leaving each day farther and farther
behind the old, cold, fanatical east, with its hard, senseless dogmas,
and its merciless civilization, without murmurings, without discord, the
man above any other on earth they most loved and feared riding at their
head, or standing with uplifted and extended hands as his people passed
by, blessing and comforting them. "We were happy and contented," says
John Taylor, "and the songs of Zion resounded from wagon to wagon,
reverberating through the woods, while the echo was returned from the
distant hills." <span id="fr_263"></span>[11](#fn_263.md)

    There were brass or stringed instruments in every company, and night
and morning all were called to prayers <span
id="fr_264"></span>[12](#fn_264.md) at the sound of the bugle. Camp-fires
drew around them the saints when their day s work was finished, and
singing, dancing, and story-telling enlivened the hour.

    As they went on their way their ranks were swelled by fresh bands,
until there were brought together 3,000 wagons, 30,000 head of cattle, a
great number of mules and horses, and immense flocks of sheep.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Richardson
Point <span id="fr_265"></span>[13](#fn_265.md) they made their second
stationary camp, the third at Chariton River, the fourth at Locust
Creek, where a considerable time was spent. Then there were—so named by
the saints—Garden Grove, <span id="fr_266"></span>[14](#fn_266.md) a large
timbered tract which had been burned over, Mount Pisgah, <span
id="fr_267"></span>[15](#fn_267.md) and finally Winter Quarters, in
Nebraska, on the west side of the Missouri, a little above the modern
Omaha, on the site of the present town of Florence. <span
id="fr_268"></span>[16](#fn_268.md) At Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah were
established farming settlements for the benefit of those who were to
follow. In July the main body reached the Missouri at the spot now known
as Council Bluffs, and soon afterward many crossed the river in a
ferry-boat of their own construction, and pitched their tents at Winter
Quarters. Other large encampments

<span id="img_22200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BETWEEN THE
MISSISSIPPI AND MISSOURI.](tn/22200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22200.jpg.md)  
BETWEEN THE MISSISSIPPI AND MISSOURI.  
</span>

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

were formed on both banks of the river, or at points near by, where
grass was plentiful. In early autumn about 12,000 Mormons were assembled
in this neighborhood, or were on their way across the plains.

 

    Leaving here the advance portion of the emigration, let us return to
Nauvoo and see how it fared with those who were still engaged in
preparations for their pilgrimage. It had been stipulated, the reader
will remember, that the Mormons should remove from the state in the
spring, or as soon afterward as they could sell their property, and that
meanwhile they should not be molested. Long before spring, thousands had
crossed the Mississippi, among whom were all the more obnoxious members
of the sect. Meanwhile, how had the gentiles kept their faith?

    But passing the cause, what a picture was now presented by the
deserted city and its exiled inhabitants!—the former, as Colonel Kane
viewed it—but which view must be regarded as ideal rather than strictly
historical—with "its bright new dwellings set in cool green gardens,
ranging up around a stately dome-shaped hill, which was crowned by a
noble marble edifice, whose high tapering spire was radiant with white
and gold. The city appeared to cover several miles; and beyond it, in
the background, there rolled off a fair country, checkered by the
careful lines of fruitful husbandry."

    To the *Nauvoo Eagle* Major Warren sent notice from Carthage, on the
16th of April, that he had been directed by the governor to disband on
the 1st of May the force which had been kept there ostensibly for the
protection of the saints, as the time appointed for their departure
would expire on that day. <span id="fr_269"></span>[17](#fn_269.md) The day
arrived, and there were yet many Mormons remaining, many who had found
it impossible to remove on

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

account of sickness, failure to dispose of their property, or other
adverse fortune; whereat the men of Illinois began to bluster and
threaten annihilation. Warren, who had disbanded his troops on the 1st,
received an order from the governor on the following day to muster them
into service again. This he did; for he would, if possible, see the
treaty between the Mormons and the governor faithfully carried out, and
while urging the saints to haste, he endeavored to stand between them
and the mob which now threatened their lives and the destruction of
their property. <span id="fr_270"></span>[18](#fn_270.md)

    Major Warren appears to have performed his duty firmly and well, and
to have done all that lay in his power to protect the Mormons. In a
letter to the *Quincy Whig*, dated May 20th, he writes: "The Mormons are
leaving the city with all possible despatch. During the week four
hundred teams have crossed at three points, or about 1,350 souls. The
demonstrations made by the Mormon people are unequivocal. They are
leaving the state, and preparing to leave, with every means God and
nature have placed in their hands." It was but the lower class of people
that clamored for the immediate expulsion of the remnant of the
saints—the ignorant, the bigoted, the brutal, the vicious, the lawless,
and profligate, those who hated their religion and coveted their lands.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

    On the 6th of June the people of Hancock county met at Carthage to
arrange for celebrating the 4th of July. One of the citizens rose and
said that since the Mormons were not all removed they could not rejoice
as freemen. Mormon affairs then took precedence, and another meeting was
appointed for the 12th, an invitation being sent to the gentiles at
Nauvoo who had occupied the deserted dwellings of the saints. It
happened that this was the day appointed for the assembling of the
militia, with a view to raise volunteers for the Mexican war; and now,
it was thought, was a good opportunity to show the Mormons the military
strength of the county. The officers conferred, and without authority
from the governor, marched their troops, some three or four hundred in
number, to a place called Golden Point, five miles from Nauvoo, where
they encamped, and opened communication with the city. It happened,
however, at this juncture, that Colonel Markham and others had returned
with teams from Council Bluffs for some of the church property, and
arming a force of six or eight hundred, prepared to sally forth; the
name of Colonel Markham was a terror to evil-doers, and the militia
fled, no one pursuing them.

    There were yet remaining, as late as August, certain sturdy saints
who, having committed no crime, would not consent to be driven from
their homes or barred from their occupations. Among these was a party
engaged in harvesting wheatat a settlement eight miles from Nauvoo, in
company with one or two of the gentiles, although it was forbidden by
the men of Illinois that any Mormon should show himself outside the
city, except en route for the west. The harvesters were seized and
beaten with clubs, whereupon the people of Nauvoo, both Mormons and
gentiles, took up the matter. Some arrests were made, and the culprits
taken to Nauvoo, but by writ of habeas corpus were removed to Quincy,
where they met with little trouble. While in Nauvoo, a gun in the hands

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

of a militia officer was recognized by William Pickett as belonging to
one of the harvesters. Pickett took possession of the weapon, and a
warrant was issued against him for theft; when an officer came to arrest
him, he refused to surrender. As the Mormons stood by him in illegal
attitude, the affair caused considerable excitement.

    In short, from the let of May until the final evacuation of the
city, the men of Illinois never ceased from strife and outrage. Of the
latter I will mention only two instances: "A man of near sixty years of
age," writes Major Warren in the letter just referred to, "living about
seven miles from this place, was taken from his house a few nights
since, stripped of his clothing, and his back out to pieces with a whip,
for no other reason than because he was a Mormon, and too old to make a
successful resistance. Conduct of this kind would disgrace a horde of
savages." In August a party consisting of Phineas H. Young, his son
Brigham, and three others who were found outside the city, were
kidnapped by a mob, hurried into the thickets, passed from one gang to
another—men from Nauvoo being in hot pursuit—and for a fortnight were
kept almost without food or rest, and under constant threat of death.

    Fears are now entertained that, by reason of the popular feeling
throughout the country, Nauvoo city will be again attacked; the gentile
citizens therefore ask Governor Ford for protection, whereupon Major
Parker is sent to their relief. <span id="fr_271"></span>[19](#fn_271.md)
All through August

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

troubles continue, the anti-Mormons almost coming to blows among
themselves. Before the end of the month about six hundred men are
assembled at Carthage, by order of Thomas Carlin, a special constable,
ostensibly to enforce the arrest of Pickett, but in reality to enforce
the expulsion of the Mormons. Major Parker orders the constable's posse
to disperse, otherwise he threatens to treat them as a mob. The
constable replies that if the major should attempt to molest them in
discharge of their duty he will regard him and his command as a mob and
so treat them. "Now, fellow-citizens," declares a committee selected
from four counties, <span id="fr_272"></span>[20](#fn_272.md) in a
proclamation issued at Carthage, "an issue is fairly raised. On the one
hand, a large body of men have assembled at Carthage, under the command
of a legal officer, to assist him in performing legal duties. They are
not excited—they are cool, but determined at all hazards to execute the
law in Nauvoo, which has always heretofore defied it. They are resolved
to go to work systematically and with ample precaution, but under a full
knowledge that on their good and orderly behavior their character is
staked. On the other hand, in Nauvoo is a blustering Mormon mob, who
have defied the law, and who are now organized for the purpose of
arresting the arm of civil power. Judge ye which is in the right."

    Intending, as it seems, to keep his word, Carlin places his men
under command of Colonel Singleton, who at once throws off the mask, and
on the 7th of September announces to Major Parker that the Mormons must
go. On the same day a stipulation is made, granting to the saints sixty
days' extension of time, and signed by representatives on both
sides. <span id="fr_273"></span>[21](#fn_273.md)

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But to the terms
of this stipulation the men of Illinois would not consent. They were
sore disgusted, and rebelled against their leaders, causing Singleton,
Parker, and others to abandon their commands, the posse being left in
charge of Constable Carlin, who summoned to his aid one Thomas Brockman,
a clergyman of Brown county, and for the occasion dubbed general. On the
10th of September the posse, now more than a thousand strong, with
wagons, equipments, and every preparation for a campaign, approached
Nauvoo and encamped at Hunter's farm.

    At this time there were in the city not more than a hundred and
fifty Mormons, and about the same number of gentiles, or, as they were
termed, 'new citizens,' capable of bearing arms, the remainder of the
population consisting of destitute women and children and of the sick.
Many of the gentiles had departed, fearing a general massacre, and those
who remained could not be relied upon as combatants, for they were of
course unwilling to risk their lives in a conflict which, if successful,
would bring them no credit. Nothing daunted, the little band, under
command of colonels Daniel H. Wells <span
id="fr_274"></span>[22](#fn_274.md) and William Cutler, took up its
position on the edge of a wood in the suburbs of Nauvoo, and less than a
mile from the enemy's camp. <span id="fr_275"></span>[23](#fn_275.md)

    Before hostilities commenced, a deputation from Quincy <span
id="fr_276"></span>[24](#fn_276.md) visited the camp of the assailants, and
in vain attempted to dissuade them from their purpose. No sooner had
they departed than fire was opened on the Mormons from a battery of
six-pounders, but without effect. Here for the day matters rested. At
sunrise the posse changed their position, intending to take the city by
storm, but were held in cheek by

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Captain
Anderson <span id="fr_277"></span>[25](#fn_277.md) at the head of
thirty-five men, termed by the saints the Spartan band. The enemy now
fired some rounds of grape-shot, forcing the besieged to retire out of
range; and after some further cannonading, darkness put an end to the
skirmish, the Mormons throwing up breastworks during the night. <span
id="fr_278"></span>[26](#fn_278.md)

    On the morning of the 12th the demand of unconditional surrender was
promptly rejected; whereupon, at a given signal, several hundred men who
had been stationed in ambush, on the west bank of the river, to cut off
the retreat of the Mormons, appeared with red flags in their hands, thus
portending massacre. The assailants now opened fire from all their
batteries, and soon afterward advanced to the assault, slowly, and with
the measured tramp of veterans, at their head being Constable Carlin and
the Reverend Brockman, and unfurled above them—the stars and stripes.
When within rifle-range of the breastworks the posse wheeled toward the
south, attempting to outflank the saints and gain possession of the
temple square. But this movement had been anticipated, and posted in the
woods to the north of the Mormon position lay the Spartan band. Leading
on his men at double-quick, Anderson suddenly confronted the enemy and
opened a brisk fire from revolving rifles. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[27](#fn_279.md) The posse advanced no farther, but for
an hour and a half held their ground bravely against the Spartan band,
the expense of ammunition in proportion to casualties being greater than
has yet been recorded in modern warfare. Then they retreated in
excellent order to the camp. The losses of the Mormons were three killed
and a few slightly wounded; the losses of the gentiles are variously

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

stated. <span id="fr_280"></span>[28](#fn_280.md) Among those who fell were
Captain Anderson and his son, a youth of sixteen, the former dying, as
he had vowed that he would die, in defence of the holy sanctuary.

    The following day was the sabbath, and hostilities were not renewed;
but on that morning a train of wagons, despatched by the posse for
ammunition and supplies, entered the town of Quincy. It was now evident
that, whether the men of Illinois intended massacre or forcible
expulsion, it would cost them many lives to effect either purpose. With
a view, therefore, to prevent further bloodshed, a committee of one
hundred proceeded to Nauvoo and attempted mediation. At the same time
the Reverend Brockman sent in his ultimatum, the terms being that the
Mormons surrender their arms, and immediately cross the river or
disperse, and that all should be protected from violence. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[29](#fn_281.md) There was no alternative. The armed mob
in their front was daily swelling in number, while beyond the river
still appeared the red flag; their own ranks, meanwhile, were being
rapidly thinned by defection among the new citizens. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[30](#fn_282.md)

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

    On the 17th of September the remnant of the Mormons crossed the
Mississippi, and on the same day the gentiles took possession of
Nauvoo. <span id="fr_283"></span>[31](#fn_283.md)

 

    It was indeed a singular spectacle, as I have said, this upon the
western border of the world's great republic in the autumn of 1846. A
whole cityful, with other settlements, and thousands of thrifty

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

agriculturists in the regions about, citizens of the United States,
driven beyond the border by other citizens: not by reason of their
religion alone, though this was made a pretence; not for breaking the
laws, though this was made a pretence; not on account of their
immorality, for the people of Illinois and Missouri were not immaculate
in this respect; nor was it altogether on account of their solid voting
and growing political power, accompanied ever by the claim of general
inheritance and universal dominion, though this last had more to do with
it probably than all the rest combined, notwithstanding that the spirit
of liberty and the laws of the republic permitted such massing of social
and political influence, and notwithstanding the obvious certainty that
any of the gentile political parties now playing the role of persecutors
would gladly and unscrupulously have availed themselves of such means
for the accomplishment of their ends. It was all these combined, and so
combined as to engender deadly hate. It gave the Mormons a power in
proportion to their numbers not possessed by other sects or societies,
which could not and would not endure it; a power regarded by the others
as unfairly acquired, and by a way and through means not in accord with
the American idea of individual equality, of equal rights and equal
citizenship. In regard to all other sects within the republic, under
guard of the constitution, religion was subordinated to politics and
government; in regard to the Mormons, in spite of the constitution,
politics and government were subordinated to religion.

    And in regard to the late occupants of the place, the last of the
Mormon host that now lay huddled to the number of 640 on the western
bank of the river in sight of the city: <span
id="fr_284"></span>[32](#fn_284.md) if the first departures from Nauvoo
escaped extreme hardships, not so these. It was the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

latter part of September, and nearly all were prostrated with chills and
fevers; <span id="fr_285"></span>[33](#fn_285.md) there at the river bank,
among the dock and rushes, poorly protected, without the shelter of a
roof or anything to keep off the force of wind or rain, little ones came
into life and were left motherless at birth. <span
id="fr_286"></span>[34](#fn_286.md) They had not food enough to satisfy the
cravings of the sick, nor clothing fit to wear. For months thereafter
there were periods when all the flour they used was of the coarsest, the
wheat being ground in coffee and hand mills, which only cut the grain;
others used a pestle; the finer meal was used for bread, the coarser
made into hominy. Boiled wheat was now the chief diet for sick and well.
For ten days they subsisted on parched corn. Some mixed their remnant of
grain with the pounded bark of the slippery elm which they stripped from
the trees along their route.

    This encampment was about two miles above Montrose on the
Mississippi, and was called the Poor Camp. Aid was solicited, and within
three weeks a little over one hundred dollars was collected, mostly in
Quincy, with provisions and clothing, though the prejudice against them
was deep and strong. <span id="fr_287"></span>[35](#fn_287.md) Some of the
people were crowded into tents, made frequently of quilts and blankets;
others in bowers made of brush; others had only wagons for shelter. They
suffered from heavy thunder-storms, when the rain was bailed out with
basins from their beds. Mothers huddled their children in the one dress
which often was all they possessed, and shaking with ague or burning
with fever, took refuge from the pitiless storms under wagons and
bushes. <span id="fr_288"></span>[36](#fn_288.md)

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

    "While the people for the most part were ill with chills and fever,"
says Wells, "quail fell into camp and were picked up with ease. <span
id="fr_289"></span>[37](#fn_289.md) This supply was looked upon as
miraculous by the half famished people. So long had they been lashed by
the fierce winds of misfortune, that now they accepted with gratitude
this indication of providential care.

    Wagons were sent from Winter Quarters for the removal of the people
from Poor Camp; and gradually all reached the various stations in which
the Mormons had gathered. <span id="fr_290"></span>[38](#fn_290.md)

    Of their long journey many painful incidents are recorded. Weakened
by fever or crippled with rheumatism, and with sluggish circulation,
many were severely frost-bitten. Women were compelled to drive the
nearly worn-out teams, while tending on their knees, perhaps, their sick
children. The strength of the beasts was failing, as there were
intervals when *they* could be kept froth starving only by the browse or
tender buds and branches of the cotton-wood, felled for the
purpose. <span id="fr_291"></span>[39](#fn_291.md)

    At one time no less than two thousand wagons could be counted, it
was said, along the three hundred miles of road that separated Nauvoo
from the Mormon encampments. Many families possessed no wagons,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

and in the long procession might be seen vehicles of all descriptions,
from the lumbering cart, under whose awning lay stretched its
fever-stricken driver, to the veriest makeshifts of poverty, the
wheelbarrow or the two-wheeled trundle, in which was dragged along a
bundle of clothing and a sack of meal—all of this world's goods that the
owner possessed.

    On arriving at the banks of the Missouri, the wagons were drawn up
in double lines and in the form of squares. Between the lines, tents
were pitched at intervals, space being left between each row for a
passage-way, which was shaded with awnings or a lattice-work of
branches, and served as a promenade for convalescents and a playground
for children.

    And what became of Nauvoo? The temple was destroyed by fire and
tempest, <span id="fr_292"></span>[40](#fn_292.md) and all the wood-work
consumed, while the rock was utilized for miles around as foundations of
houses, for door-steps, and other purposes. A French company coming in
later bought the stone from those in possession, and built wine-vaults.
Foundations of buildings were broken up, and houses once surrounded by
carefully tended flower-gardens, pillaged of all that was valuable, were
now abandoned by their ruthless destroyers. <span
id="fr_293"></span>[41](#fn_293.md) "At present," writes Linforth, "the
Icarians form the most important part of the population of Nauvoo…They
live in a long ugly row of buildings, the architect of which and of the
school-house was a cobbler." In the house built for the prophet and his
family dwelt in 1854 the prophet's widow, his mother, and his
family. <span id="fr_294"></span>[42](#fn_294.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_253"></span>[214:1](hou11.htm#fr_253.md) Parley Pratt's
calculation for an outfit of every family of 5 persons was 1 good wagon,
3 yoke cattle, 2 cows, 2 beef cattle, 3 sheep, 1,000 lbs flour, 20 lbs
sugar, 1 rifle and ammunition, a tent and tent-poles, from 10 to 20 lbs
seed to a family, from 25 to 100 lbs tools for farming, and a few other
items, the cost being about $250, provided they had nothing else but
bedding and cooking utensils. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 125.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[214:2](hou11.htm#fr_254.md) In December the
drying-house of emigrating company no. 18 was burned to the ground,
consuming $300 worth of wagon timber. *Id*., MS., Dec, 1845.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[215:3](hou11.htm#fr_255.md) Kane, with the
carelessness usual in his statements, says that the temple was completed
and consecrated in May, and that the day after its consecration its
ornaments were carried away. 'For that one day the temple shone
resplendent in all its typical glories of sun, moon, and stars, and
other abounding figured and lettered signs, hieroglyphs, and symbols;
but that day only. The sacred rites of consecration ended, the work of
removing the sacrasancta proceeded with the rapidity of magic. It went
on through the night; and when the morning of the next day dawned,' all
the ornaments and furniture, everything that could provoke a sneer, had
been carried off; and except some fixtures that would not bear removal,
the building was dismantled to the bare walls. It was this day saw the
departure of the last elders, and the largest hand that moved in one
company together. The people of Iowa have told me that from morning to
night they passed westward like an endless procession. They did not seem
greatly out of heart, they said; but at the top of every hill, before
they disappeared, were to be seen looking back, like banished Moors, on
their abandoned homes and the far-seen temple and its glittering spire.'
*The Mormons*, 21.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[215:4](hou11.htm#fr_256.md) *Times and Seasons*,
vi. 1018. In this number is a notice, signed by Willard Richards,
cutting off William Smith, the prophet's brother, for apostasy.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[217:5](hou11.htm#fr_257.md) 'The Mormons went up
and down with their furniture, etc., and traded for anything that could
travel, such as an animal or a wagon…Another company went out in May,
but they did not sell their property, leaving it in the hands of
trustees to sell.' *Wells’ Narrative*, MS., 37. Their two-story brick
house, which they had occupied but three months, and which they had
denied themselves in every way to build, Mrs Richards says was sold for
'two yoke of half-broken cattle and an old wagon.' *Reminiscences*, MS.,
20.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[217:6](hou11.htm#fr_258.md) When we were to leave
Mo., the saints entered into a covenant not to cease their exertions
until every saint who wished to go was removed, which was done…We are
better off now than we were then;…he \[B. Y.\] wants to see this
influence extend from the west to the east sea.' Brigham moved: 'That we
take all the saints with us, to the extent of our ability, that is, our
influence and property; seconded by Elder Kimball, and carried
unanimously.' This covenant was entered into Oct. 6, 1845. *Times and
Seasons*, vi. 1011.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[218:7](hou11.htm#fr_259.md) 'We encamped at Sugar
Creek, in the snow, while two of my children were very ill. We slept in
our wagons, which were placed close to our tents.' *Horne's Migrations*,
MS., 16.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[219:8](hou11.htm#fr_260.md) The camp of Israel
was wherever the president and apostles were.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[219:9](hou11.htm#fr_261.md) It has been stated
that after dismissing his congregation on the 17th the president led
several of the twelve aside to a valley east of the camp, and held a
council. A letter was then read from Samuel Brennan, a Mormon elder then
in New York, together with a copy of an agreement between him and one A.
G. Benson. Brennan was at that time in charge of a company of saints
bound for the Pacific coast by way of Cape Horn, and the agreement which
he forwarded for Brigham's signature required the pioneers to transfer
to A. G. Benson and company the odd numbers of all the town lots that
they might acquire in the country where they settled. 'I shall select,'
writes Brennan, 'the most suitable spot on the bay of San Francisco for
the location of a commercial city.' the council refused to take any
action in the matter. In case they refused to sign the agreement,
Tullidge soberly relates, *Life of Brigham Young*, 19-23, the president,
it was said, would issue a proclamation, setting forth that it was the
intention of the Mormons to take sides with either Mexico or Great
Britain against the United States, and order them to be disarmed or
dispersed! Further mention of this matter is made in *History of
California*, vol. v. cap. xx., this series.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[220:10](hou11.htm#fr_262.md) 'In the latter part
of March we started for Council Bluffs, 400 miles distant, and were
three months on the way. Crossing a long prairie in a fearful storm, the
mud became so soft that we could not travel, and we were obliged to
encamp; the water was several inches deep all over our camping-ground;
we had no wood for a fire, and no means of drying our soaked clothing.
In the morning everything was frozen fast; and a squirrel was found
frozen…Frequently boughs were laid on the ground before the teams could
pass…We had to camp in mad until the roads were dry enough to travel.'
*Horne's Migrations*, MS., 18-19.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[221:11](hou11.htm#fr_263.md) 'It is true,' he
writes, 'that in our sojourning we do not possess all the luxuries and
delicacies of old-established countries and cities, but we have
abundance of the staple commodities, such as flour, meal, beef, mutton,
pork, milk, butter, and in some instances cheese, sugar, coffee, tea,
etc.' Letter in *Millennial Star*, viii. 114.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[221:12](hou11.htm#fr_264.md) Each family had
prayers separately. *Taylor's Rem*., MS., 9.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[222:13](hou11.htm#fr_265.md) In Lee County, Iowa,
three weeks from their staging-point.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[222:14](hou11.htm#fr_266.md) About 150 miles from
Nauvoo, on the east fork of the Grand River. 'Many located there,
ploughing and sowing, and preparing homes for their poor brethren for a
longer period.' *Horne's Migrations*, MS., 19. 'On the morning of the
27th of April the bugle sounded at Garden Grove, and all the men
assembled to organize for labor. Immediately hundreds of men were at
work, cutting trees, splitting rails, making fences, cutting logs for
houses, building bridges, making ploughs, and herding cattle. Quite a
number were sent into the Missouri settlements to exchange horses for
oxen, valuable feather-beds and the like for provisions and articles
most needed in the camp, and the remainder engaged in ploughing and
planting. Messengers were also despatched to call in the bands of
pioneers scattered over the country seeking work, with instructions to
hasten them up to help form the new settlements before the season had
passed; so that, in a scarcely conceivable space of time, at Garden
Grove and Mount Pisgah, industrious settlements sprung up almost as if
by magic.' *Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young*, 41.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[222:15](hou11.htm#fr_267.md) This site was
discovered by Parley, who was sent forward to reconnoitre by Brigham. It
was situated on a branch of Grand River, and for years was the
resting-place for the saints on their way to Utah. *Autobiog. P. Pratt*,
381.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[222:16](hou11.htm#fr_268.md) Here 700 log cabins
and 150 dugouts (cabins half under ground) were built. A large quantity
of hay was cut, and a flouring mill erected. *Id*., 383.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[223:17](hou11.htm#fr_269.md) 'The removal of the
entire population,' the major adds, has been looked forward to as an
event that could alone restore peace and quiet to this portion of our
state,' *Fullmer's Expulsion*, 24.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[224:18](hou11.htm#fr_270.md) 'Thus while with one
hand he pushed the saints from their *possessions* across the river to
save their lives, with the other he kept at bay the savage fiends who
thirsted for blood, and who would fain have washed their hands in the
blood of innocence, and feasted their eyes on the smoking ruins of their
martyred victims.' *Id*., 24-5. From Nauvoo, May 11, 1846, Warren
writes: 'To the Mormons I would say, Go on with your preparations, and
leave as fast as you can. Leave the fighting to be done by my
detachment. If we are overpowered, then recross the river and defend
yourselves and property. The neighboring counties, under the
circumstances, cannot and will not lend their aid to an unprovoked and
unnecessary attack upon the Mormons at this time; and without such aid
the few desperadoes in the county can do but little mischief, and can be
made amenable to the law for that little. The force under my command is
numerically small; but backed as I am by the moral force of the law, and
possessing as I do the confidence of nine tenths of the respectable
portion of the old citizens, my force is able to meet successfully any
mob which can be assembled in the county, and if any such force does
assemble, they or I will leave the field in double-quick time.'

<span id="fn_271"></span>[226:19](hou11.htm#fr_271.md) 'Sir—I have received
information that another effort is to be made on Monday next to drive
out the inhabitants of Nauvoo, new as well as old, and destroy the city.
I am informed that it is believed in the surrounding counties that the
new citizens in Nauvoo are all Mormons, and that the remnant of the old
Mormon population are determined to remain there, although I am assured
that the contrary in both particulars is the truth. You are therefore
hereby authorized and empowered to repair to Nauvoo, and there remain
until you are relieved. You will immediately inquire how many of the
inhabitants are new citizens, and how many of them are Mormons; how many
of the old Mormon population remain, and what the prospect is of their
removal in a reasonable time; and in case an attack on the city should
be attempted or threatened, you are hereby authorized to take command of
such <span id="page_227">p. 227</span> volunteers as may offer
themselves, free of cost to the state, to repel it and defend the city.'
*Fullmer's Expulsion*, 29-30.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[227:20](hou11.htm#fr_272.md) Among the members
was the Rev. Thomas S. Brockman, who afterward took command of the
posse.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[227:21](hou11.htm#fr_273.md) Hostilities to
cease; the city to be evacuated in 60 days, 25 men remaining to see the
stipulation carried out. *Id*., 34-5.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[228:22](hou11.htm#fr_274.md) Who afterward became
lieut-gen. of the Nauvoo legion in Utah.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[228:23](hou11.htm#fr_275.md) There were about 300
Mormons and new citizens who could then bear arms against the mob, but
on the day of the fight no more than 100 could be found to go, as the
Mormons were continually leaving.' *Wells’ Narrative*, MS., 39.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[228:24](hou11.htm#fr_276.md) John Wood, the
mayor, Major Flood, Dr Conyera, and Joel Rice. See *Wells’ Narrative*,
MS., passim.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[229:25](hou11.htm#fr_277.md) He was more than
brave, he was presumptuous. Wells, in *Utah Notes*, MS., p. 7.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[229:26](hou11.htm#fr_278.md) 'Many of our log
houses were torn down by the mob, which numbered 1,000 men; we made
barricades of corn-stalks stacked up.' Wells, in *Utah Notes*, MS., 7.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[229:27](hou11.htm#fr_279.md) Elder John S.
Fullmer, then a colonel in the Nauvoo legion, claims that he directed
this movement. *Expulsion*, 38.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[230:28](hou11.htm#fr_280.md) 'But three in all
were killed…Meetings were held to stop the effusion of blood,…but there
was no necessity for such action, when no blood was shed.' Wells, in
*Utah Notes*, 7.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[230:29](hou11.htm#fr_281.md) '1st. The city of
Nauvoo will surrender. The force of Reverend Brockman to enter and take
possession of the city to-morrow, the 17th of September, at three
o'clock P.M. 2d. The arms to be delivered to the Quincy committee, to be
returned on crossing the river. 3d. The Quincy committee pledge
themselves to use their influence for the protection of persons and
property, and the officers of the camp and the men likewise pledge
themselves. 4th. The sick and helpless to be protected and treated with
humanity. 5th. The Mormon population of the city to leave the state or
disperse as soon as they can cross the river. 6th. Five men, including
the trustees of the church, and five clerks with their families (William
Pickett not one of the number), to be permitted to remain in the city
for the disposition of property, free from all molestation and personal
violence. 7th. Hostilities to cease immediately, and ten men of the
Quincy committee to enter the city in the execution of their duty as
soon as they think proper.' It will be observed that nothing is said
about the surrender of Pickett. He was not even arrested.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[230:30](hou11.htm#fr_282.md) 'The mob entered the
temple, instituted an inquisition, and regardless of the Mormons or new
citizens, went from house to house plundering cow-yards, pig-pens,
hen-roosts, and bee-stands indiscriminately; thus turning some of their
best friends into enemies, bursting open trunks and cheats, searching
for arms, keys, etc.' p. 343. 'In the temple ringing the bells,
shouting, and <span id="page_231">p. 231</span> hallooing; they took
several to the river and baptized them, swearing, throwing them
backward, then on to their faces, saying: "The commandments must be
fulfilled, and God damn you."'. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 345.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[231:31](hou11.htm#fr_283.md) The best narrative,
and indeed the only one that enters circumstantially into all the
details of the expulsion from Nauvoo, is contained in the *Assassination
of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the Prophet and the Patriarch of the Church
of Latter-day Saints. Also a Condensed History of the Expulsion of the
Saints from Nauvoo by Elder John S. Fullmer (of Utah, U. S. A.), Pastor
of the Manchester, Liverpool, and Preston Conferences*. Liverpool and
London, 1855. The work is written from a Mormon standpoint, but
including as it does copies of the despatches of Illinois officers and
officials, of the stipulations between the belligerents, and of some
comments made by the *Quincy Whig*, appears in the main reliable. The
author's comments on the gentiles are sufficiently bitter, and his
description of the fight at Nauvoo and the valor of the saints militant
must of course be taken with due allowance. For instance: 'Seeing our
men take possession of some vacant buildings on the line of their
approach, they took a position on an elevated spot of ground, and opened
a heavy cannonade at a distance of something less than half a mile. This
was returned with great spirit on our part from guns made of steam
shafts that carried six-pound balls. Many were the balls that we picked
up as they came rolling and bounding among us, and we sent them back
with as much spirit and precision as they were first sent.' p. 37. Col
Kane says: 'A vindictive war was waged upon them, from which the weakest
tied in scattered parties, leaving the rest to make a reluctant and
almost ludicrously unavailing defence.' *The Mormons*, 54. In the
General Epistle of the Twelve, Dec. 23, 1847, in *Snow's Voice of
Joseph*, 14-15, we read: 'In September 1846 an infuriated mob, clad in
all the horrors of war, fell on the saints who had still remained in
Nauvoo for want of means to remove, murdered some, and drove the
remainder across the Mississippi into Iowa, where, destitute of houses,
tents, food, clothing, or money, they received temporary assistance from
some benevolent souls in Quincy, St Louis, and other places, whose names
will ever be remembered with gratitude. Their property in Hancock co.,
Illinois, was little or no better than confiscated; many of their houses
were burned by the mob, and they were obliged to leave most of those
that remained without sale; and those who bargained sold almost for a
song; for the influence of their enemies was to cause such a diminution
in the value of property that for a handsome estate was seldom realized
enough to remove the family comfortably away; and thousands have since
been wandering to and fro, destitute, afflicted, and distressed for the
common necessaries of Life, or unable to endure, have sickened and died
by hundreds; while the temple of the Lord is left solitary in the midst
of our enemies, an enduring monument of the diligence and integrity of
the saints.' Mention of the expulsion from Nauvoo is of course made in
most of the books published on Mormonism, but in none of them, except
perhaps in one or two of the meet rabid anti-Mormon works, which I have
not thought it worth while to notice, is the conduct of the Illinois mob
defended.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[232:32](hou11.htm#fr_284.md) A few months before,
Nauvoo with the neighboring Mormon settlements had contained some 20,000
saints, of whom in July about 15,000 were encamped on the Missouri
River, or were scattered through the western states in search of
employment.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[233:33](hou11.htm#fr_285.md) While at Montrose,
Heber C. Kimball writes thus in his journal of the condition of his
family, his wife having a babe a few days old, and he himself ill with
ague. 'I went to the bed; my wife, who was shaking with the ague, having
two children lying sick by her side;…the only child well was little
Heber Parley, and it was with difficulty he could carry a two-quart pail
full of water from a spring at the bottom of the hill.'

<span id="fn_286"></span>[233:34](hou11.htm#fr_286.md) 'Such deaths
occurred from exposure and fright in Nauvoo. The camp journalist
recorded: Effect of persecution by the Illinois mob.'

<span id="fn_287"></span>[233:35](hou11.htm#fr_287.md) The trustees from
Nauvoo also distributed clothing, and molasses, salt, and salt pork.
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1846, 383.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[233:36](hou11.htm#fr_288.md) *Mrs Clara Young's
Experience*, MS., 3.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[234:37](hou11.htm#fr_289.md) 'On the 9th of
October, while our teams were waiting on the banks of the Miss. for the
poor saints…left without any of the necessaries of life,…and nothing to
start their journey with, the Lord sent flocks of quail, which lit upon
their wagons and on their empty tables, and upon the ground within their
reach, which the saints, and even the sick, caught with their hands
until they were satisfied.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1847, 9. This
phenomenon extended some 30 or 40 miles along the river, and was
generally observed. The quail in immense quantities had attempted to
cross the river, but it being beyond their strength, had dropped into
the river boats or on the bank.' Wells, in *Utah Notes*, MS., 7.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[234:38](hou11.htm#fr_290.md) See *The Mormons: A
Discourse delivered before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, March
26, 1850, by Thomas L. Kane*. Philadelphia, 1850. A copy of it will be
found at the end of *Orson Pratt's Works*, and in *Mackay's The
Mormons*, 200-45. The story of the Mormon exodus, as handed down to us
by a man of Colonel Kane's powers of observation, would have been a
valuable record were it not plainly apparent that truth is too often
sacrificed to diction. Among Mormon writers we find no detailed
narrative of this exodus, and among others little that is not borrowed
from the colonel's discourse.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[234:39](hou11.htm#fr_291.md) *Snow's Biography*,
89.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[235:40](hou11.htm#fr_292.md) The temple was half
destroyed by fire on Nov. 19, 1848. *Nauvoo Patriot*, in *Millennial
Star*, xi. p. 46; and on May 27, 1850, further damaged by a tornado.
*Hancock Patriot*, in *Mackay's The Mormons*, 210. For cut of remnants,
see *Linforth's Route from Liverpool to G. S. L. Valley*, 62, and
*Hyde's Mormonism*, 140. See also George Q. Cannon, in *Juvenile
Instuctor*, vol. ix. no. 5, and *Wells’ Narrative*, MS., 41; *Deseret
News*, Aug. 24, 1850; *Frontier Guardian*, July 24, 1850.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[235:41](hou11.htm#fr_293.md) As James Linforth
describes in writing of Nauvoo in 1858.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[235:42](hou11.htm#fr_294.md) *Route from
Liverpool to G. S. L. Valley*, 63.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. At The Missouri. 1846-1847.](hou12.md)
