[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou15)  [Next](hou17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

### CHAPTER XIII. SETTLEMENT AND OCCUPATION OF THE COUNTRY. 1847-1852.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Founding of
Centreville—Bountiful—Ogden—Lynne—Easton—Marriotsville—San
Pete—Provo—Indian War—Walled Cities—Evansville—Lehi—Battle
Creek—Pleasant Grove—American Fork—Payson—Nephi—Manti—Chief
Walker—Fillmore—Site Chosen for the
Capital—Tooele—Grantsville—Kaysville—Little Salt Lake—Parowan—Cedar
City—Paragoonah—Forts Walker and Harmony—Box Elder Creek—Brigham
City—Willard City—San Bernardino in California.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">In</span> the autumn of 1847 one Thomas
Grover arrived with his family on the bank of a stream twelve miles
north of Salt Lake City, and now called Centreville Creek. His intention
was to pasture stock for the winter; and for this purpose a spot was
chosen where the stream spreading over the surface forms plats of
meadow-land, the soil being a black, gravelly loam. Here Grover, joined
by others in the spring, resolved to remain, though in the neighborhood
were encamped several bands of Indians, and this notwithstanding that as
yet there was no white settlement north of Salt Lake City. Land was
ploughed and sown in wheat and vegetables, the crops being more
promising than those to the south. But in May of the following year the
settlers were startled, not by the war-whoop of the Utahs, but by hordes
of black monster crickets, swarming down from the bench-lands, as at
Salt Lake City, and bringing destruction on field and garden. They
turned out to do battle with the foe; ditches were dug around the
grain-fields, and the

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

water of the stream diverted into them, while men, women, and children,
armed with clubs, checked the advance of the devouring host. Enough of
the crop was saved to supply the wants of the settlers, and their
energy, on this occasion, coupled with a supposed

<span id="img_30600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SETTLEMENTS AT THE
END OF 1852.](tn/30600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30600.jpg)  
SETTLEMENTS AT THE END OF 1852.  
</span>

miraculous visitation of gulls, probably saved a foretaste of the
disaster of 1848. <span id="fr_464"></span>[1](#fn_464)

A site for a town was

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

surveyed in the autumn of 1849, and the place was named Centreville.

    Near Centreville, in what was afterward Davis county, a settlement
was begun in the spring of 1848 by Peregrine Sessions, the place being
called Bountiful. <span id="fr_465"></span>[2](#fn_465)

    As early as 1841 the country round where the city of Ogden was laid
out was held as a Spanish grant by Miles M. Goodyear, who built a fort,
consisting of a stockade and a few log houses, near the confluence of
the Weber and Ogden rivers. <span id="fr_466"></span>[3](#fn_466) On the
6th of June, 1848, James Brown, of the battalion, coming from California
with $5,000, mostly in gold-dust, purchased the tract from
Goodyear. <span id="fr_467"></span>[4](#fn_467) As it was one of the
most fertile spots in all that region, grain and vegetables being raised
in abundance, not only numbers of the brethren from Salt Lake City, but
after a while gentiles from the western states, settled there. In August
1850 Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and others laid out
the city of Ogden, so called from the name of the river. <span
id="fr_468"></span>[5](#fn_468) The

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

president urged the people to move at once to their city lots, and to
build for themselves substantial dwellings, a meeting-house, and a
school-house, to fence their gardens and plant fruit-trees, so that the
place might become a permanent settlement, and the headquarters of the
northern portion of the territory. Before the end of the year a log
structure was finished, which served for school and meeting house, and
soon afterward the settlers commenced to build a wall for protection
against the Indians, completing it about three years later at a cost of
some $40,000. <span id="fr_469"></span>[6](#fn_469) So rapid was the
growth of the town, that in 1851 it was made a stake of Zion, <span
id="fr_470"></span>[7](#fn_470) divided into wards, and incorporated by
act of legislature. <span id="fr_471"></span>[8](#fn_471)

    In 1848 Isaac Morley and two hundred others settled in the southern
part of the valley of the San Pete <span
id="fr_472"></span>[9](#fn_472)—particulars to be mentioned hereafter.

    In the spring of 1849 a stockade was built and log houses erected by
the pioneer settlers of Utah county, numbering about thirty
families, <span id="fr_473"></span>[10](#fn_473) near the Timpanogos or
Provo River, and below the point where a small creek issuing from it
discharges into Lake Utah. To

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

this settlement was given the name of Fort Utah. Within the space
enclosed by the stockade was a mound, the top of which was levelled, and
on a platform bulk thereon were mounted several twelve-pounders for the
purpose of intimidating the Indians. But the Indians were not to be thus
intimidated. In the autumn they began to steal the grain and cattle of
the white men, and one of their number being killed while in the act of
pilfering, hostilities broke out and the fort was soon in a state of
siege.

    Indeed, ill feeling on the part of the Indians had begun to show
itself the previous year. Vasquez and Bridger wrote to Brigham on the
17th of April, 1849, that the Utes were badly disposed toward Americans,
and that chiefs Elk and Walker were urging the Utes to attack the
settlements in Utah Valley. The brethren were advised to protect
themselves, but if the Indians were friendly, to teach them to raise
grain, and "order them to quit stealing." Brigham was persuaded that
Bridger was his enemy, and expressed the conviction that he and the
other mountaineers were responsible for all the Indian trouble, and that
he was watching every movement of the Mormons and reporting to Thomas H.
Benton at Washington. <span id="fr_474"></span>[11](#fn_474) Alexander
Williams and D. B. Huntington were empowered by the council to trade
exclusively with the Indians on behalf of the community.

    On the 31st of January, 1850, Isaac Higbee, of Fort Utah, reported
at Salt Lake that the Indians of Utah Valley had stolen fifty or sixty
head of cattle or horses, threatening further depredations, and asked
permission to chastise them, which was granted. General Daniel H. Wells
then called for volunteers from the militia, and on the 4th of February
Captain George D. Grant started with a company for Utah Fort, followed
soon after by Major Andrew Lytle.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Indians were
attacked on the 8th, and took refuge in a log house, whence they were
dislodged next day, and driven into the thicket along the Provo River.
In this encounter Joseph Higbee was killed, and Alexander Williams,
Samuel Kearns, Albert Miles, Jabez Nowland, and two men named Orr and
Stevens were wounded.

    On the 11th the Indians fled from the thicket to Rock Cañon, whither
the volunteers pursued them; but failing to find them, the white men
proceeded to the west and south sides of Utah Lake, and shot all they
could find there.

    During the expedition twenty-seven warriors were killed. The women
and children threw themselves upon the settlers for protection and
support, and were fed and cared for in Salt Lake City until spring. Thus
Utah Valley was entirely rid of hostile Indians. Until 1852 there was no
further trouble with them of a serious nature; <span
id="fr_475"></span>[12](#fn_475) and thus ended the first Indian war of
Utah, which like all the others was rather a tame affair. It was the
mission of the Mormons to convert the Indians, who were their brethren,
and not to kill them.

    Later in the year was founded the city of Provo, <span
id="fr_476"></span>[13](#fn_476) somewhat to the eastward of Fort Utah,
near the western base of the Wasatch Mountains, on a site where timber
and pasture were abundant, <span id="fr_477"></span>[14](#fn_477) and
where the gradual fall of the Timpanogos affords excellent water-power.
In March 1851 it was organized as a stake of Zion. The settlement was
pushed forward with the energy characteristic of the settlers. Before
the close of 1850 more than twenty dwellings

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

had been completed; <span id="fr_478"></span>[15](#fn_478) and before
the end of 1851 the place began to wear the appearance of a town, among
the buildings in course of erection being a touring-mill and two hotels;
manufactures were started; all were busy the livelong day at farm or
workshop, and in the evening, writes Elder Isaac Higbee, in February
1852, "We have on Monday singing-school, on Tuesday lyceum, on Wednesday
seventies' meeting, on Thursday prayer-meeting, on Friday
spelling-school, and on Saturday the meeting of the lesser
priesthood." <span id="fr_479"></span>[16](#fn_479)

    On Dry Creek, near the head of Lake Utah and about sixteen miles
northwest of Provo, a settlement was formed in 1851, named
Evansville. <span id="fr_480"></span>[17](#fn_480) The neighboring lands
were surveyed in lots of forty acres, and to each new settler as he
arrived was given a plat of this size until the tract was exhausted. The
soil was rich; but here, as elsewhere in the northern part of Utah
county, water was scarce. A supply was obtained by diverting a portion
of the waters of American Fork creek, <span
id="fr_481"></span>[18](#fn_481) and thereafter the affairs of the
settlement prospered so rapidly that, in February 1852, the place was
incorporated under the name of Lehi, or as it is sometimes written,
Lehigh.

    South-east of Lehi, on a plain about three miles east of Lake Utah,
was founded, in 1850, a settlement

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

first known as Battle Creek, and afterward called Pleasant Grove. It was
here that the first engagement with the natives occurred. Captain Scott
with a band of thirty or forty men started south in pursuit of Indians
who had stolen fourteen horses from Orr's herd, on Wilson Creek, in Utah
Valley, and several cattle from Tooele Valley. The band was found
encamped on a creek in the midst of willows and dense brushwood in a
deep ravine. After a desultory fight of three or four hours, four
Indians were killed, but none of the settlers. As was their custom, the
women and children of the slain followed the victorious party to their
camp. <span id="fr_482"></span>[19](#fn_482)

    In the neighborhood of Pleasant Grove were good farming land, good
range for stock, and water-power, inducements which quickly attracted
emigrants, and caused the place to thrive rapidly. In 1853 the present
site was laid out, <span id="fr_483"></span>[20](#fn_483) and to this
spot were transferred, on July 24th of that year, the effects of the
community, then numbering seventy-five families.

    Between Lehi and Pleasant Grove the village of American Fork was
founded in 1850, on a site where were farming and grazing land of fair
quality, a little timber, springs of fresh water, and a stream that
could be easily diverted for purposes of irrigatiom. <span
id="fr_484"></span>[21](#fn_484)

    About twenty miles south of Provo the settlement of Payson was laid
out on the banks of the Peteetneet Creek; <span
id="fr_485"></span>[22](#fn_485) a few miles to the north-east of Payson
was founded a village named Palmyra, containing, at the close of 1852,
fifty families; and in 1851, on Salt Creek,

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

twenty-five miles to the south, the site of Nephi, in Juab county, was
first occupied by Joseph L. Heywood. Nephi was surveyed in the autumn of
1852, the spot being selected on account of its beauty and convenience.
A fort was afterward built, surrounded by a wall twelve feet in height
and six feet at the base. <span id="fr_486"></span>[23](#fn_486) Through
this town passed the old California or southern road made by the
pioneers in 1849; and here, in cabins built of mud and willows, lived,
at the close of 1852, more than forty families. <span
id="fr_487"></span>[24](#fn_487)

 

    I have mentioned that Isaac Morley with two hundred settlers went
into the San Pete country in 1848. On the 14th of June, 1849, a council
was held at Salt Lake City, at which were present a Ute chief named
Walker, <span id="fr_488"></span>[25](#fn_488) and twelve of his tribe.
After the pipe of peace had been passed around, Walker declared himself
a friend of the settlers, and asked their sachem to send a party
southward to the valley of San Pete, where they might teach his people
how to build and farm. "Within six moons," answered Brigham, "I will
send you a company." In the spring of this year the party sent to
explore this valley had already selected the site of the present town of
Manti, on a branch of the San Pete Creek, though there was little in the
neighborhood to invite the settler, sage brush and rabbit brush, the red
man and the coyote, being

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

the principal features. In November the town was laid out. <span
id="fr_489"></span>[26](#fn_489) The name of Manti was suggested by
Brigham, who declared that on this spot should be raised one of the
cities spoken of in the book of Mormon, and here he built with his own
hands an adobe house, which in 1883 was still pointed out to visitors as
one of the curiosities of the place. <span
id="fr_490"></span>[27](#fn_490)

    On Chalk Creek, in Pahvan Valley, south-west of Manti and about a
hundred and fifty miles from Salt Lake City, a site was chosen by
Brigham, in October 1851, for the capital of the territory, and named
Fillmore, in honor of the president. <span
id="fr_491"></span>[28](#fn_491) During 1852 the foundations of the
state-house were laid, and many private buildings erected, the
settlement numbering about seventy families at the close of the year.

 

    In the autumn of 1849, John Rowberry, Cyrus Tolman, and others set
forth from Salt Lake City to explore the country west of the Jordan
Valley, in search of grazing lands whereon to pasture their stock.
Crossing the mountain range which forms the western boundary of Cedar
and Jordan valleys, <span id="fr_492"></span>[29](#fn_492) they
discovered a spot where grass, timber, and water were abundant, and
encamped for the winter on the banks of a stream now called Emigrant
Cañon creek. Returning in the spring, they made their report to Brigham,
who recommended them to form a settlement in that neighborhood. To this
the men consented. "By what name will you call it?" asked the

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

president. Tolman suggested Cedar Valley, a large belt of cedar having
been found there; but Brigham recommended Tule, as reeds were plentiful
in that neighborhood. And so it was ordered; and this word, spelled
Tooele by Thomas Bullock, the president's private secretary, is still
applied to the town, the site of which was discovered by Rowberry and
his comrades. <span id="fr_493"></span>[30](#fn_493)

 

    In the winter of 1849-50, Edward Phillips and John H. Green
proceeded northward from Salt Lake City, intending to settle in the
neighborhood of Ogden. When within twelve miles of that place, the
snow-drifts prevented further progress, and turning aside to Sandy
Creek, or as it was later termed, Kay Creek, where the land was covered
with bunch-grass, they resolved to take up their abode in that
neighborhood. After passing the winter in Salt Lake City, the two men
set forth in the spring of 1850, accompanied by William Kay and others,
and founded the settlement of Kaysville. <span
id="fr_494"></span>[31](#fn_494) In September it was organized as a
ward, Kay being appointed bishop, with Green and Phillips as
councillors. <span id="fr_495"></span>[32](#fn_495)

 

    In the winter of 1849-50, it was ordered by the first presidency
that Parley P. Pratt, with a company of fifty men, should explore the
southern part of the territory in the neighborhood of Little Salt Lake.
They found the brethren at Manti well pleased with their location, there
being a good stone quarry and an abundance

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

of cedar at hand. At the Sevier River they met Charles Shumway, James
Allred, and Elijah Ward; also Walker, the Utah war chief, and his
people, many of whom were sick with the measles. They proceeded to
explore the country for some distance round. On the 1st of January,
1850, they were on Virgen River, whence they passed up the Santa Clara,
and came to "the valley subsequently named Mountain Meadows." One
division of the party explored Little Salt Lake. Beaver Creek was
pronounced an excellent place for a settlement. In a half-frozen
condition they reached Provo the 30th, and next day some of them were in
Salt Lake.

    The report of Parley being favorable, a party of about one hundred
and seventy persons, well supplied with wagons, implements, live-stock,
seeds, and provisions, <span id="fr_496"></span>[33](#fn_496) set forth,
in charge of George A. Smith, on the 7th of December, 1850, toward the
south; and on Centre Creek, in a valley of the Wasatch Range, about two
hundred and fifty miles from Salt Lake City, built a fort near the site
of the present town of Parowan. <span id="fr_497"></span>[34](#fn_497)
Pasture and timber were plentiful, the soil was of good quality, and in
the season of 1851 a bountiful harvest was gathered from about one
thousand acres of land. <span id="fr_498"></span>[35](#fn_498) The main
attraction, however, was the immense deposits of magnetic iron ore found
in the neighboring mountains. In May, Brigham and others visited Parowan
and addressed the people in the fort. The Indian name Parowan was then
recommended and adopted. Brigham

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

urged the people to buy up the Lamanite children as rapidly as possible,
and educate them in the gospel, for though they would fade away, yet a
remnant of the seed of Joseph would be saved. <span
id="fr_499"></span>[36](#fn_499)

    At Cedar City—or, as it was then called, Cedar Fort—seventeen miles
to the south-west of Parowan, a furnace was built in 1852, but at the
close of the year stood idle for lack of hands. <span
id="fr_500"></span>[37](#fn_500) Here, in May 1851, coal had been
discovered near what was then known as the Little Muddy, now Coal Creek.
In November of that year the site was occupied <span
id="fr_501"></span>[38](#fn_501) by a company from Parowan. The winter
was passed amid some privation, mainly from lack of warm clothing; but
on the 30th of January a dry-goods pedler making his appearance—probably
the first who had ventured so far south into the land of the Utahs—the
settlers were soon clad in comfort. <span
id="fr_502"></span>[39](#fn_502) In October it was resolved to move the
settlement to a point farther to the west and south, and before the end
of the year a number of iron-workers and farmers arrived from Salt Lake
City. <span id="fr_503"></span>[40](#fn_503)

    In 1851 a party under Simeon A. Carter, sent to explore the country
north of Ogden, founded a small settlement at Box Elder Creek. <span
id="fr_504"></span>[41](#fn_504) The soil was of the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

poorest, but near by were a few spots of meadow and farm land, on which,
with irrigation, a fair crop could be raised. A number of emigrants,
principally Welsh and Scandinavian, joined the party, and two years
later a new site was surveyed <span id="fr_505"></span>[42](#fn_505)
under the direction of Lorenzo Snow. To the town then laid out was
afterward given the name of Brigham City.

    A few weeks later a small settlement was formed about five miles
south of this point, and in 1853 was removed to the present site of
Willard City. <span id="fr_506"></span>[43](#fn_506)

    On Red Creek, about twenty miles north of Cedar City, a small
settlement was formed in the autumn of 1852, named Paragoonah, the
Pi-Ede name for Little Salt Lake. <span id="fr_507"></span>[44](#fn_507)
Six miles south of Cedar City, Fort Walker was built, containing at the
close of 1851 only nine men capable of bearing arms; and on Ash Creek,
nineteen miles farther south, was Fort Harmony, the southernmost point
in the valley occupied by white men, <span
id="fr_508"></span>[45](#fn_508) and where John D. Lee located a rancho
in 1852.

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

    Thus we see that within less than two years after the founding of
Salt Lake City, the population there had become larger than could be
supported in comfort on the city lots and the lands in their vicinity,
and it had been found necessary to form new settlements toward the north
and south, the latter part of the territory being preferred, as water,
pasture, and land fit for tillage were more abundant. Instead of merely
adding suburb to suburb, all clustering around the parent centre, as
might have been done by other communities, the church dignitaries, while
yet Salt Lake City was but a village, ordered parties of the brethren,
some of them still barely rested from their toilsome journey across the
plains, to start afresh for remote and unprotected portions of a then
unknown country. As new locations were needed, exploring parties were
sent forth, and when a site was selected, a small company, usually of
volunteers, was placed in charge of an elder and ordered to make ready
the proposed settlement. Care was taken that the various crafts should
be represented in due proportion, and that the expedition should be well
supplied with provisions, implements, and live-stock.

    When, for instance, at the close of 1850, it had been resolved to
form a settlement in the neighborhood of Little Salt Lake, a notice
appeared in the *Deseret News* of November 16th, giving the names of
those who had joined the party, and calling for a hundred additional
volunteers. They must take with them 30,000 pounds of breadstuffs, 500
bushels of seed wheat, 34 ploughs, 50 horses, 50 beef-cattle, 50 cows,
and 25 pairs of holster pistols; each man must be supplied with an axe,
spade, shovel, and hoe, <span id="fr_509"></span>[46](#fn_509) a gun and
200 rounds

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

of ammunition. Among them there should be five carpenters and joiners, a
millwright, a surveyor, and two blacksmiths, shoemakers, and masons.
Thus equipped and selected, the settlers, with their marvellous energy
and thrift, made more progress and suffered less privation in reclaiming
the waste lands of their wilderness than did the Spaniards in the garden
spots of Mexico and Central America, or the English in the most favored
regions near the Atlantic seaboard.

    A company was organized in March 1851, at the suggestion of Brigham,
to go to California and form the nucleus of a settlement in the Cajon
Pass, where they should cultivate the olive, grape, sugar-cane, and
cotton, gather around them the saints, and select locations on the line
of a proposed mail route. <span id="fr_510"></span>[47](#fn_510) The
original intention was to have twenty in this company, with Amasa M.
Lyman and C. C. Rich in charge. The number, however, reached over five
hundred, and Brigham's heart failed him as he met them at starting. "I
was sick at the sight of so many of the saints running to California,
chiefly after the god of this world, and was unable to address
them:" <span id="fr_511"></span>[48](#fn_511)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_464"></span>[306:1](hou16.htm#fr_464) After this incident
the water in the creek began to fail, thus for a time preventing the
growth of the settlement. In 1880 there was a good flow of water,
sufficient for the wants of forty families, with their orchards,
gardens, and farm lands. N. T. Porter, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 177.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[307:2](hou16.htm#fr_465) A little to the south
of Centreville was a small settlement which at first went by the name of
Call's settlement, afterward taking the name Bountiful. *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 132. In *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 130-1, it is stated
that there were three settlements of this name—East, West, and South
Bountiful—West Bountiful being settled in 1848 by James Fackrell and his
family, South Bountiful by George Meeyers and Edwin Page. All are now on
the line of the Utah Central railroad. In January of this year Sessions
also founded a settlement which bore his name, about 15 miles north of
S. L. City. *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS., 45.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[307:3](hou16.htm#fr_466) The tract is
described as commencing at the mouth of Weber Cañon, following the base
of the mountains north to the hot springs, thence westward to the Great
Salt Lake, along the southern shore of the lake to a point opposite
Weber Cañon, and thence to the point of beginning. *Stanford's Ogden
City*, MS., l; *Richards’ Narr*., MS., passim.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[307:4](hou16.htm#fr_467) Some say for $1,950;
others place the amount at $3,000. See *Richards’ Narr*., MS.;
*Stanford's Ogden City*, MS.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[307:5](hou16.htm#fr_468) *Utah Early Records*,
MS., 112. See also *S. L. C. Contributor*, ii. 240; and *Deseret News*,
Sept. 7, 1850. *Stanford's Ogden City*, MS., 1-2. The site was selected
as early as Sept. 1849, on the south side of the Ogden River, at the
point of bench-land between the forks of the Ogden and Weber rivers, so
that water from both streams might be used for irrigation. *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 94. North Ogden, formerly called Ogden Hole, once the
resort of a noted desperado, was laid out in 1851. Amos Maycock, in
*Utah Sketches*, MS., 114. 'Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, J. M.
Grant, Brigham Young, and several others ascended a sand hill, Sept. 3d,
to discover the best location for a town, which we finally decided
should be on the south side of <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> Ogden…A
dance was instituted in the evening.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1849, 124.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[308:6](hou16.htm#fr_469) Raised by taxation.
*Stanford's Ogden City*, MS., 4.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[308:7](hou16.htm#fr_470) Of which Lorin Farr
was appointed president, and R. Dana and David B. Dillie councillors.
*Id*., 3.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[308:8](hou16.htm#fr_471) The first municipal
election was held on Oct. 23d, Farr being chosen mayor, Gilbert Belnap
marshal, David Moore recorder, and William Critchellow justice of the
peace. Four aldermen and twelve councillors were also elected. *Id*., 4.
According to the statement of John Brown, a resident of Ogden in 1884,
there were 100 families in Ogden in 1852. Brown, a native of Yorkshire,
England, came to Winter Quarters in 1849, remained in the church for 21
years, and was then cut off at his own request. In 1883 he was the
proprietor of the hotel which bears his name. Two miles north of Ogden a
settlement named Lynne was formed in 1849. *Stanford's Weber Co*., MS.,
1. Near Lynne a few families formed a settlement named Slaterville in
1852-3, but on account of troubles with Indians, moved into Lynne in
1854. *Id*., 3. Eight miles south-east of Ogden, at the month of Weber
Cañon, on the line of the railway, a small settlement named Easton was
formed in 1852, a branch of the church organized, and A. Wadsworth
appointed bishop. Three miles northwest of Ogden a settlement named
Marriotsville was formed in 1850 by three families. The neighborhood was
infested with wolves and bears, and near by were the lodges of 200
Indian warriors. *Id*., 10.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[308:9](hou16.htm#fr_472) So called from the
name of an Indian chief. *Richards’ Narr*., MS., 66.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[308:10](hou16.htm#fr_473) Under the leadership
of John and Isaac Higbee and Jefferson Hunt of the battalion. Albert
Jones, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 54.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[309:11](hou16.htm#fr_474) 'I believe that old
Bridger is death on us, and if he knew that 400,000 Indians were coming
against us, and any man were to let us know, he would cut his throat…His
letter is all bubble and froth…Vasquez is a different sort of man.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1849, 77.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[310:12](hou16.htm#fr_475) 'I was ordered not
to leave that valley until every Indian was out of it.' *Wells’ Narr.*,
MS., 45-6.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[310:13](hou16.htm#fr_476) At a general
conference of the church, held in October 1849, it was ordered that a
city be laid out in the Utah Valley, and called Provo. *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 97.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[310:14](hou16.htm#fr_477) A heavy growth of
cotton-wood and box-elder covered the river bottom, with a large belt of
cedar extending some four miles north from the river and about half a
mile in width. Bunch-grass was very plentiful. Albert Jones, in *Utah
Sketches*, MS., 55.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[311:15](hou16.htm#fr_478) *Deseret News*, Jan.
24, 1852. Ross R. Rogers built the first adobe house in 1851. Albert
Jones, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 53. A large building was erected in 1852
for George A. Smith, the prophet's cousin, then president of Utah co.
stake. It was afterward used as a school-house and known as the
seminary. In 1851 an adobe wall was commenced, 14 feet in height and
four feet at the base. Three sides of it, with bastions, port-holes, and
gates, were completed in 1855, the finished length being then two and a
half miles. A portion of this wall remained in 1880. *Id*., 57. These
walls were built about several of the settlements. 'It was usual for our
people to protect themselves by building what we call a fort—a place the
people could get into in the event of a raid. Our wall was a kind of
concrete. In Mount Pleasant their walls were built of cobble rock, parts
of which are now standing. At that place they put a grist-mill inside,
so the Indians couldn't cut them off. At Nephi the Indians did cut them
off from their grist-mill.' *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 60.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[311:16](hou16.htm#fr_479) Letter in *Deseret
News*, Feb. 21, 1852.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[311:17](hou16.htm#fr_480) A few houses were
built on an adjacent site by David Savage and others in 1850. David
Evans, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 37.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[311:18](hou16.htm#fr_481) By a ditch seven
miles in length.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[312:19](hou16.htm#fr_482) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1849, 24-5; John Brown, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 30. The first
Indian trouble was a little skirmish between some sheep-herders and
Indians. *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 43.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[312:20](hou16.htm#fr_483) By George A. Smith
and Ezra T. Benson.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[312:21](hou16.htm#fr_484) The site was laid
out by George A. Smith, assisted by L. E. Harrington, Arza Adams,
Stephen Chipman, William Greenwood, and Stephen Mott. A. J. Stewart was
the surveyor. The first house was built by Adams and Chipman in 1850;
the first grist-mill by Adams in 1851; and the first store was opened by
Thomas McKenzie in the same year. L. E. Harrington, in *Utah Sketches*,
MS., 121.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[312:22](hou16.htm#fr_485) The first settlers
were James Pace, Andrew Jackson Stewart, and John C. Searle, Joseph S.
Tanner, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 3.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[313:23](hou16.htm#fr_486) Its length was 420
rods, and its cost $8,400. Portions of it remained in 1880. Geo.
Teasdale, in *Id*., 111.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[313:24](hou16.htm#fr_487) The first settler
was Timothy B. Foote, who, with his wife and six children, took up his
abode in this neighborhood in the autumn of 1851. Before the end of the
year he was joined by seven other families. *Id*., 107; and before the
end of 1852, 35 additional families settled at Nephi. *Deseret News*,
Dec. 11, 1852.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[313:25](hou16.htm#fr_488) 'Walker was the
chief of the Ute Indians…Uinta was the great chief of this region, and
Ora was the head chief of the Ute nation…Walker's headquarters were the
Sevier, generally; he would pay a visit to San Pete once a year.'
*Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 48, 56. 'Walker used to go into California to steal
horses; had a place of concealment among the mountains. At one time,
while there, people were so incensed that they turned out to capture him
and his band. In the dead of night be quietly took possession of their
horses and trappings and came into Utah triumphant. He would boast of
his proceedings some time later. He never brought stolen goods into the
settlements, but secreted them among his people.' *Utah Notes*, MS., 8.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[314:26](hou16.htm#fr_489) Including 110
blocks, each 26 rods square, with eight lots to each block. *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 111. The site was surveyed by Jesse W. Fox, under
Brigham's direction. J. B. Maiben, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 172.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[314:27](hou16.htm#fr_490) In June 1852 a fort
was completed, the walls being eight feet high and two feet thick.
*Deseret News*, July 10, 1852.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[314:28](hou16.htm#fr_491) In the *Deseret
News* of Jan. 24, 1852, is a letter to Brigham from Anson Call, one of
the first settlers, dated Nov. 24, 1851. 'We have had an addition of
three to our camp since you left; have built a corral according to your
instructions, including about two and a half acres of ground. We found,
upon trial, that the ground was so dry and hard, being also rocky, that
it was next to an impossibility to stockade or picket in our houses with
the tools we have to work with; so we have built our houses in close
order, having our doors or windows on the outside.'

<span id="fn_492"></span>[314:29](hou16.htm#fr_492) Now called the
Oquirrh Mountains, Oquirrh being probably an Indian word.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[315:30](hou16.htm#fr_493) The site was
surveyed by Jesse W. Fox, under Rowberry's direction. The first house
was built by Tolman, who in partnership with Rowberry erected a saw-mill
nine miles north of the settlement. The first grist-mill was built by
Ezaias Edwards, and the first store opened by Isaac Lee. John Rowberry
and F. M. Lyman, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 150. A meeting-house 24 feet
square had been finished in March 1852. *Deseret News*, April 17, 1852.
Twelve miles to the west of Tooele was a small settlement named
Grantsville.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[315:31](hou16.htm#fr_494) From 5 bushels of
club-wheat, planted during this year, 250 bushels were raised. Edward
Phillips, in *Utah Sketches*, 81-2.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[315:32](hou16.htm#fr_495) A mile and a half
south of Sandy Creek was a herd-house, the property of S. O. Holmes.
Near this spot a fort was built, surrounded with a mud wall.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[316:33](hou16.htm#fr_496) John Urie, in *Utah
Sketches*, MS., 88, says that there were 119 men and 48 women and
children, with 101 wagons, 368 oxen, 146 cows, and about 22 tons of
seed; that they were well supplied with implements, and had 300 lbs of
flour *per capita*. Richards, in *Utah Early Records*, MS., 117,
mentions 163 souls, of whom 30 were women.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[316:34](hou16.htm#fr_497) James G. Bleak, in
*Utah Sketches*, MS., 67-8. On the south-east corner of the fort a
meeting-house in the shape of a St Andrew's cross was built of hewn
logs. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 163. The name was first spelt Paroan.
*Frontier Guardian*, Aug. 8, 1851. A view of the fort, with Little Salt
Lake in the distance, painted by W. Majors, was presented by Brigham
Young to the Deseret University in 1870. *Contributor*, ii. 270.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[316:35](hou16.htm#fr_498) In the *Deseret
News* of March 6, 1852, is an account of the pioneer anniversary
celebrated at Parowan on July 24, 1851.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[317:36](hou16.htm#fr_499) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1851, 46. On the same page is mentioned the first use in the
country of the stone-coal at Parowan, used in blacksmith work.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[317:37](hou16.htm#fr_500) George A. Smith, in
*Frontier Guardian*, Aug. 8, 1851, and in *Deseret News*, Dec. 11, 1852.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[317:38](hou16.htm#fr_501) This valley had been
explored as early as 1847. In December of that year, a party of the
pioneers passed through it, as already mentioned, on their way to
California to purchase live-stock and provisions.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[317:39](hou16.htm#fr_502) Building progressed
rapidly, and during the following summer one Burr Frost, a blacksmith
from Parowan, started the manufacture of iron, making nails enough to
shoe a horse. *Deseret News*, Nov. 27, 1852.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[317:40](hou16.htm#fr_503) John Urie, in *Utah
Sketches*, MS., 93-4. See also *Deseret News*, July 24, 1852. The
scarcity of nails hindered building. Workmen were brought from England
to manufacture them from native ore, but the experiment failed; as the
work could not be done on a sufficiently large scale to make it
profitable, and it was abandoned. Years later, when the soldiers were
ordered away from Camp Floyd, the settlers bought old iron cheap, and
nails were manufactured to advantage. The price in market then was 30 or
40 cts a lb.; afterward the railroad brought them in and they were sold
at 3 to 5 cents a pound.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[317:41](hou16.htm#fr_504) About 60 miles north
of Salt Lake City. A. Christensen, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 102.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[318:42](hou16.htm#fr_505) In blocks of six
acres, each lot being half an acre.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[318:43](hou16.htm#fr_506) The first settlers
on the old site were Jonathan S. Wells, who built the first house, and
was the first to commence farming, Elisha Mallory, who with his brother
Lemuel built the first grist-mill, M. McCreary, Alfred Walton, and Lyman
B. Wells. George W. Ward, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 44-5. The city was
named after Willard Richards. *Richards’ Narr*., MS., 67.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[318:44](hou16.htm#fr_507) In December, 15 or
20 families had settled there. *Deseret News*, Dec. 11, 1852. On June
12, 1851, a company with a few wagons started for this point from Salt
Lake City, *Utah Early Records*, MS., 128.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[318:45](hou16.htm#fr_508) This settlement was
20 miles north of the Rio Virgen. It was thought that the route to
California might be shortened by way of the fort about 35 miles.
*Deseret News*, Dec. 11, 1852. In addition to those mentioned in the
text, a number of small settlements had been made in various parts of
the territory. Farmington, now the county seat of Davis co., and on the
line of the Utah Central railroad, was first settled in 1848 by D. A.
Miller and four others. In 1849 it was organized as a ward. Mill Creek,
in S. Lake co., was settled in 1848-9 by John Neff and nine others;
Alpine City and Springville, in Utah co., in 1850, the former by Isaac
Houston with ten others, the latter by A. Johnson and three comrades.
Santaquin, in the same county, was settled in 1852; abandoned in 1853 on
account of Indian raids, and reoccupied in 1856 by B. F. Johnson and 23
associates. The site of Harrisville, a few miles north of Ogden, was
occupied in the spring of 1850 by Ivin Stewart, abandoned the same
autumn on account of an Indian outbreak, and resettled in 1851 by P. G.
Taylor and others· In 1883 Taylor was bishop of this ward. Slaterville,
in Weber county, was first settled in the fall of 1850 by Alex. Kelley,
who was soon afterward joined by several families; in 1853—the year of
the Walker war—it was abandoned, the inhabitants taking refuge in
Bingham Fort, but was again occupied in 1854. South Weber, in the same
county, <span id="page_319">p. 319</span> was located in 1851 by Robt
Watts and nine others. Uintah, at the mouth of Weber Cañon, was settled
in 1850 by Dan. Smith and a few others. It was first called East Weber,
and received its present name on the 4th of March, 1867, at which date
the Union Pacific railroad was finished to this point. *Sloan's Utah
Gazetteer*, 1884, passim. Of the above settlements, those which became
prominent will be mentioned later.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[319:46](hou16.htm#fr_509) The party must also
have 17 sets of drag teeth, and of grain and grass scythes, sickles, and
pitchforks, 50 each.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[320:47](hou16.htm#fr_510) In *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1851, 85, it is stated that, at the next session of congress, it
was expected that a mail route would be established to San Diego by way
of Parowan. At this date there was, as we shall see later, a monthly
mail between S. L. City and Independence, Mo. There was also a mail to
Sacramento, leaving that and S. L. City on the 1st of each month, a
bi-monthly mail to The Dalles, Or., a weekly mail to the San Pete
valley, and a semi-weekly mail to Brownsville.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[320:48](hou16.htm#fr_511) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1851, 14. The object of the establishment of this colony was that
the people gathering to Utah from the Islands, and even Europe, might
have an outfitting post. In 1853, Keokuk, Iowa, on the Mississippi
River, was selected by the western-bound emigrants as a rendezvous and
place of outfitting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Education, Manufactures, Commerce, Agriculture,
Society. 1850-1852.](hou17)
