[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou17)  [Next](hou19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

### CHAPTER XV. MORMONISM AND POLYGAMY.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">What is Mormonism?—Tenets of
the Church—Sacred Books and Personages—Organization—Priesthood—First
Presidency—the Twelve Apostles—Patriarchs—Elders, Bishops, Priests,
Teachers, and Deacons—the Seventies—Stakes and Wards—Marriage—Temple
Building—Tabernacle—Political Aspect—Polygamy As a Church
Tenet—Celestial Marriage—Attitude and Arguments of
Civilization—Polygamy's Reply—Ethics and Law—the Charge of
Disloyalty—Proposed Remedies.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">We</span> are now prepared to ask the
question with some degree of intelligence, What is Mormonism? In
formulating an answer, we must consider as well the political as the
religious idea. I will examine the latter first.

    Mormonism in its religious aspect is simply the acceptation of the
bible, the whole of it, literally, and following it to its logical
conclusions.

    As the Christian world has advanced in civilization and intelligence
these two thousand years or so, it has gradually left behind a little
and a little more of its religion, first of the tenets of the Hebraic
record, and then somewhat even of those of the later dispensation. Long
before religionists began to question as myths the stories of Moses, and
Jonah, and Job, they had thrown aside as unseemly blood-sacrifice and
burnt-offerings, sins of uncleanness, the stoning of sabbath-breakers,
the killing in war of women, children, and prisoners, the condemnation
of whole nations to perpetual bondage, and many other revolting customs
of the half-savage Israelites sanctioned by holy writ.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This they did of
their own accord, not because they were so commanded, but in spite of
commandments, and by reason of a higher and more refined culture—a
culture which had outgrown the cruder dogmas of the early ages. Then
came the putting away of slavery and polygamy, the former but recently
permitted in these American states, and the latter being here even now.
Among the discarded customs taught and encouraged by the new testament
are, speaking in tongues, going forth to preach without purse or scrip,
laying on of hands for the healing of the sick, raising the dead,
casting out devils, and all other miracles; and there will be further
repudiations as time passes, further ignoring of portions of the
scriptures by orthodox sects, a further weeding out of the unnatural and
irrational from things spiritual and worshipful.

    The tenets of the Mormon church are these:

    The bible is the inspired record of God's dealings with men in the
eastern hemisphere; the book of Mormon is the inspired record of God's
dealings with the ancient inhabitants of this continent; the book of
Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints consists of revelations from God concerning the present
dispensation to Joseph Smith, who was inspired to translate the book of
Mormon and organize the church of Christ anew. Joseph Smith to the
present dispensation is as Moses was to Israel; there is no conflict,
either in personages or books. The statements, assertions, promises, and
prophecies of the books, and the precepts and practices of the
personages, are accepted, all of them, and held to be the revealed will
to man of one and the same God, whose will it is the duty and endeavor
of his people to carry out in every particular to the best of their
ability.

    There are more gods than one. There are spiritual gifts. Not only
must there be faith in Christ, but faith in the holy priesthood, and
faith in continual

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

revelation. <span id="fr_542"></span>[1](#fn_542.md) Man is a free agent.
The laying on of hands for ordination, and for the healing of the sick,
descends from the early to the later apostles. <span
id="fr_543"></span>[2](#fn_543.md) There will be a *resurrection* of the
body and a second coming of Christ. Israel is a chosen people; there has
been a scattering of Israel, and there will be a gathering. Joseph Smith
was the fulfiller not only of bible prophecies, but of the book of
Mormon prophecies, and of his own prophecies. Foreordination, election,
and dispensation of the fulness of times are held. There was an apostasy
of the primitive church, and now there is a return. There was the
Jerusalem of the eastern hemisphere; on the continent of North America
is planted the new Jerusalem. Miracles obtain; also visions and dreams,
signs and tokens, and angels of light and darkness. There are free
spirits and spirits imprisoned; the wicked will be destroyed, and there
will be a millennial reign. The saints are largely of the house of
Israel, and heirs to the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The
aboriginal inhabitants of America and the Pacific isles were the

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

seed of Joseph, divided into numerous nations and tribes. The Lamanites
were of the house of Manasseh.

    We believe, say their articles of faith, in God the father, in Jesus
Christ the son, and in the holy ghost. For their own sins, and not for
any transgression of Adam, men will be punished; but all may be saved,
through the atonement, by obedience to the ordinances of the gospel,
which are: faith in Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion, <span
id="fr_544"></span>[3](#fn_544.md) and laying on of

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

hands for the gift of the holy ghost. We believe in the same
organization and powers that existed in

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

the primitive church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers,
evangelists; in the gift of tongues, <span
id="fr_545"></span>[4](#fn_545.md)

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

prophecy, revelation, and visions. In the scriptures is found the law of
tithing, which law is now revived, and the keeping of it made one of the
first duties of the saints. The ten commandments, and all other
commandments, ordinances, promulgations, and possibilities, are in force
now as at the time they were given. Marriage is a sacred and an eternal
covenant. Plural marriage, sanctioned under the old dispensation and
revived under the new, is open to all, and is, in some instances,
commanded, when it becomes a sacred obligation.

    Seldom does a good Mormon appear in a court of law arrayed against a
brother Mormon. And this is why, as the saints allege, the twenty-five
or fifty lawyers in Utah who are compelled to derive their living almost
entirely from the gentiles, are so bitter against the saints. When two
Mormons disagree, they present themselves before the president of the
stake, who with twelve councillors, six facing six, their selection
having been agreed to by the litigants, is ready to try the case without
delay. Plaintiff and defendant, each with his witnesses, take their
places before the president, and between the rows of councillors. Prayer
is then offered, almighty aid being asked in bringing the affair to a
righteous and amicable conclusion. The litigants state the case, each
from his own standpoint; the witnesses are heard; the councillors
decide. Prayer is again offered. The adversaries shake hands; there is
nothing to pay. Until the gentiles came, there were in Utah no police or
police courts; no houses of drinking, or of gambling, or of
prostitution. Of the administration of justice among the saints I shall
speak more at length in a later chapter.

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

    The doctrine of blood atonement was early inculcated by the church,
as a sacrifice necessary for salvation, and not, as many have asserted,
in order to legalize murder. There were the altars and the offerings of
the old testament, and the great god-man sacrifice of the new. Christ
made the atonement for the sins of the world by the shedding of his
blood. By the laws of the land, he who commits murder must atone for it
by his own death. <span id="fr_546"></span>[5](#fn_546.md) There are sins
of various degrees

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

of heinousness; some requiring only public confession and promised
reformation by way of atonement, whilst others are characterized by an
enormity so vast that pardon on earth is impossible. Of the first class
are all minor offences against church discipline, breach of which has
been publicly acknowledged by nearly every leader, from Joseph himself
down to the humblest official.

 

    For the proper carrying out of the instructions revealed in the
sacred books, an organization has been effected in these latter days,
based upon books and on former organizations. There are two principal
priesthoods, the Melchisedek and the Aaronic, the latter including the
Levitical. The Melchisedek is the higher, comprising apostles,
patriarchs, high-priests, seventies, and elders. It holds the right of
presidency, with authority to administer in all the offices, ordinances,
and affairs of the church. It holds the keys of all spiritual blessings,
receives the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, whose doors are ever
open, and holds communion with God the father, Jesus Christ the
mediator, Joseph Smith the prophet, and all departed saints. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[6](#fn_547.md)

    The Aaronic is a subordinate priesthood, being an appendage to the
Melchisedek, and acting under its

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

supervision. It comprises bishops, priests, teachers, and deacons, who
hold the keys of the ministering angels, having power to administer in
certain ordinances and in the temporal affairs of the church, baptizing
and sitting as judges in Israel. The bishopric is the presidency of the
Aaronic priesthood. The office of a bishop is to administer in temporal
matters. First-born sons, lineal descendants of Aaron, and no others,
have a legal right to the bishopric. But a high-priest of the order of
Melchisedek may officiate in all lesser offices, including that of
bishop, when no lineal descendant of Aaron can be found, and after he
has been ordained to this power by the first presidency. There is also
the patriarchal priesthood, <span id="fr_548"></span>[7](#fn_548.md)

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

the patriarch to be the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed
of Abraham. Likewise there are mothers in Israel. <span
id="fr_549"></span>[8](#fn_549.md)

    Head over all is the First Presidency of the Church, known also as
the First Presidency of the High-Priesthood, and consisting of a
president and two councillors. <span id="fr_550"></span>[9](#fn_550.md) The
first presidency presides over and governs

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

all the affairs of the church, temporal and spiritual; the first
president is the prophet of God, seer, revelator, and translator.

    Next in authority are twelve apostles, who are a travelling
presiding high-council, and with whom, on the death of the president of
the church, the supreme rulership rests until another first presidency
is installed. <span id="fr_551"></span>[10](#fn_551.md) The president of
the twelve, chosen in the

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

first instance by reason of seniority or ordination, usually becomes
president of the church. The office of the twelve is to preach and teach
throughout the world, regulating the affairs of the church everywhere
under the direction of the first presidency, calling to their aid
therein the seventies.

    An apostle may administer in the several offices of the church,
particularly in spiritual matters. <span
id="fr_552"></span>[11](#fn_552.md) The office of a patriarch is to give
patriarchal blessings; the office of a member of a seventy is to travel
and preach the gospel; but a patriarch, a high-priest, a

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

member of a seventy, and an elder may, in common with an apostle,
adtninister in other spiritual offices.

    All superior officers are frequently called elders. Thus an apostle
is an elder; and he may baptize, and ordain other elders, priests,
teachers, and deacons. It is his calling to administer bread and wine,
or bread and water, emblems of the flesh and blood of Christ; to confirm
the baptized by the laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the
holy ghost; to teach, expound, exhort, and to lead in meetings as lie is
led by the holy ghost.

    A bishop who is a first-born and a lineal descendant of Aaron may
sit as a common judge in the church without councillors, except in the
trial of a president of the high-priesthood. But a bishop from the
high-priesthood may not sit as a judge without his two councillors. Over
all the bishops in the church there is a presiding bishop.

    The duties of a priest are to preach, baptize, administer the
sacrament, and visit families and pray with them. The duties of a
teacher are to watch over and strengthen the church, and see that no
iniquity creeps into it, and that every member performs his obligations
and conducts himself without guile. The duties of the deacon are to
assist the teacher and the bishop, attending to the temporal affairs of
the church, looking after the houses of worship and the necessities of
the poor. Teachers and deacons may instruct and exhort, but they are not
authorized to baptize, lay on hands, or administer the sacrament. No one
can hold office except by authoritative call and ordination, or by
special appointment of God.

    The seventies are organized into various councils of seventy,
commonly called quorums. Each council of seventy has seven presidents,
chosen out of the seventy, one of the seven presiding over the others
and over the whole seventy. The seven presidents of the first council of
seventies also preside over all the councils

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

of seventies. <span id="fr_553"></span>[12](#fn_553.md) According to Elder
John Jaques, to whose little book on the priesthood I am indebted for
this information, there were in 1882 seventy-six councils of seventies,
with seventy members in each council when complete. Elders are organized
in councils of ninety-six, each council having a president and two
councillors. \[Priests are organized in councils of forty-eight, each
with a president—who must be a bishop—and two councillors. Teachers are
organized in councils of twenty-four, and deacons in councils of twelve,
each with a president and two councillors. <span
id="fr_554"></span>[13](#fn_554.md)

    In the society of saints, there are territorial divisions into what
are called Stakes of Zion. In Utah, these divisions correspond usually,
but not necessarily, with the counties, each county being a stake.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Every stake has a
president, with his two councillors, and a high-council, consisting of
twelve high-priests. <span id="fr_555"></span>[14](#fn_555.md) The
high-priests assemble in council, having its president and two
councillors, at stated times, usually once a month, for conference and
instruction. The president of a stake, with his two councillors,
presides over the high-council of that stake, which has original and
appellate jurisdiction, and whose decisions are usually, but not
invariably, final. Appeals are had to a general assembly of the several
councils of the priesthood, but such appeals are seldom taken. The
jurisdiction of the several councils is ecclesiastical, affecting
fellowship and standing only, the extreme penalty being excommunication.

    Each stake is divided into wards, the number being according to
territory and population; over each ward presides a bishop, with his two
councillors. Each stake and each ward, as a rule, has its own
meeting-house. There are about twenty-five stakes, divided into some
three hundred wards. Salt Lake City is divided into twenty-one wards,
each containing for the most part nine ten-acre blocks, though in the
outskirts they are larger. Each stake holds a quarterly conference; and
the church holds a general conference every April and October.

    It will be observed that the orders of priesthood and organization
of the church are copied essentially from the bible. As before remarked,
the Mormons believe and practise what their sacred books teach, and all
that they teach, without intended misinterpretation,

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

elimination, or repudiation. And as the book of Mormon is held to be a
continuation of the historical portion of the bible, and equally with it
the word of God; and as the ideas and instructions contained in the book
of Doctrine and Covenants have been derived, for the most part, from a
study and literal interpretation of the bible—though with something
added—it is safe to say that in the main the Mormons believe what the
bible teaches, and that Mormonism is the acceptation of the bible, the
whole of it, literally, and following it to its logical conclusions.

 

Tithing, though enjoined by divine command, is a free-will
offering. <span id="fr_556"></span>[15](#fn_556.md) The law of tithing in
its

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

fulness requires the tenth of the surplus property of members coming to
Zion to be paid into the church as a consecration, and after that one
tenth of increase or earnings annually. This is to be used for the poor,
for

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

building or other church purposes, and for the support of those engaged
in church business. There are no salaried preachers. Tithing is paid in
kind to the bishop, who renders a strict account, the whole financial

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

system being in the hands of the bishopric, but supervised by the
trustee in trust through the aid of an auditing committee. The names of
those who do not keep the law of tithing shall not be enrolled with the
people of God; neither shall their genealogy be kept.

    The doctrine of divine revelation is continued. God's ways are
immutable; past and present to him are as one; what he has done, that he
continues to do; what was right five thousand years ago is right now. If
God spoke to Abraham and Solomon, and gave them more wives than one,
even giving to David his neighbor's wives, there is no reason why he
should not do the same with Joseph and Brigham. There is nothing which
God has ever done and sanctioned that he may not do and sanction now;
otherwise he is not an omniscient, omnipotent, unchangeable, all-wise,
and perfect being. Every member of the church may hold communion with
God relative to his own affairs; revelations for the church are only
given through its head.

    As through Christ alone man may be saved, in order that the souls of
many millions who never heard of him may not be all of them lost,
baptism for the dead, and thereby salvation, was revealed, as was also
celestial marriage.

    Nature is dual. An unmarried man or woman is and forever must be an
imperfect creature. There are marriages for time and marriages for
eternity. A celestial marriage is a marriage of God, and those thus

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

joined can never be divorced, except by the power of God. If a man's
wife dies and he marries another, and she dies and he marries a third,
believing in resurrection and a life of purity beyond the grave but
repudiating polygamy, how will he manage with his plural wives in
heaven? She who dies unmarried cannot enter into the full enjoyment of
God; but as a man may be baptized for the dead and so save their souls,
so he may be sealed to a husbandless woman in heaven. There is a
difference between marriage and sealing; the former is secular, and the
latter both secular and celestial, as it may be either for time or for
eternity, in person or by proxy, and with the living or with the dead. A
woman may be sealed to one man for time and to another for eternity, the
former being still living. <span id="fr_557"></span>[16](#fn_557.md)

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

    A sacred duty is the constant effort to convert all men throughout
the world to a belief in the divinity

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

of Joseph Smith's mission. To this end are sent forth proselyting
ministers, elders of the church, selected by

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

the authorities and called by the saints assembled at the general
semiannual conferences held in Salt Lake City. Neither age nor pecuniary
condition governs the selection. They may be men or boys, rich or poor;
but they must have faith and integrity, and go forth without purse or
scrip, relying alone upon the hand of God to feed them. An elder is
likewise selected by the church authorities to preside over each
mission. Thus has been visited almost every quarter of the globe, the
book of Mormon being meanwhile translated into many languages. And a
Perpetual Emigration Fund Company has been established, which has
advanced the funds to bring out thousands to Zion, the money being paid
back by the immigrant after his arrival, as he has been able to earn it.

    Temple building is a characteristic work, and is prompted by the
belief that Jesus Christ will some day come suddenly to his temple.
Hence the devotion and self-sacrifice practised by Christ's people in
order to prepare for him a fitting place of reception. Wonders in this
direction have been accomplished by a poor and wandering people, at
Kirtland, at Nauvoo, at Salt Lake City, St George, Manti, and Logan.

    In the north-west corner of Temple block, Salt Lake City, in which
is the tabernacle, the smaller church building, and the new temple,
stands a plain two-story adobe structure known as the Endowment House.
Here are conducted the most secret and solemn mysteries of the church,
which may be termed religio-masonic ceremonies, illustrative of the
origin and destiny of man. Here also are performed the rites of baptism
for the dead, anointing with oil, marriage, and other ceremonies, by
which the convert is endowed with the special grace of God, receives his
inheritance as a child of God, and is made a partaker of the fulness of
all the blessings of religion. All these rites should properly be
performed in the temple, which on its completion will supersede the
endowment

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

house, and in which special apartments are being constructed for these
purposes. <span id="fr_558"></span>[17](#fn_558.md)

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

    The order of exercises in the tabernacle, which seats seven thousand
persons, is much the same as in orthodox evangelical churches, beginning
and ending with prayer and singing, and sometimes singing and
administering the sacrament in the middle of a discourse. The speaker
seldom knows that he is to speak until called upon by the moderator, who
regulates the services, and makes the selection under inspiration,
announcing the name of the person sometimes without knowing whether he
is in the house, or even in the city. The singing is very fine, the
organ, constructed wholly by Mormon artisans, being the largest

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

and finest in America at the time it was built. The acoustic properties
of the oval-shaped room and ceiling are wonderful; stationed at one
point, a pin may be heard drop at the opposite end. The singers, thirty
or forty in number, are stationed on the main stage, facing the audience
in front of the organ. In front of them are the church officials, seated
on a series of platforms according to their respective grades, the first
presidency highest, next the twelve apostles, and finally the teachers,
priests, and bishops, who have charge of administering the sacrament of
the Lord's supper, which is done regularly every Sunday. In the first
organization of the church, bread and wine were specified as the proper
elements to be used, but it was soon after revealed that it makes no
difference what the emblems are, and now bread and water are used.
Tabernacle services are held Sunday afternoons; there are Sunday-schools
at the ward meeting-houses Sunday mornings, and preaching at the same
places in the evening by subordinate officials, who often repeat the
main points of the morning tabernacle discourse. In the tabernacle,
several rows of the best seats are reserved for gentile strangers, and
are filled for the most part by travellers and tourists, American and
European, who take no pains to hide their contempt for all about them,
and return the courtesy extended by smiles and sneers, which, to say the
least, is in bad taste for people pretending to a superior
culture. <span id="fr_559"></span>[18](#fn_559.md)

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

    After all that can be said about Mormonism and polygamy in their
social or moral relations, it is only when we come to consider them in
their political aspect, in their relations to government and governing,

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

that we touch the core of the matter. Those who wax the hottest against
the latter-day saints and their polygamous practices are not as a rule
among the purest of our people. They care no more, indeed,

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

about the half-dozen wives of the Mormon than about the half-dozen
mistresses of the congressman. As Judge Roseborough, in a very able
dictation to my stenographer, remarks: "When I came here I was a

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

democrat. They pretended to be democrats, but, I found them such
democrats as hell is full of. They are neither democrats nor
republicans. I did not care about matters of belief, if they were
American citizens.

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They might worship
the devil if they were citizens and discharged their duties as citizens.
But I found that in a military way, in a political way, and in a
judicial way they controlled matters; and nearly all of them

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

are aliens. I found that I had got out of the United States and come to
Utah. I have never got over that feeling yet, and I think I will get out
of Utah and back into the United States again."

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

    Thus, notwithstanding the iniquities of the saints, together with
their impudence and arrogance, as charged upon them by their enemies,
the impossibility of others living with them as members of one
community, of

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

one commonwealth, is the real difficulty—not their religion, their
so-called blasphemies, their pretended revelations and miracles, their
opposition bible, their latter-day dispensations, and the rest; nor yet
their crimes and misdemeanors, their robberies and murders; nor even yet
their secret ceremonies, their endowments, Danite bands, blood
atonement, and the rest. The copy or counterpart of very many of these,
in greater or smaller degree, is, or has been, practised by the
gentiles; or if not, few care enough for any of them to go to war on
their account. The trouble is this, and this will continue to be the
trouble, in Utah or elsewhere in the United States, and that whether
polygamy stands or falls—the saints are too exclusive, industrially and
politically, for their neighbors.

    The theory of government of this republic is numerical equality,
each man and each hundred men being equal to every other man or every
other hundred men as industrial and political factors. In this case,
however, it is not so, and it never can be so. Spiritual manifestations
and spiritual wives have nothing to do with it. A hundred or a thousand
Mormons are a unit, socially, politically, and commercially, in a
community organized theoretically upon the basis of only one man to the
unit. And until the principles of the United States republic are
remodelled, Mormons and gentiles cannot live together in peace and
amity. It is folly for gentiles to enter a Mormon

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

community and think to rule, or to have any part in the government as at
present existing, and following the line of law and order. This is why
the people of Missouri and Illinois drove them out—not because of their
religion or immorality, for their religion was nothing to the gentiles,
and their morals were as good or better than those of their neighbors.
It may as well be understood and agreed upon that, in the United States
or out of the United States, the Mormons are, and ever will be, a people
self-contained and apart.

    Thus the matter continues to be discussed by the world at large, as
a question of theology or morality, and not of active political and
judicial control, or of the domination of a politico-religions
organization, with aspirations and purposes diverse from those of the
American people generally.

    The theory and assumption of the Mormon church as a
politico-religious organization is that the church is a government of
God, and not responsible to any other government on earth conflicting
with it, if not indeed bound from necessity to overturn and supplant all
civil governments. This assumption lies at the very foundation of the
Mormon creed; and from this point, in practical operation as well as in
theory, there is a divergence between that organization and the United
States government. Grant that any man believes what the Mormons believe,
say their enemies, and where will his allegiance rest—with the
government of the United States, or with this politico-religious
organization which ought to and will, as they imagine, supplant all
other governments? Many of them are alien born, and, from the treatment
they receive on their arrival, learn to distrust the government of the
United States, and to cling all the closer to the institutions of their
sect.

    "It is not consistent that the people of God," says Orson Pratt,
"should organize or be subject to man-made governments. If it were so,
they could never

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

be perfected. There can be but one perfect government,—that organized by
God, a government by apostles, prophets, priests, teachers, and
evangelists; the order of the original church of all churches
acknowledged by God."

    Early in this narrative we saw plainly, and remarked upon it as we
proceeded, that it has been chiefly the political character and
aspirations of the church that have brought it into all its difficulties
everywhere—in Ohio, in Missouri, in Illinois. And its thirty years of
isolation and independence in Utah, during which time it came in contact
with the American people or with the government only in a limited
degree, intensified its desire for control. The only way the Mormons can
live in peace with gentile neighbors is for them to follow the example
of their brethren, the Josephites—leave politics and government out of
their ethics, and not combine for the purpose of controlling counties,
states, or territories. But this strikes at the very root of their
religion, which has already given them for an inheritance all counties
and countries and peoples throughout the world, as they modestly claim.

    There is here much more than the religious unity of ancient Israel.
As a cooperative association, Mormonism has not its equal in the history
of the world. In every conceivable relation, position, interest, and
idea; in every sentiment of hope and fear, of joy and sorrow—there is
mutual assistance and sympathy. It enters into all affairs, whether for
time or eternity; there is an absolute unity in religion, government,
and society, and to the fullest extent short of communism, internal
assistance in agriculture, commerce, and manufactures. If a foreign
convert wishes to come to America, he is helped hither; if he wants
land, farming implements, seed, stock, he is helped to them; trade and
manufactures are largely cooperative. And this bond of strength, whether
it be called the holiness of saints or

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

the bigotry of fanatics, causes them to be feared and hated by their
neighbors.

 

    Polygamy, as a tenet of the Mormon church, is based upon scripture
example, and if this is unlawful, it says, all is unlawful. Marriage is
ordained of God, and essential to salvation. Christian sects hold up the
patriarchs as examples in their sacred instruction, and yet condemn in
these personages a practice which Christ nowhere condemns. While in
polygamy, God blessed them and their polygamous seed, saying never a
word about their plural wives. Polygamy was common in Asia at the time
of the apostles; yet none of them preached against it, nor does John the
revelator mention it, writing to the seven churches. In the days of
Justin Martyr, the Jews practised polygamy. It is true that the emperor
Theodosius, about A. D. 393, promulgated a law against polygamy, but it
was repealed sixty years after by Valentinian. Nevertheless, as the
civilized world, particularly Christian sects, regarded the practice
with abhorrence, the prophet Joseph inquired of the Lord as to what he
should do. And the Lord answered, commanding him to restore all things,
the practice of polygamy among the rest. The revelation on this subject
is given entire in note [19](#fn_560.md) of this chapter. The inferior
order of wifehood, known in the sacred scriptures as concubinage, is not
recognized in the Mormon church. By the marriage covenant, all are made
wives, and all children are legitimate.

    Celestial marriage and the plural-wife system, as incorporated parts
of the Mormon religion, are essential to the fulness of exaltation in
the eternal world. The space around us, it declares, is inhabited by
spirits, thousands of years old, awaiting tabernacles in the flesh,
which can be legitimately furnished them only by marriage and
procreation; and bodies cannot be obtained for these spirits fast enough
unless men have more wives than one. It is the will and glory of God

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

that these spirits have bodies as speedily as possible, that they become
saints on earth and in his kingdom, those who keep this commandment thus
to multiply being as gods; otherwise these spirits will take refuge in
the bodies of unbelievers, and so sink to perdition.

    But civilization has pronounced polygamy a curse and a crime, a
retrogression, an offence against society and against morality, a
beastly abomination, immoral, incestuous, degrading, a relic of
barbarism, a sin, a shame, a vice, and as such has discarded it and
passed laws against it. And the issue between polygamy and monogamy is
one purely for civilization to determine; christianity has not a foot of
ground to stand upon in the matter.

    Culture cares nothing for religion; it is what a man does, not what
he believes, that affects progress. It will not do to break the law in
the name of religion. Suppose a man's religion authorizes him to commit
murder: does that make it right? Civilization seeks the highest
morality; and the highest morality, it says, is not that of the bible,
of the book of Mormon, or of any other so-called holy book. The highest
morality is based on nature, and by a study of nature's laws men may
find it. Long before Christ, civilization awoke to the evils of this
custom, which is not in accord with its morality. The religious
reformer, Buddha, who died 470 years before Christ was born, and whose
followers now number about one third of the whole human race, preached
against polygamy. When Greece and Rome were the foremost nations of the
world, they did not practise polygamy, nor has ever the highest
civilization entertained it. Polygamy is to monogamy as Greece to China,
or as England to India.

    All very religious people, as well as science fanatics, are
partially insane. This insanity may be passive and harmless, or
aggressive and hurtful. We have innumerable instances of both kinds in
the history of the Christian church. But as the world

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

progresses, religion becomes less dogmatic, and the insanity assumes
more and more the milder form. Thus it is with the Mormons as with
others; they would not feel justified in doing now some things which
were done by their predecessors, any more than gentile Christians would
wish to burn heretics, or slaughter millions in the name of the
redeemer; or any more than they would accept Joseph Smith as a prophet
from God, or believe in his metal book of Mormon, or his pretended
revelations.

    But admitting man's obligation to follow the precepts and example of
the bible, which, if done literally, would lead him into all manner of
contrarieties and absurdities, even as it does the Mormons to-day, the
scriptural argument in support of polygamy does not go for much. Among
the half-savage Israelites the custom obtained, but as they grew more
civilized, it died out. The first apostles had none of them two wives,
and St Paul maintained that it was best not to have any; the spirit of
the new testament is all against plurality of wives, and, though it
nowhere in so many words condemns the system, the books of Mormon and
doctrine and covenants do.

    Thus we see that holy books are contradictory and unreliable, not
being consistent in themselves, or producing consistent followers. Codes
of morality depending on the divine will are without foundation: are,
indeed, not codes of morality, which to be genuine must be based on
nature as the law-giver and punisher; for otherwise all men to whom the
will of God has not been revealed, or who do not believe in any god or
revelation, would be without any knowledge of right and wrong, or any
standard of morality.

    Innate perceptions, supernatural intuitions, or a conscience
divinely given, instead of one evolved from the ever-increasing
accumulation of human experiences, are not safe guides to right conduct,
as the doctrines and doings of the Mormons clearly show. By the result
of an act, not by supernatural revelation, we know

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

whether it is good or bad; and here, the result being bad, the act is
wrong, immoral.

    The result is bad because by reason of the act civilization takes a
step backward, woman is degraded, and the progress of the race hampered.
The mono-gamic is the highest type of family, and the highest type of
society, yet evolved. Polygamy is better than promiscuity or polyandry,
but it is not equal to monogamy. Polygamy springs from the desire to
extend the sexual gratification at the expense of the better sense of
the better part of the world's inhabitants. It is but a few removes from
the old way among savages, where women were property, and bought by
husbands to be used as slaves. To monogamy is due the fullest
development of the emotions, of the higher sentiments, motherly
tenderness, fatherly care, and the dutiful respect and obedience on the
part of children. It is here that the passion of love assumes its most
refined form; it is here that we find in family, social, and political
relations, the greatest good to the greatest number.

    For if we degrade woman, we degrade her children, her husband, and
the whole community. Throughout all ages the position of woman has fixed
the advancement of the nation in the scale of refinement and
intelligence. Polygamy makes of woman, not the equal and companion of
man, but his subordinate, if not indeed his serf or slave. The charm of
her influence is gone; the family circle becomes incongruous and less
cohesive; and there is an absence of those firm relations, filial and
paternal, which, continued through successive generations, engender the
highest type of society yet known. Make of American women Circassian
slaves, and you will make of American men Turks.

    The nations having the highest and best literature, laws, commerce,
and religion, the nations that are enlightening the world with their
books, telegraphs, steamboats, and railroads, are monogamic. Polygamy

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

encourages, if it does not necessitate, a domestic despotism, which,
united with a religious and political despotism, constitutes one of the
worst possible of social evils. It adds to the Mormons numbers and
strength, banding them in a peculiar brotherhood, politically and
socially.

    The system is not an equitable one. There are born a tolerably even
number of males and females, so that under this arrangement, where one
man had a dozen wives, a dozen or so men would have none. Then, as to
the relationships of the individual members, injustice is wrought, some
of them being but little better than those existing among animals. There
is an instinct in every woman which tells her that to be second or third
is to be no wife at all. Neglect must exist. One man cannot properly
care for so many women and children. Even if he is wealthy, he has not
the time. Differences of origin and interests breed jealousies, foster
selfishness, and are injurious to character. Then, when the reproductive
age has passed, there is nothing left for the wife but a lonely and
miserable old age.

    Further than this, if reproduction be the chief incentive to the
plural-wife system among the Mormons, and if it be true, as is often
asserted, that as a rule the sexes are born numerically equal, then the
system will in the end defeat its own object, for more children will be
born and cared for where there is one man for every woman than where
some women have to go without a husband, or with a fraction of one. It
might pertinently be asked, in this connection, what is the benefit in
multiplying the population? Are there not enough people already in the
world? and is it not better to improve the stock than unduly to multiply
it? This prevention is practised often for improper motives and by
injurious methods; but millions do it because they think they cannot
afford to raise children, and have no right to bring them into
existence.

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

    True, the evils of the practice are not so great under a theocratic
and patriarchal system like that of the Mormons, as it would be if
allowed to run riot round the world, giving libertines the widest
opportunity to deceive and then desert women; in which case there would
be no need of prostitution to satisfy men's passions, as the great
barriers between the virtuous and the lewd would be for the most part
broken down. Among the Mormons, this is prevented by strong religious
feeling, and by the patriarchal influence of the leaders. But the
majority of mankind in the great outside world are not controlled by
religion or reason—they simply drift.

    Whether for this reason or some other reason, Mormons are not loyal
to the government, and the issue is between polygamic theocracy and
American republicanism. Nor are the fears of the friends of the latter
wholly groundless; for, as one writer said of it, "the Mormon church is
one of the best organized systems in the world. The cunning of the devil
and the sophistry of error are so mingled with truth as to make it one
of the most powerful agencies to delude the ignorant." The truth is, the
theocratic organization has already become absolute. Opposition
stimulates propagandism, and persecution brings only defiance of federal
authority and the moral sense of the nation. Legislation is defeated at
every turn. The history of Utah is the history of the Mormon priesthood
in its attempt to subordinate the state to the church, and make the
authority of the priesthood superior to that of the United States
government.

    So says civilization.

 

    In answer, polygamy reiterates scriptural example and divine
command, and repudiates civilization wherever it interferes with
religion. Culture and progress, which set at defiance God's law, are of
the devil. There is no retrogression in keeping the commands of the most
high. God blessed Abraham, and

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> David, and
Solomon; polygamy is no curse. And that cannot be a sin which God
commands; that cannot be a vice which has for its accomplishment only
the highest and holiest purposes of the almighty; that cannot be against
morality which is practised only by the righteous, and for the pure and
eternal welfare of the human race. <span
id="fr_560"></span>[19](#fn_560.md)

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

    Whatever may be the blessings attending civilization, they are
insignificant as compared with the blessings of religion, a life of
faith and holiness, and the pure worship of God. Civilization with its
one-wife or no-wife system breeds licentiousness, fosters prostitution,

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

and brings much misery on the human race in this world, not to mention
the world to come. The laws of God we know; civilization's laws we know
not. Civilization has little to boast of in the

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

line of its moralities. It is true that monogamy was early enforced in
Greece; but outside of marriage limits, there was gross indulgence in
every form, which was as freely permitted and practised as among

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

the foremost nations of to-day. Plato even advocated plurality of wives,
chiefly on patriotic grounds. In Rome, the one-wife system was more
firmly established, though in the absence of marriage, chastity was
little regarded. Marcus Aurelius, indeed, was eulogized by his
biographer for bringing into his

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

house a concubine, upon the death of his wife, instead of inflicting
upon his children a step-mother.

    If monogamy is the only natural form of sexual relationship, how
happens it that, throughout the lifetime of the race, there have been
and still are so many other forms of relationship? From time immemorial
polygamy has existed, and has been sanctioned by all religions. Bramin,
Parsee, and Rajpoot all indulged in it. Though nothing is said of it in
the new testament, we learn from the Talmud that it was lawful among the
Jews about the time of Christ's coming. Among the early converts to
christianity in Syria and Egypt were many polygamists who remained
uncensured. The rabbies of the west prohibited it eight or nine
centuries ago, but those of the east, where it is practised by nearly
all nations, permit it even now. It is common to-day throughout a large
part of the world. Take all the peoples of the earth, of all times and
cultures, and those among whom plural wives obtained are far in excess
of the others.

    Pre-nuptial unchastity was scarcely censured either in Greece or
Rome. "If there be any one," said Cicero, "who thinks that young men
should be altogether restrained from the love of courtesans, he is
indeed very severe." Even that most austere of Stoics, Epictetus, makes
a wide distinction between what he regards as comparatively innocent
pre-nuptial indulgences, and those which were regarded as adulterous and
unlawful. While the utmost license was allowed the husband, the wife was
held under close restrictions. Courtesans were the real companions of
men, and the only free women in Athens. Apelles painted them; Pindar and
Simonides sang their praises. Aspasia was worshipped before Pericles,
and sage philosophers did not hesitate to pay homage at her shrine, and
receive words of wisdom from her lips.

    In imperial Rome, while the courtesan class never

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

attained to such distinction as in Greece, divorce was so easy and
frequent as to render the marriage ceremony almost a nullity. There were
periods when the term 'adultery' had no significance as applied to men;
only women were punished for this crime. Persons five, ten, twenty times
married and divorced were not uncommon. Though monogamy obtained, female
life was lower there than in England under the restoration, or in France
under the regency. Alexander Severus, the most persistent of all the
Roman emperors, in vainly legislating against vice, provided his
provincial governors, if unmarried, with a concubine as well as with
horses and servants.

    The privilege of royalty in having many mistresses, tolerated until
all the people arose and usurped royalty, was but a modified form of
polygamy, and is still secretly practised by individuals.

    The question of sensualism has nothing to do with it. The
polygamist, as a rule, is no more sensual than the monogamist. Your true
sensualist does not marry at all. He holds himself free to taste
pleasure as he can find it. The trammels of matrimony and the
responsibilities of parentage he alike avoids. He is the most selfish of
beings; for his own gratification he is willing to sacrifice society,
debase manhood, and doom to perdition the highest inspirations and
holiest affections of the race.

    Beastliness is hardly a fit word to apply to the exercise of an
animal impulse, the gratification of animal appetite. It too often
maligns the brute creation. Eating and sleeping are in one sense
beastly; while smoking and dram-drinking are worse than beastly. Beasts
are natural in all things. In many respects they are less open to the
charge of beastliness, as we commonly employ the term, than men; they
indulge less in excess; they are sometimes gluttonish, but they do not
intoxicate themselves; if they do not regulate intercourse by numbers,
they do by seasons. Their passions are in subordination to the

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

laws of nature. Man's passions are not. Taking this charge of
beastliness as it is meant, the polygamist is less beastly than the
monogamist, who in the majority of cases is more beastly in his sexual
intercourse than the beast, being less obedient to the laws of nature,
less considerate for the health and strength of his one only wife.
Millions of gentle, uncomplaining women have been killed by beastly
husbands putting upon them more children than they should bear, not to
mention innumerable cruelties of other kinds. In so far as any system is
not in accordance with the laws of nature, nature will in due time
assert her rights and put it down. It is said that the Mormon women are
martyrs: so are other women; part of them because they are married, and
part because they are not.

    The readers must bear in mind that these are the assertions and
arguments of polygamy, and must be prepared to take them for what they
are worth, and answer them each according to the light of his own
reason. I have already presented the current arguments against polygamy;
these are the opinions and dogmas of the Mormons themselves, the
doctrines they everywhere preach and print, teaching them to their
children, inculcating them into the minds of young men and women, until
they have fully imbibed them.

    And thus they continue. How many husbandless women there are who
drag out a miserable existence in the effort to sustain themselves
without sin! how many fall into shame under the effort! Society lays no
heavier burden on any of its members than on its poverty-stricken single
women, reared in luxury, and unable to support themselves by work.

    If you are so tender of woman, her position and morals, why not turn
your batteries against the ten thousand of your own people of all
classes, including preachers and legislators, who tamper with other
men's wives, seduce and abandon innocent girls, keep mistresses, and
frequent the haunts of prostitution?

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

    That the race deteriorates under the polygamous system is not true,
they say. The single wife is very often hurried to a premature grave by
an inconsiderate or brutal husband, the offspring which she meanwhile
bears being puny and ill-developed. And again, it is only the better
class of men, the healthy and wealthy, the strongest intellectually and
physically, who as a rule have a plurality of wives; and thus, by their
becoming fathers to the largest number of children, the stock is
improved.

    The charge of immorality, as laid upon the Mormons as a community,
is likewise untenable. Morality is the doctrine of right and wrong, the
rule of conduct implying honesty and sobriety. In all honesty and
sobriety the Mormons live up to their standard of right and wrong, they
claim, more completely than any other people. They indulge in fewer
vices, such as drunkenness, prostitution, gambling, and likewise fewer
crimes. There is nothing necessarily immoral in the practice of
polygamy; if it is not immoral for a man to take one wife, it is not for
him to take twelve wives.

    The Mormons are loyal to their consciences and convictions. They are
essentially a moral people, moral in the highest sense of the term, more
so, they claim, than the average American or European. They do not
drink, cheat, or steal; adultery is scarcely known among them; they are
not idle, profligate, or given to lying. They are true to themselves,
true to their principles, and true to the world. Of what other society
can you fairly say as much? They are honest in all things, and
law-abiding when the law does not touch their rights or their religion;
when it does, all who are not dastards will fight. Judge them by their
fruits; if a sect is to be regarded from the standpoint of its
imperfections and inconsistencies rather than from its results, what
shall be said of christianity, which has butchered millions for the
faith,

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

and has further committed all the wickedness flesh is heir to, or of
which Satan could conceive?

    It is not right to place the polygamist on a par with the bigamist.
The one, without deception, and in conformity with the proclaimed tenets
of his faith, takes to wife the second, or third, or twentieth—the more
the better for all, it is said—promising to her the same life-long care
and protection as to the first; the other breaks his contract with his
first wife, and deserts her for another woman. Neither can the
polygamist be justly placed on a level with the adulterer. Mormons abhor
everything of the kind. The sacred ceremony of marriage signifies far
more with them than with those who mark the difference between morality
and immorality by a few insignificant rites.

    The Mormons lay no small stress on the fact that there is always a
large number of women who have no husbands, and can get none, on account
of women being always so greatly in the preponderance. They deny that
there are more men than women.

    Whatever may be true with regard to the numerical equality or
inequality of the sexes at birth, it is certain, dating back almost from
the beginning, that there have always been more women than men in the
world. Particularly in primitive times, owing to war or exposure, the
death rate was much greater among the males than among the females. To
obviate the evil—for it was early recognized that the sexes should be
mated—in some instances the female children were killed, but more
frequently the excess of women was divided among the men. Where wars
were frequent and continuous, everything else being equal, the
monogamous nation could not long stand before a polygamous neighbor.

    Coming down to later times, it is safe to say that there are a
million more women than men in christendom to-day; there are here five
millions of women who would like to marry but cannot, being denied one
of the fundamental rights of humanity by statutory law.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A large class of
men refuse to take upon themselves the cost and cares of matrimony,
preferring more free and cheaper indulgence. Of very many of these five
millions thus left to themselves, unmated, unsupported, forbidden to
become plural wives, Christian civilization makes prostitutes or
paupers. And this is the orthodox idea of the elevation of woman! Make
angels of light and happiness of one portion, while dooming the rest,
under the hard heel of social despotism, to the depths of misery and
despair. Nay, more: while the men are thus busied working upon the
affections of women, taking advantage of their loneliness and poverty,
and constantly adding to the numbers of the lost by seducing the pure
from the paths of respectability, their sisters, mothers, wives, and
daughters are applying the scourge with all their might to these
unfortunates, hoping thereby to gain further favor with the men by
showing how much better are they than their most foully wronged sisters.

    Such are the men, such the society, in which the foulest wrongs to
women are so universally and constantly committed—wrongs which would put
to blush savages, yea, and all the devils of darkness; such are the men
who wage war on the plural-wife system, which would give to this class
and all classes of women home and honorable alliance.

    Further than all this, polygamy claims that men or governments have
no natural or moral right to forbid the practice, pass laws against it,
and inflict punishments. Inherent human rights are above statutory law.
Governments have no right to pass laws against gambling, prostitution,
drunkenness, or any act of the individual resulting in injury only to
himself. He who harms another may be punished, not he who harms himself;
otherwise, who is to determine what is or what is not harmful? All men
and women are every day doing things harmful to themselves, but which no
one thinks of checking by legislation. By no line of logic can polygamy
be rightly placed in the

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

criminal category. In its worst aspect, it can only be called a vice.
Drunkenness is not a crime: it is a vice. Statutory law cannot justly
make criminal that which by the law of human rights is only a vice.
Governments may repress crime, but they never can uproot vice; and the
sooner legislators realize and act upon this truth, the fewer failures
they will have to record. Public sentiment and moral force are the only
agencies which can be brought against this class of evils with any hope
of success.

    The right and wrong of the matter, as usually discussed, are not the
right and wrong of nature and common sense, but of divine and human
enactment, variously interpreted and viewed from different standpoints.
The bible forbids prostitution, but permits polygamy; the supporters of
the bible and its civilization forbid polygamy, but permit prostitution.

    The Mormons are held to be a most unphilosophical sect, and yet the
sentiment against them is more un-philosophical than their doctrines or
practices. The American congress is not a Sunday-school, neither is it
within the province of government to establish and enforce a code of
ethics. Congress has no more right to legislate, against their consent,
for the territories than it has for the states. I do not know that all
Mormons hold to this opinion, but many of them do. The idea of political
nonage is only an idea; it is not a fact. Murder, theft, breach of
contract, malefeasance in office, unjust monopoly, cheating,
slave-holding, adulteration, bigamy, etc., are crimes to be punished by
law. Drunkenness, gambling, prostitution, and the like, are vices to be
uprooted by precept and example. A crime is an injury to one's neighbor;
a vice is an injury to one's self. I have no right to injure my
neighbor, but I have the right to do as I will with my own and myself,
howsoever foolish may be the act. Congress, indeed, would have its hands
full were it to undertake to pass laws to keep men from making fools of
themselves. If polygamy must be

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

placed in one category or the other, it must be denominated a vice, and
not a crime. If one man and three women contract to live in a connubial
relationship, neither God nor nature pronounces it a crime. In bigamy
the marriage contract is broken; in polygamy it is kept. Admit that
monogamy is best, that one man for one woman tends to the highest
culture, it still does not prove that coercion in morals is better than
precept and example. Is woman less chaste than in the days of feudalism,
now that she is less watched? If the law has the right to limit a man to
one wife, it may if it chooses deny him any wife, as many orders among
the Greeks and Armenians, the heathens and christians, have declared. If
one man is restricted by law to one woman, the least the law can do in
common justice is to compel every man to marry one woman. Why does not
the United States war upon the catholic priest or the unprincipled
debauchee, who by refusing to take a wife repudiates the laws of nature,
and sets an example which if universally followed would prove the
strangulation of the race? Better punish those who denaturalize
themselves rather than those who are too natural.

    This is what Utah polygamy says to civilization. <span
id="fr_561"></span>[20](#fn_561.md)

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

    In reply to the charge of disloyalty, of maintaining an
anti-American attitude toward the people of America, of endeavoring by
any illegal or indirect means to undermine the institutions of the
country

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

and eventually usurp the government, the Mormons say that it is not
true. It is not true that Mormons are not good citizens, law-abiding and
patriotic. Even when hunted down and robbed and butchered by the

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

enemies to their faith, they have not retaliated.—On this point they are
naturally very sore.—When deprived of those sacred rights given to them
in common with all American citizens, when disfranchised, their

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

homes broken up, their families scattered, the husband and father
seized, fined, and imprisoned, they have not defended themselves by
violence, but have left their cause to God and their country.

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

    Much has been said in terms of reproach against the unity and
brotherhood of the Mormons, or as it is more often denominated, their
exclusiveness or clannishness, as applied to their social, business, and
religious relations. It is said that they hold to one another, band
against all societies and interests except their own; that they hold all
the agricultural lands, coöperate in commerce and manufactures, vote all
one way, and so work into one another's hands in every way; that no
other people can stand up in competition with them.

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

    Grant it, they answer; is it a crime? May not people legally labor
hard, practise frugality, worship God after their own fashion, and vote
as they choose? Is this contrary to the free enlightenment of American
institutions?

    Of what are the people of the United States afraid, with their fifty
millions of free, intelligent, progressive men and women, that they
should deem it their duty to be seized with such a savage hate toward
this handful of poor and despised religionists? In the evolution of
society as an organism, the fittest is sure to remain. If this principle
be true, it is perfectly safe to let the Mormons alone. Their evil
practices, as well as those of their enemies, are sure in due time to be
dissipated by the ever-increasing enlightenment of

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

civilization. The best will remain, while the rest will be destroyed.

 

    As a remedy against the Mormon evil, many plans have been put forth.
"Send an army and wipe them out," say the unthinking masses. An army was
sent once, but when it came to Utah there was nothing at hand to wipe
out. But should an army go and find them there, it would hardly be
prepared to enter upon the wholesale slaughter of 140,000 men, women,
and children while in pursuit of their daily vocations. Education has
been urged. This means is already employed; but while there are gentile
schools, the Mormons still teach Mormonism, and the more they educate,
the stronger and more widely extended becomes their faith. Senator Hoar
suggested seizing the perpetual emigration fund, but this appeared too
much like robbery. Make marriage a civil compact, give the wife the
right of dower, and so make her less dependent on the husband, some have
said. Amend the constitution, prohibiting polygamy, others have urged.
But if congressional enactment fails, what can constitutional amendment
do? Admit Utah as a state, and let the people split into parties, and so
fight out their own issues. But they will not split into parties, is the
reply. If they were like other people, this might be the result; but
they are not like other people. For the people to differ from their
chiefs on matters of government, or on any other matters, would throw
them outside the category of Mormons. Such a thing cannot be. Their
government, ecclesiastical and civil, is a government of God; their
chief is God's prophet and vicegerent, and his will is God's will and
cannot be questioned.

    By the Edmunds act, approved March 22, 1882, congress made polygamy
punishable by disfranchisement, and a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars, with imprisonment for not more than three years, the children
to be deemed illegitimate. There have

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

been numerous convictions under this law, bringing serious injury upon
individuals, and greatly alarming the entire brotherhood. Many other
schemes have been urged. Cut up the territory and divide it among the
adjacent states; permit the wife to testify against her husband; compel
marriages to be registered; throw in more gentile population,
establishing milliners' shops for the women and whiskey-shops for the
men, so that the full force of civilization may be brought to bear upon
them. A proposed remedy is for congress to assume the political powers,
and govern the country by a commission of nine or thirteen members
appointed for that purpose, and which, the majority being always
gentiles, would adopt the necessary laws for the government of the
territory, instead of congress or a legislature. Executive and judicial
affairs would go on in the usual way; and as for the municipal, the
commission as a legislature could make such regulations as they pleased,
providing for the appointment of mayors by the governor if necessary. In
such an event there would not be held ally elections of any kind. A
board of five commissioners was appointed under act of congress of March
22, 1882, but nothing extraordinary came of it.

    In conclusion, it is scarcely necessary to say that an intelligent
and well-balanced mind, free from the bias of religion, and regarding
the well-being and refinement of the race as most greatly to be desired,
cannot look upon polygamy as conducive to the highest culture. On the
other hand, it may as truthfully be said that coercion is not consistent
with the highest type of morality, and that a social despotism, in the
name of freedom and pure republicanism, can become the severest of
tyrannies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_542"></span>[335:1](hou18.htm#fr_542.md) In 1853, Benjamin
Brown, high-priest, and pastor of the London, Reading, Kent, and Essex
conferences, published at Liverpool a tract entitled, *Testimonies for
the Truth; a Record of Manifestations of the Power of God, Miraculous
and Providential*, witnessed by him in his travels and experiences. The
author was a native of New York, and born in 1794. He was a firm
believer in latter-day revelations from God, and that the ancient gifts
of the gospel still remained, long before he joined the Mormons. He
labored long and in various places. He held property in Nauvoo when the
saints were driven out, and was obliged to take $250 for what was worth
$3,000. Afterward he underwent all the sufferings and vicissitudes of
the overland journey to Salt Lake. Mr Brown was an earnest and honest
man; his book is the record of his life, and is simple and attractive in
style and substance.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[335:2](hou18.htm#fr_543.md) Healing the sick.
Joseph early laid it down as a rule that all diseases and sickness among
them were to be cured by the elders, and by the use of herbs alone.
Physicians of the world were denounced as enemies to mankind, and the
use of their medicines was prohibited. Afterward, anointing with oil,
prayer, and laying on hands were resorted to in addition to the first
mentioned. Says Mrs Richards, 'In all sicknesses we used no medicines,
with the exception of herb teas that we ourselves prepared, trusting
exclusively to the efficacy of the anointing with oil and prayer.'
*Reminiscences*, MS., 34. Joseph said, 'All wholesome herbs God hath
ordained for the constitution, nature, and use of man. Every herb in the
season thereof, and every fruit in the season thereof.' The use of flesh
was not forbidden, but rather restricted to seasons of cold and famine.
All grain was pronounced good for man, but wheat was particularly
recommended with corn for the ox, oats for the horse, rye for fowls and
swine, and barley for all useful animals, and for mild drinks; as also
other grain. *Times and Seasons*, v. 736.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[336:3](hou18.htm#fr_544.md) Baptism, a
prerequisite to church membership, as well as to final salvation, to be
of avail, must be by immersion, and performed by one of the sect. The
person who is called of God, and has authority from Jesus Christ to
baptize, shall go down into the water with the person to be baptized,
and shall say, calling him or her by name: 'Having been commissioned of
Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the father, and of the son,
and of the holy ghost. Amen.' *Doctrine and Covenants*, 115, 118.
Baptisms are entered in the general church records, giving the name,
place, and date of birth, quorum, date of baptism, first time or
re-baptism, by whom baptized, when and by whom confirmed. *Deseret
News*, Feb. 22, 1851. In 1844, complaints were made that members of the
church, dismissed by the council, had been re-baptized by elders who
were themselves excluded, and declaring such baptisms invalid. *Times
and Seasons*, v. 458-9.

    In 1836, Joseph introduced the ceremony of anointing with
consecrated oil. He first anointed his father, who, having been blessed
by the first presidency, anointed them in turn, beginning with the
eldest. The bishops of Kirtland and Zion, together with their
counsellors, were next anointed, and afterward the presiding officers of
each quorum performed the ceremony on their subordinates, assisted in
some instances by the Smith brothers. Joseph describes the ceremony of
consecreting the oil, as follows: 'I took the oil in my left hand,
Father Smith being seated before me, and the remainder of the presidency
encircled him round about. We then stretched our right hands towards
heaven, and blessed the oil, and consecrated it in the name of Jesus
Christ.' *Mil. Star*, xv. 620. Olive-oil is commonly used. *Mrs
Richards, Reminiscences*, MS., 34. Many remarkable cures are mentioned.
A seaman, belonging to H. B. M. ship *Terror*, was rendered deaf and
dumb by a stroke of lightning, at Bermuda. Several years after, he was
baptized by elders in a canal in England, and instantly recovered both
speech and hearing. *Frontier Guardian*, Jan. 23, 1850. In 1840, a young
woman then living at Batavia, N.Y., who had been deaf and dumb for four
and one half years, was first restored to her hearing by the laying on
of the hands of the elders of the church, and a second ministration,
some time afterward, enabled her to speak. *Times and Seasons*, ii.
516-17. During the building of Nauvoo, nearly every one was attacked
with malarial fever, caused by breaking up the new land, and even the
prophet himself succumbed for a time. But hearing the voice of the Lord
calling on him, he arose and went through the camp healing all to whom
he drew near. *Woodruff (Mrs), Autobiog*., 2-3. Brigham declares he was
among the number healed at this time. *Mil. Star*, xxv. 646. While
Joseph was in the midst of his sick, an unbeliever, living a few miles
distant, came to him, beseeching him to come and heal his twin children,
who were near death's door. The prophet was unable to go himself, but
sent Wilford Woodruff in his place. Says the latter, 'He \[Joseph\] took
a red silk handkerchief out of his pocket and gave it to me, and told me
to wipe their faces with the handkerchief <span id="page_337">p.
337</span> when I administered to them, and they should be healed.' He
also said unto me: "As long as you will keep that handkerchief, it shall
remain a league between you and me." I went with the man, and did as the
prophet commanded me, and the children were healed. I have possession of
the handkerchief unto this day \[1881\].' *Leaves from my Journal*, 65.
F.D. Richards, who had been sick for several months, was baptized,
anointed, and confirmed; immediately after which he was restored to
health. Some time afterward, being then an elder, he cured a severe
toothache by touching the tooth with his finger. *Narrative*, MS.,
15-16. Mrs Richards’ brother, afterward Elder Snyder, was raised from a
sick-bed after having been baptized and administered to by Elder John E.
Page. Mrs Richards was taken by her brother from a sick-bed to a lake
from the surface of which ice more than a foot thick had been removed,
and there baptized, whereupon she immediately recovered. Similar cases
might be given by the score.

    Baptism for the dead is first alluded to by the prophet, who, in a
revelation dated Jan. 19, 1841, declares, 'A baptismal font there is not
upon the earth, that they, my saints, may be baptized for those who are
dead.' It is intimated that a reasonable time will be allowed in which
to build a temple and a permanent font, and that during this time a
temporary substitute for the font may be employed; but after the
completion of the temple, no baptisms for the dead will be of avail
unless conducted within the building. See *Doctrine and Covenants*, 392,
395. Brigham says he first heard of the new doctrine when he was in
Europe (1840), and that he believed in it before anything was said or
done about it in the church. *Times and Seasons*, vi. 954. Daniel Tyler
says the doctrine was first taught in Nauvoo, although Joseph told some
of the elders in Kirtland that it was part of the gospel, and would yet
be practised as such. *Juvenile Instructor*, xv. 56. He also says that
before other provision was made, many were baptized in the Mississippi
River. The first baptismal font, a temporary structure, intended for use
only until the completion of the temple, was erected in the basement of
that building, and dedicated on Nov. 8, 1841, Joseph being present and
Brigham delivering the address. Joseph thus describes the font: It is
constructed of pine staves, tongued and grooved, and is oval-shaped,
'sixteen feet long east and west, and twelve feet wide, seven feet high
from the foundation, the basin four feet deep; the mouldings of the cap
and base are formed of beautiful carved work in antique style. The sides
are finished with panel-work. A flight of stairs in the north and south
sides lead up and down into the basin, guarded by a side railing. The
font stands upon twelve oxen, four on each side and two at each end,
their heads shoulders, and fore legs projecting out from under the font;
they are carved out of oak plank, glued together, and copied after the
most beautiful five-year-old steer that could be found in the country,
and they are an excellent striking likeness of the original; the horns
were geometrically formed after the most perfect horn that could be
procured. The oxen and the mouldings were carved by Elder Elijah
Fordham, from the city of New York, the work occupying eight months. The
whole was enclosed in a temporary frame building. *Mil. Star*, xviii.
744. On Sept. 6, 1842, Joseph writes to the church that all baptisms
must be recorded by a person appointed for the purpose, and whose duty
it will be to note every detail of the ceremony in each case. One of the
officials is to be appointed in each ward, and his returns properly
certified to are to be forwarded to the general recorder, who will enter
them on the church records, together with the names of all witnesses,
etc., and finally add his own certificate as to the genuineness of the
signature of the ward recorder. This detail is necessary for the proper
identification hereafter of those baptized, for the authority for which
the prophet quotes *Revelations*, xx. 12. 'And I saw the <span
id="page_338">p. 338</span> dead, small and great, stand before God; and
the books were opened,' etc. He also states that it was revealed to him
on Sept. 1, 1842, that a general recorder must be appointed. *Mil.
Star*, xx. 5-6; *Doctrine and Covenants*, 409-13. For the ceremony
itself, he finds warrant in *1st Cor*., xv. 29. 'Else what shall they do
who are baptized for the dead? If the dead rise not at all, why are they
then baptized for the dead?'

    Confirmation follows baptism, with frequently an interval of a few
days. Baptism may take place on any day in the week, and the
confirmation be deferred until the church assembles on the following, or
even a later, Sunday. Two or more elders commonly attend, all taking
part in the ceremony. Mrs Stenhouse thus describes her own confirmation:
'Four elders placed their hands solemnly upon my head, and one of them
said: "Fanny, by virtue of the authority vested in me, I confirm you a
member of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints; and inasmuch
as you have been obedient to the command of God, through his servants,
and have been baptized for the remission of your sins, I say unto you
that those sins are remitted. And in the name of God I bless you, and
say unto you, that inasmuch as you are faithful and obedient to the
teachings of the priesthood, and seek the advancement of the kingdom,
there is no good thing that your heart can desire that the Lord will not
give unto you. You shall have visions and dreams, and angels shall visit
you by day and by night. You shall stand in the temple in Zion, and
administer to the saints of the most high God. You shall speak in
tongues and prophecy; and the Lord shall bless you abundantly, both
temporally and spiritually. These blessings I seal upon your head,
inasmuch as you shall be faithful; and I pray heaven to bless you; and
say unto you, be thou blessed, in the name of the father, and of the
son, and of the holy ghost. Amen."' *Englishwoman in Utah*, 19-20.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[338:4](hou18.htm#fr_545.md) The gift of tongues
is the power to speak in a strange language, but not to translate. It
first appeared about 1830, when it was pronounced of the devil. Howe
says it was revived in the early part of 1833, and that at one meeting
Joseph passed around the room laying his hand upon each one, and
speaking as follows: 'Ak man, oh son, oh man, ah ne commene en holle
goste en haben en glai hosanne en holle goste en esac milkea jeremiah,
ezekiel, Nephi, Lehi, St John,' etc. *Mormonism Unveiled*, 132-6. In
this year, it was suggested that 'no prophecy spoken in tongues should
be made public, for this reason: many who pretend to have the gift of
interpretation are liable to be mistaken, and do not give the true
interpretation of what is spoken;… but if any speak in tongues a word of
exhortation or doctrine, or the principles of the gospel, etc., let it
be interpreted for the edification of the church.' *Times and Seasons*,
vi. 865. The gift was not confined to men; many women were noted for
eloquence when thus inspired. Says Mrs Stenhouse of a Sister Ellis: 'Her
hands were clenched, and her eyes had that wild and supernatural glare
which is never seen save in cases of lunacy or intense feverish
excitement. Every one waited breathlessly, listening to catch what she
might say; you might have heard a pin drop. They \[her utterances\]
seemed to me chiefly the repetition of the same syllables, something
like a child repeating la, la, la, le, lo; ma, ma, ma, mi, ma; dele,
dele, dele, hela; followed, perhaps, by a number of sounds strung
together, which could not be rendered in any shape by the pen.'
*Englishwoman in Utah*, 27-8. Says Orson Hyde: 'We believe in the gift
of the holy ghost being enjoyed now as much as it was in the apostles'
days, and that it is imparted by the laying on of hands of those in
authority; and that the gift of tongues, and also the gift of prophecy,
are gifts of the spirit, and are obtained through that medium.'
*Frontier Guardian*, Dec. 12, 1849. Mrs Stenhouse remarks that 'in later
days, the exercise of this gift has been discouraged by the elders, and
especially by Brigham.' Going to the Lion House one day, she was blessed
by one of Brigham's wives, <span id="page_339">p. 339</span> and the
blessing interpreted by another wife; the latter, however, cautioned her
not to repeat what had occurred, for 'Brother Brigham does not like to
hear of these things.' *Englishwoman in Utah*, 29. Tullidge mentions the
names of many women who were distinguished as possessing this gift, and
relates an instance of a party whose wagon was surrounded by Indians,
escaping with their lives and property; the captors being induced to
abandon their prize by Jane Grover, a girl of seventeen, who addressed
them in their own language. *Women of Mormondom*, 474-8.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[340:5](hou18.htm#fr_546.md) The theory of blood
atonement is that for certain sins the blood of the transgressor must be
shed to save his soul. Among these sins are apostasy, the shedding of
innocent blood, and unfaithfulness to marriage obligations on the part
of the wife. Says Brigham, in a discourse delivered in Salt Lake City:
'There are sins which then commit for which they cannot receive
forgiveness in this world, or in that which is to come, and if they had
their eyes open to their true condition, they would be perfectly willing
to have their blood spilled upon the ground, that the smoke thereof
might ascend to heaven as an offering for their sins; and the smoking
incense would atone for their sins; whereas, if such is not the case,
they will stick to them and remain upon them in the spirit world. I
know, when you hear my brethren telling about cutting people off from
the earth, that you consider it is strong doctrine; but it is to save
them, not to destroy them…I do know that there are sins committed, of
such a nature that if the people did understand the doctrine of
salvation they would tremble because of their situation. And
furthermore, I know that there are transgressors who, if they knew
themselves and the only condition upon which they can obtain
forgiveness, would beg of their brethren to shed their blood, that the
smoke thereof might ascend to God as an offering to appease the wrath
that is kindled against them, and that the law might have its course. I
will say further: I have had men come to me and offer their lives to
atone for their sins…There are sins that can be atoned for by an
offering upon an altar, as in ancient days; and there are sins that the
blood of a lamb, of a calf, or of turtle-doves cannot remit, but they
must be atoned for by the blood of the man.' And at another time: 'All
mankind love themselves, and let these principles be known by an
individual, and he would be glad to have his blood shed. That would be
loving themselves, even unto an eternal exaltation. Will you love your
brothers or sisters likewise when they have committed a sin that cannot
be alerted for without the shedding of their blood? Will you love that
man or woman well enough to shed their blood? That is what Jesus Christ
meant…I could refer you to plenty of instances where men have been
righteously slain in order to atone for their sins. I have seen scores
and hundreds of people for whom there would have been a chance in the
last resurrection if their lives had been taken and their blood spilled
on the ground as a smoking incense to the almighty…I have known a great
many men who have left this church for whom there is no chance whatever
for exaltation; but if their blood had been spilled it would have been
better for them. This is loving our neighbor as ourselves; if he needs
help, help him; and if he wants salvation, and it is necessary to spill
his blood on the earth in order that he may be saved, spill it.'
*Deseret News*, Oct. 1, 1856, Feb. 18, 1857. Following Brigham's lead,
Heber C. Kimball and Jedediah M. Grant taught the same doctrine during
the religious revival, or so-called reformation, in Utah, in 1856-7, of
which more later, Grant being the most vehement of the three. The reader
will find these discourses reported at length in the *Deseret News*. the
doctrine is very clearly explained in *Penrose's* <span id="page_341">p.
341</span> *Blood Atonement*, passim. See also *Lee's Morm*., 282-3;
*Morm. Proph*., 157-60; *Young's Wife No. 19*, 182-99; *Paddock's La
Tour*, 305-8; *Bertrand's Mem Morm*., 139-72, 250-8, 296-316.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[341:6](hou18.htm#fr_547.md) In regard to the two
priesthoods, the Melchisedek and the Aaronic, or Levitical, all
authority in the church is subordinate to the first, which holds the
right of presidency and has power over all the offices in the church.
The presidency of the high-priesthood of this order has the right; to
officiate in all the offices of the church. High-priests are authorized
to officiate m any lower positions in the church, as well as in their
own office. Elders are of this priesthood, and are authorized to
officiate instead of high-priests, in the absence of the latter. The
twelve apostles are charged with the duty of ordaining all the
subordinate officers of the church, and also with its missionary work.
Together they form a quorum whose authority equals that of the first
presidency, but action by either body must be unanimous. A majority may
form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to assemble the
whole body. They also constitute a travelling, presiding high-council,
under the direction of the presidency of the church, and it is their
duty to ordain ministers in all large branches. The seventies are also
missionaries—assistants to the twelve, and united they are equal in
authority with the twelve.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[342:7](hou18.htm#fr_548.md) About 1834, Joseph
Smith had a revelation to the effect that it was the will of the Lord
that every father should bless his own children, and that patriarchs
should be set apart to bless those without a father in the church. This
revelation was due to an expressed desire on the part of Brigham Young's
father to bless his own children before dying, after the manner of the
patriarchs of old. *Young's Wife No. 19*, 581. Several years before
this, it had been directed that every member of the church having
children should bring them to the elders before the church, who were to
lay their hands upon them in the name of Jesus Christ, and bless them.
*Doctrine and Covenants*, 72. During the life of the first
patriarch—Jos. Smith, sen.—these blessings were nominally free to the
recipients. A high-council held at Kirtland in Sept. 1835 decided that
when the patriarch was occupied in blessing the church, he should be
paid at the rate of ten dollars a week, and his expenses; also that
Frederick G. Williams be appointed to attend blessing meetings, and
record the proceedings, for which services he should receive the same
compensation. The payment of twelve dollars for a book in which to
record the blessings caused discussion in this council, and brother
Henry Green, who had intimated that a suitable book could be procured
for less money, was excluded from the church for his presumption. *Mil.
Star*, xv. 308-9. In Jan. 1836, Smith, sen., was anointed with oil by
the prophet, blessed by each of the presidency in turn, and was
thenceforth known as Father Smith. *Id*., 620. In 1837, the pay of the
patriarch was fixed at a dollar and fifty cents a day, and that of the
recorder at ten cents for each 100 words. *Mil. Star*, xvi. 109. When
Hyrum became patriarch, says the author of *Young's Wife No. 19*, 581,
the demand for blessings had so increased that one dollar each was
charged for them; and in 1875 the price had advanced to two dollars.
Upon the death of his father in 1840, Hyrum Smith succeeded to the
office of patriarch, pursuant to a revelation entailing it on the eldest
son. The revelation is dated in Jan. 1841. *Doctrine and Covenants*,
305-6; *Mil. Star*, xviii. 363. The following notice appears in *Times
and Seasons*, Nov. 1, 1841: 'The brethren are hereby notified that our
well-beloved brother, Hyrum Smith, patriarch of the church, has erected
a comfortable office opposite his dwelling-house \[in Nauvoo\], where
himself, together with his scribe and recorder, James Sloan, will attend
regularly every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, during the entire day, or
upon any other day if urgent circumstances require it, to perform the
duties of his high and holy calling. A copy of the blessings can be
received immediately after being pronounced, so that the brethren who
live <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> at a distance can have it to take
with them.' Hyrum's successor was his brother William, who was
disfellowshipped in 1845, John Smith, brother to the prophet, being
ordained patriarch over the church, and holding that office until his
death in 1854. In the following year Hyrum's son John was ordained
patriarch, and since that date has been sustained in his office at each
successive conference. A child is first blessed when eight days old, and
again so soon as the mother is able to present her child on a regular
fast-day. The first Thursday in each month is set apart for fasting.
*Mrs Richards’ Reminiscences*, MS., 34-5. The second ceremony is usually
attended by both parents, and in addition to a blessing, the child
receives its name. Each birthday it is customary for the parents to hold
a family gathering, when the child is again blessed, and prayers offered
for its welfare. When eight years old, the child is baptized. See
*Horace's Migrations*, MS., 37. The blessings are not only pronounced,
but also written out. *Id*., 34. 'These blessings are rather wonderful
affairs; they promise all sorts of things, in a vague, indefinite way,
if only the recipient proves faithful. Some are assured they shall never
taste death, but live until Christ comes, and be caught up to meet him
in the air; others are assured that they are to have the privilege of
redeeming their dead so far back that there shall not be a broken link
in the chain. Absurd as this all seems, there are hundred of saints who
believe that every word shall be fulfilled.' *Young's Wife No. 19*, 581.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[343:8](hou18.htm#fr_549.md) Hall says there is a
class of women, mothers in Israel, whose business it is to instruct
females as to their duty in matters not suitable to be taught from the
stand. *Mormonism Exposed*, 39-44.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[343:9](hou18.htm#fr_550.md) Early in 1833 the
first presidency was established, with Joseph Smith at the head, his
associates in the management of affairs being Sidney Rigdon and
Frederick G. Williams. The revelation creating this trium virate is
dated March 8th, and in it Joseph's coadjutors are instructed first to
finish the translation of the prophets, and afterward preside over the
affairs of the church and the school. *Times and Seasons*, v. 736-7.
William Hall, who was a member of the church for seven years,
erroneously states that the presidency at first consisted of Smith,
Rigdon, and William Law. *Abominations*, 8. At a conference held in
Sept. 1837, Joseph appealed to the church to ascertain if he was still
regarded as its head, when the vote was unanimous. He then introduced
Rigdon and Williams as his councillors. According to the minutes of the
conference, Williams was not accepted at first, but this action appears
to have been rescinded afterward. *Mil. Star*, xvi. 56. Oliver Cowdery,
Jos. Smith, sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith were accepted as assistant
councillors, and these seven were henceforth to be regarded the heads of
the church. At a general conference of the branch of the church at Far
West in Nov. 1837, the action of the Kirtland conference was sustained
so far as Smith and Rigdon were concerned, but Williams was rejected.
Hyrum Smith was unanimously chosen in Williams’ place. *Mil. Star*, xvi.
106-7. At a conference held at Far West in April 1838, the first
presidency was appointed to sign the licenses of the official members of
the church. In Jan. 1841, Joseph had a revelation to the effect that he
was presiding elder over all the church, translator, revelator, a seer,
and prophet; and that his councillors were Sidney Rigdon and William
Law. These three were to constitute <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> a
quorum and first presidency, to receive the oracles for the whole
church. Law's selection was to fill the vacancy caused by the
appointment of Hyrum Smith to be patriarch. *Mil. Star*, xviii. 363. In
this same month Joseph notified the recorder of Hancock county that he
(Joseph) had been elected sole trustee of the church of Jesus Christ of
latter-day saints by the church at Nauvoo, to hold office during life.
*Id*., 373. Smith, Rigdon, and Law were continued in office by the
annual conference, convened in April 1843. After the murder of the
Smiths in 1844, the first presidency lapsed, and for more than three
years the church was governed by the quorum of the twelve apostles, of
which Brigham was president. At a meeting of the twelve apostles,
high-council, and high-priests at Nauvoo, in August 1844, Sidney Rigdon
offered himself as guardian to the church, claiming that his action was
in obedience to revelation. Young opposed Rigdon's claims, and the
assembly decided that the twelve should govern the church, with Young at
their head. *Mil. Star*, xxv. 215-17, 263-4. In Dec. 1847 Brigham Young,
Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards were chosen to constitute the
first presidency. *Juv. Inst*., xiv. 128. Young died in 1877, and the
presidency remained vacant until October 1880, when John Taylor was
chosen, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as councillors.
*Marshall, Through America*, 161. This conference lasted five days.
*S. L. Tribune*, Oct. 11, 1880. On the death of the president the quorum
is dissolved, and its members, as a presidency, have no status.
*Richards’ Narr*., MS., 51.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[344:10](hou18.htm#fr_551.md) On Feb. 14, 1835,
the church at Kirtland met for the purpose of choosing and ordaining the
twelve apostles. The business occupied several days. Briefly, the
ceremonies were as follows: The assemblage consented to accept the names
presented by the three witnesses who had been appointed to make the
selection. P.P. Pratt says, in his *Autobiog*., 127-28, the ceremonies
were performed by Smith, Whitmer, and Cowdery, and that they acted in
accordance with the revelation of June 1829; but in the history of Jos.
Smith, *Mil. Star*, Mar. and Apr. 1853, the three witnesses only are
mentioned. Martin Harris' name does not appear in the revelation
referred to. See *Doctrine and Covenants*, 190-2. In an article by 'R.
A.' in the *Juv. Inst*., xiv. 128, the selection is accredited to the
three witnesses, who are mentioned by name. As Pratt was one of the
ordained, it would seem that his account should be reliable. Each
candidate came forward as summoned, and in return received a blessing,
and a charge from one of the three. The order of ordination was as
follows: On Feb. 14th, Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, and Heber C.
Kimball. On the next day, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke Johnson, Wm
E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith. On Feb. 21st, Parley P.
Pratt, Orson Pratt, and Thos B. Marsh, who were absent on a mission,
were ordained upon their return to Kirtland, which occurred later. *Mil.
Star*, xv. 206-12. Shortly after, the names were arranged according to
seniority, when they stood, Marsh, Patten, Young, Kimball, Hyde,
McLellin, P. P. Pratt, Luke Johnson, Smith, O. Pratt, Boynton, and L. E.
Johnson. Four of the above apostatized in 1838, viz.: McLellin, the
Johnsons, and Boynton; John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and
Willard Richards were appointed instead. Shortly after this, Marsh, the
<span id="page_345">p. 345</span> president of the twelve, apostatized,
and in 1838 Patten was killed, which left Young at the head of the list,
and he became president of the twelve. Geo. A. Smith was ordained in
1839, and Lyman Wight not long after. In 1844, according to Elder
Phelps, the following names were on the roll: Young, Kimball, Parley P.
Pratt, Hyde, Richards, Taylor, William Smith, Woodruff, George A. Smith,
Orson Pratt, Page, and Wight. During this year Wm Smith and Page
apostatized, and were replaced by Amasa M. Lyman and Ezra T. Benson.
Early in 1845, Young, Kimball, and Richards were chosen to the first
presidency, and Wight was disfellowshipped for apostasy; the vacancies
thus caused were filled by appointing Chas C. Rich, Lorenzo and Erastus
Snow, and Franklin D. Richards. In 1857, Geo. Q. Cannon was appointed,
vice P. P. Pratt, deceased. In 1867, Lyman was dropped and Jos. F. Smith
appointed. In 1868, Geo. A. Smith became one of the first presidency,
and Brigham Young, jun., succeeded him. Albert Carrington was appointed
in 1869 in place of Benson, deceased, and Moses Thatcher in 1879, vice
Hyde, deceased in 1878; which left the twelve in the following order:
John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, Chas C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow,
Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young,
Joseph F. Smith, Albert Carrington, Moses Thatcher, Pratt being the only
remaining member of the original twelve. *Juv. Inst*., xiv. 128-9. The
vacancies caused by the elevation of John Taylor to the presidency in
1839, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as councillors, were
partially filled by the appointment of Francis M. Lyman and John H.
Smith. *S. L. Tribune*, Oct. 11, 1880. Orson Pratt died Oct. 1881, and a
year later Geo. Teasdale and Heber J. Grant were elected. *Handbook of
Ref*., 89-90. Up to 1877, the twelve received no pay for their services;
but the conference of Oct. voted $1,500 a year to each apostle. 'This is
the first sum that has ever been publicly appropriated to any council of
the church for the performance of their duties to the people. When I
went to Europe in 1866, I borrowed the means and gave my note; on my
return I had to pay back my indebtedness.' *Richards’ Narr*., MS.,
59-60.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[345:11](hou18.htm#fr_552.md) In 1845 was issued
at New York and Liverpool, *Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; to all the Kings of the
World; to the President of the Uuited States of Ammerica; to the
Governors of the several states, and to the rulers and people of all
nations*, Greeting, 'Know ye that the kingdom of God has come,' etc. The
tract goes on to say that 'Jehovah has been pleased once more to speak
from the heavens,' by which means the apostleship of Christ has been
restored, in preparation for his coming, which is now near at hand. Then
are recited the leading points of faith, with allusions to the history
of the church, and calls to repentance.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[347:12](hou18.htm#fr_553.md) In February 1835,
Joseph Smith, with the aid of the recently appointed apostles, proceeded
to organize two quorums of the seventies, whose duties were to assist in
the missionary work of the church. Each quorum had seven presidents, and
these constituted the councils of the two organizations. Joseph
Youngsen, who gives an account of the seventies, gives the names of the
presidents of the first quorum only, as follows: Hazen Aldrich, Joseph
Young, Levi W. Hancock, Leonard Rich, Zebedee Coltrin, Lyman Sherman,
and Sylvester Smith. After noting the changes in the interval, he states
that in 1878 the presidents were Young, sen., Hancock, Henry Herriman,
Albert P. Rockwood, Horace S. Eldredge, Jacob Gates, and John Van Cott.
*Hist. of Organ. of Seventies*, 1-8. In an account of the dedication of
their hall at Nauvoo, in 1844, it is stated there were fifteen
quorums—one thousand and fifty in all, if each quorum was full. *Times
and Seasons*, vi. 794.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[347:13](hou18.htm#fr_554.md) For act of
incorporation of Mormon church, 1851, see Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866),
108; *S.L.C. Contributor*, ii. 270; number and wealth of churches,
*Seventh Census Rept*, 1851-2, 45; prayer in the family, *Robinson's
Sinners and Sailors*, 243-4; church property, and law regulating it,
*Richards’ Narr*., MS., 83; church government, *Ward's Husband in Utah*,
16-17; *Mil. Star*, iii. 67; positions of church officials, *Id*., xv.
709. As showing the relative standing of the church dignitaries, the
order of voting, as prescribed at the conference which elected Taylor to
the presidency in 1880, is given. The twelve apostles and their
councillor's; the patriarchs; presidents of stakes and their
councillors, and the high-councils; the high-priests; the seventies; the
elders; the bishops and their councillors; the lesser
priesthood—priests, teachers, and deacons. The members of each order
voted standing and with the right hand uplifted, and finally the
congregation voted in tire same manner. *S. L. City Tribune*, Oct. 11,
1880. On faith and doctrine, see *Jaques’ Church of Jesus Christ*,
passim; *Hand-book of Reference*, passim; *Jaques’ Catechism*, passim;
*Book of Doctrine and Covenants*, passim; *Richards’ and Little's
Compendium*, passim; *Articles of Our Faith*, passim; *Pearl of Great
Price*, passim; *Times and Seasons*, passim; *Millenial Star*, passim;
*Deseret News*, passim; *Moffat's Catechism*, passim; *Pratt's
Persecutions*, passim; *Pratt's Voice of Warning*, passim; *Reynolds’
Book of Abraham*, passim; and many other books, pamphlets, and
periodicals by various members and dignitaries of the church.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[348:14](hou18.htm#fr_555.md) The standing
high-council at the stakes of Zion forms a quorum equal in authority in
the affairs of the church, in all its decisions, to the quorum of the
presidency, or to the travelling high-council. Each order is governed as
follows: the seventy, by seven presidents, one of whom presides over the
other six; and as many additional seventies may be organized as the
increase of the church shall demand. The president of the high-priests
is to preside over the whole church; the president of the elders
presides over ninety-six elders; the president of the Aaronic priesthood
over forty-eight priests; the president of the teachers over twenty-four
teachers, and the president of the deacons over twelve deacons. Should
the president of the church transgress, he is to be tried before the
common council of the church.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[349:15](hou18.htm#fr_556.md) Upon the matter of
tithing, Joseph Smith in 1831 had three several revelations, each
containing a clause requiring money and other property to be set apart
for general use in the church. The first was received in Feb., the
second in May, and the last in Aug. See *Times and Seasons*, iv. 369; v.
416, 466. But it was not until several years later that an organized
system was established, by revelation dated Far West, July 8, 1838. See
*Doctrine and Covenants*, 382-3. During the progress of settlements at
Far West, the question of taxation was brought up and referred to the
prophet, who inquired of the Lord, and received answer that all surplus
property must be turned over to the bishop as the first step, after
which one lentil of each annual interest was also to be paid. These
payments were to be devoted to the building of a place of worship, and
for the debts of the presidency. In the *Millennial Star*, xxv. 474, it
is denied that the priesthood receive any support from the tithing fund,
and asserted that it is expended for general purposes solely, such as
public buildings, roads, assisting immigration. The twelve apostles, in
an epistle dated Nauvoo, Dec. 13, 1841, declare that the tithing
required is 'one tenth of all any one possessed at the commencement of
the building of the temple, and one tenth part of all his increase from
that time till the completion of the same, whether it be money, or
whatever he be blessed with. Many in this place are laboring every tenth
day for the house, and this is the tithing of their income, for they
have nothing else.' *Times and Seasons*, iii. 626. Says William Hall:
'When I came to Illinois, I gave, as was required, one tenth of the
amount of my whole estate to be appropriated to the building of the
temple. After this, annually, I gave one tenth of the products of my
farm; even the chickens, cabbages, and other vegetables in kind were
turned over, with a like share of the grain.' *Mormonism Exposed*, 6.
Mrs Stenhouse, during her first winter in Salt Lake City, made bonnets
for Brigham Young's wives, for which a bill of $250 was presented to
Young, when the latter gave orders that the amount should be credited to
the Stenhouses for tithing. *Englishwoman in Utah*, 187-8. There are two
colonies of Mormons in Arizona that are free from territorial and county
taxes. They are so isolated that the cost of collecting amounts to more
than the taxes. They do not escape tithes, however. *Elko (Nev.) Daily
Independent*, Jan. 28, 1882. During the construction of the railroad
through Utah, Mormon agents collected tithings from the railroad
laborers. *Salt Lake Reporter*, Feb. 9, 1869, in *S. F. Times*, Feb. 19,
1869. Should a laborer be idle thirty days, the tithing office claims
three <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> days from him, on the grounds
that he may do as he pleases with twenty-seven days, but he has no right
to idle away three days belonging to the Lord. *Vedette*, in *San José
Mercury*, Mar. 14, 1867. Says Richards: 'If they do not pay their
tithes, nothing is done to compel them to do it; they are only reminded
of the case, as with neglect to attend meeting, or of any other duty.'
*Narr*., MS., 60-1. At the conference held at Salt Lake City on April 6,
1880, it was reported that the total tithing receipts for the year
ending Dec. 31, 1879, were $458,333; which amount it had cost
$13,956.75—paid the bishops—to collect. *S. L. C. Tribune*, April 7,
1880. This report includes only the branches of the church in Utah.
Coyner, in a letter to the *Boston Educational Journal*, dated S. L.
City, Nov. 20, 1878, states that the church lies an income of about
$1,000,000 from tithing. Numerous complaints are made from the church's
pulpits against delinquents who have failed to pay. In a book of
travels, entitled *My First Holiday*, Boston, 1881, Caroline H. Dall
wrongly asserts that the Scandinavian Mormons refuse to pay tithes. In
almost any number of the *Deseret News* the reader may find a notice
calling upon delinquents to pay their tithing. In the issue of May 14,
1853, the bishop within whose jurisdiction a saw-mill is in operation is
reminded that lumber is wanted at the public yard; and in the number of
July 20, 1854, the first presidency calls on every bishop throughout the
territory to furnish at once lists showing who have paid and who still
owe. In a speech by Brigham, April 7, 1873, he said: 'When I reached
here I could not pay one tenth, I could not pay my surplus, I could not
give my all, for I had nothing.' *Deseret News*, April 23, 1873.
Finally, at the jubilee conference, held in celebration of the
semi-centennial of the church's organization, one half of the delinquent
tithes throughout the whole church, the amount being about $75,900, was
remitted. The deserving poor of the church were further assisted on this
occasion by the gift of 6,000 head of milch-cows and sheep, and a loan
of about 34,000 bushels of wheat until after harvest, without interest.
*Circulars from the Twelve Apostles*, S. L. City, Apr. 16, 1880.

    If tithing dues are satisfied by manual labor, the workman is paid
from the public stores at rates which, though fixed from time to time,
are probably never so low as those paid in ready money elsewhere.
Captain Burton copies a price-current list for 1860, too long for me to
repeat here, but which will be referred to again elsewhere, and remarks
that wheat is quoted at $1.50 per bushel, more than double its current
value at the time in the valley of the Mississippi. *City of the
Saints*, 389. Mrs Waite states that when the poor clamored, in 1862-3,
because the tithing-office price of flour was $6 per hundred, they were
assured that though flour would undoubtedly still advance in price, the
cost to them would be no greater. But the following winter, when, owing
to the demand from the mining regions of Idaho and elsewhere, flour rose
rapidly in price, the tithing-office charged $12 per hundred. This
caused so great an excitement that Brigham deemed it necessary to
interfere, and the price was reduced to $6 again. It is complained in
the *Deseret News* of Jan. 10, 1852, that merchants are paying 33 per
cent more for butter than tithing-house rates, and that this action had
drawn the saints away from the tithing-house, and thus forced the
laborers on the temple to eat their bread without butter. This was in
the midst of winter, when such action might not be altogether
unexpected; but we find six months later another complaint, reporting
that from March 29th to July 11th there had only been received 5,115 3/4
pounds of butter, 2,534½ of cheese, and 1,182½ dozens of eggs, and
inquiring how fast the work would proceed at this rate of supply. *Id*.,
July 24, 1852. The revelation establishing tithing was followed <span
id="page_351">p. 351</span> ten days later by another, in which it was
declared that the church fund should be disposed of by a council
composed of the first presidency, the bishop and his council, and the
high-council. This revelation, which is not given in the earliest
editions of *Doctrine and Covenants*, will be found, however, on p. 383
of the edition (if 1876, and also in the *Mil. Star*, xvi. 183. The
twelve, in an epistle dated Nauvoo, Dec. 13, 1841, direct that all money
and other property designed for tithings be paid to President Joseph
Smith, trustee in trust. *Times and Seasons*, iii. 627. Smith had been
chosen to this office some time before by a general conference, at
Quincy, Ill. *Id*., ii. 579. After Smith, each president has held the
position in turn. W. Richards, editor of the *Deseret News*, describes
the system of accounts in use at the general tithing-office, in his
number of Nov. 29, 1851. A debtor and credit account was kept on a
ledger, with all persons who paid tithing. When an account was settled
in full, the name was transferred to the general tithing record, or the
book of 'The Law of the Lord,' and a certificate of non-in-debtedness
given to the person paying, which was evidence in case of a demand from
the bishop of his ward. Four kinds of certificates were issued at this
time: one for property tithing due previous to Sept. 10, 1851; one for
property tithing due in accordance with the vole of a conference of the
date mentioned; and one each for labor and produce tithing. These were
all for the year 1851, after which only the labor and produce tithes
would be required until a future conference should authorize a new levy.
the business of appraising property belongs of right to the presiding
bishop, but he may send one of his clerks to attend to the matter. It
has been charged against Joseph Smith that his entire wealth was
acquired by the diversion of tithes. The prophet, at his own estimate,
had property worth one million dollars about the time of his death. He
was then at the head of affairs in planning and laying out the city of
Nauvoo. His estimates, based upon his faith in the prosperity of the
city, may have been not unreasonable; but with the crash of the falling
walls of his temple came ruin to his estate. As the general conduct of
the church under Brigham was peaceful, and therefore progressive
compared with the disastrous rule of his predecessor, so opportunities
increased, not only for augmenting private fortunes, but for the
circulation of scandal. A writer in the *Salt Lake Tribune* of June 25,
1879, asserts that during Brigham's term of office he received about
$13,000,000 in tithes, of which 'about $9,000,000 was squandered on his
family,' and dying, left the remainder to be quarrelled over by his
heirs and assigns, including the church. In July 1859 Horace Greeley
visited Brigham, who said: 'I am the only person in the church who has
not a regular calling apart from the church's service, and I never
received one farthing from her treasury. If I obtain anything from the
tithing-house, I am charged with and pay for it, just as any one else
would…I am called rich, and consider myself worth $250,000; but no
dollar of it was ever paid me by the church, nor for any service as a
minister of the everlasting gospel. I lost nearly all I had when we were
broken up in Missouri and driven from that state. I was nearly stripped
again when Joseph Smith was murdered, and we were driven from Illinois;
but nothing was ever made up to me by the church, nor by any one. I
believe I know how to acquire property, and how to take care of it.'
*Overland Journey to California*, 213-14. The governor, in his message
to the legislature in 1882, stated that tithing should be prohibited.
The message was referred to a committee, which reported that the
question being one of a purely religious character did not call for
legislative action. 'The payment of tithing, like contributions for
missionary, charitable, <span id="page_352">p. 352</span> and other
church purposes, by the members of other religious bodies, is clearly an
ecclesiastical matter, with which, as law-makers, we have nothing
whatever to do, so long as the free exercise thereof does not interfere
with the rights and liberties of others. Tithing is not, as we
understand it, a new doctrine, for, as a religious privilege and duty,
Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedek about four thousand years ago. We are
not aware, however, that exactions of tithings are made in this
territory, even by ecclesiastical authority; but supposing they were,
there is no law by which payment can be enforced, nor is it likely there
ever will be, for it is a matter not within the constitutional province
of legislative enactment. If any citizen in the territory feels
aggrieved by reason of the payment of tithes or other church donations,
he holds the remedy in his own hands by simply renouncing connection
with any religious body requiring such donations.'

<span id="fn_557"></span>[353:16](hou18.htm#fr_557.md) Gentile marriage and
divorce are not recognized as valid in the Mormon church. In its early
days, the church had no marriage ordinances of its own, and the
requirements, conditions, and ceremonies incident to the rite were
similar to those of the various protestant sects. Nor had it officials
legally qualified to marry, other, perhaps, than a few such men as
Sidney Rigdon, wire, having been duly appointed to preside over churches
of other denominations, were still competent to join in legal marriage.
In 1836, when the church was three years old and the Kirtland temple
about to be dedicated, we find Joseph petitioning the court of Medina
county, Ohio, for licenses permitting his elders to perform marriage
ceremonies, which authority had been refused them by the Geauga county
court. *Mil. Star*, xv. 708.

    Later, when the church had gained power, the result of more complete
organization, Joseph announced, as its belief respecting marriage, that
it 'should be solemnized in a public meeting, or feast, prepared for
that purpose,' and that the celebrant should be 'a presiding
high-priest, bishop, elder, or priest.' But no prohibition was issued
against marriage by any other authority. Neither were church-members
forbidden to marry out of the church, though any so doing would be
considered weak in the faith. In the edition of *Doctrine and
Covenants*, published at S. L. City in 1876, a revelation of the
prophet's purporting to explain 1st Cor., vii. 14, is construed as
forbidding marriages between believers and unbelievers. Ann Eliza Webb,
who was twice married according to Mormon practice, once by Brigham, and
afterward to him, thus describes the ceremonies: After registration,
which includes name, age, place of birth, with county, state, or
country, 'we went before Brigham Young, who was waiting for us,' and who
asked, 'Do you, Brother James Dee, take Sister Ann Eliza Webb by the
right hand, to receive her unto yourself, to be your lawful and wedded
wife, and you to be her lawful and wedded husband, for time and
eternity, with a covenant and promise on your part that you will fulfil
all the laws, rights, and ordinances pertaining to this holy matrimony,
in the new and everlasting covenant, doing this in <span
id="page_354">p. 354</span> the presence of God, angels, and these
witnesses, of your own free will and accord?' 'Yes.' 'Do you, Sister Ann
Eliza Webb take Brother James Dee by the right hand, and give yourself
to him, to be his lawful and wedded wife, for time and for all eternity,
with a covenant and promise on your part that you will fulfil all the
laws, rights, and ordinances pertaining to this holy matrimony, in the
new and everlasting covenant, doing this in the presence of God, angels,
and these witnesses, of your own free will and accord?' 'Yes.' 'In the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the authority of the holy
priesthood, I pronounce you legally and lawfully husband and wife, for
time and for all eternity. And I seal upon you the blessings of the holy
resurrection, with power to come forth in the morning of the first
resurrection, clothed with glory, immortality, and everlasting lives;
and I seal upon you the blessings of thrones, and dominions, and
principalities, and powers, and exaltations, together with the blessings
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And I say unto you, Be fruitful, and
multiply and replenish the earth, that you may have joy and rejoicing in
your prosperity in the day of the Lord Jesus. All these blessings,
together with all other blessings pertaining to the new and everlasting
covenant, I seal upon your heads, through your faithfulness unto the
end, by the authority of the holy priesthood, in the name of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen.' 'The scribe then entered
the date of the marriage, together with the names of my mother and the
one or two friends who accompanied us.' When the marriage is a
polygamous one, the wife stands on the left of her husband, and the
bride at her left hand. The president then puts this question to the
wife: 'Are you willing to give this woman to your husband, to be his
lawful and wedded wife for time and for all eternity? If you are, you
will manifest it by placing her right hand within the right hand of your
husband.' The right hands of the husband and bride being thus joined,
the wife takes her husband by the left arm, as in walking, and the
ceremony then proceeds as in the manner quoted above. *Young's Wife No.
19*, 388. Mrs Stenhouse, who gave a polygamous wife to her husband,
states that in her case the ceremony was performed at the altar, her
husband kneeling on one side, and the two women opposite him; the wife
being required to join the hands of the contracting parties as in the
other case; but it does not appear that she afterward took her husband's
arm. Indeed, the position of the three would render this impracticable.
See *Tell It All*, 453-4. Of course, as these ceremonies took place in
the endowment house, the temple robes were worn.

    But apart from ordinary marriage as known among gentiles, remarriage
of converts and polygamous unions, the church in its beneficence, by an
additional marriage rite, secures to her children eternal salvation
accompanied with permanent positions of rank. This is effected by the
ceremony known as spiritual marriage, based upon the following tenets:
No unmarried man or woman can be eternally saved. One woman can save one
man only; but a man can be instrumental in the salvation of an
indefinite number of women. Scaling may be either for the dead, or for
those yet alive. Persons sealed on earth need not necessarily live
together. Brigham, in a discourse delivered in Nauvoo, Apr. 6, 1845,
announces the doctrine in the following language: 'And I would say, as
no man can be perfect without the woman, so no woman can be perfect
without a man to lead her. I tell you the truth as it is in the bosom of
eternity; and I say so to every man upon the face of the earth: if he
wishes to be saved, he cannot be saved without a woman by his side. This
is spiritual wifeism, that is, the doctrine of spiritual wives.' *Times
and Seasons*, vi. 955. 'No woman can be scaled to two husbands; she must
choose which it shall be whom she will marry for eternity. The man can
be scaled to as many wives as he pleases. If the husband will be
baptized for a former husband who perhaps died out of the church, then
it leaves the wife at liberty to make that choice. If she feels that her
second husband is her preference, she can be baptized for some dead
female, and have her sealed to her dead husband, so as to secure his
conjugal happiness forever.' *Mrs Richards’ Inner Facts*, MS., 5. 'If a
husband has lost his wife by death, before he had the opportunity of
attending to this holy ordinance, and securing her as his lawful wife
for eternity, then it is the duty of the second wife, first, to be <span
id="page_355">p. 355</span> sealed or married to the husband, for and in
the name of the deceased wife, for all eternity; and, secondly, to be
married for time and eternity herself, to the same man. Thus, by this
holy ordinance, both the dead and the living wife will be his in the
eternal worlds. But if, previous to marriage for eternity, a woman lose
her husband by death, and marry a second, and if her first husband was a
good man, then it is the duty of the second husband to be married to her
for eternity, not for herself, but in the name of her deceased husband,
while he himself can only be married to her for time; and he is obliged
to enter into a covenant to deliver her up, and all her children, to her
deceased husband, in the morning of the first resurrection.' *Waite's
Mormon Prophet*, 173. 'A man can either have a woman sealed to him as
his cow sort for this world only, or he can have her sealed to him both
for this world as well as for the world to come—she is A.'s wife while
she is on earth, but she becomes B.'s as soon as she has reached heaven.
Or again, a woman—a spinster, for instance—who has taken a particular
fancy to any deceased saint, and who wishes to become his consort in the
world to come, can be sealed to him by proxy by becoming the wife of
some living saint. She has first to be sealed on earth before she can
obtain the necessary introduction into heaven. When a woman is said to
be sealed to a man, it does not necessarily imply that she is married to
him. It may mean marriage, or it may simply amount to an arrangement to
marry, to be consummated in the next world, made either directly between
the two parties, or by proxy by another party in place of one of the two
interested parties who is dead,…even if she prefers being the consort of
Abraham, Isaac, Moses, Job, etc., for the Mormon spiritual-wife doctrine
even ventures to go the length of this!' *Marshall, Through America*,
186. Mrs Stenhouse says President Heber C. Kimball upon one occasion
introduced her to five of his wives in succession, and upon being asked,
'Are these all you have got?' replied, 'O dear! no. I have a few more at
home, and about fifty more scattered over the earth somewhere. I have
never seen them since they were sealed to me in Nauvoo, and I hope I
never shall again.' *Exposé of Polygamy in Utah*, 91-2. See also, in
this connection, *Green's Mormonism*, 180-92; *Lee's Mormonism
Unveiled*, 166-72.

    Brigham, as head of the church, claimed authority not only to marry,
but also to divorce at will. No law's delay, mo filing of bills,
summoning witnesses, or learned decision granting absolute or partial
severance, accompanied by partial or impartial award of property and the
custody of infants, was required. Given the approbation of the chief,
and the rest followed as speedily as a clerk could write the certificate
and receive the fee. In a district removed from the capital, only the
consent of the bishop is necessary, and the bill of divorcement is a
very simple writing. 'March 18, 1871. To whomsoever it may concern. This
is to certify, in the beginning of 1869 when I gave a bill of divorce to
Sarah Ann Lowry I gave to her for the good of her four children the
following property, viz.: a parcel of land of about nine acres enclosed
all around, with a house of two rooms and one cow and heifer. William C.
Ritter.' The customary fee is ten dollars, and Mrs Waite relates an
instance in which a woman who had been granted a divorce was told by
Brigham that the act was null until the money was paid. *The Mormon
Prophet*, 239. The following is copied from note G, app. to *Paddock's
Madame La Tour*: 'An Englishwoman who abandoned her husband and children
for the purpose of gathering with the saints to Zion has been divorced
and remarried five times since she came to Utah. The present writer has
lived within half a block of a woman who, after being divorced from five
husbands, is now living in polygamy with the sixth; and one of our
district judges reports the case of an elderly saintess, living near the
place in which he holds court, who has been divorced fourteen times.'

<span id="fn_558"></span>[357:17](hou18.htm#fr_558.md) The ceremony of
Endowment, or as it is termed, going through the endowment house,
occupies usually about eight hours. It has been described at length by
several persons who have experienced it, and I give herewith a
condensation of the most reliable accounts. Minor changes have been
introduced since the days of Joseph Smith, but, in the main, the rites
are as they were in the beginning. Certain days in each week, throughout
the year, are set apart, upon which candidates present themselves at the
endowment house, as early as seven o'clock A. M. Each is required to
bring a bottle of the best olive-oil, and supposed to bring his robes
also, although it is common to borrow the latter from friends, for the
first appearance, after which every good Mormon possesses his own. These
garments are described as follows: The temple robe, alike for both
sexes, is a long, loose, flowing garment, made of white linen or
bleached muslin, and reaching to the ankle. It is gathered to a band
sufficiently long to pass around the body from the right shoulder
underneath the left arm, thus leaving the latter free. A linen belt
holds it in place. The women wear a head covering made of a large square
of Swiss muslin, gathered in one corner so as to form a sort of cap to
fit the head, the reminder falling down as a veil. For the men, a round
piece of linen, drawn up with a string and a bow in front, something
after the fashion of a Scotch cap, is used. The under garment, which is
also alike for both sexes, is a sort of jacket and trousers together,
something like the night-dresses made for children; and is worn night
and day. When changed, only an arm or a leg must be removed at once, the
fresh garment being thus put on as the other is taken off. This garment
protects from disease, and even death, for the bullet of an enemy will
not penetrate it. The prophet Joseph carelessly left off this garment on
the day of his death, and had he not done so, he would have escaped
unharmed. Over the inner garment the men wear an ordinary shirt, and the
women a white skirt. White stockings and a pair of white linen slippers
complete the costume. Entering the building, the candidate's own name
and age are registered, and also the names of the parents. The
candidates hand in their oil, remove their shoes, and pass with their
bundles of clothing into a bath-room divided down the middle by a heavy
curtain which separates the sexes. Here the ceremony of purification is
performed, the women being washed by women, and the men by men. The
person washed is informed that he or she is now cleansed from the blood
of this generation, and if faithful, shall never be subject to the
plagues and miseries which are about to come upon the earth. Next
follows the anointing. The oil is poured from a large horn into the hand
of the person officiating, and applied to the crown of the head, eyes,
ears, mouth, and feet of the candidate. The eyes are touched, that they
may be quick to see; the ears, that the hearing may be sharp; the mouth,
to bestow wisdom upon speech; and the feet, that they be swift to run in
the ways of the Lord. Then a new name, which is rarely to be mentioned,
is whispered into the ear, and all are marched into room No. 2, where
they are seated, the sexes on opposite sides of the room, and facing
each other. Here they are told by a priest that any person not strong
enough to proceed may retire; but if any portion of the ceremony is
disclosed, the throat of the person so offending will be cut from ear to
ear. Those faltering, if any, having retired, the remainder are taken
into room No. 3, where a representation of the creation, the temptation,
and fall is given. Each candidate then puts on over his robe an apron of
white linen, upon which are sewn pieces of green silk representing
fig-leaves, and also the cap or veil. All good Mormons are buried in
their endowment robes, and the veil worn by the women covers their faces
when they are consigned to the grave. In the morning of the
resurrection, this veil is to be lifted by the husband; otherwise no
woman can see the face of the almighty in the next world. This ends the
first degree; and the initiated are now driven out of Eden into room No.
4, <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> which represents the world, where
they encounter many temptations, the chief of which is the false gospel
preached by methodists, baptists, etc. Finally St James and St John
appear and proclaim the true gospel of Mormonism, which all gladly
embrace. After this they receive certain grips and pass-words, and all
are arranged in a circle, kneel, and the women lower their veils. Then,
with the right hand uplifted, an oath is taken to avenge the death of
Joseph Smith, jun., upon the gentiles who had caused his murder, to
teach the children of the church to do likewise, to obey implicitly and
without murmur or question all commands of the priesthood, to refrain
from adultery, and finally, eternal secrecy concerning all that
transpired in the endowment house is promised. Then comes an address,
after which another room is entered, leading from which is a door with a
hole in it, covered with a piece of muslin. The men approach this door
in turn and ask to enter. Then a person behind the door reaches through
the opening, and with knife in hand cuts a certain mark on the left
breast of the shirt, another over the abdomen, and one over the right
knee, which marks are faithfully copied by the women in their own
garments after returning to their homes. The man then mentions his new
name, gives the grip of the third degree, and is permitted to pass in.
This is called going behind the veil. When the men are all in, each
woman is passed through by her husband, or having none, by one of the
brethren. This concludes the ceremony, with the exception of marriage,
which will be noticed elsewhere. Of these ceremonies Mrs Stenhouse, from
whose account the foregoing is partly taken, says: 'About what was done
in Nauvoo, I can only speak by hearsay, but have been told many strange
and revolting stories about the ceremonies which were there performed.
Of the endowments in Utah, everything was beautifully neat and clean,
and I wish to say most distinctly that, although the initiation appears
now to my mind as a piece of the most ridiculous absurdity, there was,
nevertheless, nothing in it indecent or immoral. *Englishwoman in Utah*,
190-2. For more on endowment ceremonies, see *Morm. at Home*, 209;
*Stenhouse's Englishwoman*, 155-201; *Tell It All*, 233-6, 514-15;
*Beadle's Life in Utah*, 486-502; *Hyde's Morm*., 89-101, 108-9;
*Worthington's Woman in Battle*, 591-2; *Burton's City of Saints*,
271-2; *Young's Wife No. 19*, 306-72; *S. L. Herald*, Mar. 31, 1881;
*Tribune*, Nov. 16, 1878; Sept. 28, 1879; *Utah Rev*., Dec. 12, 1871;
*S. F. Bulletin*, 1878, Nov. 16; 1879, May 5, Oct. 25; *Herald*, July
27, 1852; *Red Bluff Sentinel*, Nov. 30, 1878; *Sac. Union, Sept*. 25,
1858; *Rec.-Union*, Oct. 1, 1879; *San José Argus, Sept*. 15, 22, 1877;
*Sta Cruz Cour*., May 10, 1878; *Stockton Indep*., May 6, 1879; *Tehama
Tocsin*, Nov. 1, 1879; *Yreka Union*, Nov. 22, 1879; *Salem (Or.)
Statesman*, Nov. 7, 1879; *Carson City (Nev.) Tribune*, Oct. 6, 1879;
*Elko Indep*., Dec. 12, 1878; *Gold Hill News*, 1878, Oct. 29-31.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[359:18](hou18.htm#fr_559.md) One or two other
matters of belief I may mention here. There was early established the
order of Enoch. The prophet Joseph not only indorsed the biblical
account of the translation of Enoch, but added to it. There was not only
one Enoch, but a whole city full. This city of Enoch was located where
are now the waters of the gulf of Mexico, and its inhabitants were
absolutely perfect. Many sought to reach this place, for its fame had
become noised abroad; but none were successful, owing to wanderings and
bickerings by the way. Within its gates all things were held in common,
and unalloyed happiness reigned. And inasmuch as the people of Enoch
were unfitted by their moral excellence to mingle with other earthly
inhabitants, they were removed to celestial realms. Joseph's idea at
this time seems to have been to induce his followers to surrender all
rights, including that of property, into the hands of the church. In May
1831 it was revealed, 'And again, let the bishop appoint a storehouse
unto this church, and let all <span id="page_360">p. 360</span> things,
both in money and in meat, which is more than is needful for the wants
of this people, be kept in the hands of the bishop.' *Times and
Seasons,* v. 416. This revelation was for the information and guidance
of the first bishop, Partridge, who is authorized therein to take what
he wants for himself and family. The prophet's revelation concerning the
order of Enoch is without date, and is entitled 'Revelation given to
Enoch concerning the order of the church for the benefit of the poor.'
In it is prescribed that there shall be two treasuries: from the first,
to be called 'the sacred treasury of the Lord,' nothing can be taken but
by the voice of the order, or by commandment; into the second treasury
are to be cast all moneys except those reserved for sacred purposes. It
is also provided that general consent is necessary for the withdrawal of
funds from this, as in the case of the first repository, but common
consent in this case is construed to be, if any man shall say to the
treasurer, 'I have need of a certain sum,' he shall receive it, provided
the asker shall be in full fellowship. The revelation in full will be
found in *Doctrine and Covenants,* 283-9. One of the grounds of
complaint brought against the saints in Caldwell county, by the
Missourians, was that the former were communists, as has been narrated
already. Says the *Salt Lake Tribune* of May 9, 1874: 'The Mormons paid
the United States authorities $318,000 for public lands in Missouri, but
were not allowed to enjoy one acre of their purchase.' See also *Deseret
News,* May 13, 1874. At Nauvoo, Joseph had himself appointed trustee in
trust of the whole church, and thereafter we hear no more of the order
of Enoch until some years subsequent to the establishment of the Deseret
colonies. Soon after Joseph's death we find Brigham sole trustee of
affairs. During the scenes following the murder of the Smiths, the
expulsion from Illinois, and up to the settlement of the migratory
saints in Utah, there was little property to care for; but after that,
attention was again turned to the matter. Robinson, in his *Sinners and
Saints,* gives a copy of a deed: 'Be it known by these presents, that I,
Jessie W. Fox, of Great Salt Lake City, in the county of Great Salt
Lake, and territory of Utah, for and in consideration of the sum of one
hundred ($100) dollars and the good-will which I have to the church of
Jesus Christ of latter-day saints, give and convey unto Brigham Young,
trustee in trust for the said church, his successor in office and
assigns, all my claims to and ownership of the following-described
property, to wit: One house and lot, $1,000; one city lot, $100; east
half of lot 1, block 12, $50; lot 1, block 14, $75; two cows, $50; two
calves, $15; one mare, $100; one colt, $50; one watch, $20; one clock,
$12; clothing, $300; beds and bedding, $125; one stove, $20; household
furniture, $210; total, $2,127; together with all the rights,
privileges, and appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining. I
also covenant and agree that I am the lawful claimant and owner of said
property, and will warrant and forever defend the same unto the said
trustee in trust, his successor in office and assigns, against the
claims of my heirs, assigns, or any person whomsoever.' Then follows the
attestation of the witness, and the formal certificate of the judge of
the probate court that the signer of the above transfer personally
appeared before him on April 2, 1857, and made the customary
acknowledgment. Robinson also gives a list of rules, which I have not
room for in detail, but which the reader may find in pp. 223-5, in the
work already quoted. William Hall, who was a member of the church from
1840 until 1847, says that at the time of the exodus from Nauvoo a
mercantile firm was appointed to act as trustees, not only for the
church property, but also for individuals. These trustees were to sell
the property <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> left behind, and account
to the proper owners. *Mormonism Exposed,* 66-70. Says Ex-elder John
Hyde, jun.: 'In 1854 Brigham Young commanded the people to consecrate by
legal transfer all right and title to all personal property. Quitclaim
deeds were drawn up, and from their land to their wearing apparel the
maiority transferred everything to Brigham or his successor as trustee
in trust for the latter-day saints; and some, in the exuberance of
enthusiasm, threw in their wives and families.' *Mormonism,* 37-9. The
legislature, by act approved Jan. 18, 1855, legalized these transfers,
and provided a form in blank therefor. See *Utah Laws* (ed. 1855),
268-9; (ed. 1866), 92-3. At the semiannual conference held in Oct. 1873,
the subject of reviving the order was again agitated. Elder David
McKenzie touched upon the ultimate establishment of the order of Enoch
in a very emphatic manner. *Deseret News,* Oct. 15, 1873. The *Salt Lake
Tribune* of March 21, 1874, quotes the elder as follows: 'We should give
thanks and praise to almighty God that there is a chance, a door opened,
by which we may take a step towards establishing the order of Enoch.'
Mrs Stenhouse says efforts were made to revive the order before the
completion of the railways, which were not finished until 1869.
*Englishwoman in Utah,* 371-2. Rev. Clark Smith, author of a 12mo
pamphlet entitled *Mystery and Crime in the Land of the Ute,* states
that the plan for reviving the order was matured during the winter of
1873-4 at St George, where Brigham and a few of his leaders were at that
time. During the early part of 1874, scarcely a sermon was delivered
without a reference to the order and an assurance that all joining would
be benefited both spiritually and temporally. On May 9th an election of
officers was held. Brigham was was chosen president; Geo. Smith, Danl H.
Wells, and the twelve apostles, vice-presidents; David McKenzie, George
Goddard, D.O. Calder, P. A. Schettler, John T. Caine, and James Jack,
secretaries; Thos W. Ellerbeck, general book-keeper; Edward Hunter,
treasurer; and Horace J. Eldridge, John Sharp, Ferezmore Little, James
Van Cott, Moses Thatcher, Thos Dinwiddie, and Elijah Sheets, directors.
S. L. C. *Tribune,* May 16, 1874.

    The dogma of adoption for eternity originated after Joseph's time.
Hall says he first heard of it about the date of the expulsion from
Nauvoo. *Mormonism Exposed,* 70. It was ascertained that many of the
saints had inter-married with gentile stock, and were thus debarred from
a full enjoyment of the rights and privileges of the house and lineage
of Abraham. But these lost blessings could be restored by ingraftment
upon the stock of one of the twelve tribes of Israel, represented by the
twelve apostles, each of whom was deemed as in lineal descent from
Abraham, tracing his consanguinity to Isaac and Jacob, and thence to
himself as a chief of one of the tribes. Romans, xi. 16, is quoted as
authorizing the doctrine, which requires every member of the church,
except the twelve, to choose a father fresh one of the latter. The
father may be either younger or older than the son, but in any case
assumes the character of guardian, with full control of the labor and
estate of the adopted son Many young men give themselves over to the
leaders as 'eternal sons,' in the hope of sharing the honor of their
adopted parents. W.C. Statues was Brigham's adopted son, and D.
Candland, Heber C. Kimball's. *Hyde, Mormonism,* 110. Witbert Earls is
also mentioned as Kimball's son. *Hall, Mormonism Exposed,* 70.

    About 1840, in obedience to a special revelation, Joseph Smith
established a secret society known as the Order Lodge. None save persons
of high standing in the church could gain admission, the avowed object
of the organization being induction into the higher mysteries of the
priesthood. J. C. Bennett writes as follows of this order: 'The
lodge-room is carefully prepared and <span id="page_362">p. 362</span>
consecrated; and from 12 to 24 sprigs of cassia, olive branches, cedar
boughs, or other evergreens, are tastefully arranged about it. These are
intended to represent the eternal life and unmingled bliss, which, in
the celestial kingdom, will be enjoyed by all who continue in full
fellowship.'…The candidate is stripped naked, blindfolded, and in this
condition marched around the lodge-room, the most excellent Grand Master
repeating: 'I will bring the blind by a way they know not; I will lead
them in paths that they have not known; I will make darkness light
before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto
them, and not forsake them.' The candidate having knelt before the
altar, the following oath is administered: 'In the name of Jesus Christ,
the son of God, I now promise and swear, truly, faithfully, and without
reserve, that I will serve the Lord with a perfect heart and a willing
mind, dedicating myself, wholly and unreservedly, in my person and
effects, to the upbuilding of his kingdom on earth, according to his
revealed will. I furthermore promise and swear that I will regard the
first president of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints as
the supreme head of the church on earth, and obey him the same as the
supreme God, in all written revelations, given under the solemnities of
a "thus saith the Lord," and that I will always uphold the presidency,
right or wrong. I furthermore promise and swear that I will never touch
a daughter of Adam unless she is given me of the Lord. I furthermore
promise and swear that no gentile shall ever be admitted to the secrets
of this holy institution, or participate in its blessings. I furthermore
promise and swear that I will assist the Daughter of Zion in the utter
destruction of apostates, and that I will assist in setting up the
Kingdom of Daniel in these last days, by the power of the highest and
the sword of his might. I furthermore promise and swear that I will
never communicate the secrets of this degree to any person in the known
world, except it be to a true and lawful brother, binding myself under
no less a penalty than that of having melted lead poured into my ear. So
help me God and keep me faithful.' *Hist. of the Saints,* 275-6.

    I have thousands of references to articles written and sermons
preached on the doctrines of the church. The tabernacle and bowery
sermons have been reported and published in the *Deseret News,* from its
first publication up to 1860. Besides President Young, the prominent
speakers were Parley P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Lorenzo Snow,
Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, John Taylor, Franklin D. Richards,
David Fullmer, J. W. Cummings, John Young, Wilford Woodruff, John D.
McAllister, Joseph Young, Daniel H. Wells, Cyrus H. Wheelock, Robert T.
Burton, Jacob Gates, Charles H. Bassett, and many others. For duties of
bishops, see *Deseret News,* 1850, Aug. 10; patriarchal notice, Sept.
21; revelation, Dec. 28; 1851, for religious questions and answers, Jan.
11; minutes special conference of seventies, Jan. 25; appel. presidency
and apostolate, Mar. 8; min. gen. con., 19; Patriarch Smith's letter to
the saints throughout the world, and letter from P. P. Pratt to Brigham
Young, Nov. 29; letter from Thos Bullock, president of seventies, Dec.
27; 1852, letter from O. Jones to Pres. Young, Jan. 10; offices in
church, authority explained, Jan. 24; signs of the times, and advice to
the saints, Feb. 7; disc. by Brigham, Feb. 9; letter, Patriarch Smith,
Feb. 20; opinions about Mormonism (from *Harper's Mag.),* Feb. 21; min.
con. new tabernacle, Apr. 17; Mormon question *(N. Y. Tribune and
Herald),* May 1; letter of defence (in *N. Y. Herald),* May 15;
reflections, O. Pratt, June 26; disc. by Kimball, Aug. 15; gen. funeral
sermon by O. Pratt, Aug. 21; Brigham on apostles, *News* extra, p. 25;
remarks by Taylor and Kimball, Sept. 4; speech by Kimball, Sept. 14;
special con., <span id="page_363">p. 363</span> Sept. 18; disc. by
Brigham, Oct. 2; min. gen. con., Oct. 16 and Nov. 6; epistle by Young,
Oct. 16; the Mormons the Mahometans of 19th cent. (*N. Y. Herald),* Nov.
2; remarks, Young, Aug. 26, Nov. 6; 1853, sermon by P. P. Pratt, Jan.
19; address by Taylor, Jan. 19; disc. by Benson, Feb. 1; sermon, Pratt,
Mar. 2; Brigham and Pratt, address, Apr. 2; Brigham, disc., Apr. 13;
min. gem con., Apr. 16, 30; epistle pres., rept quorum seventies, Apr.
16; ad., Hyde, May 14; ad., Brigham, May 14; disc., Brigham, July 6 and
20; speech, Hyde, July 30; disc., Brigham, Aug. 24, 31, and Oct. 1; min.
gen. con., Oct. 15 and 29; ep. pres., Oct. 15; disc., Brigham, Sept. 7;
ad., H. Kimball, Nov. 12; ad., tabernacle, Nov. 24; Mormon vs gentile,
Nov. 24; ad., Brigham, Dec. 8; Mormonism, Dec. 8; sermon, Taylor, Dec.
22; 1854, disc., H. Kimball, Jan. 4; Smith, Jan. 18; reg. dialogue, and
art. on restitution, Jan. 12; bible and Mormonism, Jan. 19; repts of
quorums of seventies, Mar. 2, Apr. 13, Apr. 27; gen. epis., Apr. 13;
gen. confer., Apr. 13; address, Hyde, Apr. 27; disc., Pratt, Apr. 27;
address, Kimball, Apr. 27; disc., Taylor, May 11; Brigham, May 11;
Smith, May 11; Grant, June 8; Brigham, July 27; Grant, July 27; Brigham,
Aug. 3; Kimball, Aug. 17; epis. pres., Sept. 14; disc., Kimball, Sept.
14; a Mormon leader (from *Sem. Wy. Jour.,* Tex.), Sept. 21; disc.,
Grant, Sept. 21; epis. against litigation, Sept. 21; remarks, Grant,
Sept. 28; disc., Kimball, Sept. 28; Hyde, Oct. 5, Oct. 19; Kimball, Oct.
19; Benson, Oct. 19; Smith, Oct. 26; Pratt, Oct. 26; Brigham, Oct. 26;
Hyde, Nov. 9; Grant. Nov. 2; Kimball, Nov. 23; Pratt, Nov. 30; Grant,
Dec. 7; Kimball, Dec. 14; Pratt, Dec. 21; local recog. of Morm. (from
*Democracy),* Dec. 21; disc., Pratt, Dec. 28; 1855, Grant, Jan. 25;
testimony, Kimball, Jan. 25; disc., Brigham, Feb. 8; rept of 27 quor.,
Jan. 11; disc. on prophecies, Pratt, Feb. 22; Morm. worldliness, etc.,
Harrison; address, Brigham, Mar. 1; belief in superiority, Hyde, Mar.
14; sermon, Woodruff, Mar. 21; Hyde, Mar. 28; Smith, Apr. 4; testimony,
faith, and confidence; gen. confer., Apr. 11; sermon, Grant, Apr. 11;
gen. epist., Apr. 25; disc., Brigham, Apr. 25, May 9; remarks, Pratt,
May 2; elders' corresp., May 16; disc., Pratt, May 16; on inspection,
Brigham, May 23; elders' corresp., May 23, May 30; remarks, Brigham,
June 6; disc., Brigham, June 20; the word of wisdom (in *Doctrin*e*s and
Covenants),* June 27; sermon Smith, July 11; Morm., July 18; disc.,
Brigham, July 18; lecture, Grant, July 25; disc. Brigham, Aug. 1; Smith,
Aug. 22; Benson, Aug. 22; Smith, Aug. 29; comments (*N. Y. Papers),*
Sept. 12; remarks, Benson, Sept. 12; disc., Pratt, Sept. 12; remarks,
Pratt, Sept. 19; disc., Brigham, Sept. 26; Smith, Oct. 10; gen. confer.,
Oct. 10; disc., Oct. 10; bowery meeting, Oct. 17; confer., Oct. 17, 24;
tabernacle meeting, Oct. 24, 31; gen. epis., Oct. 31; sermon, Brigham,
Oct. 31; to the truth-loving, Nov. 7; disc., Nov. 7; remarks, Grant,
Nov. 7; tabernacle meeting, Nov. 7; remarks, Kimball, Nov. 7; sermon,
Brigham, Nov. 21; disc., Kimball, Dec. 4; Pratt, Dec. 12, 19; Lyman,
Dee. 19, 26; 1856, disc., Lyman, Jan. 2; Pratt, Jan. 30; Kimball, Feb.
6; Brigham, Feb. 6; Grant, Feb. 6; Lyman, Feb. 20; Brigham, Feb. 27;
remarks, Kimball, Mar. 5; Brigham, Mar. *5,* 12; cpis. to high priest's
quorum, Mar. 12; disc., Kimball, Mar. 12; remarks, Grant, Mar. 12; fair
weather disc., Mar. 12; disc., Wells, Mar. 19; Kimball, Mar. 19;
Brigham, Mar. 26; Vernon, Mar. 26; remarks, Brigham, Mar. 26; disc.,
Grant, Apr. 2; Brigham, Apr. 2; Kimball, Apr. 2; gen. confer., Apr. 9;
disc., Kimball, Apr. 9; sacrifice, Apr. 9; disc., Smith, Apr. 16;
obedience, Apr. 23; disc., Pratt, Apr. 23; Brigham, Apr. 30; Pratt, May
14; the world and the saints May 28; remarks Brigham June 18 disc.,
Brigham, June 25; counsel, July 9; obedience, July 16; disc., Pratt,
July 16; Kimball, Aug 20; sermon Brigham Aug. 27; confer. at Kayville.
Sept. 24; disc., Pratt, Sept. 24; sermon, Brigham, Sept. 27; disc.,
Grant, Sept. 27; disc., <span id="page_364">p. 364</span> Brigham, Oct.
1; meetings, Oct. 1; disc., Kimball, Oct. 1; Brigham, Oct. 1; remarks,
Grant, Oct. 1; confer., Oct. 8; remarks, Kimball, Oct. 8; Brigham, Oct.
8, 15; disc., Richards, Oct. 15; confer., Oct. 15; remarks, Spencer,
Oct. 15; condition of saints, Oct. 22; remarks, Kimball, Nov. 5; disc.,
Grant, Nov. 5; special confer., Nov. 5; quart. confer., Nov. 12;
remarks, Nov. 12; disc., Brigham, Nov. 12; Grant, Nov. 12; appointments,
Nov. 12; disc., Grant, :Nov. 19; Kimball, Nov. 19; remarks, Brigham,
Nov. 19; Young (Jos. A.), Nov. 19; Woodruff, Nov. 28; Brigham, Nov. 26;
Kimball, Nov. 26; address, Pratt, Dec. 1; remarks, Brigham, Dec. 10;
gen. epist., Dec. 10; disc., Pratt. Dec. 24; high priest's meeting, Dec.
31; sermon, Kimball, Dee. 31; remarks, Woodruff, Dec. 31; 1857, disc.,
Kimball, Jan. 7: remarks, Grant, Jan. 7; disc., Snow, Jan. 14; Richards,
Jan. 21; Kimball, Jan. 21; Snow, Jan. 28; remarks, Woodruff, Feb. 4;
toleration, Feb. 4; remarks, Grant, Feb. 4; morals, Feb. 11; disc.,
Brigham, Feb. 11; Kimball, Feb. 11; Cummings, Feb. 18; Brigham, Feb. 18;
remarks, Kimball, Feb. 25; Hyde, Mar. 4; disc., Richards, Mar. 4;
Woodruff, Mar. 4; remarks, Wells, Mar. 4; disc., Brigham, Mar. 11;
Kimball, Mar. 11; Snow, Mar. 11; remarks, Wells, Mar. 11; disc.,
Brigham, Mar. 18; Young (Jos.), Mar. 18; Brigham, Mar. 25; Kimball, Mar.
25; Grant, Mar. 25; remarks, McAllister, Mar. 25; Kimball, Apr. 1;
Richards, Apr. 1; disc. Woodruff, Apr. 1; sermon, Brigham, Apr. 8;
remarks, Burton, Apr. 8; gen. confer., Apr. 15; remarks, Wells, Apr. 15;
Stout, Apr. 15; Wells, Apr. 15; disc., Kimball, Apr. 2-2; Brigham, Apr.
22, 29; remarks, Herriman, Apr. 29; Wheelock, Apr. 29; remarks, Snow,
May 6; Brigham, May 6; Woodruff, May 13; disc., Brigham, May 13; disc.,
May 20; the bible, May 20; remarks, Brigham, May 20; Ferguson, May 29;
Fullmer, May 20; Davis, May 20; McKnight, May 20; Bassett, May, 27;
disc., Gates, May 27; remarks, Woodruff, May 27; disc., Woolley, June 3;
Mills, June 3; remarks, Brigham, June 10; Smith, June 10; Kimball, June
10; disc., Kimball, June 17; remarks, Brigham, June 17, 24; Rich, June
24; Brigham, June 24; Hyde, June 24; Lyman, June 24; disc., Kimball,
June 24; Chislett, July 8; remarks, Brigham, July 8; Cummings, July 8;
Brigham, July 15; Kimball, July 15; Carn, July 15; Lyman, July 22;
Ellsworth, July 22; Brigham, July *22;* disc., Lyman, July 29; pol.
move. against Utah, July 29; remarks, Brigham, Aug. 5; Smoot, Aug. 5;
Smith, Aug. 5; disc., Hyde, Aug. 5; Smith, Aug. 12; Kimball, Aug. 12;
Smith (E.), Aug. 12; remarks, Brigham, Aug. 12; Kimball, Aug. 12;
Taylor, Aug. 19; Brigham, Aug. 19; Kimball, Aug. 26; Brigham, Aug. 26;
disc., Hyde, Aug. 26; Taylor, Sept. 2; remarks, Brigham, Sept. 9;
Stewart, Sept. 9; disc., Kimball, Sept. 9, 16; Taylor, Sept. 16, 23;
remarks, Smith, Sept. 23; Brigham, Sept. 23; Kimball, Sept. 30; Brigham,
Sept. 30; disc., Taylor, Sept. 30; remarks, Woodruff, Oct. 7; disc.,
Kimball, Oct. 7; sem. ann. confer., Oct. 14; remarks, Brigham, Oct. 14;
Spencer, Oct. 14; Snow, Oct. 14; disc., Hyde, Oct. 14; Kimball, Oct. 14;
Snow, Oct. 21; sermon, Lyman, Oct. 21; remarks, Spencer, Oct. 21;
remarks, Brigham, Oct. 21; Rich, Oct. 21; Young, Oct. 21; Snow, Oct. 21;
Brigham, Oct. 28; by bishops and elders, Oct. 28; Brigham, Nov. 11, 25,
Dec. 2, 9, 30; 1858, confer., Apr. 14; 1859, Mar. 9, Apr. 13, Oct. 12,
Dec. 28; disc., 1858, Jan. 27, Feb. 17, Apr. 14, July 14, 28; 1859, May
25, June 1, 8, 15, July 6, Aug. 10, 17, Nov. 10, 23, 30; 1860, remarks,
Brigham, Mar. 14, Apr. 4, 25, May 2, 16, 30, June 6, 27, July 18, 25,
Aug. 1, 8, 15, 22, 29, Sept. 5; 1864, June 15; 1865, Jan. 4; 1866, Mar.
15; 1867, Feb. 3; 1868, Jan. 15; 1869, Jan. 20, Feb. 2, Dec. 10; 1870,
Mar. 30; 1871, Apr. 19; 1879, Feb. 12; confer., 1860, Feb. 8, Apr. 11,
Oct. 10; 1861, Apr. 10, Oct. 23; 1862, Apr. 9, 16, 29, Oct. 15; 1863,
Apr. 15, 22; 1864, Apr. 13, May 25, Oct. 12, Dec. 14; 1865, Apr. 12,
Oct. 12; 1866, Mar. 8, Apr. 12, Oct. 10; 1867, Apr. 10, Oct. 9; 1868,
Apr. 8, 15, Oct. 14; <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> 1869, Apr. 14,
July 7, Oct. 13; 1870, Apr. 13, May 11, Oct. 12, Nov. 2; 1871, Apr. 12,
May 24, Oct. 11; 1872, Apr. 10, 17, 24, May 1, Aug. 28, Oct. 9, 16;
1873, Apr. 9, 16, May 7, Aug. 13, Oct. 8; 1874, Apr. 8, May 13, Oct. 14;
1875, Mar. 3, Apr. 14, 21, Oct. 13; 1876, Apr. 12, Oct. 11; 1877, May
16, June 6, 13, Oct. 10; 1878, Mar. 9, Apr. 10, Oct. 9, 16; 1879, Apr.
9, 16; Oct. 15; 1884, Apr. 7; high council, 1877, Oct. 24; meetings of
priesthood, 1877, Oct. 10, Dec. 5; 1878, Feb. 6; 1879, Mar. 12; epist.,
1879, Apr. 2; elders' disc., 1872, Jan. 24; 1873, Jan. 22, Apr. 16;
1874, Jan. 21, Apr. 22, May 6, 27; 1876, May 3, Oct. 11; 1877, May 16,
23; 1878, Feb. 13; hist. of Morm. (from *St Louis Weekly Union),* Dec.
27, 1851; miscel. (from *St Louis Republican), S. F. Herald,* Sept. 25,
1851.

    For sermons and discourses, see also *Millennial Star,* passim;
address, Kimball, *Young's* *Journal of Discourses,* ii. 354-7; sermons,
*Ferris, Utah and the Mormons,* 217-32, 302-3; sermon, Brigham, *Salem
(Or.) Statesman,* Feb. 5, 1856; repts of confer., among others,
*Frontier Guardian,* 1851, June 13, Oct. 31, Nov. 28; gen. epist., in
*Id.,* Nov. 14; various sermons, *Young's Jour. of Disc.,* ii. passim;
disc., Pratt, *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 79-103; sermons, Brigham, *Sac.
Union,* 1855, Oct. 25, Dec. 13; 1857, June 16; sermons by Brigham and
Kimball, *et al., S. F. Alta,* 1854, May 16; 1S55, Apr. 6, May 1; 1857,
Jan. 12, June 4, Oct. 14; *S. F. Bulletin,* 1857, May 2; 1866, Apr. 18;
lecture, Hyde, *S. F. Herald,* 1857, Apr. 14; rites and ceremonies,
*Ferris, Utah and the Mormons,* 311-17; *Gunnison's Mormons,* 37-8;
*Remy's Journey to G. S. L. City,* ii. 4-82; *Derby, Overland Route,*
30-2; *Rae's Westward by Rail,* 123-4; *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 255-9;
*Rusling's Across America,* 166-9; *Life among the Mormons,* 173-9;
*Boller's Among the Indians,* 401-3; *Bowles’ Our New West,* 242-7;
*Stenhouse, Tell It All,* 251, 387-9; W*ard's Husband in Utah,* 204-8;
*Schiel, Reise dutch Felsengeb,* 103-24; *Smith's Rise, Progress and
Travels,* 64-5; *Utah Scraps,* 5, 16; *Burton's City of Saints,* 365-75.
On faith and doctrines, see *Smith, Doc. and Cov.,* passim; *S. F. Gol.
Era,* Dec. 1, 1867: *Des. News,* Sept. 14, 1864; *Mackay's The Morm.,*
51-4; *Ferris, Utah and Morm.,* 201-16; *Gunnison's Morm.,* 39-63;
*Frontier Guardian,* Feb. 20, 1850; *Busch, Morm.,* 72-105; *De Rupert's
Cal. and Morm.,* 138-46; *Times and Seasons,* vi. 971; *Tucker's Morm.,*
174-9; *S. L C. Contributor,* ii. 192-324; church gov., *Tullidge, Hist.
S. L. City,* 57-8; *Todd's Sunset Land,* 185-93; S. L. *Direc.,* 1869,
58; *Head,* in *Overland Monthly,* v. 275-7; *Utah Seraps,* 8-9;
*Mackay's Morm.,* 298-305; *Ferris, Utah and Morm.,* 171-7; *Stausbury's
Expior. Exp.,* 135-9; *Richards’ Narr.,* MS., 42; *Smith's Rise, Prog.,*
etc., 17-18, 27-8; *Green's Morm.,* 150-66, 308-19; *Hyde's Worm.,* 18,
25, 101-2, 188-9; *The Morm. Proph.,* 120-1, 114-19; *Beadle's Life in
Utah,* 381-9; *Remy's Journey to G. S. L. City,* ii. 229-34; *Young's
Wife No. 19,* 577; *Gunnison's Morm.,* 23-5, 57-61, 78-9; *Sac. Union,*
June 26, 1857; theory of creation, *Stenhouse's R. M. Saints,* 485-94;
order of Enoch, *Id.,* 495-503; law of adoption, *Id.,* 503-6; book of
Abraham, *Id.,* 507-20; res. of infants, 483-4; Washington bap. by
prox., *Id.,* 475-82; Hyde expelled, *Id.,* 640; negro Mormons, *S. F.
Bulletin,* Nov. 14, 1884; pub. discuss., *Pratt, Ser. of Pamph.,* no.
10, 1-46, no. 11, 1-46; *Taylor's Govt of God,* passim; Morm. pro and
con, *Chandless' Visit to S. Lake,* 156; *Ward's Husband in Utah,*
140-283; *Gunnison's Morm.,* 35, 164; *Salem (Or.) Statesman,* Dec. 5,
1854; *S. F. Herald,* 1854, Jan. 26, Aug. 23, Sept. 27; *Alta,* 1851,
July 24, Aug. 6, 7; 1852, Dec. 21; 1853, Nov. 26; 1854, June 25, 26;
1856, May 10, 15, June 13, Sept. 15, Dec. 17; 1858, Jan. 22; *Cal.
Chris. Advoc.,* Apr. 6, 1865; *Bulletin,* 1856, Aug. 21; 1877, Sept. 8;
*Sac. Union,* 1855, Mar. 16, July 17, Dec. 13; 1856, June 14; *Morm. at
Home,* 65, 122-3, 142-5, 220-1; *N. Y. Jour. of Com.,* in *Pan. Star and
Her.,* <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> Feb. 18, 1869; *Smucker's Hist.
Morm.,* 323-99; *Young's Wife No. 19,* 333-40; *Olshausen, Morm.,*
170-5; *Jonveaux, L’Amerique,* 235-6, 244-8; *Mackay's The Morm.,*
271-326; *Ferris, Utah and Morm.,* 171-7; *Young's Resurrection,* 11;
*Smet's Western Missions,* 390-7; *32 Cong. 1st Sess.,* H. Ex. Dec.,
19-20; *Frontier Guardian,* 1850, Feb. 6, 20, Mar. 6, 20, June 12, July
10, Sept. 4, Oct. 30, Dec. 25; 1851, Jan. 8, Mar. 21, Apr. 18, May 16,
30, June 13, 27, July 25, Aug. 8, Sept. 5, Oct. 31, Dec. 12, 26; 1852,
Jan. 9, 23, Feb. 6, 20; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 283-9; *Hyde's Morm.,*
50, 179-81, 306-30; *Burton's City of Saints,* 437-97; *Hickman's Dest.
Angel,* 10-15.

    In addition to these authorities, it is safe to assert that every
gentile paper of importance in the U.S. has at some time extracted from
the Salt Lake papers, and commented freely thereon. During the existence
of the *Kanes-ville (Iowa) Frontier Guardian,* 1849-52, nearly every
issue contained articles explanatory of the dogmas of the church, a few
of which I have referred to. The *Millennial Star,* although devoted
more especially to missionary effort abroad, has always copied freely
from home publications. I append a few additional authorities, as
follows: On religion, *S. F. Alta,* Jan. 19, 1860; *Bulletin,* June 19,
1871; *S. L. Rev.,* Sept. 22, 1871; *Gaz. Utah,* 1874; *S. L. Trib.,*
Jan. 29, 1876, May 19, 1877; *Juv. Inst.,* xv.; doc., *Pratt, Key to
Scien. Theol.,* passim; *Bonwick, Morm. and Silv. Mines,* 34-61; *S. L.
Trib.,* Jan. 25, 1872, Mar. 28, 1874; *S. L. C. Contributor,* ii. 39,
70, 135; bible and book of Morm., *S. L. Trib.,* May 16, 1874; rev.,
*Eureka Sent.,* Apr. 16, 1875; *Silv. City Avalan.,* Mar. 31, 1876; *S.
L. Trib.,* June 2, Oct. 20, 1877; Sept. 24, Oct. 26, 1879; *Silv. Reef
Miner,* June 11, 1879; *Stenhouse, Englishwoman in Utah,* 34, 74; *S. F.
Stock Rept,* Jan. l, 1880; church, *Sac. Union,* Feb. 4, Sept. 1, 1860;
*S. F. Bulletin,* Dec. 22, 1868, Oct. 10, 1870; *Chronicle,* Oct. 7,
1883; priesthood, *Sac. Union,* Oct. 20, 1860; *S. L. Trib.,* in
*Unionville Silv. State,* Mar. 23, 1872; *Eureka Sent.,* Apr. 15, 1873;
*S. F. Alta,* Apr. 14, 1873; *S. L. Trib.,* July 4, 1874, July 10, 1875;
*Gold Hill News,* Dec. 14, 1875; *Smith's Mystery and Crime,* 16-23,
27-30; *C*i*rculars of First Presid.,* 1877; Pratt's prophecy, *Austin,
Reese Riv. Rev.,* Apr. 23, 1880; worship and preachers, *Burton, City of
Saints,* 316; sermons, Young, 1860; *Burton, City of Saints,* 320; *Sac.
Union,* May 30, Oct. 9; *Morm. Expos.,* i. no 1; *S. F. Call,* May 11,
1865; *Bulletin,* Oct. 17, 1867; *Alta,* July 19, 1860; *S. L. Rev.,*
Dec. 7, 1871; *Hubner's Round the World,* 109; *The Resurr.,* S. L.
City, 1875; *Prescott Miner,* Aug. 17, 1877; by elders, *S. L. Tel.,*
June 15, 1869; *Corinne Reptr.,* in *Elko Indpt,* Aug. 21, 1869;
*Greenwood's New Life,* 144-7; *Taylor's Summer Savory,* 21-5; *S. L.
Herald,* 1878, Sept. 2, 17, 24, Oct. 1, 22, 29, Nov. 5, 12, 19;
*Marshall's Through Amer.,* 198-205; *Silver Reef Min.,* June 18, 1879;
character of, *Sala's Amer. Revis.,* 296; *Richardson's Beyond Miss.,*
356-7; *Sac. Union,* Feb. 28, 1861; relig. freedom, *Cannon, Rev. of
Decis. of Supm. Ct;* confer., *S. F. Alta,* 1869, Oct. 9; 1872, Apr. 29;
*Bulletin,* 1870, Apr. 12; 1871, Oct. 6, 7; 1872, Apr. 9, 29; 1873, Apr.
7, 9; 1874, Oct. 7; 1876, Nov. 3; 1877, Apr. 11, Oct. 8; 1879, Apr. 9;
1883, Oct. 6, 15; *Call,* 1864, Apr. 7; 1871, Apr. 11; 1872, Apr. 9;
1873, Apr. 7; *Chronicle,* 1883, Oct. 6; *Post,* 1875, Apr. 12; 1877,
Apr. 6; *Times,* 1868, Apr. 21; *Sac. Union,* 1860, Oct. 20; *Carson
Union,* Apr. 12, 1873; *Jackson (Amador) Ledger,* Dec. 29, 1877; *S. L.
Herald,* 1878, Oct. 8; 1879, Apr. 9, 12, 22, May 20, June 10, 24, Oct.
7; 1880, Jan. 6; *Telegraph,* 1869, Apr. 6, 7, 8, 9; 1870, May 7, 8, 9;
*Tribune,* 1873, May 10; 1874, Apr. 4; 1875, Apr. 17, Aug. 6, Oct. 9,
10, 12; 1876, Apr. 8-15, Oct. 7; 1877, May 19, 26, Oct. 13; 1878, Apr.
13, July 13, Oct. 12; 1879, Apr. 5, 8, Oct. 7; 1880, Apr. 10, Sept. 23;
*Townsend's Morm. Trials,* 44; *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 278:-89;
*Robinson's Sinners and Saints;* bishops, *Des. News,* Nov. 29, 185l;
book of <span id="page_367">p. 367</span> Abraham, *Smith's Pearl of Gt
Price,* 25-30; *Mil. Star,* xv. 549-50, passim. For additional sermons
on theology, see *Mil. Star,* i. passim, vi. 33-8, 49-56, 65-70, 97-9,
viii. 35-8; *Times and Seasons,* ii., iii., iv., and v. passim, vi.
808-9, 823-5, 957-8, 1001-5; anal. of, *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 311-31;
*Townsend's Morm. Trials,* 40; on creed and faith, *Times and Seasons,*
i. 68-70, iii. 863-5, 931-3; *Spencer's Letters,* etc., 1-252; *Young's
Wife No. 19,* 58-60; *Bennett's Hist. of Saints,* 103-32, 302-7, 340-1;
*Eden Rev.,* Apr. 1854, 352; *Pratt, Inter. Acct,* 27-36; *Id., Series
of Pamph.,* nos 2-6; *Tucker's Morm.,* 139-52; *Vetromile, A Tour,*
70-1; *Ferris’ Utah and Morm.,* 211-13, 299-300; *Sten-house's Tell It
All,* 295-300; *Reynolds' Bk of Abraham,* 15; *Grass Valley, Foothill
Tidings,* July 5, 1879; *Pratt,* in *Des. News,* Aug. 21, 1852; *Smith,*
in *Times and Seasons,* iii. 709; *Id., Pearl of Gt Price,* 63;
*Smucker's Morm.,* 61-6; *Pratt's Persecutions,* iii.-v.; *Id., Voice of
Warn.,* passim; *Dixon, White Conquest,* 182-8, 193-7, 223-8; preachers
and preaching, *Greeley's Overland Jour.,* 218-22; Seventies, *Mil.
Star,* xxxvi. 369-72; church charter, *S. F. Bulletin,* Nov. 26, 1858;
sincerity of Morm., *S. F. Alta,* Mar. 30, 1858.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[376:19](hou18.htm#fr_560.md) For a time, in so
far as possible, the practice of polygamy in Illinois and Utah was kept
secret by the missionaries in England and in Europe. Says Parley P.
Pratt in Manchester, and in the *Millennial Star* of 1846, 'Such a
doctrine is not held, known, or practised as a principle of the
latter-day saints;' and John Taylor at the Boulogne discussion, in
France, in July 1850, says, 'We are accused here of polygamy and actions
the most indelicate, obscene, and disgusting, such as none but a corrupt
heart could have conceived. these things are too outrageous to be
believed.'

    On the morning of Aug. 29, 1852, before a special conference in
session at S. L. City, Orson Pratt preached on the subject of marriage,
in which discourse he stated, 'It is well known, however, to the
congregation before me, that the latter-day saints have embraced the
doctrine of a plurality of wives as part of their religious faith.' In
the evening, whilst the sacrament was being passed, Brigham addressed
the audience, saying in the course of his remarks, 'Though that doctrine
\[polygamy\] has not been preached by the elders, this people have
believed in it for many years.' At the close of Brigham's address, the
revelation of July 12, 1843, was read by Elder Thomas Bullock. The
proceedings of this conferencc were published in full in all 8vo
pamphlet of 48 pages, issued as an extra by the *Deseret News*, on Sept.
14, 1852, when the revelation first saw the light. It next appeared in
the Millennial Star, and may now be found in the book of *Doctrine and
Covenants*. Herewith I give the revelation entire.

    Revelation given to Joseph Smith, at Nauvoo, July 12, 1843: 'Verily,
thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, that inasmuch as you
have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord,
justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also Moses, David,
and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principle and doctrine of
their having many wives and concubines: behold, and lo! I am the Lord
thy God, and will answer thee as touching this matter; therefore,
prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I am about
to give unto you; for all those who have this law revealed unto them
must obey the same; for behold! I reveal unto you a new and an
everlasting covenant, and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye
damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter
into my glory; for all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide
the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions
thereof, as were instituted from before the foundations of the world;
and as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it was instituted
for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof
must and shall abide the law, or he shall be damned, saith the Lord God.
And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law arc these:
All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances,
connections, associations, or expectations that are not made and entered
into and sealed by the holy spirit of promise, of him who is anointed,
both as well for time and for all eternity, and that, too, most holy, by
revelation and commandment, through the medium of mine anointed, whom I
have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed
unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is
never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of
this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in
and after the resurrection from the dead: for all contracts <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> that are not made unto this end have an end
when men are dead. Behold mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord
God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept an offering, saith the
Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that
which I have not appointed? And will appoint unto you, saith the Lord,
except it be by law, even as I and my father ordained unto you, before
the world was? I am the Lord thy God, and I give unto you this
commandment that no man shall come unto the father but by me, or by my
word, which is my law, saith the Lord; and everything that is in the
world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or
powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be that are not by me, or
by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain
after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the
Lord your God; for whatsoever things remain are by me, and whatsoever
things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed. Therefore, if a man
marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not byrne, nor by my
word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world, and she
with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are
dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound
by any law when they are out of the world; therefore, when they are out
of the world, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are
appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to
minister for those who are worthy of a far more and an exceeding and an
eternal weight of glory; for these angels did not abide my law,
therefore they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly,
without exaltation, in their saved condition to all eternity, and from
henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. And
again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife, and make a covenant
with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant is not by me or
by my word, which is my law, and is not sealed by the holy spirit of
promise, through him whom I have anointed and appointed unto this power,
then it is not valid, neither of force when they are out of the world,
because they are not joined by me, saith the Lord, neither by my word;
when they are out of the world, it can not be received there because the
angels and the gods are appointed there, by whom they cannot pass; they
cannot, therefore, inherit my glory, for my house is a house of order,
saith the Lord God. And again, verily I say unto you if a man marry a
wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting
covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the holy spirit of promise, by
him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys
of this priesthood, and it shall be said unto them, Ye shall come forth
in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in
the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms,
principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths; then
shall it be written in the Lamb's book of life, that he shall commit no
murder whereby to shed innocent blood, and if lie abide in my covenant,
and commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done
unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in
time and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are
out of the world, and they shall pass by the angels and the gods which
are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been
sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a
continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods,
because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to
everlasting because they continue; then shall they be above all, because
all things <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> are subject unto them. Then
shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are
subject unto them.

    'Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot
attain to this glory; for straight is the gate and narrow the way that
leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there
be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world, neither do ye
know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and
shall receive your exaltation, that where I am ye shall be also. This is
eternal lives, to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law. Broad is the gate
and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths, and many there are that go
in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my
law. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according to
my word, and they are sealed by the holy spirit of promise, according to
mine appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin or transgression of
the new and everlasting covenant whatever, and all manner of
blasphemies, and if they commit no murder wherein they shed innocent
blood, yet they shall come forth in the first resurrection and enter
into their exaltation; but they shall be destroyed in the flesh, and
shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan, unto the day of
redemption, saith the Lord God. The blasphemy against the holy ghost,
which shall not be forgiven in the world nor out of the world, is in
that ye commit murder wherein ye shed innocent blood, and assent unto my
death, after ye have received my new and everlasting covenant, saith the
Lord God; and he that abideth not this law can in no wise enter into my
glory, but shall be damned, saith the Lord. I am the Lord thy God, and
will give unto thee the law of my holy priesthood as was ordained by me
and my Father before the world was. Abraham received all things
whatsoever he received by revelation and commandment by my word, saith
the Lord, and hath entered into his exaltation and sitteth upon his
throne. Abraham received promises concerning his seed and of the fruit
of his loins—from whose loins ye are, viz., my servant Joseph—which were
to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham
and his seed out of the world, they should continue; both in the world
and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars,
or if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore, ye could not number
them. This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the
promise was made unto Abraham, and by this law are the continuation of
the works of my father, wherein he glorifieth himself. Go ye, therefore,
and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law, and ye shall be
saved. But if ye enter not into my law, ye cannot receive the promise of
my Father which he made unto Abraham. God commanded Abraham, and Sarah
gave Hagar to Abraham to wife. And why did she do it? Because this was
the law, and from Hagar sprang many people. This, therefore, was
fulfilling, among other things, the promises. Was Abraham, therefore,
under condemnation? Verily I say unto you, nay; for I, the Lord,
commanded it. Abraham was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless
it was written thou shalt not kill. Abraham, however, did not refuse,
and it was accounted unto him for righteousness.

    'Abraham received concubines, and they bare him children, and it was
accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him
and he abode in my law; as Isaac also, and Jacob, did none other things
than that which they were commanded; and because they did none other
things than that which they were commanded, they have entered into their
exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not
angels, but <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> are gods. David also
received many wives and concubines, as also Solomon and Moses, my
servants, as also many others of my servants, from the beginning of
creation until this time, and in nothing did they sin, save in those
things which they received not of me. David's wives and concubines were
given unto him of me by the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of
the prophets who had the keys of this power; and in none of these things
did he sin against me, save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and
therefore he hath fallen from his exaltation and received his portion;
and he shall not inherit them out of the world, for I gave them unto
another, saith the Lord. I am the Lord thy God, and I gave unto thee, my
servant Joseph, an appointment, and restore all things; ask what ye
will, and it shall be given unto you, according to my word; and as ye
have asked concerning adultery, verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man
receiveth a wife in the new and everlasting covenant, and if she be with
another man, and I have not appointed unto her by the holy anointing,
she hath committed adultery, and shall be destroyed. If she be not in
the new and everlasting covenant, and she be with another man, she has
committed adultery; and if her husband be with another woman, and he was
under a vow, he hath broken his vow and hath committed adultery; and if
she hath not committed adultery, but is innocent, and hath not broken
her vow, and she knoweth it, and I reveal it unto you, my servant
Joseph, then shall you have power, by the power of my holy priesthood,
to take her and give her unto him that hath not committed adultery, but
hath been faithful, for he shall be made ruler over many; for I have
conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I
restore all things and make known unto you all things in due time. And
verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on earth shall
be sealed in heaven, and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by
my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and
whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the
heavens, and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in
heaven. And again, verily I say, whomsoever you bless, I will bless; and
whomsoever you curse, I will curse, saith the Lord; for I the Lord am
thy God. And again, verily I say unto you, my servant Joseph, that
whatsoever you give on earth, and to whomsoever you give any one on
earth, by my word and according to my law, it shall be visited with
blessings, and not cursings, and with my power, saith the Lord, and
shall be without condemnation on earth and in heaven; for I am the Lord
thy God, and will be with thee even unto the end of the world, and
through all eternity; for verily I seal upon you your exaltation and
prepare a throne for you in the kingdom of my father, with Abraham, your
father. Behold! I have seen your sacrifices, and will forgive all your
sins; I have seen your sacrifices, in obedience to that which I have
told you; go, therefore, and I make a way for your escape, as I accepted
the offering of Abraham, of his son Isaac.

    'Verily I say unto you, a commandment I give unto mine handmaid,
Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay herself
and partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto her; for I
did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham, and that I
might require an offering at your hand by covenant and sacrifice; and
let my handmaid Emma Smith receive all those that have been given unto
my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me; and those
who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed,
saith the Lord God; for I am the Lord thy God, and ye shall obey my
voice; and I give unto my servant Joseph that he shall be made ruler
over many things, for he hath been faithful over a few things, and from
henceforth I will strengthen him. And I command mine handmaid <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> Emma Smith to abide and cleave unto my
servant Joseph and to none else. But if she will not abide this
commandment, she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord, for I am the Lord
thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law; but if she
will not abide this commandment, then shall my servant Joseph do all
things for her even as he hath said, and I will bless him and multiply
him, and give unto him a hundred-fold in this world, of fathers and
mothers, brothers and sisters, houses and lands, wives and children, and
crowns of eternal lives in the eternal worlds. And again, verily I say,
let mine handmaid forgive my servant Joseph his trespasses, and then
shall she be forgiven her trespasses, wherein she has trespassed against
me, and I, the Lord thy God, will bless her and multiply her, and make
her heart rejoice. And again, I say, let not my servant Joseph put his
property out of his hands, lest an enemy come and destroy him—for Satan
seeketh to destroy—for I am the Lord thy God, and he is my servant; and
behold! and lo I am with him, as I am with Abraham, thy father, even
unto his exaltation and glory. Now as touching the law of the
priesthood, there are many things pertaining thereunto. Verily, if a man
be called of my Father, as was Aaron, by mine own voice, and by the
voice of him that sent me, and I have endowed him with the keys of the
power of this priesthood, if he do anything in my name, and according to
my law, and by my word, he will not commit sin, and I will justify him.
Let no one, therefore, set on my servant Joseph, for I will justify him;
for he shall do the sacrifice which I require at his hands, for his
transgressions, saith the Lord your God. And again, as pertaining to the
law of the priesthood; if any man esouse a virgin, and desire to espouse
another, and the first give her consent, if and he espouse the second,
and they are virgins, and have vowed to on other man, then is he
justified; he cannot commit adultery, for they are given unto him; for
he cannot commit adultery with that that belonged unto him, and to none
else; and if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot
commit adultery, for they belong to him and they are given unto him;
therefore is he justified. But if one or either of the ten virgins after
she is espoused shall be with another man, she has committed adultery
and shall be destroyed; for they are given unto him to multiply and
replenish the earth, according to my commandment and to fulill the
promise which was given by my father before the foundation of the world,
and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they may bear the
souls of men; for herein is the work of my father continued, that he may
be glorified. And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man have
a wife who holds the keys of this power, and he teaches unto her the law
of my priesthood as pertaining to these things, then shall she believe
and administer unto him, or she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord your
God; for I will destroy her; for I will magnify my name upon all those
who receive and abide in my law. Therefore it shall be lawful in me, if
she receive not this law, for him to receive all things whatsoever I,
the Lord his God, will give unto him, because she did not administer
unto him according to my word; and she then becomes the transgressor,
and be is exempt from the law of Sarah, who administered unto Abraham
according to the law, when I commanded Abraham to take Hagar to wife.
And now, as pertaining to this law, verily, verily, I say unto you, I
will reveal more unto you hereafter; therefore let this suffice for the
present. Behold I am Alpha and Omega. Amen.'

<span id="fn_561"></span>[388:20](hou18.htm#fr_561.md) My references to
articles, both printed and in manuscript, relating to polygamy, are no
less voluminous than those touching upon other church matters. I note as
follows: early polygamists, *Ferris’ Utah and Morm.*, 117; *Smucker's
Hist. Morm.,* 161-2; *Young's Wife No. 19,* 150-5; *Stenhouse's Exposé,*
85-93; *Atlantic Monthly,* 1859, 576-7; denial of exist., *Stenhouse's
Tell It All,* 103-4, 499-500; Pratt, in *Millennial Star,* vi. 22;
*Lee's Morm.,* 167; *Young's Wife No. 19,* 329-31; favored by women,
*Des. News,* 1870, Jan. 12, 19; 1871, Nov. 8, Dec. 20; *S. F. Gol. Era,*
June 13, 1868; *Woodruff's Autobiog.,* MS., 4-6; *The Morm. at Home,*
145-7, 159; *S. L. Herald,* Feb. 1, 1879; *Burton's City of Saints,*
525-34; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 130-4, 216-22; *Tanner's Letter,* MS.,
passim; *Smoot's Experience,* etc., MS., 4, 8-9; *Tracy's Narr.,* MS.,
30-2; *Richards’ Retain.,* MS., 18-19, 36-7, 48-9; Pratt (Belinda M.),
in *Utah Pamph. Relig.,* no. 3, 27-33; *Marshall's Through Amer.,*
185-8; *Millennial Star,* xvii. 36-7; *Brown's Letter,* MS., passim;
arg. in favor of, *Smith's Rise, Progress,* etc., 48-56; *Millennial
Star,* xix. 636-40, xxxvii. 340-1; *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 252-4;
*Paddock's La Tour,* 324-5; *Ferris’ Utah and Morm.,* 115-17; Johnson,
in *Utah Tracts,* no. 10; Richardson, with *Taylor's Govt of God,* no.
19; Spencer, with *Id.,* no. 18; *Taylor vs Hollister, Sup. Ct Decis.,*
no. 2, in Morm. *Pamph.; Cannon's Rev. of Decis.,* no. 11, in *Id.;
Robinson's Sinners and Saints,* 82-109; *Dilke's Greater Brit.,* i. 130;
*Stenhouse's Exposé,* 218-21; *Tell It All,* 256-8; *Richards’ Narr.,*
MS., 79-81; *Worthington's Women,* etc., 592-3; *Busch, Gesch. Morm.,*
340-52, 407-44; *Times and* <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> *Seasons,*
vi. 798-9; *Tullidge's Women,* etc., 367-78; *B*oisé *City Statesman,*
Sept. 30, 1879; *S. F. Alta,* Nov. 13, 1857; *Chronicle,* 1880, Dec. 12;
1882, Feb. 15, July 29; *Stock Rept,* Jan. 8, 1880; *Des. News,* 1857,
May 13, July 16; 1866, Mar. 15; 1867, Apr. 17, 24; 1871, Oct. 11; *S. L.
Contrib.,* ii. 213; *Tribune,* 1875, July 17; 1879, Oct. 10, 11; *S. F.
Herald,* 1852, Sept. 17; 1853, Mar. 1; 1869, Aug. 28; 1880, Jan. 6, 18;
sermons, Young, *Dilke's Greater Brit.,* i. 129; Young, *Jour. of
Disc.,* ii. 75-90; *S. iv. Bulletin,* 1856, Sept. 16; 1862, Sept. 10;
1866, Oct. 26; 1869, Mar. 3; 1874, Nov. 13; *Call,* 1867, Sept. 11;
1868, Sept. 5; *Occident,* July 10, 1873; *Sac. Union,* Jan. 12, 1856;
*Elko Indpt,* Sept. 6, 1873; *Pan. Star and Her.,* Jan. 1867; *Boisé
City Statesman,* July 24, 1869; *Salem (Or.)Statesman,* May 5, 1857; *S.
L. Herald,* June 6, 1877; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 104-30, 245-6,
303-7; *Des. News,* May 25, 1870; Pratt, Smith, and Cannon,
*Discourses,* passim; disc., Pratt, *Des. News,* Oct. 20, 1869; Hyde,
*S. F. Herald,* Nov. 23, 1854; *Des. News,* May 9, 1860; Young (John),
*Id.,* Apr. 22, 1857; origin and prog., *S. F. Bulletin,* 1858, July 23;
1859, Apr. 16; 1868, July 18; 1869, Mar. 1; 1870, Nov. 12; 1871, July 6;
1872, Feb. 21, June 25; 1882, Mar. 3; *Call,* 1865, Aug. 2; 1868, Aug.
29; 1869, Feb. 28; 1874, July 15, Oct. 21; *Gol. Era,* July 3, 1869;
*Plac. Times,* Feb. 2, 1850; *N. Y. Her., in Watsonville Pajar.,* June
6, 1872; *Cal. Chris. Advoc.,* Oct. 15, 1874; *Cal. Farm.,* June 16,
1870; *Des. News,* 1866, Mar. 22, Apr. 19, May 17; 1879, May 7, 14; *S.
L. Contrib.,* iii. 61; *Herald,* May 23, 77; *Review,* 1871, Dee. 11,
19; *Telegraph,* May 26, 1868; *Tribune,* 1874, May 16; 1883, Oct. 20;
*Sac. Union,* Nov. 26, Dec. 5, 1856; *S. L. Herald, in Helena Gaz.,*
Apr. 27, 1872; *Cole, Cal.,* 18; *Beadle's Letter,* Jan. 1, 1869; *Life
in Utah,* 346-7; *The Morm. at Home,* 94-5, 102, 111-12; *Young's Wife
No. 19,* 124-6, 135-59; *Olshausen, Gesch. Morm.,* 175-84; *Smucker's
Hist. Morm.,* 402-24; *Bertrand's Mem. Morm.,* 173-217; *Busch, Gesch.
Morm.,* 105-33, 313-17; *Marshall's Through Amer.,* 221; *Stenhouse's
Englishwoman in Utah,* 38-9, 76-87, 153-4; *Slater, Morm.,* 85-6;
*Burton's City of Saints,* 217, 301-2; *The Morm. Proph.,* 211-14;
*Ferris’ Utah and Morm.,* 239, 248-64, 309-11; *Mackay's The Morm.,*
287; *Olympia, Pion. and Dem.,* Feb. 6, 1857; women's opposition,
*Stenhouse's Exposé,* 34-41, 72-84; *Tell It All,* 393-404, 420-58.

    For arguments against polygamy, see *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 180,
303-5; *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 262-4, 354-80; *Nouv. Ann. Voy.,*
cxliii. 183-4; *Carvallo's Inc. of Travel,* 151-4, 166-71; *Hall's Morm.
Exp.,* 52-5; *Overland Monthly,* vii. 551-8; *De Rupert, Cal. and
Morm.,* 153-62; *Todd's Sunset Land,* 161-212; *Dilke's Greater Brit.,*
i. 144-52; *Remy's Journey,* etc., ii. 137-72; *Young's Wife No. 19,*
98-109, 591-7; *Pop. Scien. Month.,* lii. 479-90, lvi. 160-5; *Codman's
Round Trip,* 173-277; *Froiseth's Women,* etc., passim; *Jonveaux,
L'Amer.,* 230-49; *Waite's Morm. Proph.,* 216-60; *Book of Morm.,* 83,
132; *Doc. and Cov.,* 218, 330; *Tuckcr's Morm.,* 184-6, 267, 283;
*Times and Seasons,* iv. 369; *Ferris’ Utah and Morm.*, 309-10;
*Marshall's Through Amer.,* 178-9; *Harper's Mag.,* liii. 647-51;
*Stansbury's Explor. Exp.,* 4-5; *Life Among Morm.,* 123-59; *Utah
Scraps,* 15-17; *Townsend's Morm. Trials,* 42-3; *Greenwood's New Life,*
131-71, 161-3; *Hubner's Ramble,* 90, 116; *Olshausen, Morm.,* 175-82;
*McClure's Three Thous. Miles,* etc., 158-9; *Nordhoff's Cal.,* 43;
*Burton's City of Saints,* 517-25; *Crimes of L. D. Saints,* 30-4;
*Hyde's Morm.,* 284-5; *Dixon's White Conq.,* i. 200-14; *Stenhouse's
Exposé,* 47-51, 146-53; *Taylder's Morm.,* 148-83; *Barnes' Atlan. to
Pac.,* 56-8; *Greeley's Overland Jour.,* 238-41; *Howitt's Hist. Amer.,*
ii. 356; *Richardson's Beyond Miss.,* 360-2; *S. F. Advocate,* Aug. 4,
1870; *Alta,* Mar. 26, 1877; Feb. 7, 1882; *Bulletin,* 1856, Aug. 18;
1860, Apr. 28; 1864, Jan. 18; 1865, Aug, 24; 1867, Oct. 25; 1870, Apr.
22, Sept. 2; 1871, Nov. 6; 1872, Sept. 25; 1873, Jan. 17, Dec. 17; <span
id="page_390">p. 390</span> 1875, Apr. 9; 1877, June 1, Aug. 3; 1878,
Jan. 8, Nov. 1; 1879, Jan. 7, 10, 21; 1881, Aug. 22; *Call,* 1870, Mar.
27; 1871, June 30, Aug. 9, 18; 1872, Feb. 21, Sept. 6; 1873, Feb. 11;
1874, Jan. 14; 1879, Aug. 11; *Cal. Farm.,* Apr. 17, 1863; *Chronicle,*
1869, June 26, July 28, Aug. 11, 17, 18, 22, Nov. 12, 28, Dec. 14; 1870,
Jan. 28, Feb. 27, May 8, 17; 1871, Sept. 21, Oct. 4, 8, 14, 17, 31, Nov.
5, Dec. 2; 1872, Feb. 3, 10, Apr. 20, Oct. 10; 1873, Apr. 11, 12, July
17, 27, 31, Aug. 1, 6, 26, Mar. 4; 1880, Oct. 14, 24, Nov. 6, 14, 28;
1881, Jan. 9; *Gol. Era,* Sept. 26, 1869; *News Letter,* Mar. 16, 1867;
*Pacif. Observ.,* Nov. 10, 1871; *Pioneer,* Sept. 15, 1873; *Post,*
1879, Sept. 11, Dec. 5; *Times,* 1869, Jan. 5, Mar. 25; *Town Talk,*
Nov. 26, 1856; *Sac. Union,* May 11, 1859; *San José Herald,* Apr. 20,
1877; *Jackson (Am.) Ledger,* Dec. 15, 1877; *Sta Barbara Index,* Mar.
8, 1877; *San Rafael Jour.,* Oct. 16, 1879; May 20, 1880; *Red Bluff
Sentinel,* Nov. 16, 1878; Jan. 18, 1879; *Ukiah Democ.,* Sept. 6, 1879;
*Cres. City Cour.,* Oct. 15, 1879; *Roseburg Plaindealer,* Dec. 20,
1879; *Marin Co. Jour.,* Oct. 16, 1879; *Monterey Cal.,* Feb. 4, 1879;
*Antioch Ledger,* Nov. 23, 1878; *Healdsburg, Russ. Riv. Flag,* Aug. 22,
1872; *Ogden (Utah) Freeman,* Max. 28, 1879; *S. L. Anti-Polyg.
Standard,* June 1880; *Contributor,* iii. passim; *Des. News,* 1854,
Aug. 24, Oct. 5; 1858, Aug. 11, 25; 1866, Mar. 29; 1867, July 3; 1869,
Aug. 5, Sept. 22; 1870, Feb. 2; 1871, Nov. 1; 1878, Nov. 20; 1884, Sept.
10; *Utah Rev.,* 1871, Aug. 18, Dec. 5; 1872, Jan. 12, 26; *Tribune,*
1872, May 25, June 1; 1874, Mar. 21, Apr. 4, Oct. 24; 1875, Aug. 21;
1876, Jan. 5, Nov. 19; 1877, Apr. 14, Aug. 25; 1878, Oct. 1, Nov. 22,
Dec. 21; Apr. 20, May 9, June 25, 29, July 17, Aug. 23, Sept. 24, Oct.
3, 10, 29, Nov. 16; 1883, June 7; 1884, Sept. 7, 14; *Austin (Nev.)
Reese Riv. Reveil.,* Feb. 15, 1866, Mar. 5, 1872; *Carson State Regis.,*
Oct. 24, 1871; *Elko Indep.,* Aug. 11, 1879; *Eureka Sentinel,* Aug. 28,
1879; *Gold Hill News,* Dec. 6, 1878; *Tuscarora Times-Rev.,* Nov. 22,
1878; *Virg. City Chron.,* Dec. 12, 1877; *Winnemucca, Silv. State,*
Apr. 26, 1880; *Prescott (Ariz.) Miner,* Aug. 15, 1879; *Helena (Mont.)
Indep.,* Mar. 12, 1875; *Boisé (Idah.) News,* Aug. 27, 1864; *City
Statesman,* May 24, 1879; *Oxford (Idah.) Enterprise,* Oct. 9, 1879;
*Portland (Or.) Bee,* Oct. 30, 1878; *Oregonian,* July 28, 1865; *Ev.
Telegram,* May 1, 1879; *Astoria, Astorian,* Jan. 19, 1878; *Eugene City
Guard,* Feb. 1, 1879; *Salem Mercury,* Oct. 29, 1870; *Dy Talk,* Nov. 7,
1879; socialism, *Woods (J. O.),* in *N. Y. Church Union,* Aug. 15,
1884; suggest. for suppress. polyg., *Colfax,* in *Freiseth, Women,*
360-2; *Bliss in Id.,* 367-71; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 55-62; *Crimes
of L .D. Saints,* i.-iii.; *Russling, Across Amer.,* 191-5; *S. F.
Alta,* Jan. 8, 1880; *Bulletin,* Feb. 8, 1859; Nov. 29, 1883; *Inyo
Indep.,* July 27, 1872; sermons against, *Smith (T. W.),* in *N. Y.
Herald,* Feb. 20, 1882; *Higbee, A Discourse,* etc., passim; *Sac.
Union,* May 12, 1855; Nov. 15, 1856; *S. L Review,* Sept. 15, 1871; *S.
F. Alta,* Nov. 8, 1878; *Ogden Freeman,* May 30, 1879; marriage, social
and moral effects, *Young's Wife No. 19,* 388-9; *S. F. Alta,* Oct. 14,
1857; *Pratt,* in *Des. News,* Jan. 16, 1856; sealing for eternity,
*Chandless, Visit to S. L.,* 161-2; *Stenhouse's Exposé,* 69-70; *Rocky
Mtn Saints,* 586-8; *.Englishwoman in Utah,* 120-1; *Tell It All,*
405-19, 550, 607; S. *F. Bulletin, Jan.* 27, 1872; Oct. 29, 1878;
*Ferris’ Utah and Mormons,* 233-46; *Young's Wife No. 19,* 310-18;
*Ward's Husband in Utah,* 12-38, 208-12; *Hyde's Morm.,* 83-9; *Tucker's
Morm.,* 270-5; *San Jose Herald-Argus,* Nov. 22, 1878; *Dall, My First
Holiday,* 91; first monog. marriage, *S. F. Call,* Feb. 8, 1865;
divorce, *Utah Laws,* 1878, 1-2; *Utah Scraps,* 19; *Stenhouse's Tell It
All,* 390-1, 554-8; *S. F. Alta,* 1873, July 31, Aug. 9, 23; *Bulletin,*
1877, Sept. 27, Oct. 11; *Cal. Farm.,* May 12, 1870; *Post,* Feb. 13,
1873; *Stock Exch.,* Feb. 23, 1878; *Sta Rosa Times,* Nov. 1, 1877; *S.
L. Tribune,* 1874, Mar. 28; 1877, June 9, July 14, Sept. 29; *Virg. City
Chron.,* Sept. 27, 1877; dower, *Paddock's La Tour,* 293; <span
id="page_391">p. 391</span> *Utah, Gov. Mess.,* 1882, 14; adultery,
*Dilke's Greater Brit.,* i. 127; *Kanesville (Iowa) Front. Guard.,* June
13, 1851; *Crimes of L. D. Saints,* 2-6; condition of women,
*Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities,* etc., 103-4; *Leslie, California,*
etc., 76-102; *Putnam's Mag.,* 144-607, passim; *Utah Scraps,* 18-19;
*Young's Wife No. 19,* 224-531, passim; *Cradlebaugh, Speech of,* 4-7;
*Bowles’ Our New West,* 249-53; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 23-303,
passim; *The Morm. Proph.,* 218-77; *Life Among Morm.*, 183-6; *Prime's
Around the World,* 31-2; *Dilke's Greater Brit.,* i. 129; *Hyde's
Morm.,* 51-82, 158-67; *Hall's Morm.,* 113; *Tucker's Morm.,* 173-82,
275-6; *Appleton's Jour.,* xi. 547-8; *Morm. at Home,* 116-85; *Clark's
Sights,* MS., 7-11; *Mackay's The Morm.,* 298, 303; *Smith's Mys. and
Crimes,* 38-43; *Bonwick's Morm. and Silv. Mines,* 110-140; *Jackson's
Bits of Trav. at Home,* 22-7; *Greenwood's New Life,* 160-1; *Gunnison's
Morm.,* 75, 159-61; *Stenhouse's Englishwoman,* 202-339; *Exposé,*
96-190; *Tell It All,* passim; *S. F. Alta,* July 17, 1873; *Call,* Oct.
8, 1876; *Bulletin,* 1856, Nov. 24; 1858, Nov. 17; 1871, May 4, July 25;
1872, Sept. 30; 1872, Aug. 20; 1877, July 19; *Herald,* Nov. 24, 1856;
*Mail,* Jan. 4, 1876; *Pacif. Baptist,* Sept. 17, 1874; *Post,* Nov. 18,
1872; *Eureka Sentinel,* Jan. 22, 1875; *Placer Herald,* Nov. 4, 1871;
*Red Bluff Indept,* Apr. 3, 1867; *Sac. Union,* Aug. 25, 1855; Aug. 19,
1857; Bee, Nov. 9, 1878; *S. L. Obispo Tribune,* May 5, 1877; *Stockton
In-dept,* Mar. 8, 1879; *S. L. Des. News,* Oct. 5, 1850; Jan. 15, 1868;
Apr. 27, 1870; *Herald,* Nov. 12, 1878; June 25, 1879; *Utah Rev.,*
1871, Aug, 21, Oct. 7, Dec. 7, 19; 1872, Jan. 17, 20, 24; *Tribune,*
1877, Apr. 28, May 19, 26, June 9; *Kanesville (Iowa) Front. Guard.,*
June 13, 1849; *Belmont (Nev.) Cour.,* Jan. 12, 1878; *Portland (Or.)
Oregonian,* Dec. 24, 1863; *Ev. Telegram,* May 5, 1879; Young's wives,
*Stenhouse's Englishwoman,* 168-78; *Exposé,* 154-97; *Tell It All,*
510-14; *Ward's Husband in Utah,* 243-4; *Morm. at Home,* 130-1;
*Young's Wife No. 19,* 598-605; *S. L. Tribune,* 1874, Apr. 25, May 23,
July 18; *S. F. Call,* 1874, Aug. 27, Oct. 4; 1866, Mar. 29, Aug. 2;
1867, Feb. 1; *Deer Lodge (Mont.) New N. West, Jan.* 31, 1874. For
references to polygamy in presidential messages, see *S. F. Times,* June
27, 1869; *U.S. H. Ex. Doc.,* i., 42 Cong., 2d Sess.; *S. F. Bulletin,*
Aug. 1, 1872; *Post,* Feb. 15, 1873; *Elko Indept,* Dec. 18, 1875; *S.
L. Herald,* Dec. 8, 1881; *N. Y. The Nation,* Dec. 15, 1881.

    In his message to the congress of 1883-4, the president favors a
repeal of the organic act, and recommends a federal commission as a
substitute. In commenting upon this, the *Des. News* declares that the
destruction of the local government will fail to destroy polygamy,
neither can 'commissions, edicts, or armies, or any other earthly
powers,' for the plural marriages of the Mormons are ecclesiastical,
perpetual, and eternal. Says W. S. Godbie, well-known writer on
Mormonism, in a letter to the *S. L. Tribune* of Dec. 9, 1883, after
first quoting George Q. Cannon as preaching in the tabernacle 'it is not
vox populi vox Dei,' but 'vox Dei vox populi,' 'The essence of the whole
Utah question lies couched in these telling words of the church organ
and the leading apostle.'

    For the messages of Utah governors touching polygamy, see *Utah
Jour. Legis.,* 1862-3, app. v.-viii.; 1872, 32-4; 1876, 31-3, 34, 240;
1878, 43, 44-5, 47-9; *Utah, Gov. Mess.,* 1882, 11; *S. F. Call,* Jan.
28, 1872; Jan. 17, 1878; *Prescott Miner,* Apr. 30, 1875; *Morm.
Prophet,* 79-84; Hazen's report, in *Hayes’ Scraps,* R. R. iii. 212;
discussions in congress, *S. F. Bulletin,* Mar. 23, 1870; *Call,* 1870,
Feb. 19, Mar. 24, Aug. 16; *Chronicle,* Feb. 16, 1882; *Deer Lodge New
N. West,* Apr. 29, 1870; *S. L .Dy Teletgraph,* Mar. 23, 24, 1870; *Des.
News,* May 16, 1860; Apr. 26, 1866; Apr. 3, 1867; Mar. 9, 1870; Apr. 6,
1870; Nov. 29, 1871; Mar. 6, 1872; *Tribune,* May 15, 1875; *Millennial
Star,* xxxiv. 257-63, 268-71; <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> *Antioch
Ledger,* Jan. 17, 1874; *Gooch's Speech,* Apr. 1860; *Green, Morm.,*
457-65; *Beadle's Life in Utah,* 523-6; *Utah Pamph., Polit.,* no. 2;
*Id., Relig.,* no. 7; *Colfax's Morm. Quest.,* passim; *Prescott Miner,*
Apr. 30, 1875; also *Cong. Globe,* passim; bills introd. in congress,
*U. S. H. Jour.,* 34 Cong., 1st-2d Sess., 1117-18; *U.S. Acts,* 37
Cong., 2d Sess., 208-9; *S. F. Bulletin,* Apr. 1, 1870; *S. L. Dy
Telegraph,* Mar. 25, 1870; *Cong. Globe,* 1870-1, 966; *N. Y. Herald,*
Jan. 27, 1872; *Utah, Jour. Legis.,* 1872, 84; 1878, 203-4; *Nat.
Quart.* Rev., July 1879, 91-2; *U. S. Dist Atty,* in *Froiseth's Women,*
etc., 334-5, 346 -51, 355; *S. L. Herald,* Dec. 15, 1881; *Robinson's
Sinners and Saints,* 74-81; *S. L. Contributor,* iii. 204-13; *S. F.
Alta,* 1874, Mar. 1, June 3, Dec. 6; S. F. *Bulletin,* Dec. 14, 1881;
*Call,* Jan. 9, 1879; Feb. 17, 1882; *Chronicle,* 1881, Dec. 13; 1882,
Jan. 25, Feb. 17; 1884, June 18; *Post,* Feb. 27, 1873; June 3, 1874;
*S. José Mercury,* Dec. 1878; *Austin, Reese Riv. Reveil.,* Aug. 12,
1879; *Eureka Sentinel,* Jan. 28, 1879; *Gold Hill News,* Jan. 3, 1878;
*S. L. Tribune,* Feb. 2, 1878; *U.S. Acts and Res.,* passim.

    Arthur G. Sedgwick, in the *Century Mag.* for Jan. 1882, under the
heading *Leading Aspects of the Mormon Problem,* refers to the various
bills introduced, and mentions the most important prosecutions and their
results: decis. of U.S. Supreme Ct, *S. L. Herald,* 1879, Jan. 8, May
23; *Tribune,* Aug. 2, 1879; *S. F. Bulletin,* 1879, Jan. 7, 8, Feb. 24;
*Eureka Sentinel,* Jan. 16, 1879; evasion of the Edmunds law, *S. F.
Bulletin,* 1883, Apr. 30, Sept. 29; grand juries, charges to, *S. F.
Bulletin,* Dec. 9, 1858; *Salem (Oregon) Argus,* Aug. 28, 1858; *Sac.
Union,* Apr. 20, 22, 1867; *S. F. Call,* Oct. 14, 1875; competency of
polygamists as jurors, *S. L. Utah Rev.,* 1871, Sept. 19, 27; report of,
*Deseret News,* Oct. 3, 1877; rept of commission, *Utah, Rept on Gov.
Mess.,* 9-13; *S. F. Bulletin,* Dec. 7, 1882; *Chronicle,* Oct. 3, 1882;
cause of trouble with U.S., *Richards’ Narr.,* MS., 74; discuss. between
Colfax and Morm., *Bowles’ Our New West,* 238-41; *Des. News,* Feb. 9,
1870; Chaplain Newman and others, *Pratt and Newman,* etc., 3-67;
*Tullidge's Life of Young,* 403-6; *Newman, Sermon,* passim; *Des.
News,* Aug. 17, 1870; corresp. Newman and Young, *Id.,* 1870, Aug. 10,
17;mass-meetings, memorials, petitions, and protests, *Tullidge's Life
of Young,* 389-413; *Women of Morm.,* 379-402, 528-31; *Coyner's
Letters,* etc., vii.; *Stenhouse's Englishwoman,* etc., 373-4; *Tell It
All,* 606-7; *U.S. H. Ex. Doc.,* 58, 45 Cong., 3d Sess., 1-6; *Utah
Pamph., Relig.,* no. 18; *The Cullom Bill,* in *Morm. Pamph., no.* 6;
*S. F. Alta,* Apr. 22, 1872; *Bulletin,* Jan. 18, 1870; Nov. 9, 1878;
Jan. 21, 1879; Feb. 17, 23, 1882; *Call,* Nov. 8, 1878; *Chronicle,*
Feb. 3, 27, 1882; *Petaluma Argus,* Nov. 22, 1878; *Sac. Bee,* Nov. 16,
1878; *Stockton Indept,* Jan. 21, 1878; *Elko Indept,* Nov. 15, 1878;
*Eureka Sentinel,* Nov. 17, 1878; *Gold Hill News,* Nov. 8, 1878; *Reno
Gazette,* Nov. 21, 1878; *S. L. Contributor,* iii. 155-6; *Des. News,*
1867, Jan. 16; 1870, Apr. 6; 1872, May 22, 29; *Herald,* June 14, 1879;
*Telegraph,* Apr. 1, 1870; *Tribune,* 1878, Nov. 16, 23; the Reynolds
case, *Froiseth's Women,* 401-12; *Utah Pamph., Polit.,* no. 17, 20;
*Review of Opin.,* etc., in *Morm. Pamph.,* no. 1; *S. F. Bulletins,*
Aug. 21, 1874; *Call,* Dec. 22, 1875; Dec. 10, 1878; *Elko Indept,*
1878, Oct. 30, Nov. 13; 1879, Jan. 8; *Eureka Sentinel,* Aug. 6, 1879;
*Gold Hill News,* Nov. 15, 1878; *Tuscarora Times-Rev.,* Nov. 21, 1878;
*S. L. Coutributor,* ii. 154-7, 188-90; *Des. News,* 1874, Oct. 28;
1875, Apr. 7; 1878, Oct. 9; 1879, Jan. 15, 29, Dec. 3; *Herald,* July
19, 1879; the Miles case, *S. F. Bulletin,* May 7, 1879; *Call,* Oct.
31, 1878; *Sac. Rec.-Union,* May 5, 7, 1879; *Elko Indept,* June 5,
1879; *Virg. City Eve. Chron.,* Oct. 30, 31, Nov. 8, 1878; *S. L. Des.
News,* 1878, Nov. 6, 13; 1879, May 7, 14, June 4; *Herald,* 1878, Oct.
27, 29, Nov. 5; 1879, Apr. 29, 30, May 1-4, 6, 7.

    On March 10, 1863, the president of the church was arrested, as we
shall see later, the charge being polygamy, and brought under the act of
July 1, 1862; the accused was placed under bonds in the sum of $2,000 to
appear <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> at the next sitting of the U.S.
ct for the 3d judic. dist. On Oct. 2, 1871, he was again arrested on an
indictment of the grand jury, found under the statutes of Utah; see
*Utah Laws,* 58, sec. 32, which prohibits the cohabitation of persons
not married to each other. On Jan. 2, 1872, Brigham was for the third
time arrested, the accusation on this occasion being complicity in the
murder of one Richard Yates in Echo Cañon, in 1857. There being no
government jail, and the prisoner old and feeble, he was allowed to
remain in his own house under charge of the U.S. marshal. It does not
appear that, beyond the annoyance caused by restraint of liberty,
Brigham suffered in consequence of either of these charges. For details
of the arrests, I refer to *Millennial Star,* xxv. 273-4, xxxiii.
696-700, 708-14, 728, xxxiv. 58-60, 70-1, 120-3, 209-15; *S. F. Alta,*
1871, Oct. 3, 4, 8, 13, 28, 29, Nov. 1, 22, 24, 1872, Apr. 26;
*Bulletin,* 1871, Oct. 3, 9, 13, 25, 27, 30, 31, Nov. 21, 28; 1872, Jan.
3, 8, Apr. 26; *Call,* 1870, Jan. 3; 1871, Oct. 3, 5, 11, 17, Nov. 22,
28; 1872, Apr. 26; *Examiner,* 1871, Oct. 6, 9, 13, 17, 19, 25, Nov. 2,
22, 28; 1872, Jan. 3, Feb. 14; *Gol. Era,* Nov. 12, 1871; *Sac. Unions,*
1871, Oct. 6, 18; *S. L. Des. News,* 1871, Oct. 11, 18, Nov. 1, 8, 22;
1872, May 1; *Tribune,* 1872, Feb. 1, Apr. 27; *Utah Review,* 1871, Oct.
12, 13, 20, 21, Nov. 25, 27, Dec. 1, 4; 1872, Jan. 16, Feb. 10; *Carson
State Regis.,* Oct. 14, 1871; *Elko Indept,* Jan. 6, 1872; *Silver City
(Id.) Avalanche,* Oct. 7, 1871; *Portland (Or.) Deutsche Zeit.,* Nov. 4,
1871.

    On Oct. 28, 1871, Thomas Hawkins, of Salt Lake City, having been
found guilty of adultery with two women, under a territorial statute
approved by Gov. Young on Mar. 6, 1852, was sentenced to three years’
imprisonment and to pay $500 fine; see *S. F. Alta,* Oct. 4, 1871;
*Bulletin,* Nov. 3, 1871; *Sac. Unions,* 1871, Oct. 24, 30, Nov. 1. On
Mar. 6, 1879, Dan. H. Wells was imprisoned for two days and fined $100
for contempt of court in refusing to testify as to the garments worn
during the endowment ceremonies. *Juv. Inst.,* xiv. 114-15; *McClellan,
Golden State,* 587-9. In 1873, Ann Eliza Young, known as Wife No. 19,
began suit against Brigham for divorce, with alimony. About two years
later she was awarded $500 per month, which decision was afterward set
aside, but not, Tullidge says, until Brigham had been imprisoned for
contempt of court, and had paid two months' alimony and $4,000 counsel
fees; see *Young's Wife No. 19,* 553-65; *Tullidge's Life of Young,*
431-3; *Helena (Mont.) Indept,* Nov. 25, 1875; *Virginia Madisonian,*
June 9, 1877; *S. F. Bulletin,* 1873, July 29, 31; 1875, Feb. 26, May
11; 1876, Nov. 1, 8; *Call,* July 10, 1875; *Los Angeles Star,* May 5,
1877; *Dayton (Lyon co.) Times,* May 2, 1877; *Eureka Sentinel,* Jan.
10, 1879; *Gold Hill News,* Apr. 28, 1877; *S. L. Des. News,* Apr. 24,
1872; Sept. 2, 1874; Mar. 3, Nov. 3, 24, 1875; Aug. 2, Nov. 8, 1876;
*Tribune,* Nov. 16, 1875; July 22, 1876; Apr. 28, 1877.

    Herewith I give a table, brought down to include 1882, compiled from
census of 1880, police and penitentiary statistics, and report of
commissioners appointed under the Edmunds bill, comparing the
distribution of criminals <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> between
Mormon and non-Mormon. The table includes the Mormon settlements in
Idaho.

<div align="center">

|                                                                                        |                                    |                                       |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
|                                                                                        | <span class="small">Mormons</span> | <span class="small">Non-Mormon</span> |
| Murder, manslaughter, and all assaults endangering life                                | 41                                 | 317                                   |
| Rape                                                                                   | 1                                  | 5                                     |
| Prostitution                                                                           | —                                  | 95                                    |
| Keeping brothels                                                                       | —                                  | 27                                    |
| Lewd conduct, insulting women, exposing person, nuisance, obscene and profane language | 4                                  | 47                                    |
| Forgery and counterfeiting                                                             | —                                  | 8                                     |
| Drunkenness, etc                                                                       | 109                                | 594                                   |
| Violation of liquor ordinance                                                          | —                                  | 18                                    |
| Gambling                                                                               | —                                  | 52                                    |
| Robbery and burglary                                                                   | 4                                  | 62                                    |
| Disturbing the peace                                                                   | 34                                 | 111                                   |
| Bigamy                                                                                 | —                                  | 1                                     |
| Destroying property                                                                    | 15                                 | 26                                    |
| Arson                                                                                  | —                                  | 2                                     |
| Obtaining property under false pretences                                               | —                                  | 25                                    |
| Opium-smoking, etc                                                                     | —                                  | 16                                    |
| Stealing railroad rides                                                                | —                                  | 19                                    |
| Vagrancy                                                                               | —                                  | 147                                   |
| Violating prison rules                                                                 | <u> —</u>                          | <u>     6</u>                         |
|                                                                                        | 208                                | 1,578                                 |
|                                                                                        | <span class="small">Mormon</span>  | <span class="small">Non-Mormon</span> |
| Confined in Utah penitentiary                                                          | 6                                  | 22                                    |
| Confined in S. L. co. jail                                                             | 14                                 | 97                                    |
| Confined in Oneida co. jail                                                            | 1                                  | 30                                    |
| Confined in Idaho penitentiary                                                         | —                                  | 6                                     |
| Confined in Bear Lake co. jail                                                         | —                                  | 1                                     |

</div>

    The prostitutes enumerated are those in S. L. City only; to these it
will be safe to add as many more living in the outside towns and mining
camps. In 1880, the population of Utah was 143,963, that of Oneida. co.,
Idaho, was 6,964, and there were 3,235 souls in Bear Lake county. About
7,000 women were in 1885 living in polygamy in Utah. See *Richards’
Crime in Utah*, MS., passim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Missions and Immigration. 1830-1883.](hou19.md)
