[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou11)  [Next](hou13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

### CHAPTER IX. AT THE MISSOURI. 1846-1847.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Native Races of the
Missouri—the Pottawattamies and the Omahas—the Mormons Welcomed As
Brethren—War With Mexico—Californila Territory—Mexican
Boundaries—Application to the United States Government for Aid—An Offer
to Serve As Soldiers Accepted—Organization of the Mormon
Battalion—Departure of the Battalion—Bounty Money—March Across the
Continent—the Battalion in California—Matters on the
Missouri.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">Among</span> the savages on either side of
the Missouri, the Pottawattamies on the east side and the Omahas on the
west side, the outcasts from Nauvoo were warmly welcomed. "My Mormon
brethren," said the chief Pied Riche, <span
id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_295) "the Pottawattamie came sad and tired
into this unhealthy Missouri bottom, not many years back, when he was
taken from his beautiful country beyond the Mississippi, which had
abundant game and timber and clear water everywhere. Now you are driven
away in the same manner from your lodges and lands there, and the graves
of your people. So we have both suffered. We must help one another, and
the great spirit will help us both."

    Extreme care was taken not to infringe in any way upon the rights of
the Indians or the government. Brigham counselled the brethren to regard
as sacred the burial customs of the natives; frequently their dead were
deposited in the branches of trees, wrapped in buffalo robes and
blankets, with pipes and trinkets

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

beside them. At Cutler Park there were friendly negotiations made with
Big Elk, chief of the Omahas, who said: "I am willing you should stop in
my country, but I am afraid of my great father at Washington." <span
id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_296)

    As the United States pretended to hold the title to the land, it was
thought that the Pottawattamies had no right to convey their timber to
others; so Brigham enjoined that there should be no waste of timber
within these limits, but that as much as was necessary might be used. A
permit for passing through their territory, and for remaining while

<span id="img_23700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ABOUT THE
MISSOURI.](tn/23700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/23700.jpg)  
ABOUT THE MISSOURI.  
</span>

necessary, was obtained from Colonel Allen, who was acting for the
United States. <span id="fr_297"></span>[3](#fn_297)

    Although it was late in the season when the first bands of emigrants
crossed the Missouri, some of them still moved westward as far as the
Pawnee villages on Grand Island, intending to select a new home before
winter. But the evil tidings from Nauvoo, and the destitute condition in
which other parties of the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

saints reached the Mormon encampments, forbade further progress, and all
prepared to spend the winter on the prairie. To the Mormon encampment on
the site of the present town of Council Bluffs was afterward given the
name of Kanesville. <span id="fr_298"></span>[4](#fn_298)

 

    While the saints were undergoing their infelicities at Nauvoo, war
had broken out between the United States and Mexico. At that time New
Mexico and California were a part of Mexico, and Utah and Nevada were a
part of California. <span id="fr_299"></span>[5](#fn_299) Journeying
west from Nauvoo, California or Oregon would be reached. The latter
territory was already secured to the United States; people were there
from the United States, composing religious sects and political parties
as jealous of their holdings as any in Missouri or Illinois. Vancouver
Island <span id="fr_300"></span>[6](#fn_300) was practically unoccupied,
but the Hudson's Bay Company would scarcely regard with favor its
occupation by a large body of American citizens whose government was at
that moment crowding them out of the Oregon territory and across the
Columbia River.

    But had the Mormons known their destination, had they known what
point among the mountains or

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

beside the sea was to be their final resting-place, they would not have
told it. When they turned their back on Nauvoo, the whole western coast
was before them, with its multitudinous mountains and valleys, its
rivers and lakes, and long line of seaboard. Of the several parts of
this immense territory, ownership and right of occupation were not in
every instance determined. The question of the boundary line between
England's possessions and those of the United States had stirred up no
small discussion and feeling, and out of the present war with Mexico
would doubtless arise some changes. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[7](#fn_301) It was a foregone conclusion in the
minds of many, before ever the migratory saints had reached the Missouri
River, that when the present troubles with Mexico were ended the United
States would have California. But however this might be, the saints had
a firm reliance on an overruling providence, and once adrift upon the
vast untenanted west, their God and their sagacity would point out to
them their future home. Thus it was that while the Mormons in the
western states took the route overland, another portion living at the
east took passage round Cape Horn, the intention being that the two
bodies of brethren should come together somewhere upon the Pacific
slope, which indeed they did. <span id="fr_302"></span>[8](#fn_302)

    The national title to what is now the Pacific United States being at
this time thus unsettled, and the Mormons having been driven from what
was then

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

the United States, it was considered but natural, as indeed it seemed to
be a necessity, that they would take possession of such unoccupied lands
in the region toward the Pacific as best suited them. But it was not
necessary that they should hold possession of such lands in opposition
to the government of the United States, as they have been charged with
doing.

    They now applied to the government at Washington for work, offering
to open roads, transport military stores, or perform any other service
which the government might require in this farthest west, even to assist
in fighting its battles. Such occupation would be of the greatest
advantage to them in this new country, where land was fertile and plenty
and free, and possessing as they did large herds of cattle and horses
and sheep, with no market and but little money. And on the other hand,
being on the ground, accustomed to work, and having every facility at
hand without long and expensive transportation, they could give more and
better work for the pay than the government could obtain by any other
means.

    They even asked for aid direct about the time the exodus began,
being represented at Washington by Elder Jesse C. Little, <span
id="fr_303"></span>[9](#fn_303) who, aided by Colonel Kane, Amos
Kendall, and others, brought the matter before President Polk. While
negotiations were yet in progress, news arrived that General Taylor had
already won two victories over the Mexicans; whereupon the elder
addressed a petition to the president, stating that from twelve to
fifteen thousand Mormons had set forth from Nauvoo for California, while
some had departed by sea, and in Great Britain alone were forty thousand
converts, all resolved to join the saints in their promised land. Many
of them were without means; they were compelled to go; they wanted
assistance

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

either in the way of work or otherwise. The Mormons were true-hearted
Americans, the memorial went on to say, and if the government would
assist them in their present emergency, the petitioner stood ready to
pledge himself as their representative to answer any call the government
might make upon them for service on the field of battle.

    Elder Little was taken at his word. At a cabinet meeting, held a day
or two after his petition was presented, the president advised that the
elder be sent at once to the Mormon camps, and there raise a thousand
men to take possession of California in the name of the United States,
while a thousand more be sent by way of Cape Horn for the same purpose,
on board a United States transport. It was finally arranged that the
elder, in company with Kane, should proceed westward, the latter bearing
despatches to Kearny, then at Fort Leavenworth, with a view to raising a
corps of about five hundred men.

    On the 19th of June, Kearny issued an order to Captain James Allen
of the 1st dragoons to proceed to the Mormon camp, and there raise four
or five companies of volunteers, to be mustered into the service of the
United States and receive the pay and rations of other infantry
volunteers. They were then to be marched to Fort Leavenworth, where they
would be armed; after which they would proceed to California by way of
Santa Fé. They were to enlist for twelve months, after which time they
were to be discharged, retaining as their own property the arms
furnished them.

    In pursuance of his orders, Captain Allen proceeded to Mount Pisgah,
where on the 26th he made known his mission. After a conference with the
church council at that point, Allen went to Council Bluffs, where on the
1st of July it was determined by President Young that the battalion
should be raised. In two weeks the corps was enrolled, and mustered in
on the 16th of July, the president of the church

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

promising to look after the wants of the families of those enlisting.

    Though in reality a great benefit to the brethren, there were some
hardships connected with the measure. <span
id="fr_304"></span>[10](#fn_304) As Brigham and others were on their way
from Council Bluffs to Pisgah to aid in obtaining these recruits, they
passed 800 west-bound wagons. At their encampments on each side the
river there was much serious illness, and as many of the teamsters had
been withdrawn for this campaign, much heavy work fell upon the women
and children, and the aged and infirm. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[11](#fn_305)

    After a ball on the afternoon of the 19th, the volunteers next day
bade farewell to their families and friends, and accompanied by eighty
women and children, <span id="fr_306"></span>[12](#fn_306) set forth on
their march, <span id="fr_307"></span>[13](#fn_307) on the 1st of August
arriving at Fort Leavenworth. Here the men received

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

their arms and accoutrements, and to each was given a bounty of forty
dollars, most of the money being sent back to the brethren by the hands
of elders Hyde, Taylor, and others, who accompanied the battalion to
that point, and there bade them God speed. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[14](#fn_308)

    About the middle of August the corps resumed its march toward Santa
Fé, a distance of seven hundred miles, arriving at that place in two
parties on the 9th and 12th of October. There eighty-eight men were
invalided and sent back to Pueblo for the winter, and later a second
detachment of fifty-five, being found unfit for service, was also
ordered to Pueblo. <span id="fr_309"></span>[15](#fn_309) Many of them
found their way during the following year to the valley of Great Salt
Lake.

    From Santa Fé the remainder of the troops set forth for San Diego, a
journey of more than eleven hundred miles, the entire distance between
that, town and the Mormon camps on the Missouri exceeding two thousand
miles. Much of the route lay through a pathless desert; at few points
could food be obtained in sufficient quantity for man or beast, and
sometimes even water failed. Wells were sunk in the wilderness; but on
one occasion, at least, the men travelled for a hundred miles without
water. <span id="fr_310"></span>[16](#fn_310) Before leaving Santa

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fé rations were
reduced, <span id="fr_311"></span>[17](#fn_311) and soon afterward
further reduced to one half and finally to one quarter allowance, the
meat issued to the troops being the flesh of such animals as were unable
to proceed further, though their hides and entrails were eagerly
devoured, being gulped down with draughts of water, when water could be
had. <span id="fr_312"></span>[18](#fn_312) While suffering these
hardships the men were compelled to carry their own knapsacks, muskets,
and extra ammunition, and sometimes to push the wagons through heavy
sand, or help to drag them over mountain ranges.

    Passing through a New Mexican pueblo on the 24th of October, some of
the men were almost as naked as on the day of their birth, except for a
breech-clout, or as their colonel termed it, a 'centre-clothing,' tied
around the loins. In this plight, near the middle of December, the
battalion reached the San Pedro River, some three hundred and forty
strong, and here occurred the only battle which the saints militant
fought during their campaign—an encounter with a

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

herd of wild bulls. Thence, without further adventure worthy of note,
they continued their march, and reaching the Pacific coast on the 29th
of January, 1847, found the stars and stripes floating peacefully over
the town of San Diego. <span id="fr_313"></span>[19](#fn_313)

    A more detailed account of the career of the Mormon battalion will
be found in my *History of California*. It remains only to add here that
about one hundred of the men reached Salt Lake City in the winter of
1847, while some remained on the Pacific coast. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[20](#fn_314)

    The alacrity displayed by the Mormon president in raising this
battalion has been ascribed to various causes; to the fear of further
persecution should the levy be refused, and to a desire of showing that,
notwithstanding their maltreatment, the saints were still

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

unswerving in their loyalty to the United States. While all this carried
weight, the bounty of twenty thousand dollars was no insignificant
consideration, nor the hope that this battalion might serve as vanguard
to Brigham's host, provided he carried out his partially formed purpose
to settle in California.

 

    At the close of 1846, about twelve thousand souls had assembled in
the Mormon camps, a portion of them being yet stationed as far eastward
as Garden Grove. Of the rest a few had made their way to some Atlantic
port and taken ship for California; many had dispersed throughout the
country, some of whom were now gathering at the rendezvous. Though the
first bands that crossed the Mississippi encountered no very severe
hardships, as I have said, the sufferings of those who set forth later
have few parallels, even among the pioneers, who, a year or two
afterward, followed their track westward in search of gold. <span
id="fr_315"></span>[21](#fn_315)

    Mount Pisgah, the next encampment west of Garden Grove, was on the
middle fork of Grand River. Through this winter of 1846-7, which was one
of severest struggle, there was great lack of food and clothing. They
could not go on because they had no teams, most of them being employed
in bringing forward the emigration from the Mississippi. Many

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

families were entirely out of provisions, and their destitute neighbors
were sorely taxed. <span id="fr_316"></span>[22](#fn_316) A fatal
sickness swept through the camp, and soon there were not sufficient
persons to nurse the sick; frequently burials were hastened with little
ceremony. In the spring of 1847, Lorenzo Snow was made president of the
camp. The men were put to work wherever they could get it. Seed was
planted, and the result was enough not only for themselves, but they
were enabled to send supplies to the camp at Council Bluffs. <span
id="fr_317"></span>[23](#fn_317) Snow instituted religious ceremonies
and amusements to brighten and encourage them. He describes a dance in
his log cabin, where clean straw was spread over the ground floor, and
the walls draped with sheets. Turnips were scooped out and in them were
placed lighted candles, which, suspended from the ceiling of earth and
cane, or fastened on the walls, imparted a picturesque effect. Dancing,
speeches, songs, and recitations varied the exercises, which opened and
closed with prayer.

    On each side of the hills where now stands Council Bluffs could be
seen the white canvas tents of a Mormon encampment, from which arose at
sunrise the smoke of hundreds of fires. After the morning meal, the men
employed themselves in tending herds, in planting grain and vegetables,
or in building houses for winter. Many of them were excellent craftsmen,
and could fell a tree, and split its trunk into boards, scantling,
rails, posts, or whatever were needed, as

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

readily as the most expert backwoodsmen of their day. <span
id="fr_318"></span>[24](#fn_318)

    During the summer and autumn months of 1846, the Papillon camp, near
the Little Butterfly River, in common with the others, was stricken with
fever, and with a scorbutic disease which the Mormons termed the black
canker. In the autumn drought, the streams that discharge into the
Missouri at this point are often little better than open sewers,
pestilential as open cesspools, and the river, having lost more than
half its volume, flows sluggishly through its channel of slime and
sedge. Of the baked mud on either bank is formed the rich soil on which
lay the encampments, the site being called, in their own phrase, Misery
Bottom. In the year previous the Indians in this neighborhood had lost
one ninth of their number; and now that the earth was for the first time
upturned by the plough, the exhalations from this rank and steaming soil
were redolent of disease and death.

    In the camp nearest to Papillon more than one third of the company
lay sick at the beginning of August; elsewhere matters were even worse;
and as the season advanced there were in some of the encampments not one
who escaped the fever, the few who were able to stagger from tent to
tent carrying food and water to their comrades. For several weeks it was
impossible to dig graves quickly enough for the burial of the
dead, <span id="fr_319"></span>[25](#fn_319) and one might see in the
open tents the wasted forms of women brushing away the flies from the
putrefying corpses of their children.

    Through all these months building was continually going on at Winter
Quarters. <span id="fr_320"></span>[26](#fn_320) The axe and saw were

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

incessantly at work night and day. It was a city of mud and logs; the
houses had puncheon floors and roofs of straw and dirt, or of turf and
willows; they were warm and nat unwholesome, but would not endure the
thaw, rain, and sunshine. <span id="fr_321"></span>[27](#fn_321)

    There was a camp at Cutler Park which was moved to Winter Quarters.
Great difficulty was experienced in getting flour and meal; a little
grain was ground at the government mill, and the rest was obtained in
Missouri, a hundred and fifty miles distant. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[28](#fn_322) Brigham kept everybody busy, and
everything was well organized and systematically executed. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[29](#fn_323) Schools were soon established, officers
of the church appointed, and men sent on missions. The whole machinery
was apparently in as active operation as it had been at Nauvoo. The
gathering continued through the summer,

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

but it was deemed inexpedient to move forward that year. Some twelve
hundred cattle were herded on the rush bottoms, about a hundred miles up
the river.

    The building of a water flouring mill was in process of
construction, and Brigham superintended the work. As the camp journalist
writes: "He sleeps with one eye open and one foot out of bed, and when
anything is wanted he is on hand." The tithing collected was distributed
among the destitute at Mount Pisgah. To the gentiles who visited their
camps such hospitality was extended as their means permitted, which
though often scant was never stinted.

    Within the camp the women attended not only to their ordinary
household duties, but were busily occupied spinning, knitting, making
leggings from deer and elk skins, and in weaving willow baskets for
market. <span id="fr_324"></span>[30](#fn_324) With cheerfulness and
courage they adapted themselves to their many vicissitudes, their faith
in their religion never swerving, and supported by it to a patient
endurance beyond human strength. Most of them had exchanged their
household treasures and personal effects, even to their table and bed
furniture, for stores of maize or flour, which with milk were their only
articles of diet. As evening approached, the tinkling of cattle bells
announced the return of the men, when the women went forth to meet them,
and welcome them back to their log hut and frugal meal. Then a little
later all sounds were hushed, save that on the still night arose the
strains of the evening hymn and the murmur of the evening prayer, the
day closing, as it had commenced, with a supplication for the blessing
of the Almighty, and with heartfelt thanksgiving that he had been
pleased to deliver his people from the hands of their persecutors.

    During the latter part of the winter and toward the early spring
matters assumed a brighter look.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> New-year's day was
ushered in at Winter Quarters by the firing of cannon. <span
id="fr_325"></span>[31](#fn_325) There were frequent assemblies for
dancing, and in February several picnics were held. In inaugurating
these festivities, Brigham told the people he would show them how to go
forth in the dance in an acceptable manner before the Lord, <span
id="fr_326"></span>[32](#fn_326) and to the sound of music led the
dance. A picnic lasting for three days was also given, at which three
hundred of the poor were feasted. <span id="fr_327"></span>[33](#fn_327)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_295"></span>[236:1](hou12.htm#fr_295) Surnamed Le Clerc, on
account of his scholarship.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[237:2](hou12.htm#fr_296) 'The Omahas caused
them some trouble, as they would steal with one hand while we fed them
with the other.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 46, Oct. 18th.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[237:3](hou12.htm#fr_297) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1846, 98-9. Maj. Harvey brought the Mormons at Winter Quarters
letters from Washington, expecting them to leave the Pottawattamie lands
in the spring. See cor., *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 441-52.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[238:4](hou12.htm#fr_298) So called after
Thomas L. Kane. Here was first issued on Feb. 7, 1849, the *Frontier
Guardian*, and its publication was continued till March 22, 1852.
*Richards’ Narr*., MS,, 65; *Richards’ Bibliog. of Utah*, MS., 13. The
paper was edited by Orson Hyde, and makes a very creditable appearance.
The subscription was $2 per year. In the second number we read: 'Flour
nicely put up in sacks of from 50 to 100 lbs each will be received in
exchange for the *Guardian* at the rate of $2 per hundred pounds, if
good.' The last number of the *Times and Seasons* bears date Feb. 15,
1846.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[238:5](hou12.htm#fr_299) I frequently find
California and Utah confounded by writers of this early period. The
limits of California on the east were not then defined, and it was not
uncommon, nor indeed incorrect, to apply that term to territory east of
the sierra. I find this written in *Snow's Voice of the Prophet*, 15:
'The pioneers discovered a beautiful valley beyond the pass of the great
Rocky Mts, being a portion of the great basin of Upper California.' As
we shall see later, the Mormons knew even less about Utah than they did
about California.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[238:6](hou12.htm#fr_300) Brigham Young at
first suggested Vancouver Island. 'There are said to be many good
locations for settlements on the Pacific, especially at Vancouver
Island.' Circular to the brethren, in *Times and Seasons*, vi. 1019. In
1845 the report was current that the Mormons of Illinois had chosen V.
I. as their future home, the metropolis to be situated at Nootka.
*Niles' Register*, lxix. 134. The *Quincy Whig* thinks the Mormons
intend to settle at Nootka Sound. *Polynesian*, ii. 1846.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[239:7](hou12.htm#fr_301) In a letter to Pres.
Polk, dated near Council Bluffs, Aug. 9, 1846, the determination was
expressed, 'that as soon as we are settled in the great basin, we design
to petition the U.S. for a territorial govt, bounded on the north by the
British and south by the Mexican dominions, east and west by the summits
of the Rocky and Cascade Mts.' And again elsewhere: 'We told Col Kane we
intended settling in the great basin on Bear River Valley; that those
who went round by water would settle in S. F. That was in council with
the twelve and Col Kane.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 133, 140.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[239:8](hou12.htm#fr_302) In his address to the
saints in Great Britain, dated Liverpool, 1849, Elder John Taylor says:
'When we arrive in California, according to the provisions of the
Mexican government, each family will be entitled to a large tract of
land, amounting to several hundred acres; but as the Mexican and
American nations are now at war, should Cal. fall into the hands of the
American nation, there has been a bill before congress in relation to
Or., which will undoubtedly pass, appropriating 640 acres of land to
every male settler.' *Millennial Star*, viii. 115.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[240:9](hou12.htm#fr_303) In the letter
appointing and giving instructions to Elder Little is the following: 'If
our government should offer facilities for emigrating to the western
coast, embrace these facilities if possible. As a wise and faithful man,
take every advantage of the times you can.' *Tullidge's Life of Brigham
Young*, 48.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[242:10](hou12.htm#fr_304) So ingrafted in
their minds was the idea of persecution, and so accustomed were they now
to complaining, that when the government acceded to their request, there
were many who believed, and so expressed themselves, that this was but
an act of tyranny on the part of the United States, whose people, after
driving them from their borders, had now come upon them to make a draft
on their healthiest and hardiest men, forcing them to separate from
their wives and children now in the time of their extremest need, under
penalty of extermination in case of refusal. And this idea, which was
wholly at variance with the facts, is present in the minds of some even
to this day. In order to facilitate enlisting, or for some other cause
best known to himself, Brigham deemed it best to preserve this idea
rather than wholly disabuse their minds of it; for in his address to the
brethren on the 15th of July he said: 'If we want the privilege. of
going where we can worship God according to the dictates of our
consciences, we must raise the battalion.' In his address at the
gathering of the pioneers on the 24th of July, 1880, Wilford Woodruff
said: 'Our government called upon us to raise a battalion of 500 men to
go to Mexico to fight the battles of our country. This draft was ten
times greater, according to the population of the Mormon camp, than was
made upon any other portion of our nation…Whether our government
expected we would comply with the request or not, is not for me to say.
But I think I am safe in saying that plan was laid by certain parties
for our destruction if we did not comply.' *Utah Pioneers*, 33d Ann.,
20.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[242:11](hou12.htm#fr_305) 'Most of our people
were sick; in fact, the call for 500 able-bodied men from Council Bluffs
for Mexico, by the government, deprived us of about all our strength.'
*Richards’ Rem*., MS., 25.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[242:12](hou12.htm#fr_306) Compare official
report in *U. S. House Ex. Doc*., no. 24, 31st Cong., 1st Sess., and
*Tyler's Hist. Mormon Battalion*, and note discrepancies in regard to
numbers enlisted and discharged. The names of those who reached
California will be found in my pioneer register, *Hist. Cal*., this
series.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[242:13](hou12.htm#fr_307) 'The members started
upon their pilgrimage cheerfully,' says Woodruff, 'understanding that
they occupied the place of a ram caught in a thicket, and were making a
sacrifice for the salvation of Israel.' *Utah Pioneers*, 20.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[243:14](hou12.htm#fr_308) 'Here they received
100 tents, one for every 6 privates.' 'The paymaster remarked that every
one of the Mormon battalion could write his own name, but only about one
third of the volunteers he had previously paid could do so.' *Hist. B.
Young*, MS., 1846, 18. 'Five thousand eight hundred and sixty dollars
was brought in by Parley Pratt from Ft Leavenworth, being a portion of
the allowance for clothing paid the battalion. It was counselled that
this money be expended in St Louis for the families; three prices have
to be paid here;…we wish they should all act voluntarily, so that they
may have no reflections to cast upon themselves or counsellors.' *Id*.,
MS., 1846, 150. 'When the goods were bought, prices had advanced and
ferriage was very high, all of which brought the goods higher than was
anticipated, and produced some grumbling in camp.' *Id*., MS., 1847, 12.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[243:15](hou12.htm#fr_309) Families
accompanying the battalion were ordered to Pueblo for winter quarters.
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1S46, 260. A detachment was sent to Pueblo
consisting of 89 men and 18 laundresses. Later in this vol., I refer to
affairs at Pueblo as furnished me in a very valuable manuscript by Judge
Stone of Colorado.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[243:16](hou12.htm#fr_310) In a general order
issued at San Diego on Jan. 30, 1847, by command of Lieut-col St George
Cooke, then in charge of the battalion, vice Col Allen, deceased, the
men are thus complimented on their safe arrival at the shores of the
Pacific: 'History may be searched in vain for an equal march of
infantry; nine tenths of it through a wilderness, where nothing but
savages and <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> wild beasts are found; or
deserts where, for the want of water, there is no living creature.
There, with almost hopeless labor, we have dug deep wells, which the
future traveller will enjoy. Without a guide who had traversed them, we
have ventured into trackless prairies, where water was not found for
several marches. With crowbar and pickaxe in hand, we have worked our
way over mountains which seemed to defy aught save the wild goat, and
hewed a passage through a chasm of living rock, more narrow than our
wagons.' *Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 10.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[244:17](hou12.htm#fr_311) 'Until further
orders, three fourths pound of flour, also three fourths rations sugar
and coffee will be issued. Beef, one and a half pounds will be issued
for a day's ration.' *Order No. 11, Headquarters Mormon Battalion*,
Santa Fé. A copy of it will be found in *Tyler's Hist. Mor. Battalion*,
175-6.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[244:18](hou12.htm#fr_312) During the march
from Santa Fé to San Diego a song was composed by Levi W. Hancock, a
musician belonging to company E. It was entitled the 'Desert Route,' and
commences:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

While here beneath a sultry sky,  
Our famished mules and cattle die;  
Scarce aught but skin and bones remain;  
To feed poor soldiers on the plain.

*Chorus*: How hard to starve and wear us out  
Upon this sandy desert route.

We sometimes now for lack of bread,  
Are less than quarter rations fed,  
And soon expect, for all of meat,  
Naught else than broke-down mules to eat.

Now half-starved oxen, over-drilled,  
Too weak to draw, for beef are killed;  
And gnawing hunger prompting men,  
To eat small entrails and the skin.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Id*., 181-2.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[245:19](hou12.htm#fr_313) In *A Concise
History of the Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War, 1846-1847*, by
Sergeant Daniel Tlyer, (Salt Lake City,) 1881, 8vo, 376 pp., we have a
most valuable hook, and one that forms the leading authority on this
subject. Though written, of course, from a Mormon standpoint, and marked
by the credulity of his sect, the execution of the work is all that its
title-page promises. In the introduction, occupying 109 pages, we have
President John Taylor's account of the martyrdom of Joseph Smith,
Colonel Kane's discourse on the Mormons, and a poem by Eliza R. Snow,
entitled *The Mormon Battalion, and First Wagon Load over the Great
American Desert*. The remainder of the volume consists of original
matter. Tyler was a member of company C in the battalion, and no doubt
speaks the truth when he says in his preface that 'neither labor, pains,
nor expense has been spared in the effort to make this a just and
authentic history.' Among other authorities may be mentioned *Horne's
Migr. and Settlem't, L, D. Saints*, MS., 32-3; *Nebeker's Early
Justice*, MS., 3; *Woodruff's Rem*., MS., 76; *Henry W. Bigler's Diary
of a Mormon in California*, MS., in which last we have a faithful and
interesting record of the Mormon battalion and Mr Bigler's account of
the discovery of gold in California. *The Conquest of New Mexico and
California: an Historical and Personal Narrative, by P. St. George
Cooke, Brigadier and Brevet Major-general U.S.A.*, N.Y., 1878, 12mo,
gives some additional matter, as do the journal and report of that
officer in *U.S. Sen. Doc. No. 2*, 30th Cong., Special Sess., and in
*House Ex. Doc*., 30th Cong., 1st Sess., no. 41, pp. 549-63. Cooke, it
will be remembered, was in command of the battalion. Items have also
been gathered from *U.S. House Ex. Doc*., 31st Cent., 1st Sess., no. 24,
p. 22; Apostle Wilford Woodruff's Speech, in *Utah Pioneers*, 33d ann.,
19-22; *Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 8-11; *Tullidge's Life of
Brigham Young*, 41-76; *Olshausen, Gesch. de Mor*., 142-4; and *Kane's
The Mormons*, 27-9. Biographical notices of some of the members, and the
names of the women who accompanied the battalion, are given in
*Tullidge's Women*, 427, 432, 443-4.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[245:20](hou12.htm#fr_314) In the *Frontier
Guardian*, March 7, 1849, is a notice copied from the *St Joseph
Gazette*, stating that the members of the battalion can at once receive
their extra pay at Fort Leavenworth. The notice is signed by Paymaster
Thos S. Bryant.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[246:21](hou12.htm#fr_315) Instance the
experiences of Mrs Richards, *Reminiscences*, MS., passim. While on
their journey toward the Missouri, having parted from her husband who
was about starting on a mission to England, her little daughter was
taken dangerously ill, and the mother was prematurely confined in a
wagon with a son, who died soon after. 'Our situation was pitiable; I
had no suitable food for myself or my child; the severe rain prevented
our having any fire; on the third day we resumed our journey. In ten
days we reached Mt Pisgah: my little girl was very ill, and I was also.
We continued our journey till we reached my mother at Cutler Park, and
here, after weeks of almost incredible suffering, my little daughter
died. A few days previously she had asked for some potato soup, the
first thing she had shown any desire for for weeks, and as we were then
travelling, we came in sight of a potato-field. One of the sisters
eagerly asked for a single potato. A rough woman impatiently heard her
story through, and putting her hands on her shoulders, marched her out
of the house, saying, "I won't give or sell a thing to one of you damned
Mormons." I turned on my bed and wept, as I heard them trying to comfort
my little one in her disappointment. When she was taken from me I only
lived because I could not die.'

<span id="fn_316"></span>[247:22](hou12.htm#fr_316) It cannot be said
that any considerable number died of starvation. 'Only those died of it
outright,' says Kane in *The Mormons*, 'who fell in out-of-the-way
places that the hand of brotherhood could not reach…If but part of a
group were supplied with provisions, the whole went on half or quarter
ration.' 'Articles of diet, such as tea, coffee, sugar, with every
species of clothing, were eagerly stored up, as possibly the last we
should ever see.' *Brown's Testimonies*, MS., 24. 'When starting from
Nauvoo, a gentile neighbor gave me a pound of tea, which through
sickness and great suffering was about all the sustenance I had for some
time.' *Mrs Richards’ Rem*., MS., 20.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[247:23](hou12.htm#fr_317) 'Parties were sent
to the gentile settlements to look for work, food, and clothing, and
elders Dana and Campbell collected about $600 from the rich gentiles in
Ohio and elsewhere.' *Snow's Biography*, 91.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[248:24](hou12.htm#fr_318) 'There were among
them many skilled mechanics, who could work at forge, loom, or
turning-lathe. A Mormon gunsmith is the inventor of the excellent
repeating rifle that loads by slides instead of cylinders; and one of
the neatest finished fire-arms I have ever seen was of this kind,
wrought from scraps of old iron, and inlaid with the silver of a couple
of half-dollars.' *Kane's The Mormons*, 36.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[248:25](hou12.htm#fr_319) At the camp situated
on the site of the town of Florence, there were over 600 burials.
*Kane's The Mormons*, 51.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[248:26](hou12.htm#fr_320) 'Here we suffered
terribly from scurvy, for want of vegetables. I was a victim, and even
my little children as young as three years of age. The <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> first relief experienced was when a bag of
potatoes was brought in from Missouri…It was observed that those who had
milk escaped the trouble.' *Horne's Migrations*, MS., 20.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[249:27](hou12.htm#fr_321) 'The buildings were
generally of logs from 12 to 18 feet long, a few were split, and made
from lynn and cotton-wood timber; many roofs were made by splitting oak
timber into boards, called shakes, about 3 ft long and 6 in. wide, and
kept in place by weights and poles; others were made of willows, straw,
and earth, about a foot thick; some of puncheon. Many cabins had no
floors; there were a few dugouts on the sidehills—the fireplace was cut
out at the upper end. The ridge-pole roof was supported by two uprights
in the centre and roofed with straw and earth, with chimneys of prairie
sod. The doors were made of shakes, with wooden hinges and string latch;
the inside of the log houses was daubed with clay; a few had stoves.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1846, 534. 'The roofs were made of logs laid
across with flags spread over them, and earth spread over these. This
was partial protection from the rain, but when once it was soaked
through in a heavy storm, we were at the mercy of the rain.' *Richards’
Rem*., MS., 27. In Dec. 1846, at Winter Quarters there were '538 log
houses and 83 sod houses, inhabited by 3,483 souls, of whom 334 were
sick.' *Church Chronology*, 65.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[249:28](hou12.htm#fr_322) '$8,000 was sent by
Whitney to St Louis to purchase stones and machinery for flouring mills;
and through A. H. Perkins a carding machine was ordered from Savannah.'
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., Aug. 30, 1846. 'Sugar and coffee were 16 2/3 cts
per lb.; domestics and calicoes from 18 to 25 cts; $3 a cwt. for flour,'
etc.; all of which could be purchased in St Louis for a third of these
rates. These prices seemed exorbitant to the Mormons, though in reality
they were not unreasonable. In transporting the goods from St Louis
later, ferriage became so high and prices were so advanced that the
brethren burst forth: 'Woe unto you, Missourians! but we are independent
of them and can live without them, for we have thousands of cattle
left.'

<span id="fn_323"></span>[249:29](hou12.htm#fr_323) 'At a meeting of the
council July 14th, it was voted that colonies be established on the east
side of the river to put in buckwheat, and winter; that a fort be built
on Grand Island and a settlement made there; and that Bishop Miller and
a company go over the mountains.' *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1846, 50.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[250:30](hou12.htm#fr_324) Several loads of
willow baskets were manufactured. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 534.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[251:31](hou12.htm#fr_325) The thermometer was
during that week from 2° to 8° below zero, later falling several degrees
lower.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[251:32](hou12.htm#fr_326) 'I then knelt down
and prayed to God in behalf of the meeting,…and dedicated the meeting
and house to the Lord,…and led forth in the dance.' *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1847, 27. In an address Brigham said: 'For some weeks past I could
not wake up at any time of the night but I heard the axe at work,…and
now my feelings are, dance all night if you desire to do so.' p. 48.
'The "Silver Greys" and spectacled dames,…some nearly a hundred years
old, dancing like ancient Israel.' p. 49.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[251:33](hou12.htm#fr_327) 'There were 117 poor
adults,…divided into three wards…Shortly after noon I met with 66 of my
family, including my adopted children.' *Id*., p. 53.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Migration to Utah. 1847.](hou13)
