[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou26)  [Next](hou28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_656">p. 656</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV. THE LAST DAYS OF BRIGHAM YOUNG. 1869-1877.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Visit of Schuyler
Colfax—Godbe's Interview With President Grant—Governor Shaffer—Military
Riot at Provo—Governor Woods—Judge Mckean—Burlesque of Justice—Arrest of
Brigham Young and Others—George Q. Cannon Chosen Delegate—Axtell's
Administration—Governor Emery—Death of Brigham—His Obsequies—His
Character—His Will.</span></span>

    "<span class="smallcaps">Will</span> Brigham Young fight?" inquired
Schuyler Colfax of Elder Stenhouse, during his sojourn at Salt Lake City
in 1869. <span id="fr_1072"></span>[1](#fn_1072) "For God's sake, Mr
Colfax." answered the elder, "keep the United States off. If the
govermnent interferes and sends troops, you will spoil the opportunity,
and drive the thousands back into the arms of Brigham Young who are
ready to rebel against the one-man power. Leave the elders alone to
solve their own problems. We can do it; the government cannot." But with
the exception of Abraham Lincoln, none of the presidents were of the
opinion that it was best to leave the Mormons alone. At this date there
is little doubt that Grant was resolved on the suppression of polygamy,
even if need be at the cost of war. Meanwhile the famous Cullom

<span id="page_657">p. 657</span>

anti-polygamy bill <span id="fr_1073"></span>[2](#fn_1073) was before
the representatives, and the honorable Thomas Fitch was amusing congress
with his speeches on the prospect of another Mormon war. <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[3](#fn_1074) Early in 1870 mass-meetings were held
at the tabernacle, by men and women, to protest against the bill, and to
draw up a remonstrance against its provisions. A memorial was also
prepared and forwarded to congress, setting forth the revelation on
polygamy and the duties of the Mormon church in that connection, wherein
it was declared that the church would stand by its faith and polygamy
institutions in spite of all human will and law. <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[4](#fn_1075) During this year, also, an act was
passed by the territorial legislature, granting the right of suffrage to
women, but the measure subsequently adopted in Wyoming and elsewhere
seemed to be in advance of the times, <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[5](#fn_1076) or was in some way unpopular, and
little use has ever been made of the privilege. <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[6](#fn_1077)

    Among those who realized the danger of the situation were the
leaders of the Godbeite movement, who well knew that, in the event of
another Mormon war, the dramatic farce of Buchanan's administration
could not be reinacted, and that if the United States government again
entered into the controversy, it would never withdraw from it until it
had cut with its sword the Gordian knot of Mormonism.

<span id="page_658">p. 658</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Already the
apostles had declared their intention of laying the settlements of Utah
in ashes and leading their people in another exodus; but an effort was
made to save them, and from a source somewhat unexpected. It was
resolved by the leaders of the Godbeite faction that William Godbe
should proceed to Washington and state to the president the true
condition of affairs. "Mr Godbe," remarked the latter, after listening
to his arguments, "I am as solicitous as you can possibly be to preserve
the Mormon people;" and then he declared that he would save them from
their leaders by checkmating their policy. During his visit Godbe also
sought an interview with Cullom, and discussed with him the provisions
of the bill, section by section, pleading his cause with such warmth and
earnestness that all the animus of the congressman gave way, and the
bill was not brought up for action in the senate. The substance of the
policy recommended by the emissary of the liberal party in Utah was to
establish over Utah a firm and efficient federal rule, rather than
resort to special legislation or armed interference; and in these views
the president heartily concurred.

    J. Wilson Shaffer of Illinois, an old comrade of Rawlins, then
secretary of war, was the man selected for the occasion, and on the
resignation of Durkee, was appointed in his stead. <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[7](#fn_1078) At this time Shaffer was suffering
from an incurable disease, and knew that he had but a few months to
live. Nevertheless he accepted office as a trust from the president.
"Never after me," he declared, "shall it be said that Brigham Young is
governor of Utah." On the 15th of September, 1870, the annual muster of
the Nauvoo legion being then at hand, he issued a proclamation
forbidding all musters, drills, or gatherings of the militia, and all
gatherings of armed persons of whatever

<span id="page_659">p. 659</span>

description, except as a posse comitatus ordered forth by himself or by
the United States marshal. <span id="fr_1079"></span>[8](#fn_1079)

    After some correspondence with General Wells, the musters in the
various districts were postponed until further notice, by command of the
latter, though they had been regularly held for eighteen years, and
returns duly made, in accordance with an act of congress approved in
1803. In 1870 the militia, which has never since been assembled,
included about 13,000 men, most of them efficiently armed, drilled, and
equipped, while the United States troops stationed at Camp Douglas, Camp
Rawlins in Utah county, and elsewhere in the territory, numbered only a
few hundred. <span id="fr_1080"></span>[9](#fn_1080)

    The proclamation was ill-advised, and for what purpose it was
issued, save as a puerile expression of the

<span id="page_660">p. 660</span>

governor's authority, does not appear. The result, however, was most
unfortunate; for the soldiery, among whom discipline appears to have
been somewhat lax at this period, now supposed themselves masters of the
situation. At midnight on the 23d of September a party of forty or fifty
men from Camp Rawlins entered the town of Provo, armed with needle-guns,
bayonets, and revolvers, and crazed with whiskey. Surrounding the
residence of Alderman W. Miller, they fired several shots into his
bedroom window, smashed in his doors, and dragged him from his chamber.
Thence passing up Centre street, they tore down the sign and stove in
the doors of the coöperative store, and then proceeded to the house of
Councillor A. F. McDonald, which they completely demolished, scattering
its contents on the sidewalk. After some further outrages, as parading
defenceless citizens through the streets, beating them with rifles and
pricking them with bayonets, yelling, meanwhile, as they passed along
the thoroughfares, "Come out, you God damned Mormons and Mountain
Meadows massacreers," they returned to camp. <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[10](#fn_1081)

    The only provocation for this disturbance appears to have been the
fact that Miller refused to grant the soldiers, at their own terms, the
use of a hall in which to hold a social gathering, and that the bishops
had counselled the people of their wards, and especially the young
women, not to hold intercourse with them. An effort was made to bring
the offenders to justice, but, as during the administration of Governor
Cumming, there was no harmony between the chief magistrate and the
commander of the forces. After waiting several days for action to be
taken by the military, Shaffer despatched to General De Trobriand, at
Camp Douglas, a letter, in which he stated that if the soldiery could
not be restrained, it were better for

<span id="page_661">p. 661</span>

the territory to be left to itself. To this the general replied that he
was perfectly agreed; that it would be the best thing for all if the
territory, its governor, legislature, municipalities, and militia, were
left to themselves; and that if the troops had also been left alone,
instead of being poisoned physically with bad whiskey and morally with
bad influences, there would have been no trouble with them. Both letters
were published in the *Deseret News*, <span
id="fr_1082"></span>[11](#fn_1082) and of course drew forth much comment
from the saints, who were probably of opinion that, if the soldiers had
such proclivities, it was at least the business of their commanding
officer to restrain them.

    No further incident remains to be chronicled as to the career of
Governor Shaffer, whose decease occurred in October 1870, <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[12](#fn_1083) his successor being Vernon H.
Vaughan, <span id="fr_1084"></span>[13](#fn_1084) a mild and
conservative ruler, concerning whose brief administration there is
nothing worthy of record. <span id="fr_1085"></span>[14](#fn_1085) To
him succeeded George L. Woods, a Missourian by birth, a pronounced
anti-Mormon, and one who, as a ferryman in Idaho, <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[15](#fn_1086) and judge and politician in eastern
Oregon, had accumulated and lost a considerable fortune. He was a man
who, though by no means of the highest and purest morality himself, was,
it seems, exceedingly jealous

<span id="page_662">p. 662</span>

for the morality of the nation. On the 10th of March, 1871, Woods took
the oath of office, and about six weeks later arrived at Salt Lake City,
James B. McKean of New York being appointed about this date chief
justice, with C. M. Hawley of Illinois and O. F. Strickland of Michigan
as associate judges. <span id="fr_1087"></span>[16](#fn_1087)

    The administration of Governor Woods lasted for about four years,
but during that period he sought no opportunity of making the
acquaintance of Brigham Young. When invited by the first councillor to
call, as had been the custom with his predecessors, <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[17](#fn_1088) he replied that the lowest
subordinate in the United States ranked higher than any ecclesiastic on
earth, and that he should not call until the president first called on
him. The reader may judge the chief magistrate by his own words. "My
first conflict with the church occurred," he says, "July 4, 1871. The
organic act of the territory made the governor commander-in-chief of the
militia. The Mormon legislature, prior to that time, usurped that
authority, and invested it in Daniel H. Wells, the third in the church.
(They had a pantomime, in which B. Young played God the Father, Daniel
H. Wells God the Son, and John H. Smith the Holy Ghost.) That law was in
force on my arrival. On July 1, 1871, Wells issued an order as
commander-in-chief to the militia of the territory to assemble at Salt
Lake City July 4th to participate in the celebration. I resented this
usurpation, and forbade them to assemble, but my prohibition was
disregarded. Thereupon I ordered to the rendezvous three companies of
infantry, one of cavalry, and a battery of artillery, and dispersed them
at the point of the bayonet. This practically ended the Nauvoo legion.
Immediately thereafter,

<span id="page_663">p. 663</span>

by concerted action of the federal officials, an effort was made to
punish judicially the church criminals." <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[18](#fn_1089)

    The governor was ably seconded by the chief justice. In October
Brigham Young, George Q. Cannon, and others were arrested for lascivious
cohabitation. Motion made to quash the indictment was overruled by
McKean; "for," he remarked, "while the case at bar is called the people
versus Brigham Young, its other and real title is Federal Authority
versus Polygamic Theocracy." In the indictment were sixteen counts,
extending back to the year 1854, thus attempting to give an ex post
facto interpretation to the act of 1862. The president's health was
feeble at this time, and on the application of his attorney, a
continuance was granted until the March term. One Thomas Hawkins,
however, was convicted during this term, on the evidence of his first or
legal wife, sentenced under this act to three years’ imprisonment with
hard labor, and fined $500. But the severest portion of the sentence was
the homily. "Thomas Hawkins," commenced the chief justice, "I am sorry
for you—very sorry. You may not think so now, but I shall try to make
you think so by the mercy which I shall show you…The law gives me large
discretion in passing sentence upon you. I might both fine and imprison
you, or I might fine you only or imprison you only…It is right that you
should be fined, among other reasons to help to defray the expense of
enforcing the laws." <span id="fr_1090"></span>[19](#fn_1090)

    Two or three days before sentence was passed on Hawkins, this being
of course a test case, Daniel H. Wells and Hosea Stout were arrested on
a charge of murder, Brigham Young, William H. Kimball, and others being
indicted on a similar charge. <span id="fr_1091"></span>[20](#fn_1091)
Wells

<span id="page_664">p. 664</span>

was admitted to bail, <span id="fr_1092"></span>[21](#fn_1092) Stout and
Kimball were handed over to the authorities at Camp Douglas, and
Brigham, hearing that his case was set for the 8th of January, 1872,
immediately set out from southern Utah, where he was sojourning, and
travelling over 350 miles of mountainous country in midwinter, delivered
himself into custody. He was placed in charge of the marshal, bail being
refused even in the sum of $500,000, and detained a prisoner in his own
house, until discharged on the 25th of April, by Justice White, on a
writ of habeas corpus. <span id="fr_1093"></span>[22](#fn_1093)

    In sore disgust, the people of Utah adopted yet another
constitution, which was forwarded to congress, together with a memorial
for admission as a state, but without result. <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[23](#fn_1094) A bill was passed appropriating
$50,000 toward the expenses of the constitutional convention, but was
vetoed by the governor, who gave, among other reasons, the open
violation of the act of 1862, and the crimes committed against law and
public decency in the name of religion. <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[24](#fn_1095) So far, indeed, did the governor push
his privilege, that he insisted even on nominating the territorial
librarian and the superintendent of common schools. <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[25](#fn_1096)

    Meanwhile the condition of affairs in the superior courts of Utah
was simply lamentable. During a

<span id="page_665">p. 665</span>

portion of McKean's term of office there were no funds wherewith to
defray expenses, and the so-called administration of justice was openly
burlesqued. In 1872 the removal of the chief justice was urged by the
legislature. <span id="fr_1097"></span>[26](#fn_1097) This was not yet
to be; but after some further judicial blunders, <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[27](#fn_1098) he was finally superseded in March
1875 by David T. Lowe. <span id="fr_1099"></span>[28](#fn_1099)

 

    For ten years William H. Hooper had been delegate to congress, and
was in need of rest. He had done his duty faithfully; more acceptably,
perhaps, to members of congress than any of his predecessors, and it was
no easy task to fill his place. George Q. Cannon was the man selected,
although an apostle and a practical polygamist. The election of Cannon
was contested by George R. Maxwell, registrar of the land-offlce, <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[29](#fn_1100) who in 1870 had received a few
hundred votes, as against 26,000 in favor of Hooper; but in that year
and again in 1874 had no well-grounded hope of success, save his
reliance on popular prejudice. At the first session of the forty-third
congress he prevailed on one of the members from New York to introduce a
resolution embodying a number of charges against the apostle. The
reading of his certificate was then demanded, in which it appeared that
he had a majority of 20,000 votes, and thereupon he was admitted. <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[30](#fn_1101)

<span id="page_666">p. 666</span>

    The contest between Cannon and Maxwell was sharp but decisive, a
thorough canvass being made by the latter, and its results showing how
completely the saints were in unison with their church leaders. Many
persons could have been found better qualified than the apostle,
notwithstanding his great ability, but Brigham had so willed it. At this
election, if we can believe the chief magistrate, freedom of speech was
first used in Utah, and by Governor Woods. Here as on other
occasions <span id="fr_1102"></span>[31](#fn_1102) he intermeddled,
playing

<span id="page_667">p. 667</span>

the part rather of a sergeant of militia than of a ruler. A woman who
appeared at the polls and offered her ballot was refused, and insisting
on her privilege, was removed by the police, by order of Jeter Clinton,
judge of election. Woods protested, whereupon Clinton threatened to
arrest him, but after an unseemly altercation, the latter, according to
the governor's account, narrowly escaping being lynched by the gentiles,
was dragged fainting by the chief magistrate into a gentile store, while
the life of Woods was also threatened by the Mormons. The matter was
settled without bloodshed. <span id="fr_1103"></span>[32](#fn_1103) What
business the chief magistrate had at the polls he does not explain,
though he closed the proceedings by a defiance of the Mormons and their
threats, while illustrating what he considered freedom of speech in
phrase which contained at least considerable freedom of language.

    At the close of 1874 Woods retired from office, <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[33](#fn_1104) his successor being S. B. Axtell of
California, whose policy brought on him the censure of the gentile
press, by which he was accused of complicity with the Mormon leaders in
their political and other designs. <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[34](#fn_1105) He was removed in June 1875, his
successor being George B. Emery of Tennessee, who held office until
January 1880. Emery's policy was strictly neutral,

<span id="page_668">p. 668</span>

and therefore he was roundly abused by the gentile press. <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[35](#fn_1106) It is worthy of note, however, that
as the Mormons were now for the first time left undisturbed, there was
little which needs record in their annals as a body politic, <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[36](#fn_1107) except that from their midst passed
one whose place never could be filled. At the obsequies of the great
president who had cut the cords of slavery, and being asked to banish
its sister institution, said "Let them alone," believing that in time it
would banish itself, none felt the nation's loss more grievously than
did the Mormons. And now on the 29th of August, 1877, Brigham Young was
summoned to render his account at the great tribunal before which all
must appear.

    Although for several years he had been in feeble health, he was able
to attend to his manifold duties until six days before his death.
Retiring at eleven o'clock on the night of Thursday, the 23d of August,
after delivering an address before the bishops’ meeting in the
council-house, he was seized with an attack of cholera-morbus, and
suffered severely till the morning of the following Saturday, when he
obtained a few hours' sleep, opiates being administered to relieve the
pain caused by cramping of the muscles. During the afternoon, however,
inflammation of the bowels set in, and throughout this and the following
day he continued to moan at intervals, though when asked whether he was
in pain he invariably replied, "No, I don't know that I am." On Monday
morning there were strong symptoms of nervous prostration, among which
was a constant moving of the hands and twitching of the

<span id="page_669">p. 669</span>

muscles. During all this time his only nourishment was a tablespoonful
of milk and brandy, administered at brief intervals, in the proportion
of one ounce of the latter to eight of the former. At 10 o'clock on
Monday night he sank into a comatose condition, from which he was
aroused with difficulty by stimulating injections, and early on the
following morning he sank down on his bed apparently lifeless.
Artificial respiration was resorted to, and hot poultices were placed
over the heart to stimulate its action. <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[37](#fn_1108) Thus his life was preserved for a few
hours longer; but at five o'clock on the afternoon of the 29th of
August, 1877, being then in his seventy-seventh year, he passed away
quietly, surrounded by his family and intimate friends, the last rites
of the church being administered by several of the apostles, to whom he
responded in a clear and unfaltering voice, "Amen!" <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[38](#fn_1109)

    At eight o'clock on the morning of the 1st of September the remains
of President Youug, escorted by members of his own family, by members of
the twelve, and by others of the priesthood, were conveyed to the
tabernacle, the coffin being enclosed in a metallic case draped in white
and wreathed with flowers. The funeral rites were appointed for noon on
the following day, and during each hour of the interval a constant
stream of visitors, numbering in all some twenty-five thousand, passed
through the great aisle of the building, all being allowed to stop and
gaze for a moment

<span id="page_670">p. 670</span>

on the features of him who had been to them for so many years as their
God on earth, their faithful guide and counsellor. Throughout the
territory flags were hung at half-mast, and civic and religious
societies united in rendering tribute to one who had gained the respect
and almost outlived the hatred of the civilized world. It was indeed a
day of mourning in Israel, of grievous and heart-felt mourning, for to
all his followers he had been a friend and benefactor, so far as they
would accept his aid and receive his teachings. From Europe, also, and
from various portions of the United States, came messages of condolence,
and in every quarter of the globe the death of Brigham Young excited
more remark than would that of a great monarch.

    Throughout the entire day clouds lowered in heavy masses over the
city of the saints, and from them fell light but frequent showers, as if
in sympathy with the multitudes that thronged the tabernacle; but on the
morning of the 2d the sun rose over a clear, unruffled sky, ushering in
one of the calmest and brightest sabbaths that had ever been seen in
Zion. Long before the hour appointed for the services, more than thirty
thousand persons were gathered in or around the tabernacle, the aisles,
the doorways, and every inch of space being occupied. The building was
tastefully decorated. From the immense arch which spans the interior
depended strands and garlands of flowers grouped in rich profusion, in
their midst being a massive floral centre-piece. Under the entire
gallery wreaths were festooned between the pillars with baskets pendent,
the front of the platform, the stands, and the organ being draped in
black. The coffin, constructed according to the late president's
orders, <span id="fr_1110"></span>[39](#fn_1110)

<span id="page_671">p. 671</span>

decked with chaplets, but stripped of its case and drapery, stood on a
plain catafalque in view of the congregation. On the president's stand
were his councillors, John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells. The apostles,
of whom ten were present, occupied their accustomed seats, the north
side of the platform being set apart for the bishops and councillors of
stakes, and the south front for the city council, the band, and glee
club; while to the family of the deceased were allotted the seats
immediately facing the stands, his four brothers being in front.

    Precisely at noon the vast assemblage was called to order by George
Q. Cannon, who, at the request of the president's family, presided over
the ceremonies. First was sung by a choir of two hundred voices the hymn
commencing:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Hark from afar a funeral knell,"</span>

</div>

to a tune composed for the obsequies of George A. Smith, whose decease
occurred in 1875, <span id="fr_1111"></span>[40](#fn_1111) and now

<span id="page_672">p. 672</span>

used for the second time. Then followed prayer by Franklin D. Richards,
after which addresses were delivered by Daniel H. Wells, Wilford
Woodruff, Erastus Snow, George Q. Cannon, and John Taylor. A second
funeral hymn was sung, <span id="fr_1112"></span>[41](#fn_1112) a
benediction pronounced by Orson Hyde, the congregation was dismissed,
and the remains of Brigham Young were conveyed to their resting-place at
his private cemetery in the suburbs of the city, where thousands
gathered to witness the closing ceremonies. <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[42](#fn_1113)

 

    Some thirty years had now elapsed since the president of the church,
stricken with mountain fever and seeking for the remnant of his
followers an abiding-place, had stood enwrapped in vision on the Pisgah
of the west, and as he gazed for the first time on the desert and dead
sea that lay beneath, forecast the future glory of Zion. <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[43](#fn_1114) And who shall say that he had not
lived to see his vision realized? During these years, which compassed
scarce the span of a single generation, he had built cities and temples;
he had converted the waste lands of Deseret into gardens and
grain-fields; he had laid the basis of a system of manufactures and
commerce that was already the envy of older and more favored
communities; he had sent forth his missionaries to all the civilized
countries of the earth, and gathered the chosen of Israel from many
nations; he had rescued myriads from the sorest depths of poverty,
giving to all a livelihood, and to

<span id="page_673">p. 673</span>

the deserving and capable a competence. All this he had accomplished,
beginning wellnigh without a dollar, <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[44](#fn_1115) and in a region forsaken by mankind
for its worthlessness, struggling at times almost hopelessly against the
unkindliness of nature and the unkindliness of man.

    Esteemed by his followers as an angel of light, and considered by
his foes as a minister of evil, an impostor, a hypocrite, a murderer, he
was in fact simply an enthusiast, a bigoted and egotistical enthusiast,
as the world believes, but a practical and farsighted man, one who by
his will, ability, and intuitive knowledge of human nature was fitted to
combat the difficulties that beset each step in his path of life, and to
give cohesion to the heterogeneous elements of which his people was
composed. "As I sat near his bed," remarked George Q. Cannon, "and
thought of his death, if it should occur, I recoiled from the
contemplation of the view. It seemed to me that he was indispensable.
What could we do without him? He has been the brain, the eye, the ear,
the mouth, and hand for the entire people of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. From the greatest details connected with the
organization of this church down to the smallest minutiæ connected with
the work, he has left upon it the impress of his great mind." <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[45](#fn_1116)

    Not least among the traits in the character of Brigham was the
faculty for accumulating wealth; and this he did, not, as his enemies
have asserted, by

<span id="page_674">p. 674</span>

foul means, <span id="fr_1117"></span>[46](#fn_1117) but by economy and
close attention to his business interests. Of all the business men in
Utah he was perhaps the most capable, but in the art of making money he
had no set system; merely the ability for turning money to account and
for taking care of it. He purchased saw-mills and thrashing-machines,
for instance, and let them out on shares; he supplied settlers and
emigrants with grain and provisions; from the lumber and firewood which
he sold to the troops at Camp Floyd he is supposed to have netted some
$200,000, and from other contracts a much larger sum. By many he is
accused of enriching himself from the appropriations of tithes, and by
plundering alike both saint and gentile, whereas none paid his church
dues more punctually or subscribed to charities more liberally than did
the president. That with all his opportunities for making money honestly
and with safety he should put in peril his opportunities and his high
position by stooping to such fraud as was commonly practised among
United States officials of exalted rank, is a charge that needs no
comment. <span id="fr_1118"></span>[47](#fn_1118) He had a great
advantage in being able to command men and dictate measures, but he did
not rob the brethren, as many have asserted. At his decease the value of
his estate was estimated at $2,500,000, <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[48](#fn_1119) though as trustee for the church he
controlled a much larger amount.

<span id="page_675">p. 675</span>

    Brigham was certainly a millionaire, but his fortune barely sufficed
to provide for his family a moderate competence, for he had married
twenty wives, <span id="fr_1120"></span>[49](#fn_1120) and unto him were
born more than fifty children, of whom 16 boys and 29 girls survived
him. In the body of his will the wives were divided into classes, and to
each of them was given a homestead, the sum of $25, payable one month
after his decease, and such amount payable in monthly instalments as in
the opinion of his executors might be needed for their comfortable
support. <span id="fr_1121"></span>[50](#fn_1121)

<span id="page_676">p. 676</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[656:1](hou27.htm#fr_1072) Colfax also visited
Utah in 1865. For reception and purpose of visit, see *Richardson's
Beyond the Miss*., 345-6, 348-9; *Bowles’ Our New West*, 203-4;
*Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young*, 355-8; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 613-15. For speech of Colfax, in 1869, in which, probably, the
sentence most acceptable to the Mormons was the concluding line, 'I bid
you all good night and good by.' see *The Mormon Question* (S. L. City,
1870), wherein is also a reply by John Taylor, an article on the Mormon
question by the vice-president, published in the *New York Independent*,
and a rejoinder by Taylor.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[657:2](hou27.htm#fr_1073) For debate and
amendments when the bill passed the representatives, see *Cong. Globe*,
1869-70, 2180-1.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[657:3](hou27.htm#fr_1074) For career of
Thomas Fitch in Utah, see *Elliott & Co.'s Hist. Arizona*, 289.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[657:4](hou27.htm#fr_1075) For copy of
memorial and resolutions, see *Sen. Misc. Doc*., 41st Cong. 2d Sess.,
no. 112, *The Utah Bill*, 33-40, wherein is a speech by delegate W. H.
Hooper, delivered before the representatives March 23, 1870, and
published in pamphlet form, as was also the speech of Aaron H. Cragin
before the senate, May 18, 1870, the two forming nos. 4 and 5 in *Utah
Pamphlets, Political*. The memorial and resolutions were referred to a
committee which of course reported adversely. *H. Corn. Rept*, 41st
Cong. 2d Sess., i. no. 21.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[657:5](hou27.htm#fr_1076) *Woods’
Recollections*, MS., 67. See, for report in favor of female suffrage,
*Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1870, 81-2; for act granting right of suffrage,
*Utah Acts Legisl*., 1870, p. 8; *Utah Pamphlets, Polit*., no. 14, 8;
*Deseret News*, Feb. 16, 1870.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[657:6](hou27.htm#fr_1077) At the municipal
election held two days after the passage of the act only a few of the
women voted, the first one being Seraph Young, a niece of the president.
*Tullidge's Women*, 498.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[658:7](hou27.htm#fr_1078) The interregnum
between Durkee's resignation and the arrival of Shaffer was filled by
secretaries Edwin Higgins and S. A. Mann, to the latter of whom the
women of Utah tendered their thanks for signing the female-suffrage
bill. See *Deseret News*, March 2, 1870. For complimentary resolutions
from legislature, see *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1870, 183.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[659:8](hou27.htm#fr_1079) For copy of
proclamation, see *Millennial Star*, xxxii. 668; *Smith's Rise,
Progress, and Travels*, 63.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[659:9](hou27.htm#fr_1080) In 1875 the U.S.
government called for bids for the rebuilding of Camp Douglas, or as it
is now termed, Fort Douglas. The contract was awarded to the Watson
Brothers. For description of buildings, see *Surgeon-Gen. Circ*. 8,
1875, 332-46. In 1872 a military post was established near Beaver City.
For reasons and descriptions, see *H. Ex. Doc*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., xv.
285; *Sen. Doc*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., i. 12. For list of military
reservations in 1882, see *H. Ex. Doc*., 47th Cong. 2d Sess., xviii. no.
45, p. 1181. For military organization for protection against Indians in
Cache county in 1859-76, see *Tullidge's Mag*., ii. 122-31. For Indian
raid on Kanarra, Iron co., see *Utah Hand-book of References*, 81; for
Indian depredations in 1870, *Utah Co. Sketches*, MS., 78-80; *S. F.
Bulletin*, June 30, July 6, 8, 1870; for troubles in San Juan co. on
account of miners' encroachments, *H. Ex. Doc*., 43d Cong. 1st Sess.,
xii. pt 2, p. 193; *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1872, p. 93; *Sacramento Union*,
Oct. 1, 1872; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Sept. 14, 1872; *Deseret News*, Sept.
25, 1872. A brief report on the condition of Indians at this date, with
statistics, will be found in *U. S. H. Com. Rept*, 42d Cong. 3d Sess.,
365-72, 246-56, 325-6, 414-58. For remarks on the condition, management,
and wants of Indians in 1872, see *Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept*,
1872; *H. Ex. Doc*., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., xii. no. 157; for condition
and treatment of Indians on reservation in 1873-4, *Sen. Doc*. 43d Cong.
1st Sess., no. 42; *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1874, 3-4, 52-3, 104-79, 270-1,
276-7; for Indian uprising at Corinne in 1875, *S. F. Chronicle*, Aug.
2, 3, 12, 1875, Sept. l, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 17, 1875; for cause,
*Id*., Sept. 6, 1875; for Indian outbreak in 1875, *S. F. Alta*, Aug.
11, 1875; *Chico (Butte) Record*, Sept. 4, 1875. Reports of agents on
reservation Indians in 1876-7 will be found in *H. Ex. Doc*., 45th Cong.
2d Sess., viii. 550-60, 577-82. 642-62, 677-717. In 1878 congress paid
to Ben Holladay $526,789 for property destroyed by Indians and losses
sustained by change of mail-route. *Portland Oregonian*, June 21, 1878.
For Indian troubles in 1879, see *Or. Deutsche Zeitung*, Oct. 25, 1879;
in 1881, *Deseret News*, July 6, 1881; for information relating to
Indian tribes and reservations in 1881-2, see *H. Ex. Doc*., 47th Cong.
1st Sess., x. 327, 344. For acts concerning Indians in 1882, see *Utah
Laws*, 1882, pp. 32, 40. In August 1884 Gov. Murray made a requisition
for troops to protect citizens against Utes. *S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug.
14, 1884.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[660:10](hou27.htm#fr_1081) A despatch from A.
O. Smoot, mayor of Provo, giving an account of the outrage, together
with the depositions of the injured parties, will be found in the
*Deseret News*, Sept. 28, 1870.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[661:11](hou27.htm#fr_1082) Of Oct. 5, 1870,
and also in the *Deseret Evening News*, the publication of which will be
mentioned later. De Trobriand states that, as there was no organization
of military districts in the department of the Platte (which included
Utah), the commanders of the several posts must communicate with the
department headquarters, and that as soon as he received the requisite
authority he proceeded to Provo and held an investigation. His letter is
extremely insulting and indecorous.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[661:12](hou27.htm#fr_1083) On the 24th of
this month Wm H. McKay, with whom the governor had resided, and two
others, robbed the U.S. mail about 100 miles south of S. L. City, in
Juab co. They were captured the next day, and McKay was sentenced to
five years’ imprisonment. This was the first mail-coach robbery in Utah.
*Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 64. For argument between J. P.
Newman and Orson Pratt at the tabernacle on the polygamy question during
the autumn of this year, see *Millennial Star*, xxxii. 599-604, passim.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[661:13](hou27.htm#fr_1084) Shaffer's
secretary, and about a month after his decease appointed governor. Geo.
A. Black, secretary to Woods, was also acting governor in 1871. *Paul's
Utah Incidents*, MS.; *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[661:14](hou27.htm#fr_1085) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 32.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[661:15](hou27.htm#fr_1086) At Lewiston, where
he and his two partners made from $250 to $300 a day. *Woods’ Recoll*.,
MS., 3.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[662:16](hou27.htm#fr_1087) Chas C. Wilson
succeeded Titus as chief justice. *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS.
Geo. C. Bates, who in 1870 succeeded C. H. Hempstead, appointed in 1868,
was now district attorney. For his argument in the Baker habeas corpus
case on the jurisdiction of probate courts, see *Utah Pamphlets,
Political*, no. 12. A list of federal officials between 1851 and 1884 is
given in *Utah Gazetteer*, 254-8.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[662:17](hou27.htm#fr_1088) With the exception
of Shaffer. *Woods’ Recoll*., MS., 45.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[663:18](hou27.htm#fr_1089) *Id*., 46-7.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[663:19](hou27.htm#fr_1090) *Deseret News*,
Nov. 1, 1871. For adverse comments of the press on the Hawkins case, see
*Austin Reese River Reveillé, Carson Daily Register, Sacramento
Reporter, Omaha Alta*, in *Millennial Star*, xxxiii. 764-5. In
*Townsend's Mormon Trials* is an impartial account of McKean's
anti-Mormon crusade.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[663:20](hou27.htm#fr_1091) Wells and Stout
were arrested for the murder of Rich. Yates, at the mouth of Echo cañon;
Young, Kimball, Wm A. Hickman, O. P. Rockwell, <span id="page_664">p.
664</span> G. D. Grant, and Simon Dutton, for the murder of a man named
Buck, at Warm Springs. *Woods’ Recoll*., MS., 47; *Millennial Star*,
xxxiii. 744, 808-9.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[664:21](hou27.htm#fr_1092) The prosecuting
attorney asked that the bail fixed at $500;000, but the judge said he
would be satisfied with two sureties each of $50,000. *Deseret News*,
Nov. 1, 1871.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[664:22](hou27.htm#fr_1093) *Millennial Star*,
xxxvii. 788-91. In the case of Clinton et al. vs Englebrecht et al., the
judgment rendered for $60,000 against the municipal officers of S. L.
City it for suppressing an unlicensed liquor store was reversed by the
supreme court. *Millennial Star*, xxxiv. 296. For grounds, see *Smith's
Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 68-9. This decision annulled indictments
against more than 120 persons.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[664:23](hou27.htm#fr_1094) A copy of the
memorial and constitution is contained in *Utah Pamphlets, Political*,
no. 8. See also *Deseret News*, March 6, 1872; *House Misc. Doc*., 42d
Cong. 2d Sess., iii. no. 165. For counter-petitions, see *Id*., iv. no.
208; *Sen. Misc. Doc*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., ii. no. 118.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[664:24](hou27.htm#fr_1095) *Woods’ Recoll*.,
MS., 50; *Millennial Star*, xxxiv. 117-80; *Deseret News*, Jan. 31,
1872; *House Misc. Doc*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., iii. no. 155; *Utah Jour.
Legisl*., 1872, pp. 85-7. For resolution censuring veto, and in favor of
convention and election of delegates, see *Id*., 1872, pp. 104-5.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[664:25](hou27.htm#fr_1096) *Utah Jour.
Legisl*., 1872, p. 36.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[665:26](hou27.htm#fr_1097) *Utah Jour.
Legisl*., 1872, p. 231.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[665:27](hou27.htm#fr_1098) In his charge to
the grand jury, October term, 1874, MeKean, after quoting Montesquieu,
'I shall first examine the relation which laws have to the nature and
principle of each government,' 'and if I can but once establish it, the
laws will soon appear to flow from thence as from their source,'
stigmatizes the Mormons in more vile and insulting phrase than had been
used even by judges Brocchus and Drummond. See *Deseret News*, Oct. 14,
1874; *Millennial Star*, xxxiii. 550.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[665:28](hou27.htm#fr_1099) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 38. See, for opinions of press on McKean's removal,
*Millennial Star*, xxxvii. 282-5; for message of the president on
judicial administration in *Utah, Sen. Doc*., 42d Cong. 3d Sess., no.
44; for act in relation to judiciary, *House Ex. Doc*., 46th Cong. 3d
Sess., xxvi. 997.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[665:29](hou27.htm#fr_1100) Maxwell entered
the union army when 17 years of age, and at 21 was a brigadier-general.
During the war he had both legs broken, his right arm fractured, lost
three fingers of his left hand by a sabre-cut, and had his collarbone
broken by grape-shot, besides receiving several flesh wounds. *Woods’
Recollections*, MS., 39-49.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[665:30](hou27.htm#fr_1101) For further
particulars as to the Cannon-Maxwcel contest, see *House Misc.* <span
id="page_666">p. 666</span> *Doc*., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 49; *House
Com. Rept*, 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 484; Argument of Halbert E. Paine, in
*Utah Pamphlets, Political*, no. 13; *Millennial Star*, 99-100, 104-6;
*Paddock's La Tour*, 292; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Nov. 30, 1872. In 1867
Hooper's election was disputed by William McGrorty. For papers in the
case, see *House Misc. Doc*., 40th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 35; for comments,
*Deseret News*, May 27, 1868. At the opening of the 44th congress
Cannon's seat was also disputed by a man named Baskin.

    William H. Hooper was born at the old homestead known as Warwick
Manor, Eastern Shore, Md, in 1813, his father, who died during William's
infancy being of English descent, and his mother of Scotch extraction.
When 14 years of age he obtained a position in a store; and from this
beginning rose step by step, until in 1836 we find him a member of a
leading commercial firm at Galena, Ill. During the crash of 1838 the
firm suspended, their debts, amounting to $200,000, being afterward paid
in full. In 1850 he moved to Salt Lake City under engagement to Messrs
Holliday & Warner, commencing business on his own account some four
years later. In 1856 he was temporarily appointed secretary of the
territory after the death of Almon W. Babbitt, and in 1859, as we have
seen, was chosen delegate for Utah at the 36th congress, serving in the
same capacity during the 39th, 40th, and 41st congresses. In 1808 Mr
Hooper was appointed a director of Zion's Coöperative Mercantile
Institution, and in 1877 became its president, retaining that position
until his decease at the close of 1882. For further particulars, see
*Tullidge's Mag*., i. 369-85, 427-30; *Contributor*, iv. 184-6, suppl.
25-7; *Beadle's Western Wilds*, 91-2; *Deseret News*, Feb. 8, 1860.
Hooper was an able speaker, terse, to the point, and forensic. 'If,' he
replied in answer to a memorial of the Salt Lake gentile lawyers,
'congress declined to enact a law that would have enabled Chief Justice
Chase to pick out a jury that should convict Jefferson Davis of treason,
ought it now to enable Chief Justice McKean to pick out a jury to
convict Brigham Young of polygamy? It seems to me that the law would be
a greater offence against the spirit of democratic republican
institutions than is the existence of the evil thus sought to be
reached.'

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[666:31](hou27.htm#fr_1102) In consequence of
the military riot above mentioned, the police were instructed to arrest
disorderly or drunken soldiers on slight provocation, and fine them or
put them to work in chain-gangs. After protesting without avail, Woods
reported the matter to the war department, and thereupon a general order
was issued to the commanders of military posts, instructing them not to
allow the arrest of their men except for violation of the known laws of
the land. Soon afterward a soldier was arrested on a trifling charge,
whereat, his release being refused, the governor proceeded to the jail
with Major Gordon and a detachment of troops, knocked out the wall with
a battering-ram, and 'amid hurrahs for the American flag, set the
prisoner free.' *Woods’ Recoll*., MS., 53-5.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[667:32](hou27.htm#fr_1103) *Id*., 55-9.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[667:33](hou27.htm#fr_1104) See for the
memorial presented by the gentiles, setting forth the immorality and
despotism of the Mormons and the insecurity of life among the gentiles,
*House Misc. Doc*., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 120; for opinion of various
newspapers on the Mormon question, *Deseret News*, Jan. 17, 1872; for
denial by gentile merchants of the disturbed condition of affairs, as
alleged in various newspapers, *Id*., May 8, 1872. In 1867, and again
during the administration of Woods, it was proposed to annex Utah to
Nevada without consulting much the wishes of either. For reports of
committee of the senate of Nevada on the matter, see *Nev. Jour. Ass*.,
1867, 183-4, 195-7; *Nev. Jour. Sen*., 1871, 160-2; *Millennial Star*,
xxxiii. 161-2.

    Samuel Paul, a native of Londonderry, Ireland, who served for four
years as a volunteer during the war, and came to Utah in 1865, says that
while the Mormons would render no assistance to the governor or his
so-called ring, he was well treated in all the settlements which he
visited. *Paul's Utah Incidents*, MS. For description of and comments on
the political ring from a Mormon standpoint, see *Millennial Star*,
xxxiv. 68-70; xxxvi. 120-2; for Vorhees’ and Wheeler's bill, introduced
April 1, 1872, 'to aid the enforcement of the laws of the territory of
Utah,' see *Deseret News*, April 17, 1872.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[667:34](hou27.htm#fr_1105) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 32.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[668:35](hou27.htm#fr_1106) See *S. L. C.
Tribune*, April 14, June 2, 1877.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[668:36](hou27.htm#fr_1107) On the 22d of
April, 1876, Dom Pedro, emperor of Brazil, visited Salt Lake City on his
way eastward; and on October 3, 1875, President Grant, this being the
first occasion on which a president of the United States set foot in the
territory. For account of these visits, and also those of General
Sheridan, Henri Rochefort, Jay Gould, and William Hepworth Dixon in
1874, James G. Blaine in 1873, generals Garfield and McClellan and the
Japanese embassy in 1872, see files of the *Deseret News*; *Utah Jour.
Legisl*., 1872; *Ventromiles' Tour*, 74-5; *Tullidge's Life of Young*,
441. Sheridan's visit was mainly for the purpose of establishing another
military post in Utah, Provo being the point selected.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[669:37](hou27.htm#fr_1108) On the evening of
Tuesday a consultation was held by his physicians, S. B. Young, W. F.
Anderson, J. M. Benedict, and F. D. Benedict, and it was resolved to
fill up the lower portion of the bowels by injection, for the purpose of
causing an action through the alimentary canal; but this treatment was
discontinued on account of fainting symptoms. The coma was attributed to
the pressure of the swollen bowels, which checked the circulation to the
heart and lungs. *Deseret Ev. News*, Aug. 31, 1877.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[669:38](hou27.htm#fr_1109) Francis Dorr, who
crossed the plains in 1850, and rendering assistance to the Mormon
trains, was told by Brigham that he would ever be welcome to Salt Lake
City, paid the Mormons avisit in 1877, and was kindly received by their
prominent men. He is of opinion that Brigham's last illness was partly
caused by fear of being arrested and tried for complicity in the
Mountain Meadows massacre. *Dorr's Statement*, MS., 3. I find no
confirmation of this theory, which is extremely improbable, in view of
the evidence and the statements of the counsel for the prosecution at
the Lee trial. See pp. 566-8, this vol.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[670:39](hou27.htm#fr_1110) Nearly four years
before his death, Brigham gave instructions as to his funeral, and at
the same time a number of elders gave orders as to their own interment.
'I, Brigham Young, wish my funeral services to be conducted after the
following manner: When I breathe my last I wish my friends to put my
body in as clean and wholesome state as can conveniently be done, and
preserve the same for one, two, three, or four days, or as long as my
body can be preserved in a good condition. I want my coffin made of
plump 1¼-inch <span id="page_671">p. 671</span> redwood boards, not
scrimped in length, but two inches longer than I would measure, and from
two to three inches wider than is commonly made for a person of my
breadth and size, and deep enough to place me on a little comfortable
cotton bed, with a good suitable pillow for size and quality; my body
dressed in my temple clothing, and laid nicely into my coffin, and the
coffin to have the appearance that if I wanted to turn a little to the
right or left I should have plenty of room to do so.' After giving
instructions as to the services and place and method of interment, he
concludes: 'I wish this to be read at the funeral; providing, that if I
should die anywhere in the mountains, I desire the above directions
respecting my place of burial to be observed; but if I should live to go
back with the church to Jackson county, I wish to be buried there.'
Address of Geo. Q. Cannon, in *Deseret News*, Aug. 31, 1877.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[671:40](hou27.htm#fr_1111) George Albert
Smith, cousin to the prophet on the father's side, his mother being
descended from the Lymans of revolutionary fame, was born at Potsdam, N.
Y., in 1817. In the spring of 1833 the family started for Kirtland,
where they were heartily welcomed, and during the summer George was
employed in quarrying and hauling rock, and other duties in connection
with the building of the Kirtland temple. He was also one of those who
went up to redeem Zion in Jackson co., Mo., returning three months later
after travelling some 2,000 miles, most of the way on foot. Of his
missionary labors mention has already been made. Ordained a member of
the first quorum of seventies in 1835 and an apostle in 1839, he was one
of the pioneer band at the exodus from Nauvoo, and almost until the day
of his death took a prominent part in settling and redeeming the vales
of Deseret. Elected member for Iron co. under the provisional state
government, he was afterward appointed church historian, and represented
the same constituency during several sessions of the territorial
legislature. After the death of Heber C. Kimball in 1868, he was
appointed first councillor to Brigham, having previously been elected
president of the legislative council, which latter office he held during
<span id="page_672">p. 672</span> six consecutive sessions. For further
particulars as to his life, character, and abilities, see *Utah Jour.
Legisl*., 1876, pp. 65-8; *Richards’ Narr*., MS., 94; *Deseret News*,
Aug. 11, 18, 1858, June 16, Sept. 8, 1875; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Sept. 4,
11, 1875; *Tullidge's Life of Young*, suppl., 7, 13; *Townsend's Mormon
Trials*, 47; *S. L. C. Contributor*, 1882, passim; *Codman's Round
Trip*, 230-3; *Beadle's Western Wilds*, 92-3 (with cut). In 1860 the son
of Geo. A. Smith was killed by Navajos. *Deseret News*, Dec. 5, 1860.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[672:41](hou27.htm#fr_1112) Composed for the
occasion by Charles W. Penrose.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[672:42](hou27.htm#fr_1113) In accordance with
his father's instructions, a stone vault had been built by John W. Young
in the south-east corner of the cemetery. It was of cut stone, dowelled
and bolted with steel and laid in cement. The interior was also cemented
and whitened. *Deseret News*, Aug. 29, 1877, where is a full description
of the obsequies, afterward published in pamphlet form, and entitled
*Death of President Brigham Young*.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[672:43](hou27.htm#fr_1114) See pp.
[261](hou13.htm#page_261)-2, this vol.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[673:44](hou27.htm#fr_1115) He had about $50,
then almost the only money in Utah.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[673:45](hou27.htm#fr_1116) For sketches of
the character, physique, and policy of Brigham Young, see, among others,
*Hist. Brigham Young*, MS; *Utah Early Records*, MS., passim; *Richards’
Rem*., MS 15; *Richards Narr*., MS., 83-4; *Burton's City of the
Saints*, 290-4, 300; *Hyde's Mormonism*, 137-8; *Tullidge's a Life of
Young*, 456-8; *Utah Pamphlets, Religious*, no. 3, p. 19; *Bowles’
Across the Continent*, 86-7; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 286; *Stenhouse's
Englishwoman*, 163-7; *Young's Wife No. 19*, 162-5; *Beadle's Life in
Utah*, 265-7,362; *Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi*, 352-3; *Rae's
Westward by Rail*, 106-7; *Ludlow's Heart of the Continent*, 366-9,
371-3; *Rusling, Across America*, 177-8. Mention is made of these points
in more detail on pp. 200-6, this vol. A history of Brigham Young is
published in the *Deseret News*, commencing with the issue of Jan. 27,
1858, and continued in subsequent numbers.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[674:46](hou27.htm#fr_1117) Stenhouse, for
instance, relates that in 1852 he balanced his account with the church,
amounting to $200,000, by directing his clerk to place this sum to his
credit for services rendered, and that in 1867 he discharged his
liabilities, amounting to $967,000, in a similar manner. *Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 665. Such statements are pure fiction.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[674:47](hou27.htm#fr_1118) In the records of
the internal revenue office at Washington his total income for 1870 is
stated at $25,500, in 1871 at $111,680, and in 1872 at $39,952.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[674:48](hou27.htm#fr_1119) It has been stated
in several books and many newspaper paragraphs that Brigham had large
deposits in the Bank of England, the amount being placed as high as
$20,000,000. This is entirely untrue. Stenhouse, for instance, says that
a New York journalist who visited him in 1871 inquired as to this
report, the sum being then stated at $17,000,000. Brigham replied that
he had not a dollar outside of Utah, but that the church had some small
amount abroad for its use. The following extract from *Richards’ Narr*.,
MS., may serve to explain the matter: 'The rumor that President Young
ever had any money in the Bank of England is entirely false. When I was
in Liverpool I <span id="page_675">p. 675</span> opened an account with
the branch of the Bank of England in that city, but finding their
charges too high, transferred it to the Royal Bank of Liverpool, where
it remained between 1850 and 1867. On the failure of the bank I was
fortunate enough to get my money. There was a time in our business when
there was $20,000, or $30,000 to our credit. This money came from the
profits on publications, and from the deposits of people who wished to
emigrate. Donations were also remitted to us from Utah, and the
company's fund was sustained by the emigration business.' Franklin D.
Richards, the author of this manuscript, was nephew to Willard Richards,
who, as will be remembered, was appointed secretary of the Perpetual
Emigration Fund Company. See [p. 415](hou19.htm#page_415), this vol.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[675:49](hou27.htm#fr_1120) In 1869, at which
date the Boston board of trade visited S. L. City, Brigham said that he
had 16 living and 4 deceased wives, and 49 surviving children. This was
the first time that Mormon or gentile knew how many his family mustered.
*Utah Notes*, MS., 1-2. In *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 191-214, is a
burlesqued description of some of his wives, and of their treatment.
*Wife No. 19*, or the *Story of a Life in Bondage, being a Complete
Exposé of Mormonism*, by Ann Eliza Young, is, though the writer affects
to be impartial, rather a discharge of venom by a woman scorned. She was
of mature age when married, and if she had not then sense enough to
understand the responsibilities she was assuming, one would think that,
some years later, she ought at least to have had discretion enough to
abstain from inflicting her book and lectures on the public. The most
valuable part of the work, if it can be said to have any value, is the
chapter on the case of Young vs Young, in which Judge McKean awarded to
the plaintiff $500 a month as alimony, and committed defendant to jail
for refusing to pay it. His decision was reversed by Judge Lowe.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[675:50](hou27.htm#fr_1121) For copy of will,
see *S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug. 19, 1883. It has been alleged that Brigham
claimed to be a prophet. This he distinctly denied. In *Utah Notes*,
MS., it is stated that the lame, halt, and blind flocked to him to be
healed, and that he used great tact in dealing with them. One man who
had lost a leg came to him to be made whole. Brigham said it should be
as he wished; but those created with two legs would have two legs in
heaven; hence, if he casused a new one to be framed, the man would have
three for all eternity.

    Patriarch and President John Young, brother to Brigham, died April
27, 1870. For biographical sketch, see *Deseret News*, May 4, 1870. The
decease of Joseph A., Brigham's eldest son, occurred Aug. 10, 1875. For
biography, see *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1876, pp. 206-8. On July 10th of
this year died Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses to the
authenticity of the book of Mormon. His age was 92. Among others whose
decease occurred during the period to which this chapter refers may be
mentioned Ezra Taft Benson, <span id="page_676">p. 676</span> a native
of Mendon, Mass., who worked on his father's farm until he was 16 years
of age, afterward becoming hotel-keeper, and later proprietor of a
cotton-mill in the same state. In 1839 we find him at Quincy, Ill.,
whither he had gone in search of a home, and where, during the following
year, he was converted by the preaching of Orson Hyde and John E. Page.
In the autumn of 1849 he was ordained an elder, and in the summer of
1845 an apostle, most of th interval being passed in missionary work in
the eastern states. In April 1847 he accompanied the pioneers, finally
settling in the valley two years later. After some further missionary
work, he was appointed, in 1860, brigadier-general of militia in the
Cache Valley district, where he lived until the dare of his decease,
Sept. 3, 1869, his death being probably caused by heart disease. When
the provisional government was established be represented Salt Lake
county in the legislature, and when Utah was made a territory was chosen
a member, first of the representatives for Salt Lake county, and for the
last ten years of his life, of the council for Tooele county. *Deseret
News*, Sept. 8, 1869. At his death joint resolutions were passed in the
assembly as a tribute of respect, for which see *Utah Jour. Legisl*.,
1870, 185-6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Church and State. 1877-1885.](hou28)
