[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou23)  [Next](hou25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

### CHAPTER XXI. POLITICAL, SOCIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL. 1859-1862.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Brigham Threatened With
Arrest—the Federal Judges Reproved—Departure of Governor Cumming—and of
the Army of Utah—Population of the
Territory—Mortality—Wealth—Industries—Prices—Wages—Trade—Salt Lake City
in 1860—the Temple Block—Social Gatherings—Theatricals—Scientific and
Other Institutions—Character of the Population—Carson Valley—San
Bernardino—Summit County and Its Settlements—Purchase of Fort
Bridger—Wasatch County—Morgan County—Cache Valley—Settlements in
Southern Utah.</span></span>

    During the disputes between Governor Cumming and General Johnston,
the latter being aided, as we have seen, by the federal judges, there
was constant fear that the troops would come into collision with the
territorial militia. Though the Mormon authorities had no cause for
complaint as to the conduct of the soldiery, they regarded their
presence as a menace, and condemned the proceedings of the general and
the judges as a personal insult to the governor.

After the arrival of the army, Brigham never appeared in public without
a body-guard of his own intimate friends; <span
id="fr_876"></span>[1](#fn_876.md) and for many months he attended no
public assemblies. At the door of his residence sentries kept watch by
day, and at night a strong guard was stationed within its walls. Nor
were these precautions unnecessary. About the end of March 1859 a writ
was issued for his apprehension on a groundless charge of complicity in
forging notes on

<span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

the United States treasury. <span id="fr_877"></span>[2](#fn_877.md) The
officers deputed to make the arrest repaired to the governor's quarters
and besought his coöperation, but were promptly refused, Cumming
protesting against the measure as an unjustifiable outrage, <span
id="fr_878"></span>[3](#fn_878.md) whereupon they returned in discomfiture
to Camp Floyd.

    But the trouble was not yet ended. In May, Judge Sinclair was to
open his court at Salt Lake City, and threatened to station there a
detachment of troops. On Sunday the 17th of April it was reported that
two regiments were on their way to the city for the purpose of making
arrests, whereat General Wells at once ordered out the militia, and
within a few hours five thousand men were under arms. <span
id="fr_879"></span>[4](#fn_879.md) It was now expected

<span id="page_574">p. 574</span>

and almost hoped that the Nauvoo legion would measure its strength with
the army of Utah, but by a little timely forbearance on both sides the
threatened encounter was averted. Soon afterward the judges were
instructed as to their duty in an official letter from the
attorney-general, and were ordered to confine themselves within their
official sphere, which was to try causes, and not to intermeddle with
the movements of the troops—the latter responsibility resting only with
the governor. "In a territory like Utah," he remarked, "the person who
exercises this power can make war and peace when he pleases, and holds
in his hands the issues of life and death for thousands. Surely it was
not intended to clothe each one of the judges, as well as the marshal
and all his deputies, with this tremendous authority. Especially does
this construction seem erroneous when we reflect that these different
officers might make requisitions conflicting with one another, and all
of them crossing the path of the governor." <span
id="fr_880"></span>[5](#fn_880.md) The judges were superseded a few months
later; <span id="fr_881"></span>[6](#fn_881.md) and thus the matter was
finally set at rest, the action of the governor being sustained,
although he became so unpopular with the cabinet that for a time his
removal was also under consideration. <span
id="fr_882"></span>[7](#fn_882.md) Though his resignation was not demanded,

<span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

he set forth from Salt Lake City in May 1861, about two months before
his term of office expired. He had entered that city amid a forced
display of welcome, but he left it with the sincere regrets of a people
whose hearts he had won by kind treatment. <span
id="fr_883"></span>[8](#fn_883.md)

    In 1860 most of the troops were removed to Mexico and Arizona, and
about a year later, war between north and south being then almost a
certainty, the remainder of the army was ordered to the eastern states.
The government stores at Camp Floyd, valued at $4,000,000, were sold at
extremely low prices, greatly to the relief of the saints, who could now
purchase provisions, clothing, wagons, live-stock, and other articles of
which they were in need, at their own rates. Flour, which had cost the
nation $570 per ton, sold for less than $11 per ton, and other stores in
the same proportion; the entire proceeds of the sale did not exceed
$100,000, or little more than two per cent of the outlay; and of this
sum $40,000 was contributed by Brigham. <span
id="fr_884"></span>[9](#fn_884.md)

    At the sale at Camp Floyd some of the leading

<span id="page_576">p. 576</span>

merchants of Salt Lake City laid the basis of their fortunes; to the
rest of the community its main benefit was that it gave them a good
supply of warm clothing at cheap rates. For years afterward the members
of the Nauvoo legion were attired in military uniforms, which now took
the place of the sombre gray clothing that the saints were accustomed to
wear. The ammunition and spare arms were destroyed, some of the cannon
being exploded and others thrown into wells, though the latter were
recovered by the Mormons, and are still used on the 4th and 24th of
July, and other of their festivities. <span
id="fr_885"></span>[10](#fn_885.md)

    We have now arrived at a period in the history of Utah when it may
be of interest to give a brief description of the industrial and social
condition of the Mormons. Between the years 1850 and 1862 they had
increased in number from 11,380 to about 65,000, a gain that has seldom
been equalled in any of the states or territories of the republic. <span
id="fr_886"></span>[11](#fn_886.md) They were a very healthy community, the
number of deaths recorded in the census report for the year ending June
1860 being little more than nine per thousand, <span
id="fr_887"></span>[12](#fn_887.md) though this is doubtless a mistake, the
actual death rate being probably at least twelve per thousand. <span
id="fr_888"></span>[13](#fn_888.md) Of the mortality,

<span id="page_577">p. 577</span>

about twenty-six per cent occurred among infants, <span
id="fr_889"></span>[14](#fn_889.md) the most prominent diseases among
adults being consumption and enteriris. It is worthy of note that up to
this date there occurred in the territory but one case of suicide among
the Mormons. <span id="fr_890"></span>[15](#fn_890.md) There was little
pauperism in their midst, and there was little crime, or such crime as
was punished by imprisonment. <span id="fr_891"></span>[16](#fn_891.md)

    The saints were now a fairly prosperous community. The value of
their real and personal property was reported in 1860 at $5,596,118, of
improved farm lands at $1,333,355, of farming implements $242,889, of
live-stock $1,516,707, and of manufactures $900,153. To these figures
about 50 per cent must be added in order to obtain the actual value.
Among the list of premiums bestowed in this year by the Deseret
Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, <span
id="fr_892"></span>[17](#fn_892.md) we find prizes and diplomas awarded for
agricultural and gardening implements of all kinds, for steam-engines
and fire-engines, for leathern manufactures of every description from
heavy harness to ladies' kid boots of many

<span id="page_578">p. 578</span>

buttons, for woollen and cotton goods, including carpets, blankets,
flannels, jeans, linseys, kerseys, and cassimeres, for many articles of
furniture, and for the most needed articles of cutlery and
hardware. <span id="fr_893"></span>[18](#fn_893.md)

    The prices of most necessaries of life were moderate throughout the
territory, but on account of high freights—averaging from the eastern
states about $28 and from the Pacific seaboard $50 to $60 per
ton—imported commodities were inordinately dear. <span
id="fr_894"></span>[19](#fn_894.md) The cost of luxuries mattered but
little, however, to a community that subsisted mainly on the fruits and
vegetables of their own gardens, and the bread, milk, and butter
produced on their own farms.

    Wages were somewhat high at this period, common laborers receiving
$2 per day and domestic servants $30 to $40 per month. Lumbermen,
wood-choppers, brick-makers, masons, carpenters, plasterers, and
painters were in demand at good rates; though until 1857, and perhaps
for a year or two later, their hire was usually paid in kind, as there
was still but little money in circulation. Thus, a mechanic might be
required to receive his wages in hats, boots, or clothing, whether he
needed such articles or not, and must probably submit to a heavy
discount in disposing of his wares for cash or for such goods as he
might require. Some commodities, however, among which were flour, sugar,
coffee, and butter, could usually be sold at their par value, and some
could not even be bought for cash in large quantities. Most of the
stores divided their stock into two classes of wares, which they termed
cash-goods and shelf-goods, and the tradesman objected to sell any
considerable amount of the former unless he disposed, at the same time,
of a portion of

<span id="page_579">p. 579</span>

the latter. If, for instance, one should tender $50 for a bag of sugar
without offering to make other purchases, the store-keeper would
probably refuse; "for," he would argue, "if I sell all my cash-goods for
cash, without also getting rid of my shelf-goods, I shall not be able to
dispose of the latter for cash at all. I must dole out the one with care
that I may be able to get rid of the other." <span
id="fr_895"></span>[20](#fn_895.md)

    In some of the shop windows on Main Street were displayed costly
imported commodities—silks, velvets, and shawls of diverse pattern,
jewelry, laces, and millinery; <span id="fr_896"></span>[21](#fn_896.md)
near by were less pretentious stores, where home-made and second-hand
articles were retailed. In some of the latter might be seen a curious
collection of dilapidated merchandise, and people almost as singular as
the wares over which they chaffered. Here was a group of women holding
solemn conclave over a superannuated gown that to other eyes would seem
worthless; there a sister in faded garb cheapening a well-battered
bonnet of Parisian make that had already served as covering and ornament
for half a dozen heads.

    Approaching Zion from the direction of Fort Bridger, after days of
travel through sage-brush and buffalo-grass, the traveller would observe
that within a score of leagues from Salt Lake City nature's barrenness
began to succumb to the marvellous energy of the saints. The cañons had
been converted by irrigation into fertile lands, whose emerald tint
soothed the eye wearied with the leaden monotony of the desert
landscape.

<span id="page_580">p. 580</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The fields were
billowing with grain, the cattle sleek and thriving, the barns well
filled, the windmills buzzing merrily. Nevertheless, among these smiling
settlements a painful deficiency might be noticed. Everything that
industry and thrift could accomplish had been done for the farm, but
nothing for the home. Between the houses of the poor and the rich there
was little difference, except that one was of logs and the other of
boards. Both seemed like mere enclosures in which to eat and sleep, and

<span id="img_58000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SALT LAKE CITY IN
1860.](tn/58000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/58000.jpg.md)  
SALT LAKE CITY IN 1860.  
</span>

around neither was there any sign that the inmates took a pride in their
home. One might pass three dwellings enclosed by a common fence, and
belonging to one master, but nowhere could be seen any of those simple
embellishments that cost so little and mean so much—the cultivated
garden plat, the row of shade trees, the rose-bush at the doorway, or
the trellised creeper at the porch.

    The city itself wore a different aspect. The streets,

<span id="page_581">p. 581</span>

though unpaved and without sidewalks, were lined with cotton-wood and
locust trees, acacias, and poplars. Most of the private houses were
still of wood or adobe, some few only being of stone, and none
pretentious as to architecture; but nearly all were surrounded with
gardens in which fruit and shade trees were plentiful. Many of them were
of the same pattern, barn-shaped, with wings and tiny casements, for
glass was not yet manufactured by the Mormons. A few of the better class
were built on a foundation of sandstone, and somewhat in the shape of a
bungalow, with trellised verandas, and low flat roofs supported by
pillars. Those of the poor were small hut-like buildings, most of them
one-storied, and some with several entrances. At this date the entire
city, except on its southern side, was enclosed by a wall some ten or
twelve feet high, with semi-bastions placed at half musket-range, and
pierced here and there with gateways. <span
id="fr_897"></span>[22](#fn_897.md)

    In driving through the suburbs the visitor would find the
thoroughfares in bad condition, dusty in summer, and in winter filled
with viscid mud. On either side were posts and rails, which, as the
heart of the city was approached, gave way to neat fences of palings. On
Main Street were the abodes of some of the leading Mormon dignitaries
and the stores of prominent gentile merchants. On the eastern side,
nearly opposite the post-office, and next door to a small structure that
served for bath-house and bakery, stood the principal hostelry, the Salt
Lake House, a large pent-roofed building, in front of which was a
veranda supported by painted posts, and a sign-board swinging from a
tall flag-staff. Here fair accommodation

<span id="page_582">p. 582</span>

could be had at very moderate charges. <span
id="fr_898"></span>[23](#fn_898.md) Even in its business portion, Main
Street had at this date many vacant lots, being then in the embryo
condition through which all cities must pass, the log building standing
side by side with the adobe hut and the stone or brick store, with here
and there a few shanties, relics of the days of 1848.

    Among the principal attractions was the temple block, surrounded in
1860 with a wall of red sandstone, on which were placed layers of adobe,
fashioned in imitation of some richer substance, and raising it to a
height of ten feet. On each face of the wall were thirty pilasters, also
of adobe, protected by sandstone copings, but without pedestals or
entablatures. Up to the year 1860 the cost of the wall and the
foundations of the edifice already amounted to $1,000,000, a sum equal
to the entire outlay on the temple at Nauvoo. The block was consecrated
on the 3d of February, 1853, and the corner-stones laid with imposing
ceremonies on the 6th of the following April. <span
id="fr_899"></span>[24](#fn_899.md) In August 1860, the foundations, which
were sixteen feet deep and of gray granite, had been completed, but no
further progress had been made. I shall reserve until later a
description of the building as it now stands. Of the tabernacle which
occupied the southwest corner of the block, and the bowery immediately
north of the tabernacle, mention has already been made. <span
id="fr_900"></span>[25](#fn_900.md) In the north-west corner, and separated
from

<span id="page_583">p. 583</span>

the tabernacle by a high fence, stood the endowment house, <span
id="fr_901"></span>[26](#fn_901.md) where, as evil-minded gentiles
declared, human sacrifices were offered. The ceremonies that actually
took place within its walls have been described elsewhere in this
volume.

    In the blocks adjacent to the tabernacle were the residences of
Brigham, Heber, Orson Hyde, George A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, John
Taylor, and Daniel H. Wells, the first two occupying entire
blocks. <span id="fr_902"></span>[27](#fn_902.md) South of temple block was
the council-house, <span id="fr_903"></span>[28](#fn_903.md) south of
Brigham's dwelling and adjoining that of Wells was the historian's
office, where the church records were kept, and in the next plat to the
east was the social hall, <span id="fr_904"></span>[29](#fn_904.md) where
the fashion of the city held festivities.

    Balls held at the social hall were extremely select, and sometimes a
little expensive, tickets for the more pretentious fêtes costing ten
dollars for each couple, and the invitations, which were difficult to
obtain even at that price, <span id="fr_905"></span>[30](#fn_905.md) being
issued on embossed and bordered

<span id="page_584">p. 584</span>

paper. Dancing commenced about four P.M., the president of the church
pronouncing a blessing with uplifted hands, and then leading off the
first cotillon. All joined vigorously in the dance, and the prophet, his
apostles, and bishops set the example, the saltations not being in the
languid gliding pace then fashionable in other cities, but elaborately
executed steps requiring severe muscular exercise. At eight came supper,
a substantial repast, with four courses, <span
id="fr_906"></span>[31](#fn_906.md) after which dancing was resumed, varied
at intervals with song until four or five o'clock in the morning, when
the party broke up, the entertainment closing with prayer and
benediction.

    Besides these fashionable gatherings held from time to time by the
élite of Zion, there were ward parties, elders' cotillon parties, and
picnic parties, the last being sometimes held at the social hall, where
rich and poor assembled, bringing with them their children, and setting
their own tables, or ordering dainties from an adjoining kitchen
provided for that purpose. Here, also, until 1862, when the first
theatre was built, theatrical entertainments were given in winter, <span
id="fr_907"></span>[32](#fn_907.md) and these of no mean order, for among
the Mormons there was no lack of amateur talent. <span
id="fr_908"></span>[33](#fn_908.md) Among those who participated

<span id="page_585">p. 585</span>

were several of the wives and daughters of Brigham. <span
id="fr_909"></span>[34](#fn_909.md) All the actors attended rehearsal each
night in the week, except on Wednesdays and Saturdays, when the
performances took place; most of them found their own costumes, and none
received any fixed remuneration. <span id="fr_910"></span>[35](#fn_910.md)

    While the amusements of the people were thus cared for, there was no
lack of more solid entertainment. All had access to the public library
under proper restrictions, and in the council-house was opened, in 1853,
the first reading-room, which was supplied with newspapers and magazines
from all parts of the world. Among the scientific associations may be
mentioned the Universal Scientific Society, established in 1854, with
Wilford Woodruff as president, and the Polysophical Society, over which
Lorenzo Snow presided. <span id="fr_911"></span>[36](#fn_911.md) The
musical talent of Salt Lake City formed themselves, in 1855, into the
Deseret Philharmonic Society, and in June of that year a music hall was
in course of construction. <span id="fr_912"></span>[37](#fn_912.md) In the
same

<span id="page_586">p. 586</span>

year the Deseret Theological Institute was organized, its purpose being
to make known the principles of light and truth which its members
claimed to have received from the priesthood, in the belief that "the
science of theology embraces a knowledge of all intelligence, whether in
heaven or on the earth, moral, scientific, literary, or religious"!

    Prominent among the charitable associations was the Relief Society,
originally organized by Joseph Smith at Nauvoo in 1842, and discontinued
after his assassination until 1855, when it was reëstablished in Salt
Lake City. After that date its operations gradually extended from ward
to ward and from settlement to settlement, until it became a powerful
influence for good throughout the land. Its main purpose was the relief
of the poor, and by its efforts it prevented the necessity for
poor-houses, which are still unknown among the latter-day saints, and
otherwise it rendered good service—by educating orphans, by promoting
home industries, and by giving tone and character to society through its
moral and social influence. <span id="fr_913"></span>[38](#fn_913.md)

 

    To the student of humanity there were few richer fields for study
than could be found at this period in the Mormon capital, where almost
every state in the union and every nation in Europe had its
representatives. There were to be seen side by side the tall, sinewy
Norwegian, fresh from his pine forests, the phlegmatic Dane, the stolid,
practical German, the dapper, quick-minded Frenchman, the clumsy,
dogmatic Englishman, and the shrewd, versatile American. So little did
the emigrants know of the land in which their lot was cast that some of
them, while crossing the plains, were not aware that they trod on
American soil, and others cast away their blankets and warm clothing,
under the impression that perpetual summer reigned in Zion. A few years’
residence

<span id="page_587">p. 587</span>

in the land of the saints accomplishes a wonderful change, the contrast
in mien and physique between the recruits and the older settlers being
very strongly marked. Especially is this the case among the women. "I
could not but observe in those born hereabouts," writes an English
traveller in 1860, "the noble, regular features, the lofty, thoughtful
brow, the clear, transparent complexion, the long, silky hair, and,
greatest charm of all, the soft smile of the American woman when she
does smile." <span id="fr_914"></span>[39](#fn_914.md)

    Much has been said about race deterioration arising

<span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

from polygamous unions. It has never been shown that physical
development suffers from the polygamous system, especially when
regulated by religion, as in the case of the Mormons. The children of
saints are much like other children. In the streets of the capital,
however, during the period under review, might be seen youths of
eighteen or twenty, some of them the children of church dignitaries,
whose highest ambition was satisfied when they could ride through the
streets, hallooing and shouting, fantastically attired in fringed and
embroidered buckskin leggings, gaudily colored shirt, and slouched hat,
and with the orthodox revolver and bowie-knife conspicuously
displayed. <span id="fr_915"></span>[40](#fn_915.md) They resembled
somewhat the cow-boy of the present day; but their presence was barely
felt amid this staid and order-loving community, <span
id="fr_916"></span>[41](#fn_916.md) the forwardness of the second
generation of the saints being attributed, not without show of reason,
to the corrupting influence of the gentiles.

    In order to estimate fairly the character of the population of Salt
Lake City, which numbered in 1860 about 14,000, <span
id="fr_917"></span>[42](#fn_917.md) the visitor should attend the bowery or
tabernacle, where according to the season of the year about 3,000 of the
populace assembled on Sunday. The men appeared, in warm weather, without
coats and with open vests, but always in decent and cleanly garb, most
of them being clad in gray tweed, though some of the elders and
dignitaries wore black broadcloth. <span
id="fr_918"></span>[43](#fn_918.md) The women wore silks, woollen stuffs,

<span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

or calicoes, as they were able to afford, usually of plain pattern and
dark color, though a few were dressed in gaudy attire, and with a little
faded finery. <span id="fr_919"></span>[44](#fn_919.md) The congregation
was seated on long rows of benches opposite the platform, from which
they were separated by the space allotted to the orchestra, then
consisting of a violin and bass viol, vocal music being rendered by two
female and four male singers. The oratory was somewhat of the Boanerges
stamp, and contained much round abuse of the gentiles; but looking at
the audience, which consisted, in the main, of a thriving, contented,
and industrious class of people, light-hearted and ever ready to laugh
at the somewhat broad jokes of the church dignitaries, it was impossible
to believe all the hard things spoken and written of them by their
enemies. Moreover, about one third of the population consisted at this
date of emigrants from Great Britain, and at least two fifths were
foreigners of other nationalities, most of them Danes, Swedes, or
Norwegians. They were fair types of their race, and it is not very
probable

<span id="page_590">p. 590</span>

that they had so quickly changed their national characteristics as
already to forfeit the good opinion of their fellow-men.

    Such was Zion in 1860, and such its population. Of the progress and
condition of other settlements established soon after the Mormon
occupation, and the founding of which has already been mentioned, I
shall have occasion to speak later. During the thirteen years that had
now elapsed since first they entered the valley, the saints had pushed
forward their colonies in all directions almost to the verge of their
territory. Especially was this the case toward the west, where, at an
early date, they came into antagonism with settlers from California. In
1850 a few persons from that state had settled in Carson valley for
trading purposes, the migration of gold-seekers, some of whom wintered
in that region, being then very considerable. During the following year
several Mormons entered the valley, John Reese, who arrived there in the
spring with thirteen wagon-loads of provisions, building the first
house, known for several years as the Mormon station, on the site of the
present village of Genoa. <span id="fr_920"></span>[45](#fn_920.md) Reese
first came to the valley alone, his nearest neighbor, James Fennimore,
living in Gold Cañon, some twenty-five miles distant, in a "dug-out," or
hole scooped out of the bank, the front part covered in this instance
with rags and strips of canvas, the man being thriftless and a
dram-drinker. He was nicknamed Virginia, and after him was named the
city whence more bullion has been shipped in a single year than would
now replace the floating capital of the states of California and
Nevada. <span id="fr_921"></span>[46](#fn_921.md)

<span id="page_591">p. 591</span>

    By an act of the Utah legislature, approved January 17, 1854, the
limits of Carson county were defined, <span
id="fr_922"></span>[47](#fn_922.md) and the governor was authorized to
appoint for it a probate judge whose duty it should be to organize the
county, by dividing it into precincts, holding an election, filling the
various offices, and locating the county seat. The choice fell on Orson
Hyde, who with Judge Styles, the United States marshal, and an escort of
thirty-five men, reached the settlement of John Reese in June 1855,
other parties of Mormons arriving during this and the following year.
Meanwhile miners, farmers, and herdsmen from California and the Atlantic
states had settled in the valley and elsewhere on the eastern side of
the Sierra Nevada in such numbers as to alarm the Mormons, who now
desired them to leave the territory. This they refused to do, and some
pretended fears of a resort to force. The gentiles fortified themselves,
and assumed an aggressive attitude, and for two weeks the opposing
forces were en-camped almost within sight of each other, but without
coming to blows. News of the disturbance reached the mining camps on the
other side of the mountains, and numbers prepared to go in aid of their
comrades. The aggressors now feared that they would be themselves
expelled from the country, and proposed a truce, under which all should
be allowed to remain on their lands.

    As soon as the matter became known to the authorities, the county
organization was repealed, the probate judge recalled, and the records,
which contained several criminal indictments of a serious

<span id="page_592">p. 592</span>

nature, <span id="fr_923"></span>[48](#fn_923.md) were removed to Salt Lake
City. When news arrived of the approach of the army of Utah, the Carson
Mormons were ordered, as we have seen, to return to Zion and aid in its
defence, though a few remained in the valley. In 1859 the gentile
inhabitants, after several fruitless appeals to congress, formally
declared their independence, <span id="fr_924"></span>[49](#fn_924.md) and
demanded admission as a territory. Two years later the request was
granted, and the territory of Nevada was cut off from Utah, its eastern
limit being fixed at the thirty-ninth meridian, but extended by act of
1862 to the thirty-eighth, and by act of 1866 to the thirty-seventh
meridian. Reluctantly the Mormons relinquished these portions of the
public domain.

    In Eagle and Washoe valleys they had also established small
settlements in 1854 and 1855, remaining until recalled in 1857, at which
latter date, as will be remembered, the colony at San Bernardino in
California was also abandoned. During the Mormon occupation the county
of San Bernardino was cut off from that of Los Angeles, the former
assuming its proportion of the liabilities. A city was built, with
substantial dwellings, saw and grist mills, and surrounded

<span id="page_593">p. 593</span>

with thriving farms; <span id="fr_925"></span>[50](#fn_925.md) a road was
constructed as far as the timber belt in the neighboring mountains, each
man working incessantly until it was completed, and all this was
accomplished without incurring debt, a small balance remaining in the
county treasury when the settlers were ordered by Brigham to Salt Lake
City. <span id="fr_926"></span>[51](#fn_926.md)

    Of Elder Samuel Brannan's party which arrived in San Francisco, as
will be remembered, in the summer of 1846, mention is made in connection
with my *History of California*. <span id="fr_927"></span>[52](#fn_927.md)
During this year, a settlement named New Hope was founded by a portion
of the company on the north bank of the Stanislaus River, near its
junction with the San Joaquin, but was abandoned when news was received
that the brethren had resolved to remain in the valley of Great Salt
Lake. Most of the Mormons still remained, however, in California,
betaking themselves to farming and lumbering until the time of the gold
discovery, when they gathered at the mines on Mormon Island. Between
1848 and 1850 about a hundred and forty of them found their way to Utah;
the remainder cast in their lot with the gentiles, and most of them,
among whom was their leader, apostatized, though a few afterward joined
the Mormon communities at San Bernardino and in Arizona. <span
id="fr_928"></span>[53](#fn_928.md)

<span id="page_594">p. 594</span>

    Within the territory of Utah many new colonies were established. In
1853 the first settlement was made in Summit county by one Samuel
Snider, who built a number of sawmills in Parley Park. In 1861 the
county was organized, and soon became noted for

<span id="img_59400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PRINCIPAL
SETTLEMENTS IN 1862.](tn/59400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/59400.jpg.md)  
PRINCIPAL SETTLEMENTS IN 1862.  
</span>

its mineral resources, among them being gold, silver, lead, copper,
coal, iron, and mica. Its coal-fields first

<span id="page_595">p. 595</span>

brought it into prominence, and to aid in their development a short line
of railroad was built, <span id="fr_929"></span>[54](#fn_929.md) but
afterward dismantled and abandoned. Coalville, the present county seat,
was first settled in 1859. <span id="fr_930"></span>[55](#fn_930.md) In
1858 the site of the present town of Kamas was occupied as a grazing
ground by Thomas Rhoads, and was then known as Rhoads Valley. Two years
later a few families settled there, and in 1862 a ward was organized,
with William G. Russell as presiding elder. <span
id="fr_931"></span>[56](#fn_931.md)

    About seven miles north-west of Kamas, and on the east bank of the
Weber, the village of Peoa was founded in 1860 by a party of ten
settlers. <span id="fr_932"></span>[57](#fn_932.md)

    In 1853 Fort Bridger, with its Mexican grant of thirty square miles
of land, on which stood a few cabins, was sold for $8,000 to the
Mormons, <span id="fr_933"></span>[58](#fn_933.md) who during the following
year expended an equal sum in improvements. This was the first property
owned by the saints in Green River county. At Fort Supply, in this
neighborhood, a settlement was formed about the same time by John
Nebeker, Isaac Bullock, and about fifty others from Salt Lake and Utah
counties. In 1862 the first settlement was made in Wasatch county, south
of Green River and Summit counties, on the site of the present village
of Wallsburg. <span id="fr_934"></span>[59](#fn_934.md) Situated for the
most part at an elevation of about seven thousand feet, with a heavy
snow-fall and prolific of streams, this section of the territory was and
is yet mainly used for stock-ranges, though in the

<span id="page_596">p. 596</span>

north-western portion there is farming land of good quality.

    Morgan county, west of Summit, was named after Jedediah Morgan
Grant, who with Thomas J. Thurston and others first occupied it in the
spring of 1855. In 1862 it was organized, the county seat, Morgan City,
being incorporated six years later. The village of Milton was settled by
Thurston in 1856, and Enterprise, which together with Morgan is now on
the line of the Union Pacific, in 1862.

    In 1856 a party of six brethren settled in Cache Valley on the site
of the present town of Wellsville, Cache county, north of Weber, being
organized during the following year. Except toward the north, the valley
is surrounded by mountains, on which the snow lingers late into autumn,
thus affording water for irrigation throughout the year. Though the
first attempt at agriculture resulted in failure on account of the
severity of the climate, excellent crops were afterward raised, and soon
this section became known as the granary of Utah. Amid the ranges are
vast belts of timber, so dense that there are places where the sunlight
never penetrates, and where the foot of man has never trod. Minerals are
also abundant, though little utilized at present. During the year 1856 a
fort was built at Wellsville, the site of the town being laid out in
1862, when a hundred and fifty families were gathered there. <span
id="fr_935"></span>[60](#fn_935.md) Logan City, about six miles north of
Wellsville, and the capital of Cache county, was located by Peter
Maughan in the spring of 1859, the spot being selected on account of its
rich soil and pasture, and the ample water power afforded by the Logan
River. The first settlers drew lots for their

<span id="page_597">p. 597</span>

land, <span id="fr_936"></span>[61](#fn_936.md) and in 1860 the site was
surveyed, the city being divided into four wards in 1861, and
incorporated five years later. About five miles to the west of
Wellsville the settlement of Mendon was commenced in 1857, <span
id="fr_937"></span>[62](#fn_937.md) the settlers removing to Wellsville in
the winter of 1858-59 for protection against Indians, and returning the
following year in greater number. The first buildings were of logs, with
roofs and floors of mud, timber being scarce in that neighborhood. <span
id="fr_938"></span>[63](#fn_938.md)

    In 1859 Seth and Robert Langton, Robert and John Thornley, travelled
northward from Salt Lake City in search of an agricultural site.
Arriving at Summit creek, they settled within half a mile of the present
town of Smithfield, Cache county. In November the settlement was
organized as a ward, with John G. Smith as bishop, and in March 1860 a
survey was begun. A few weeks later troubles arose with the
Indians, <span id="fr_939"></span>[64](#fn_939.md) compelling the settlers
to build and take refuge in a fort, in which they remained until late in
the following year. At the close of 1861 there were in operation a
lumber-mill, a molasses-mill, and a tannery, <span
id="fr_940"></span>[65](#fn_940.md) and the town had then been laid out in
its present form. Other settlements in Cache county were Hyde Park, five
miles north of Logan, and now on the line of the Utah and northern
railroad, where, in 1860, sixteen families were gathered; <span
id="fr_941"></span>[66](#fn_941.md) Providence, two miles south of Logan,

<span id="page_598">p. 598</span>

where the first settlers <span id="fr_942"></span>[67](#fn_942.md) took up
their abode in April 1859; Millville, two miles farther south, located
in June 1860; <span id="fr_943"></span>[68](#fn_943.md) Paradise, at the
southern extremity of the valley, containing in 1861 about thirty
inhabitants, <span id="fr_944"></span>[69](#fn_944.md) and Hyrum, settled
in 1860 by about twenty families. <span id="fr_945"></span>[70](#fn_945.md)

    Thus far the progress of Mormon colonization in the north, east, and
west. Toward the south, the first settlement in Beaver county, between
Millard and Iron counties, dates from 1856, at which time Simeon F.
Howd, James P. Anderson, and Wilson G. Mowers arrived in Beaver Valley,
commenced to build a log cabin, and made preparations for farming and
stock-raising. Soon afterward they were joined by others, making in all
some thirty or forty families, and in the spring of 1858 the site of
Beaver City was laid out. <span id="fr_946"></span>[71](#fn_946.md) The
appearance of the valley was not inviting. Situated at an altitude of
6,500 feet, frosty and barren, its surface covered in parts with
sage-brush and its soil everywhere impregnated with alkali, it was at
first considered unfit for occupation. Its main attraction was the
volume of water afforded by Beaver River, which courses through the
valley from east to west, its source being at an altitude

<span id="page_599">p. 599</span>

of nearly twelve thousand feet. Within recent years, as we shall
presently see, this district has proved itself rich in minerals. Next in
importance to Beaver City, and about twenty miles to the southwest, was
Minersville, first settled in 1859, with J. H. Rollins as bishop of the
ward.

    The principal settlement in Kane county, which lay south of Iron and
east of Washington county, and at one time included a portion of the
latter, was Virgin City, founded in 1858, on the upper Virgin
River. <span id="fr_947"></span>[72](#fn_947.md) Its site is in a valley
about seven miles in width, and enclosed by mountains, their foothills,
seamed and broken by the rains, leaving but a narrow margin for
cultivation on the banks of the stream, covered with a dense growth of
cotton-woods and an undergrowth of sage and rabbit brush. Five or six
miles west of Virgin City was the town of Toquerville, established in
1858 by several families front Cedar City. <span
id="fr_948"></span>[73](#fn_948.md)

    In 1854 Jacob Hamblin and two others were sent as missionaries to
the Lamanites in the valley of the Virgin and Santa Clara rivers in
Washington county, with orders to establish a settlement in that
neighborhood. They found the Indians peaceably disposed, and in a
measure civilized, many of them being engaged in planting corn, wheat,
and squashes, but depending mainly for bread on the seeds of wild
grasses. <span id="fr_949"></span>[74](#fn_949.md)

<span id="page_600">p. 600</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In 1857 other
missionaries joined the party, together with a number of families from
Salt Lake City, and in May of this year a settlement was formed, to
which was given the name of Washington.

    In October 1861 three hundred of the saints, under the direction of
Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow, were ordered to proceed to this district,
and build a city, to be named St George, near the junction of the Virgin
and Santa Clara rivers in Washington county. In January 1862 a site was
selected and surveyed, the city incorporated, <span
id="fr_950"></span>[75](#fn_950.md) though yet unbuilt, and the people took
possession of their lots. Before doing so it was decided by unanimous
vote that the first building erected should be a social hall, to be used
for educational and other purposes. <span
id="fr_951"></span>[76](#fn_951.md) In September Brigham visited the
settlers, and advised them to build, as soon as possible, a substantial,
commodious, and well-finished meeting-house, or tabernacle, large enough
to seat at least two thousand persons, and one that would be an ornament
to their city and a credit to their enterprise. The foundation stones
were laid on the 1st of June, 1873, the prophet's birthday, and the
building completed eight years later, at a cost of $110,000. Before its
settlement, the valley of St George presented a barren appearance, its
surface being strongly impregnated with mineral salts, even the
bottom-lands of the Virgin and Santa Clara showing large strips of
alkaline soil. Its climate was mild, and, with irrigation, crops of many
kinds could be raised; but water was scarce, an artesian well sunk in
1862, at a cost of $5,000, being abandoned as a failure, after attaining
a depth of more than two hundred feet. <span
id="fr_952"></span>[77](#fn_952.md) Notwithstanding these drawbacks, the
city became

<span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

the county seat of Washington, and is to-day the leading town in
southern Utah. <span id="fr_953"></span>[78](#fn_953.md)

    Of the counties organized between 1850 and 1852, and the settlements
founded therein up to the latter date, mention has already been
made. <span id="fr_954"></span>[79](#fn_954.md) During the next decade many
small villages and towns were located in the older counties, <span
id="fr_955"></span>[80](#fn_955.md) and I shall describe later

<span id="page_602">p. 602</span>

those that afterward attained prominence. They differed but little in
outward appearance from the pioneer settlements in other parts of the
United States, except in one particular. Throughout the entire
territory, there was rarely to be seen, except in Salt Lake City, a
store or a mechanic's sign, traffic being carried on from house to
house, and the few extraneous wants of the settlers being mainly
supplied by peddlers. <span id="fr_956"></span>[81](#fn_956.md)

<span id="page_603">p. 603</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nevertheless the
traveller who might chance to visit any of the larger settlements in
1862 could purchase, at reasonable rates, all the necessaries of life,
and could perhaps supply himself with luxuries, provided he were willing
to pay from three to five fold their value. Though there was no
indication that trade in its ordinary sense existed among these
communities, and one might search in vain for a hotel, or even for a
bath-house or a barber's shop, most of the ordinary crafts were
represented, and all that was needful could be obtained for money.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_876"></span>[572:1](hou24.htm#fr_876.md) *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 419-20; *S. F. Alta*, Sept. 29, 1858.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[573:2](hou24.htm#fr_877.md) Stenhouse says that a
counterfeit plate was engraved at S. L. City, resembling the one used by
the quartermaster at Camp Floyd for drafts drawn on the assistant U.S.
treasurers at New York and St Louis. When the fraud was discovered the
culprit turned state's evidence, and testified that a person in the
employ of Brigham had furnished the paper. It was supposed that the
latter was implicated, and thereupon the writ was issued. *Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 410-11. Cradlebaugh says that the plate was seized by
Marshal Dotson, by order of Judge Eckles, and that Brigham afterward
obtained judgment against the former for $2,600 damages, the marshal's
house being sold to satisfy the judgment. *Mormonism*, 15. See also
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 507. I find nothing about this matter in
the files of the *Deseret News*; but the fact that the writ was issued
is mentioned by Tullidge *Hist S. L. City*, 228, and in the *Hand-book
of Reference*. 77. Peter K. Dotson, a native of Virginia, came to Salt
Lake City in 1851, and was first employed by Brigham as manager of a
distillery, afterward becoming express and mail agent. In 1855 he was
appointed U.S. marshal for Utah, and in 1857 proceeded to Washington,
returning with the army during that year. *Dotson's Doings*, MS.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[573:3](hou24.htm#fr_878.md) In a conversation
with Stenhouse, the governor stated that, in case of resistance, the
wall surrounding Brigham's premises was to be battered down with
artillery, and the president taken by force to Camp Floyd. So, at least,
said the officers. 'I listened to them, sir as gravely as I could,'
continued Cumming, 'and examined their papers. They rubbed their hands
and were jubilant; "they had got the dead-wood on Brigham Young." I was
indignant, sir, and told them, "By—, gentlemen, you can't do it! When
you have to take Brigham Young, gentlemen, you shall have him without
creeping through walls. You shall enter by his door with heads erect, as
becomes representatives of your government. But till that time,
gentlemen, you can't touch Brigham Young while I live.' *Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 411. Wells, *Narr*., MS., 63-5, states that Brigham attended
court, though his followers were very unwilling to allow it, as they
feared a repetition of the Carthage-jail tragedy, but that no
proceedings were taken against him.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[573:4](hou24.htm#fr_879.md) A correspondent of
the *New York Herald*, writing from S. L. City, May 23, 1859, says that
the governor notified Wells to hold the militia in readiness to resist
the troops. A copy of his letter will be found in *Tullidge's Hist.
S. L. City*, 228-30. See also *Hand-book of Reference*, 77. It is very
improbable that Cumming would have taken such an extreme measure, and I
find no mention of it in his official despatches, in those of General
Johnston, or in the files of the *Deseret News*. Gen. Wells himself
gives the following <span id="page_574">p. 574</span> account of the
matter: 'I told Cumming myself that we didn't intend the Carthage scene
reinacted, and he knew that we intended to resist the troops, which we
did. I went to see Cumming frequently, and talked the matter over with
him, and he declared himself that he could not recommend Gov. Young to
trust himself to that military mob; but he did say he could not see how
bloodshed could be hindered. I told him we would not let them come; that
if they did come, they would never get out alive if we could help it. He
said he did not know what to do.' 'They knew that if they did come, we
were ready for them, and that we were ready to cut off their retreat. It
gave us a good deal of trouble, and anxiety as well, to prepare against
it, as it occurred at a time when we were putting in our crops.'
*Narr*., MS., 634.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[574:5](hou24.htm#fr_880.md) Soon after a
mass-meeting of gentiles was held at Camp Floyd, at which the judges
took a prominent part. An address was drawn up, rehearsing all the
crimes imputed to Mormons, stating that they were still disloyal to the
government, and censuring the president for his interference.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[574:6](hou24.htm#fr_881.md) Their successors are
mentioned in the next chapter. Cradlebaugh, refusing to recognize the
right of the president to remove him, continued in office for a short
time, but finding himself unsupported by the government, left Utah and
settled in Nevada, whence he was twice sent as delegate to congress.
*Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 75-6.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[574:7](hou24.htm#fr_882.md) *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 413; *Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 233. <span
id="page_575">p. 575</span> Both these authorities claim that Cumming
was aided by Col Kane, who about this time delivered a lecture before
the historical society of New York on the situation of Utah, in which he
spoke of Cumming as a clear-headed, resolute, but prudent executive, and
the very man for the trying position. Stenhouse was present at the
lecture as reporter for the *New York Herald*, and notices of it were
widely published throughout the country.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[575:8](hou24.htm#fr_883.md) Before his departure
the citizens desired to show their respect by some public demonstration,
but this he declined, slipping away so quietly that his departure was
not known until it was published in the *Deseret News* of May 22d. His
conduct received the approval of the territorial legislature. *Utah
Jour. Legisl*., 1860-1, p. 161.

    Gov. Cumming was a native of Georgia, his wife being the daughter of
a prominent Boston physician, and an accomplished lady. In 1830 he was
mayor of Augusta, Ga, and during the cholera epidemic of that year used
his utmost effort to save the lives of the citizens. During a portion of
the Mexican war he was attached to the staff of Gen. Scott, and was
afterward appointed by government to visit several Indian tribes in the
far west. *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 75.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[575:9](hou24.htm#fr_884.md) Through his business
agent, H. B. Clawson. As Horace Greeley remarks in his *Overland Jour*.,
254, the live-stock would have brought much better prices had it been
driven to California, or even to Fort Leavenworth. He states that, in
1859, 30,000 bushels of corn, which could have been bought in Utah for
$2 per bushel, were sent from the eastern states at a cost of more than
$11 per bushel. Greeley visited the territory in this year, but his
observations, apart from his account of an interview with Brigham,
already mentioned, contain little of historical value. His reception at
S. L. City is described in the *Deseret News*, July 20, 1859.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[576:10](hou24.htm#fr_885.md) For descriptions of
public festivities, between 1855 and 1865, see *Deseret News*, Jan. 4,
July 18, 1855; July 9, 30, Aug. 6, 1856; July 8, 15, 22, 1857; July 11,
Aug. 1, 1860; July 10, 1861; July 9, 30, 1862; July 8, 1863; July 6, 20,
27, 1864; July 5, Aug. 5, 1865; *Tullidge's Life of Young*; 247-9,
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 424-5; *S. F. Alta*, Sept. 10, 1856;
*S. F. Bulletin*, Dec. 2, 1858; *Sac. Union*, July 11, 1861. A
thanksgiving proclamation issued by Gov. Harding in 1862 was ignored
throughout the territory. 'The non-observance of this thanksgiving day,'
remarks Tullidge, 'brought Stephen S. Harding to the full realization of
the fact that, though he was governor of Utah, Brigham Young was
governor of the Mormon people.'

<span id="fn_886"></span>[576:11](hou24.htm#fr_886.md) I have already
mentioned that the census report for 1860 gives the population at only a
little over 40,000, and stated my reasons for supposing this to be an
error. Beadle says that a judge who travelled extensively throughout the
territory about 1864-5 estimated it at 85,000, and thinks the judge's
estimate too low. He himself places it, in 1867, at 100,000. *Life in
Utah*, 483. Bowles, *Our New West*, about the same date, at 100,000 to
125,000. See also *S. F. Herald*, Jan. 30, 1861; *Sac. Union*, Feb. 11,
1860. In the census of 1870 the population is given at 86,786.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[576:12](hou24.htm#fr_887.md) *U.S. Census Rept*,
for 1860, li. 43. The total number of deaths reported is 374.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[576:13](hou24.htm#fr_888.md) For the year ending
June 1, 1850, it was about 22 per 1,000, the rate <span id="page_577">p.
577</span> being then greater on account of the hardships and exposure
incidental to new settlements. The following extracts from the sanitary
report of Assistant-surgeon Robert Bartholow of Utah terr., dated Sept.
1858, and published in *Sen. Doc*., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., xiii. 301-2,
may serve as a specimen of the prejudice of U.S. officials on matters
relating to the territory, and help to account for their blunders: 'The
Mormon, of all the animals now walking this globe, is the most curious
in every relation.' 'Isolated in the narrow valleys of Utah, and
practising the rites of a religion grossly material, of which polygamy
is the main element and cohesive force, the Mormons have arrived at a
physical and mental condition, in a few years of growth, such as densely
populated communities in the older parts of the world, hereditary
victims of all the vices of civilization, have been ages in reaching. If
Mormonism received no addition from outside sources, these influences
continuing, it is not difficult to see that it would eventually die
out.'

<span id="fn_889"></span>[577:14](hou24.htm#fr_889.md) From cholera
infantum 4, croup 23, infantile 57, measles 1, scarlatina 2, teething
11. *Id*. 43.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[577:15](hou24.htm#fr_890.md) After the railroad
connected the territory with the Altantic and Pacific states, suicides
became not infrequent.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[577:16](hou24.htm#fr_891.md) In *Compend. Ninth
Census*, 533, the table of pauperism and crime shows only one person
receiving support as a pauper, and eight criminals. At the time of
Burton's visit, in 1860, there were only six prisoners in the
penitentiary at S. L. City, of whom two were Indians. *City of the
Saints*, 329. In the *Deseret News* of June 18, 1856, it is stated,
however, that there were many beggars among the women and children.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[577:17](hou24.htm#fr_892.md) Incorporated by act
approved Jan. 17, 1856, 'with a view of promoting the arts of domestic
industry, and to encourage the production of articles from the native
elements in this territory.' A copy of it will be found in *Utah Acts
Legisl*. (ed. 1866), 111.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[578:18](hou24.htm#fr_893.md) For list of premiums
and diplomas, see *Burton's City of the Saints*, 384-7.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[578:19](hou24.htm#fr_894.md) From the list of
prices-current at the tithing-office in 1860, we learn that cereals were
rated in Salt Lake City at $1.50 per bushel, butcher's meat at 3 to 12½
cents per pound, chickens and ducks at 10 to 25 cents each, eggs at 18
cents per dozen, milk at 10 cents per quart, and butter at 25 cents per
pound; but sugar worth in New York about 6 cents per pound cost in Utah
35 to 60 cents, while tea ranged in price from $1.50 to $3.50, and
coffee from 40 to 60 cents per pound, or at least fivefold their cost in
the Atlantic states.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[579:20](hou24.htm#fr_895.md) William Chandless,
who visited Salt Lake City in the winter of 1855-6, states that, if one
wanted to sell anything, he could get nothing for it, because of the
scarcity of money; while if an offer were made to buy the same article
for cash, a very high price must be paid on account of the rarity of the
article. *Visit to S. L. City*, 223. For many years afterward, this
system of traffic prevailed in a measure. Thus, in the *Deseret News* of
Feb. 22, 1860, J. C. Little advertises that he will exchange his store
of furniture for wheat and flour; George B. Wallace that he will give
five gallons of molasses per cord for wood; and Felt and Allen that they
pay cash and store goods for wheat delivered at the Jordan mills.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[579:21](hou24.htm#fr_896.md) In 1860 there were
three milliner's stores, thirteen dry-goods and two variety stores.
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 277-8.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[581:22](hou24.htm#fr_897.md) *Woodruff's
Journal*, MS.; *Richards’ Hist. Incidents of Utah*, MS., 28-91 *Wells’
Narr.*, MS., 60; *Chandless, Visit to S. L*., 153; *Sloan's Utah
Gazetteer*, 25. The wall was built in 1853. Chandless remarks that for
defensive purposes it would be useless, as any one could climb it with
ease. *Burton, City of the Saints*, 245, states that it was built as a
defence against Indians, though gentiles said that it was constructed
only because the people wanted work. It was of mud mixed with hay and
gravel; in 1860 it had already begun to crumble, and in 1883 there were
few traces of it remaining.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[582:23](hou24.htm#fr_898.md) Burton relates that
at the time of his visit, in Aug. 1860, the Salt Lake House was kept by
a Mr Townsend, a Mormon convert from Maine, who had been expelled from
Nauvoo, where he sold his house, land, and furniture, for $50. *City of
the Saints*, 248. His charge for 24 days’ board and lodging was $34.25.
The bill, which is curiously worded, is given in full in *Id*., 537.
Among its items are '14 Bottle Beer 600' (cents), '2 Bottles Branday
450.'

<span id="fn_899"></span>[582:24](hou24.htm#fr_899.md) The original plans
will be found in the *Millennial Star*, xvi. 635, and *Linforth's Route
from Liverpool*, 109-10. Those given by Truman O. Angell, the architect,
in the *Deseret News*, Aug. 17, 1854, differ somewhat from the above,
but both agree that the edifice was to cover a space of 21,850 sq. feet,
or about half an acre. For descriptions of the consecration and laying
of the corner-stones, see *Woodruff's Journal*, MS.; *Tucker's
Mormonism*, 222; *Ferris’ Utah and the Mormons*, 167-9; *S. L. City
Contributor*, iii. 79; *Deseret News*, Feb. 19, Apr. 16. 1853. Seven
thousand four hundred and seventy-eight tons of rock were used for the
foundation. *Richards’ Incidents in Utah Hist*., MS., 81.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[582:25](hou24.htm#fr_900.md) Burton describes the
tabernacle, in 1860, as an adobe building, capable <span
id="page_583">p. 583</span> of accommodating 2,000 to 3,000 persons, the
interior of which was spanned by an elliptical arch. Over the entrances
were carvings in wood, 'representing the sun with his usual coiffure of
yellow beams, like a Somali's wig, or the symbol of the Persian empire.'
*City of the Saints*, 270. A few years later the tabernacle was
enlarged, and had a seating capacity of 7,000. *Utah Notes*, MS., 2.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[583:26](hou24.htm#fr_901.md) Cuts of the
tabernacle and endowment house will be found in *City of the Saints*,
facing p. 271.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[583:27](hou24.htm#fr_902.md) The residences of
Young, Kimball, and Wells were on Main St, properly East Temple St,
which runs past the temple block. Remy says that one of Brigham's houses
was 80 x 40 ft, built of granite and other kinds of stones, with long
salient ogives, that adjoining it being the dwelling which he usually
occupied. Near by were the governor's offices, the tithing-office, and
the court-house. *Jour. to S. L. City*, i. 193-4. In *Id*., i. 193-200;
*Greeley's Overland Jour*., 206-7; *Atlantic Monthly*, iii. 573-5;
*Schiel, Reise durch Felsengebirge*, 100-2, are descriptions of S. L.
City about this date.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[583:28](hou24.htm#fr_903.md) This building, which
was begun in 1849, and haa already been described, was afterward
destroyed by fire. *Nebeker's Early Justice*, MS., 3. Except for a small
structure used as a post-office, this was the first public building
erected in S. L. City. See also *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 42.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[583:29](hou24.htm#fr_904.md) The opening of the
social hall is described in the *Deseret News*, Jan. 22, 1853. Among
other buildings worthy of note were the arsenal, built on the bench
north of the city, the penitentiary in the south-eastern suburb, and the
hall of seventies on the 'states road.' *Linforth's Route from
Liverpool*, 110; *Burton's City of the Saints*, 279-80. The court-house
was yet unfinished. *Atlantic Monthly*, iii. 574.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[583:30](hou24.htm#fr_905.md) They were issued on
special occasions only for 75 or 80 guests, including a few of the more
prominent gentiles.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[584:31](hou24.htm#fr_906.md) Copies of the card
of invitation and the ménu at a 'territorial and civil ball' held at the
social hall, Feb. 7, 1860, will be found in *Burton's City of the
Saints*, 231-2. Among the dishes are bear, beaver-tails, slaw, mountain,
pioneer, and snowballs. What the names all signify I am unable to state.
Otherwise the bill of fare contains a large and choice variety of
viands.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[584:32](hou24.htm#fr_907.md) *Cooke's Theatr. and
Soc. Affairs in Utah*, MS., 9. In summer they were held at the bowery.
The S. L. theatre, or as it was usually termed the opera-house, was
dedicated March 6th of this year. *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, p. 28.
A gentleman who visited the city two or three years later states that
its interior resembled the opera-house at New York, having seats for
2,500 and capacity for 500 more. Externally the building was a plain but
not ungraceful structure of stone, brick, and stucco. *Atlantic
Monthly*, Apr. 1864, p. 490.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[584:33](hou24.htm#fr_908.md) Among others Burton
mentions H. B. Clawson, B. Snow, and W. C. Dunbar. During his stay the
'Lady or Lyons' was performed. *City of the Saints*, 280. See also
*Deseret News*, March 2, 1864; *Busch, Gesch. Morm*., 311-12, 330; *The
Mormons at Home*, 149-51. Chandless, who visited the social hall one
evening in the winter of 1855-6, when the third act of Othello and a
two-act drama were performed, mentions that the parts of Othello and
Iago were fairly rendered, but that the other characters were beneath
criticism. Desdemona, he says, 'was a tall, masculine female, with
cheeks painted beyond the possibility of a blush. Even worse was
Emilia—an old dowdy, she looked, who might have been a chambermaid at a
third-rate hotel for a quarter of a <span id="page_585">p. 585</span>
century…The afterpiece was, on the contrary, very well performed.'
*Visit to S. Lake*, 224.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[585:34](hou24.htm#fr_909.md) Three of Brigham's
daughters, Alice, Emily, and Zina, were on the stage. Hepworth Dixon,
who was well acquainted with Alice, the youngest wife of Elder Clawson,
says that she remarked to him one day at dinner, 'I am not myself very
fond of playing, but my father desires that my sister and myself should
act sometimes, as he does not think it right to ask any poor man's child
to do anything which his own children would object to do.' *New
America*, 144.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[585:35](hou24.htm#fr_910.md) *Cooke's Theatr. and
Soc. Affairs in Utah*, MS., 9-10; *Stenhouse's Tell It All*, 380-1. Mrs
Cooke states that the performers often remained at rehearsal until 12 or
1 o'clock, and that after a hard day's work. Occasionally a benefit was
given to the lady actors, and the proceeds divided among them. Her share
during the twelve years that she played amounted to $150. In *Theatrical
and Social Affairs in Utah, by Mrs S. A. Cooke*, MS., we have, besides
the information which the title-page suggests, a number of items
relating to church matters and the workings of polygamy. Mrs Cooke was
well acquainted with the wife of Heber C. Kimball, Eliza Snow, and other
prominent women among the Mormons. Of English birth, she was for eight
years a teacher of music in the city of New York, and in 1852 set forth
for California, reaching S. L. City in July, where she purposed to
remain only until the following spring, but was converted to Mormonism.
For 16 years she was employed as a teacher, among her pupils in Zion
being the children of Brigham Young.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[585:36](hou24.htm#fr_911.md) There was also a
horticultural society, organized in connection with the American
Pomological Society, and the Deseret Typographical Association formed
for the advancement of their art. *Linforth's Route from Liverpool*,
111.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[585:37](hou24.htm#fr_912.md) By the members of
Capt. Ballo's band. *Deseret News*, June 27, 1855.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[586:38](hou24.htm#fr_913.md) In 1880 this society
had nearly 300 branches. *Snow's Brief Sketch of Organizations*, MS.,
1-2.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[587:39](hou24.htm#fr_914.md) *Burton's City of
the Saints*, 278. Burton attributes this improvement in the race to
climate. In amusing contrast with Burton's remarks are those of Surgeon
Bartholow, who in his sanitary report says: 'It is a curious fact that
Mormonism makes its impress upon the countenance,…an expression
compounded of sensuality, cunning, suspicion, and a smirking
self-conceit. The yellow, sunken, cadaverous visage; the greenish
colored eyes; the thick, protuberant lips; the low forehead; the light
yellowish hair; and the lank, angular person—constitute an appearance so
characteristic of the new race, the production of polygamy, as to
distinguish them at a glance. The women of this territory, how fanatical
and ignorant soever, recognize their wide departure from the normal
standard in all christian countries, and from the degradation of the
mother follows that of the child.' *Sen. Ex. Doc*., 52, 36th Cong. 1st
Sess., 302.

    *The City of the Saints, and across the Rocky Mountains to
California*, by Richard F. Burton, London, 1861, ranks among the best of
gentile works on Mormonism. Less philosophical than that of Gunnison, it
is equally impartial, and gives many details as to the social and
industrial condition of the Mormons for which one may search in vain
elsewhere. His stay in S. L. City lasted less than four weeks (from Aug.
25 to Sept. 20, 1860), excursions being made during his visit to points
of interest in the neighborhood, but he saw more during that time than
many others have done in four years. Travelling in company with Lieut
Dana of the U.S. artillery, and procuring introductions to Gov. Cumming,
Brigham Young, and several of the church dignitaries, he had every
opportunity to note the different phases of Mormon life. The first and
last portions of the work are taken up with his travels from St Joseph,
Mo., to San Francisco, the middle chapters only relating to Utah. In
style and tone the writer is sketchy and interesting, good-natured, but
somewhat disposed to regard matters in their ludicrous aspect, for which
he offers in his preface the excuse—*sic me natura fecit*.

    *A Visit to Salt Lake; being a Journey across the Plains and a
Residence in the Mormon Settlements at Utah, by William ChandIess*,
London, 1857, is the title of a less entertaining and reliable work. As
Mr Chandless remarks in his preface, even at that date, 'fictions enough
have been written about the Mormons;' but it does not appear that his
own work is less fictitious than those of which he complains. There are
chapters about religion, government, settlements, morals, institutions,
and some that appear to be about nothing in particular, unless it be Mr
Chandless. Nevertheless, items of interest may be gleaned from them, as
the author made a tour of the principal counties in 1855, and travellers
in those parts were rare at this period. After informing us where he
slept, and where he dined, and what he had for dinner, he occasionally
finds time to tell us something about the condition of the settlements
through which he journeyed.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[588:40](hou24.htm#fr_915.md) *Jennings’ Mat.
Progr. of Utah*, MS., 3-4. Mr W. Jennings, ex-mayor of S. L. City, who
supplied me with the above MS. in 1884, says that this condition of
affairs came to an end when the railroad reached Utah.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[588:41](hou24.htm#fr_916.md) 'There were no lamps
in any but Main Street, yet the city is as safe as St James Square,
London. There are perhaps not more than 25 or 35 constables or policemen
in the whole place.' *Burton's City of the Saints*, 273. 'The few
policemen that have been on duty during the summer were discharged on
Monday last.' *Deseret News*, Sept. 12, 1860.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[588:42](hou24.htm#fr_917.md) In 1863 Brigham
stated its population at 16,000. *Atlantic Monthly*, Apr. 1864, p. 492;
Burton, in 1860, 9,000. *City of the Saints*, 284; Bowles, in 1865,
25,000 to 30,000. *Our New West*, 227. The last two are wide of the
mark.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[588:43](hou24.htm#fr_918.md) Before this date
Brigham attempted to lead the fashion, appearing in a yellow slouched
hat, much too large for his head, green frock-coat, pants <span
id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> large and loose, and white socks and
slippers. His fashion was followed by some of the elders. *Ward's
Husband in Utah*, 34-5. Burton says that the prophet was dressed in gray
homespun, and wore a tall steeple-crowned hat, as did most of the
elders. Describing one of his addresses, he writes: 'Brigham Young
removed his hat, advanced to the end of the tribune, and leaning
slightly forward upon both hands, propped on the green baize of the
tribune, addressed his followers. The discourse began slowly, word crept
titubantly after word, and the opening phrases were hardly audible; but
as the orator warmed, his voice rose high and sonorous, and a fluency so
remarkable succeeded falter and hesitation, that although the phenomenon
is not rare in strong speakers, the latter seemed almost to have been a
work of art. The manner was pleasing and animated, and the matter
fluent, impromptu, and well turned, spoken rather than preached; if it
had a fault, it was rather rambling and disconnected…The gestures were
easy and rounded, not without a certain grace, though evidently
untaught; one, however, must be excepted, namely that of raising the
forefinger…The address was long. God is a mechanic. Mormonism is a great
fact. Religion has made him, the speaker, the happiest of men. He was
ready to dance like a shaker. At this sentence the prophet, who is a
good mimic and has much of the old New English quaint humor, raised his
right arm, and gave, to the amusement of the congregation, a droll
imitation of Anne Lee's followers.' *City of the Saints*, 317.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[589:44](hou24.htm#fr_919.md) For many years after
their arrival in the valley the women dressed in homespun linseys, as
there was nothing else to wear. At one time Brigham, in order to
discourage extravagance, decreed that the men must not dance with women
who were dressed in other than homespun garments. *Jennings, Mat.
Progress*, MS., 1.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[590:45](hou24.htm#fr_920.md) It served as hotel
and store, and was a two-story log building, 50 x 30 ft. *Reese's Mormon
Station*, MS.; *Taylor's Rem*., MS.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[590:46](hou24.htm#fr_921.md) Reese states that
Virginia had a flume in the cañon for gold-washing, and that Comstock,
who came to Carson Valley in 1856, bought him out, the latter living but
a short time afterward. *Id*., 5. In *Jennings’ Carson Valley*, MS., 3,
it is related that Comstock came to the valley in the autumn of 1856, in
charge of a herd of sheep, but in a destitute condition. In 1852 Rese
was engaged in farming on a considerable scale, selling his produce
<span id="page_591">p. 591</span> readily and at high prices to
emigrants who, as he says, would pay almost any price for provisions, a
small bunch of turnips selling for a dollar. Reese lived later at S. L.
City, while S. A. Kinsey, his former partner remained at Genoa. *Van
Sickles' Utah Desperadoes*, MS. Among the earliest settlers were three
persons named Lee, and others named Condie and Gibson. *Early Hist.
Carson Valley*, MS., 1. The place was first known as 'the Mormon
station,' Genoa being laid out in 1856. *Id*., 3.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[591:47](hou24.htm#fr_922.md) It was bounded on
the north by Deseret co., east by the 118th meridian, south by the
boundary line of Utah, and west by California. *Utah Acts Legisl*. (ed.
1855), 261.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[592:48](hou24.htm#fr_923.md) A letter of James B.
Crane, dated Washington, Jan. 17, 1859, and of which copies will be
found in *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 31-5, and *Tucker's Mormonism*,
226-9, gives a detailed account of the Carson-valley troubles. The
letter, which is somewhat bitter in tone, was written with a view to the
admission of Nevada as a territory. Life and property were somewhat
insecure in Carson valley about this date, and vigilance committees were
constantly on the alert. See *Sac. Union*, Aug. 26, 1857, June 17, 22,
July 2, Aug. 2, Dec. 21, 1858, June 1, 1859, Sept. 24, 1860. On the 14th
of June, 1858, William Thorington, better known as 'Lucky Bill,' Luther
Olds, William Edwards, and four others were arrested by a party of 30
men, and tried for the murder of a Frenchman named Godier, at Honey
Lake. Lucky Bill was hanged, Olds was released on payment of $1,000 fine
and promising to leave the valley never to return, and Edwards probably
escaped by bribing his captors. The rest were released. *Van Sickles'
Utah Desperadoes*, MS.; *Placerville Tri-weekly Register*, June 24,
1858; *Popular Tribunals*, this series.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[592:49](hou24.htm#fr_924.md) The declaration
contains a number of charges against the Mormons, which will be found in
*Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City*, i. 493-4. On May 6, 1856, joint
resolutions of the California legislature were read in the U.S. senate,
setting forth that a large number of settlers in Carson valley had, for
good reasons, petitioned congress that this portion of Utah be attached
to California, and had asked the coöperation of the California
legislature, that the latter body acquiesced, and urged the passage of a
law to that effect, *Cong. Globe*, 1855-6, 1089.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[593:50](hou24.htm#fr_925.md) Elder Rich, who
arrived at S. L. City from San Bernardino in April 1852, reported 1,800
acres in grain, and about 1,000 in vegetables. *Deseret News*, May l,
1852.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[593:51](hou24.htm#fr_926.md) *Shepherd's
Colonizing of San Bernardino*, MS. See also letter of Amasa Lyman, in
*Millennial Star*, xiv. 491-2; and extract from *N. Y. Herald*, in
*Id*., xv. 61; *Richards’ Hist. Incidents of Utah*, MS., 23; *S. F.
Herald*, Aug. 21, 1852; *Hughes*, in *Hastings' Or. and Cal*., 96; *Utah
Scraps*, 11.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[593:52](hou24.htm#fr_927.md) Vol. v., 544-54. On
pp. 543-4 (note 35) is a list of the members.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[593:53](hou24.htm#fr_928.md) Frisbie states that
after the gold discovery the Mormons, many of whom had now become
wealthy, refused to pay tithes, whereupon Brannan appealed to their
sense of duty, but finding them fixed in their resolve, frankly told
them they were sensible, and had been damned fools for paying tithes so
long. From that time he ceased to be an elder. *Rem*., 33-4. For further
details as to Brannan's party, see *Glover's Mormons in Cal*., MS.,
passim; *Larkin's Doc*., MS., iv. 55; *Olvera Doc*., MS., 14-15;
*Larkin's Off: Corresp*., MS., ii. 42; *Millennial Star*, ix. 39-40,
306-7; *Times and Seasons*, vi., 1126-7. Sutter spoke of them in the
highest terms. 'So long as these people have been employed by me,' he
says, 'they have behaved very well, and were industrious and faithful
laborers.' *Hutchings’ Cal. Mag*., ii. 196. In Jan. 1847 <span
id="page_594">p. 594</span> Brannan had established a newspaper styled
the *Yerba Buena California Star*, with the press, type, and fixtures
brought from the office of *The Prophet*, in New York. It was continued
until the close of 1848. See *Hist. Cal*., v. 552, this series.
*Richards’ Bibliog. of Utah*, MS., 12-13. In Feb. 1856 Geo. Q. Cannon
commenced the issue in San Francisco of a weekly paper named the
*Western Standard*. It was discontinued in Sept. 1857, when the brethren
were recalled to Utah, *Id*., 14.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[595:54](hou24.htm#fr_929.md) The Summit County
Railroad.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[595:55](hou24.htm#fr_930.md) By H. B. Wild, A. B.
Williams, W. H. Smith, and others. It was incorporated in 1867. *Sloan's
Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 149. Summit co. was so named from the fact that
it included the summit of the Wasatch range. *Richards’ Utah Misc*.,
MS., 1.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[595:56](hou24.htm#fr_931.md) The settlers lived
in a fort until 1870, when a city survey was made, and they moved out to
their lots.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[595:57](hou24.htm#fr_932.md) The first house was
built by Henry Barnum and Jacob M. Truman. *Id*., 150.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[595:58](hou24.htm#fr_933.md) The deeds are now in
the possession of the church officials at S. L. City. *Trans. Wyom.
Acad. Sciences*, 1882, pp. 81-2. Miles Goodyear, the owner, was married
to a sister of the Indian chief Walker. *Young's Early Exper*., MS., 5.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[595:59](hou24.htm#fr_934.md) By Wm Wall, E. Garr,
and Jas Laird. *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, p. 158. In 1866 Wallsburg
was organized as a ward.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[596:60](hou24.htm#fr_935.md) Cache co. was so
called from the fact that certain trappers or emigrants cached some
goods there as they passed through; Wellsville was named for Gen. Wells.
*Richards’ Utah Miscell*., MS., 4. The first house was built at
Wellsville by Peter Maughan, the first saw-mill by Esaias Edwards,
Francis Gunnell, and Wm H. Maughan, and the first grist-mill by Dan.
Hill & Co. A school-house, which served also for meeting-house, was
constructed in 1857. *William H. Maughan*, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 33.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[597:61](hou24.htm#fr_936.md) The first house was
built by W. B. Preston and John and Aaron Thatcher, who have since been
the prominent men in Cache Valley. *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, p.
332. Hezekiah, the father of the Thatchers, had made money at the mines
in California, and was then esteemed the richest man in Utah, next to
Brigham. In 1879 his son Moses was ordained an apostle.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[597:62](hou24.htm#fr_937.md) The first settlers
were Wm Gardener and Alex. and Robt Hill. Walter Paul, in *Utah
Sketches*, 41.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[597:63](hou24.htm#fr_938.md) The first stone
dwelling was begun in 1866 by Jos. Baker; others soon followed. *Id*.,
41-2.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[597:64](hou24.htm#fr_939.md) Caused by their
stealing a horse. In a fight which ensued, Ira Merrill of Smithfield and
an Indian chief were killed. Another of the settlers was wounded.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[597:65](hou24.htm#fr_940.md) In 1861 a
lumber-mill was completed, and in 1864 a grist-mill. *Francis Sharp*, in
*Id*., 117.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[597:66](hou24.htm#fr_941.md) At this date they
lived in a fort. The town site was laid out in 1864. *Robt Daines*, in
*Id*., 120.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[598:67](hou24.htm#fr_942.md) Ira Rich, John F.
Maddison, and five others. *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, p. 128.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[598:68](hou24.htm#fr_943.md) By Ezra T. Benson,
P. Maughan, and several others. George O. Pitkin, the present bishop,
was appionted March 12, 1862. *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[598:69](hou24.htm#fr_944.md) A. M. Montierth from
Box Elder co. was the first settler in Paradise. H. C. Jackson built the
first saw-mill in 1860, and the first grist-mill in 1864, in which
latter year the town site was laid out under the direction of Ezra T.
Benson. A log meeting-house was built in 1861. In 1868 the settlement
was removed three miles father to the north, for better protection
against Indians. *Orson Smith*, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 1-2.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[598:70](hou24.htm#fr_945.md) Those of Alva
Benson, Ira Allen, and others. It is related that the settlers brought
the waters of Little Bear River to their farms in 21 working-days, by
means of a canal eight feet wide, which afterward furnished the water
supply of Hyrum. While at this work many of them lived on bread and
water, and their tools consisted only of a few old shovels and spades.
Some of them dwelt for several years in holes or cellars dug in the
ground.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[598:71](hou24.htm#fr_946.md) In the winter of
1856-7 the first log school-house was built, but gave place in 1862 to a
brick building known as the Beaver Institute. In 1867, also, the first
saw-mill was erected on the site now occupied by the coöperative
woollen-mills. *Jas H. Glines*, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 18. Beaver city
and co. were so named from the beaver dams found there. *Richards’ Utah
Misc*., MS., 7.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[599:72](hou24.htm#fr_947.md) The city was laid
out by Nephi Johnson and others. The first school was organized in 1860,
and the first meeting-house built in 1861. John Parker, in *Id*., 8.
Kane co. was so named after Col Thos L. Kane. *Richards’ Utah Misc*.,
MS., 7.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[599:73](hou24.htm#fr_948.md) Among them was the
family of Phillip Klingensmith, of Mountain-Meadows fame. John Steele,
in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 9. Mr Steele went to Southern Utah in 1850, in
company with Geo. A. Smith.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[599:74](hou24.htm#fr_949.md) On account of the
warm climate, it was supposed that cotton might be raised in the valley
of the Santa Clara. About one quart of cotton-seed was planted in the
spring of 1855, yielding enough to produce 30 yards of cloth. The
ginning and spinning were done by hand, and the weaving on a
treadle-loom. James G. Bleak, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 69. In 1857, 30
lbs were planted, but the crop was a failure, the seed being bad. In
1858-9 other experiments were made, the cotton raised the first year
costing $3.40 per lb., and the second year $1.90. The industry was found
to be unprofitable. *Id*., 70-1; *Jennings’ Mat. Progress of Utah*, MS.,
1. The attempt was made with a view to producing in the territory all
that was needed for its population. *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*,
MS., 25.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[600:75](hou24.htm#fr_950.md) By act approved Jan.
17, 1862. See *Utah Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1866), pp. 166-7. It was named St
George after Pres. Geo. A. Smith. *Richards’ Utah Misc*., MS., 4.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[600:76](hou24.htm#fr_951.md) The foundation stone
was laid March 22, 1862, and when completed, at a cost of more than
$6,000, it was named St George Hall. James G. Bleak, in *Utah Sketches*,
MS., 73-4.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[600:77](hou24.htm#fr_952.md) The people farmed on
the joint enclosure system, the first enclosed field, named the St
George, being irrigated by the 'Virgin ditch,' the cost of which between
Dec. 1861 and Aug. 1866 was $26,611.59. *Id*., 76.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[601:78](hou24.htm#fr_953.md) Other settlements in
Washington co. were Santa Clara, on the river of that name, and about
five miles north-west of St George, settled in 1853 by Jacob Hamblin and
a company of missionaries; Gunlock, founded by W. Hamblin on the Santa
Clara, in 1857; Price, occupied in 1858 as a cotton plantation,
submerged by the flood of 1861, and reoccupied for general farming
purposes in 1863; Harrisburg, twelve miles north-east of St George,
settled in 1S60 by Moses Harris and 13 others; Duncan's Retreat, on the
north bank of the Virgin, first settled in 1861 by Chapman Duncan, who
abandoned it, and resettled by William Theobald and six others; and
Shoensburg, also on the Virgin, located in Jan. 1862, by Oliver De Mill
and others. *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 161-2. In this and other
counties, settled between 1852 and 1862, were numerous small
settlements, some of which will be mentioned later.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[601:79](hou24.htm#fr_954.md) See chaps xiii. and
xvii., this vol.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[601:80](hou24.htm#fr_955.md) In 1852 Call's Fort,
in Box Elder co., now on the line of the Utah and Northern railway, was
built by Anson Call and two others. In 1883 it contained about 35
families. Deseret, near the centre of Millard co., now having a station
on the Utah Central, was founded in 1858, abandoned in 1867, and
reoccupicd in 1875 by J. S. Black and others. Scipio, in the
north-eastern part of the same county was settled in March 1860 by T. F.
Robins and six others. Circleville, in what is now Piute co., was
settled about the same time, several previous attempts having failed, on
account of trouble with Indians. In the same year, also, Fort Gunnison
was founded in the south-western part of San Pete co. In 1861 it was
organized as a ward, with Jacob Kudger-son as bishop. About 30 miles to
the north was Moroni, so called after the prophet of that name in the
book of Mormon, located in March 1859 by G. W. Bradley and others, and
incorporated in 1866. Fairview, farther to the north, and first known as
North Bend, was founded in the winter of 1859-60 by James N. Jones and
others, and was incorporated in 1872. Wales, the present terminus of the
San Pete railway, was first settled in 1857 by John E. Rees and others,
Rees being bishop of the ward in 1883; Fayette, on the west bank of the
Sevier, but still in San Pete co., in 1861, by James Bartholomew and
four others, Bartholomew being now ward bishop. In Tooele co., St John
was founded in 1858 by Luke Johnson, and Lake View in 1860 by Orson
Pratt, George Marshall, Moses Martin, and. four others, Martin being the
present bishop. In Utah co., Spanish Fork, now on the line of the Utah
Central railroad, was incorporated in 1855; Salem, a little to the
north-east of Payson, and first known as Pond Town, was founded in 1856
by Robt Durfee and six others; and Goshen, in the south-western part of
the county, in the same year by Phineas Cook and a few others. The
present site of Goshen was located in 1869 by Brigham, a few miles south
of the old settlement. In Weber county, Plain City was located in March
1859 on the Weber River, about nine miles north-west of Ogden, by J.
Spiers and a few others; West Weber, a little farther south, about the
same date, by Wm McFarland and 14 others; Eden, ten miles north-east of
Ogden, in 1860, by John Beddle and Joseph Grover; and Huntsville, twelve
miles east of Ogden, in the same year, by Jefferson Hunt and others.
*Taylor's Rem*., MS.; *Woodruff's Journal*, MS.; *Hist. B. Young*, MS.;
*Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 122-65; *Utah Sketches*, MS., passim;
*Hand-Book of Reference*, 71-8. In July 1855 a settlement was founded on
the left bank of the Grand River, in the Elk Mountain region, by Alfred
N. Billings. *Richards’ Incidents in Utah Hist*., MS., 80.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[602:81](hou24.htm#fr_956.md) Among other works
consulted in this chapter are the *Route from Liverpool to Great Salt
Lake Valley: Illustrated with Steel Engravings and Wood-cuts from
Sketches made by Frederick Piercy, together with a Geographical and
Historical Description of Utah, and a Map of the Overland Routes to that
Territory from the Missouri River. Also an Authentic History of the
Latter-Day Saints’ Emigration from Europe from the Commencement up to
the Close of 1855, with Statistics. Edited by James Linforth*. Liverpool
and London, 1855. Though this book was written mainly for the purpose of
giving a review of the latter-day saints’ emigration from Liverpool to
Salt Lake City, together with statistics to date, it contains much
historical and statistical information on other subjects, drawn, as the
editor says, 'from sources far and wide.' Mr Linforth acknowledges that
he was assisted in his work by missionaries, whose position and
acquaintance with affairs gave him access to many valuable documents. In
chap. xvii., we find a description of Nauvoo, of the Carthage-jail
tragedy, the persecutions in Missouri and Illinois, and many details
concerning the life of the prophet. In chaps xxi.-xxii. is an account of
the territory and its settlements, and the industrial condition of the
saints. In the last chapters are brief biographies of some of the
leading elders. All of this information is contained in notes, the text
merely relating the travels of the artists by whom the sketches were
made. The engravings are well executed, and among them are portraits of
several church dignitaries.

    *A Journey to Great Salt Lake City, by Jules Remy and Julius
Brenchley, M. A.: With a Sketch of the History, Religion, and Customs of
the Mormons, and an introduction on the Religious Movement in the United
States, by Jules Remy*. 2 vols. London, 1861. In addition to incidents
of travel and descriptions of the places visited, we have in these
volumes a sketch of Mormon history to 1859, together with chapters on
the Mormon church and hierarchy, polygamy, education, and propagandism.
At one time it was considered the standard gentile authority on
Mormonism, and is freely quoted by other writers, though greatly
inferior to Burton's work published two years later. 'The greater part
of the matter,' remarks the author, 'was written from day to day, often
in the open air, upon the slopes or the crests of mountains, in the
heart of deserts, among the occupations and frequently the perils which
are the necessary accompaniments of so long a journey.' Hence Mr Remy
lays no claim to literary finish, a defect which he hopes may be atoned
for by superior accuracy. Though there are many interesting passages and
some interesting chapters, one cannot but feel that he might have said
twice as much in half the space.

    *The Husband in Utah; or Sights and Scenes among the Mormons: With
Remarks on their Moral and Social Economy, by Austin N. Ward*. Edited by
Maria Ward. New York, 1857. Here and there in this work will be found
some interesting sketches of Mormon life as Mrs Ward observed it in
1855. Among them are descriptions of the industrial and social condition
of the Mormons, the stores, manufactures, streets, street scenes,
costumes, the theatre, the tabernacle. In style the work is sketchy and
entertaining, and written in more friendly mood than could be expected
from one who, as Mrs Ward declares, 'escaped from Mormondom.' At the end
of the work is <span id="page_603">p. 603</span> 'Joseph's Smith's
revelation on polygamy,' and several discourses by leading elders.
Another edition was issued in 1863, under title of *Male Life among the
Mormons*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. Progress of Events. 1861-1869.](hou25.md)
