[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou19)  [Next](hou21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

### CHAPTER XVII. UTAH AS A TERRITORY. 1849-1853.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Need of Civil Government—the
State of Deseret Organized—Memorials for Admission Into the
Union—Proposed Consolidation With California—Administration of
Justice—Proceedings of the Legislature—Babbit's Reception at
Washington—the State of Deseret Before Congress—Act to Establish a
Territorial Government Appointment of Officials—Ill Feeling Between Them
and the Mormons—the Officials Depart for Washington—Measures of the
Legislative Assembly—Stansbury's Survey—the Gunnison Massacre—Indian
Outbreaks—the Walker War—Mexican Slave-Traders.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">Until</span> the year 1849 the Mormons were
entirely under the control of their ecclesiastical leaders, regarding
the presidency not only as their spiritual head, but as the source of
law in temporal matters. Disputes were settled by the bishops, or, as
they were also termed, magistrates of wards, appointed by the
presidency. The brotherhood discountenanced litigation, as before
mentioned, but the population did not consist entirely of members of the
church. There was already in their midst a small percentage of gentile
citizens, gathered, as we have seen, from nearly all the civilized
nations of the earth. It was probable that, as the resources of the
territory were developed, this number would increase in greater ratio,
and it was not to be expected that they would always remain content
without some form of civil government. Not infrequently litigation arose
among the gentiles, or between Mormon and gentile; and though strict
justice may have been done by the bishops, it was

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

difficult for the latter to believe that such was the case. When the
loser appealed to the presidency, <span id="fr_634"></span>[1](#fn_634)
their judgment always confirmed the decision of the bishops, and hence
was further ground for dissatisfaction. The saints regarded their courts
as divinely commissioned and inspired tribunals; but not so the
gentiles, by whom reports were freely circulated of what they termed the
lawless oppression of the Mormons. Thus it became advisable to establish
for the benefit of all some judicial authority that could not be
questioned by any, whether members of the church or not, and this
authority must be one that, being recognized by the government of the
United States, would have the support of its laws and the shield of its
protection. Further than this, if the Mormons neglected to establish
such government, the incoming gentiles would do so erelong.

    Early in 1849, therefore, a convention was summoned of "the
inhabitants of that portion of Upper California lying east of the Sierra
Nevada Mountains," and on the 4th of March assembled at Salt Lake City.
A committee <span id="fr_635"></span>[2](#fn_635) was appointed to
draught a constitution, under which the people might govern themselves
until congress should otherwise provide by law. A, few days later the
constitution was adopted, and a provisional government organized, under
the name of the State of Deseret. <span id="fr_636"></span>[3](#fn_636)
An immense tract of country was claimed, extending from latitude 33° to
the border of Oregon, and from the Rocky Mountains to the Sierra Nevada,
together with a section of the territory now included in southern
California, and the strip of

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

coast lying between Lower California and 118° 30´ of west
longitude. <span id="fr_637"></span>[4](#fn_637) The seat of government
was to be at Salt Lake City, and its powers were to be divided, as in
other states, into three branches, the legislative, executive, and
judiciary. The legislative authority was to be vested in a general
assembly, consisting of a senate and house of representatives, both to
be elected by the people. <span id="fr_638"></span>[5](#fn_638) The
executive power was placed in the hands of a governor, elected as
elsewhere for four years; <span id="fr_639"></span>[6](#fn_639) a
lieutenant-governor, who was chosen for the

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

same term, and became ex officio president of the senate; a secretary of
state; an auditor; and a treasurer. <span
id="fr_640"></span>[7](#fn_640) The judiciary was to consist of a
supreme court, and such inferior courts as the general assembly might
establish. A chief justice and two associate judges were to be elected
by a joint vote of the senate and house of representatives. <span
id="fr_641"></span>[8](#fn_641)

    All free white male residents of the state over the age of
twenty-one were allowed a vote at the first election, <span
id="fr_642"></span>[9](#fn_642) and all between the ages of eighteen and
forty-five, except those exempt by the laws of the United States and of
the state of Deseret, were to be armed, equipped, and trained as a state
militia, embodied a few weeks later in the Nauvoo legion, which was now
reorganized and divided into two cohorts, each cohort containing four
regiments, each regiment two battalions, and each battalion five
companies, Daniel H. Wells being major-general, and Jedediah M. Grant
and Horace S. Eldredge brigadier-generals. <span
id="fr_643"></span>[10](#fn_643)

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

    On the 12th of March a general election was held at the bowery in
Salt Lake City, this being the first occasion on which the saints had
met for such a purpose. For the successful ticket 624 votes were polled,
Brigham Young being chosen governor; Willard Richards, secretary; Horace
S. Eldredge, marshal; Daniel H. Wells, attorney-general; Albert
Carrington, assessor and collector; Newell K. Whitney, treasurer; and
Joseph L. Heywood, supervisor of roads. As no session of the assembly
had yet been held, the judiciary was also elected by the people, Heber
C. Kimball being chosen chief justice, and John Taylor and Newell K.
Whitney associate judges. <span id="fr_644"></span>[11](#fn_644)

    The general assembly was first convened on the 2d of July, and on
the 3d Willard Snow, being appointed speaker of the house of
representatives, administered the oath or affirmation to the executive
officials.

    Thus did the brethren establish, in the valley of the Great Salt
Lake, the state of Deseret. It was certainly a novel and somewhat bold
experiment on the part of the saints, mustering then little more than
one sixth of the number required for admission as a state, thus to
constitute themselves a sovereign and independent people, with a vast
extent of territory, and calmly await the action of congress in the
matter. It will be remembered that they themselves had lent their aid,
in howsoever slight degree, in wresting a portion of this territory from
Mexico, and they did not claim more than they believed that they could
in time subdue and occupy. Already they felt assured that proselytes

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

would gather by myriads under the banner of the prophet. Nor was their
assurance unfounded; for, as we have seen, not less than fifteen
thousand arrived in the valley before the close of 1852, and were
content to remain there, believing that they had found better prospects
than were to be had even in the gold-fields of California, which lay but
a few weeks' journey beyond.

    The Mormons did not, however, hope to remain an independent
republic, nor did they probably wish to do so. Well they knew that the
tide of westward-bound migration, soon to be increased by the
establishing of a stage line and possibly by the building of a railroad,
which, as we shall see later, was already projected, would sorely
disturb the peace of their mountain home unless their claims were
recognized by the United States. On the 30th of April a memorial had
already been signed by more than two thousand persons, asking for a
"territorial government of the most liberal construction authorized by
our excellent federal constitution, with the least possible
delay." <span id="fr_645"></span>[12](#fn_645) On the 5th of July Almon
W. Babbitt was elected delegate to congress in a joint session of the
senate and representatives, and on the 6th a memorial was adopted by the
representatives, in which the senate concurred three days later, asking
for admission as a state.

    The latter memorial is a somewhat remarkable document, and serves to
show the slight esteem in which the Mormons held the legislature of the
United States, and the unbounded confidence which they placed in
themselves. Congress is reminded that it has failed

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

to provide a civil government for any portion of the territory ceded by
the republic of Mexico; that the revolver and bowie-knife have so far
been the law of the land; and that, since the gold discovery, many
thousands have emigrated to California, all well supplied with the
implements and munitions of war. Fears are expressed that, through the
failure to provide civil jurisdiction, political aspirants may subject
the government to great loss of blood and treasure in extending its
authority over this portion of the national domain. The memorial
declares that, for their own security, and for the preservation of the
rights of the United States, the people of the state of Deseret have
organized a provisional government, under which the civil policy of the
nation is duly maintained; <span id="fr_646"></span>[13](#fn_646) also
that there is now a sufficient number of individuals to support a state
government, and that they have erected at their own expense a hall of
legislature which will bear comparison with those in the older states.
"Your memorialists therefore ask your honorable body to favorably
consider their interests; and if consistent with the constitution and
usages of the federal government, that the constitution accompanying
this memorial be ratified, and that the state of Deseret be admitted
into the Union on an equal footing with other states, or to such other
form of civil government as your wisdom and magnanimity may award to the
people of Deseret; and upon the adoption of any form of government here,
that their delegate be received, and their interests properly and
faithfully represented in the congress of the United States." <span
id="fr_647"></span>[14](#fn_647)

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

    The remarks made in this memorial on the danger of failing to
provide a civil government, at a time when California was occupied by
thousands of armed and resolute men, seem the more pertinent when it is
remembered that, between 1846 and 1849, occurred the great struggle in
congress on the question of slavery or no slavery in the ceded
territory. When congress adjourned on the 4th of March, 1849, all that
had been done toward establishing some form of government for the
immense domain acquired by the treaty with Mexico was to extend over it
the revenue laws, and to make San Francisco a port of entry. Thus 'Upper
California,' as the entire region was still termed, had at this time the
same political status as was held by Alaska between 1867 and 1884, at
which latter date the national legislature placed that territory within
pale of the law.

    It is worthy of note, also, that, in September 1849, the people of
California, incensed by the dilatory action of congress, followed the
example of the Mormons by framing a constitution of their own. On the
6th of that month, by order of President Taylor, General John Wilson,
then United States Indian agent, held a consultation with Brigham Young,
Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, and others, with a view to the
temporary amalgamation of the states of California and Deseret, in order
to avoid possible difficulties on the slavery question. It was agreed
that a memorial should be drawn up, asking for a convention of all the
people of Upper California, both east and west of the Sierra Nevada, for
the purpose of consolidating the two states in one that should include
all the territory acquired from Mexico. At the beginning of 1851 the
union was to be dissolved, each state retaining its own constitution,
and the people being allowed to determine for themselves to which they
would belong. John Wilson and Amasa Lyman were sent as delegates

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

to California, and presented the memorial to the legislature; but the
governor of that state, reviewing the proposals in his message, one by
one, condemned them all. "The two communities were too far apart," he
declared, "to be combined even temporarily, and Texas and Maine might as
well have been made one state as Deseret and California." Thereupon the
legislature refused to entertain the memorial, and nothing was
accomplished. <span id="fr_648"></span>[15](#fn_648)

 

    While Babbitt and his colleagues <span
id="fr_649"></span>[16](#fn_649) are fulfilling their mission to
Washington, let us inquire how justice is administered and the affairs
of the people managed in the self-constituted state of Deseret, through
which lay the principal routes to the gold-fields of California. Some of
the emigrant parties arrived at Salt Lake City with no effects save
their jaded cattle, their wagons, and a scant outfit, while others
brought with them valuable merchandise, for which they hoped to find a
market in the mining camps. When they made a division of their property,
as frequently happened on arriving in the valley, difficulties arose
among them, and the discontented parties applied for redress to the
courts of Deseret. In these instances there is sufficient evidence that
impartial justice was rendered, <span id="fr_650"></span>[17](#fn_650)
and whatever the decision, appeal to a higher court was useless, for the
judgment was invariably confirmed. If the losing party rebelled, or
expressed in unseemly language his opinion of Mormon justice, he was
severely fined, or sometimes imprisoned for a term long enough to teach
him respect for the civil law.

    Trespass of emigrants’ cattle on the imperfectly

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

fenced lands of the Mormons was a frequent cause of trouble between
saint and gentile. For this a fine was imposed, and the injured party
must be fully recompensed. Protests were often made and the case taken
before the bishops, but the only result was that the costs were added to
the original demand. From the ruling of the bishop, who acted somewhat
in the capacity of county court judge, an appeal was sometimes made to
the bench of bishops; but seldom to any purpose. A final appeal could be
made, however, to Brigham, who administered practical justice in
patriarchal fashion, and whose opinion of the bishops was the reverse of
flattering. "They are not fit to decide a case between two old women,
let alone two men," he remarked on one occasion, while at the same time
he threatened to dismiss the entire bench if they did not improve.

    The organization of a civil government was intended mainly for the
better control of the gentiles, <span id="fr_651"></span>[18](#fn_651)
since, to its own members, the authority of the church sufficed. The
judicial system of the saints was founded on the doctrines of the book
of Mormon rather than on common law, and later, as we shall see, became
obnoxious to federal judges and lawyers, none of whom succeeded in
making much impression on the pockets of the community. For other
reasons the Mormon code was distasteful, especially so far as it related
to women. To marry out of the church was an offence. Those who had been
sealed were advised not to cast in their lot with the gentiles; <span
id="fr_652"></span>[19](#fn_652) any one found guilty of seducing a
Mormon's wife must surely be put to death. <span
id="fr_653"></span>[20](#fn_653)

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

    As with the judiciary so with the legislature. The people were
instructed by their spiritual law-givers whom to elect as law-makers in
matters temporal, and these were always the dignitaries of the church.
Vote by ballot obtained, indeed, in name, but there was practically no
freedom of election, and there were seldom even opposing candidates, the
strife between political parties, as republican and democrat, being
something unknown among them. It is this that the gentiles find fault
with; though the Mormons boasted, they say, and still boast of this
feature in their polity, as showing the harmony which prevails in their
midst, it is in fact tyranny, and tyranny of the worst kind—an oligarchy
with the form but without any of the spirit of republican institutions.
Here we have one of the worst phases of Mormonism. It must be
remembered, however, that a great majority of the Mormons were
foreigners or of foreign extraction, most of them being men who had
never enjoyed political rights, and therefore did not miss them in the
land of their adoption.

    In the proceedings of the general assembly of the state of Deseret
there is little worthy of record, and that little relates mainly to
municipal affairs, and the establishment of courts of justice, no
expense being incurred for this or other branches of government. <span
id="fr_654"></span>[21](#fn_654) During the winter of 1849-50 a portion
of the territory was divided into counties, which were named Salt Lake,
Weber, Utah, San Pete, Tooele, and Juab. <span
id="fr_655"></span>[22](#fn_655) To these were added, in 1850, Iron
county; in 1851, Millard

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

and Box Elder counties; and in 1852, Washington county. The limits of
Davis county were settled as early as 1848, and the boundaries of
several other counties, together with the county seats, were defined in
1850. <span id="fr_656"></span>[23](#fn_656) Acts were passed whereby it
was ordered that county courts should be established, and judges,
clerks, and sheriffs appointed for each, together with justices and
constables for the several precincts. At Salt Lake City, the supreme
court was to hold annual sessions, and a system of jurisprudence was
instituted, whereby every case, whether civil or criminal, could receive
a hearing before the proper officers, and be determined without delay,
according to law and equity.

    In January 1851 Salt Lake City was incorporated <span
id="fr_657"></span>[24](#fn_657) by charter of the general assembly,
powers being granted to levy and collect taxes; to establish a system of
common schools; to provide a water supply; to open streets, light them,
and keep them in repair; to organize a police; and to tax, regulate,
restrain, or suppress gambling-houses, houses of ill-fame, and the sale
of spirituous and fermented liquors. <span
id="fr_658"></span>[25](#fn_658) Acts of incorporation were also passed,
between this date and 1865, for Payson, Tooele, Palmyra, Parowan, Nephi,
Springville, Lehi, Manti, American Fork, Pleasant Grove, Spanish Fork,
Fillmore, Cedar City, Ogden, and Provo, <span
id="fr_659"></span>[26](#fn_659) the privileges granted being similar to
those conferred on the capital.

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

    Perhaps the most remarkable feature in the proceedings of the
assembly is the liberality with which valuable timber and pasture lands
and water privileges were granted to favored individuals. By act of
December 9, 1850, the control of City Creek and cañon was granted to
Brigham Young, who was required to pay therefor the sum of five hundred
dollars. A month later the right to the timber in the cañons of the
mountain range that lay to the west of the Jordan was bestowed on George
A. Smith. To Ezra T. Benson was granted the control of the timber in the
cañons and mountains at the entrance of Tooele Valley, of the curious
between that point and Salt Lake Valley, and of the waters of Twin and
Rock Springs in Tooele Valley. To Heber C. Kimball were given the waters
of North Mill Creek cañon—all these grants, with the exception of the
first, being made without consideration. <span
id="fr_660"></span>[27](#fn_660)

 

    On his arrival at Washington, Babbitt met with a somewhat cool
reception. That the Mormons, not deigning to pass through the years of
their political minority, should now ask admission as a state, and
meanwhile constitute themselves a free and independent community, an
imperium in imperio, issuing full-fledged, as did Minerva from the
cranium of Jove, into the society of republics, was a proceeding that of
course failed to meet with the approval of congress. The memorial,
accompanied by the constitution of the state of Deseret, was presented
to the senate on the 27th of December, 1849, by Stephen A. Douglas, who
moved that it be referred to the committee on territories, <span
id="fr_661"></span>[28](#fn_661) and about one month later it was so

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

referred. <span id="fr_662"></span>[29](#fn_662) On the 28th of January,
1850, it was ordered by the house of representatives that a memorial
presented by the delegate praying to be admitted to a seat in that body
be referred to the committee on elections. <span
id="fr_663"></span>[30](#fn_663) The committee unanimously recommended
the adoption of the following resolution: "That it is inexpedient to
admit Almon W. Babbitt, Esq., to a seat in this body, as a delegate to
the alleged state of Deseret." In a committee of the whole the report of
the committee on elections was read, and among the reasons alleged
against the admission of Babbitt the following is most cogent: "The
memorialist comes as the representative of a state; but of a state not
in the Union, and therefore not entitled to a representation here; the
admission of Mr Babbitt would be a quasi recognition of the legal
existence of the state of Deseret; and no act should be done by this
house which, even by implication, may give force and vitality to a
political organization extra-constitutional and independent of the laws
of the United States." After considerable debate the report was adopted
by a vote of 108 to 77, and the state of Deseret thus failed to receive
recognition from congress. <span id="fr_664"></span>[31](#fn_664)

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

    Some action must be taken in the matter, however, for while yet the
struggle on slavery was at its fiercest, the inhabitants of the
territory ceded by Mexico had formed themselves into two separate
states, each with its own constitution, the people of California having
declared against slavery, and the people of Deseret having taken the
reins into their own hands. Finally, on the 7th of September, 1850, on
which date the celebrated compromise measures became law and were
supposed to have settled forever the slavery question, a bill passed the
senate for the admission of California as a state, without slavery,
while the self-constituted state of Deseret, shorn somewhat of its
proportions, was reduced to the condition of New Mexico, under the name
of the Territory of Utah, with a proviso that, "when admitted as a
state, the said territory, or any portion of the same, shall be received
into the Union, with or without slavery, as their constitution may
prescribe at the time of their admission." Two days later, both bills
passed the house of representatives, and afterward received the
president's signature. It is worthy of remark that the final discussion
on the bill for the admission of Utah turned entirely on the question of
allowing slavery in that territory, for throughout the magnificent
domain acquired from Mexico, the only chance now remaining to the south
was in the desert portion of the great basin, which, as Senator Sodden
of Virginia remarked, "had been abandoned to the Mormons for its
worthlessness."

    The act to establish a territorial government for

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Utah <span
id="fr_665"></span>[32](#fn_665) placed the southern boundary at the
thirty-seventh parallel, the section between that limit and the
thirty-third parallel being included in the territory of New Mexico,
with the exception of the part transferred to California, by which state
Utah was to be bounded on the west. On the north, Oregon was to remain
as the boundary, and on the east the Rocky Mountains. The remaining
provisions of the organic act differ but little from those framed for
other territories, for New Mexico, admitted at the same date as was
Utah, or for Nevada, admitted in 1861.

    Thus the Mormons were shut in between the mountain walls of the
great basin, the strip of coast which was claimed under the constitution
of the state of Deseret, and would have included the port of San Diego,
being denied to them. It is probable that, if they could have foreseen
all the results of the war with Mexico, the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,
and the gold discovery, which now threatened to place them almost in the
centre of the United States, and not, as they had intended, in a remote
and untravelled solitude, they would have selected the site of their new
Zion elsewhere than in the valley of the Great Salt Lake.

    On the 5th of April, 1851, the general assembly of the state of
Deseret was dissolved, <span id="fr_666"></span>[33](#fn_666) though it
was

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

not until one year later that the state was officially merged into the
territory of Utah. The territorial form of government was accepted only
as a temporary measure, applications being made to congress for
admission as a state, at intervals, as we shall see later, until 1882.
Meanwhile, for many years, the shadow of a state government was
preserved, the members of the ideal state assembly, after each session,
reënacting and sanctioning by vote and in due form the laws which they
had previously passed as a territorial legislature.

    On the 1st of July a proclamation was issued by the governor,
ordering that an election for members of the assembly and for a delegate
to congress be held throughout the territory on the first Monday in
August. On July 21st three Indian agencies were established, <span
id="fr_667"></span>[34](#fn_667) an agent and two sub-agents, of whom
the latter had already arrived, and were now assigned to their
districts, having been appointed by the government. On the 8th of August
three judicial districts were defined. Judges were assigned to each, and
the times and places appointed for holding courts in the several
counties appointed, <span id="fr_668"></span>[35](#fn_668) these powers
being temporarily conferred on the governor by the organic act.

    The appointment of governor and superintendent of

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indian affairs was
given to Brigham, <span id="fr_669"></span>[36](#fn_669) and it is
probable that no better selection could have been made. It is at least
certain that if any other had been made, the rupture which occurred a
few years later between the Mormons and the United States government
would have been hastened. B.D. Harris of Vermont was chosen secretary;
Joseph Buffington of Pennsylvania, chief justice; Perry E. Brocchus of
Alabama and Zerubbabel Snow of Ohio, associate judges; Seth M. Blair of
Deseret, United States attorney; and Joseph L. Heywood of Deseret,
United States marshal. As Buffington declined to serve, Lemuel H.
Brandebury was selected to fill his place. <span
id="fr_670"></span>[37](#fn_670) Snow, Heywood, and Blair being Mormons,
the government patronage was thus fairly distributed between saints and
gentiles. Although these appointments were made on the 20th of
September, 1850, none of the gentile officials arrived in Salt Lake City
until the following summer, and all were not assembled until the first
week in August. With them came Almon W. Babbitt, who was intrusted with
the sum of $20,000 appropriated by congress toward the building of a
state-house. Harris also brought with him $24,000 for the expenses of
the legislature.

    The authorities were kindly received by the saints; and had they
been men of ability and discretion, content to discharge their duty
without interfering with the social and religious peculiarities of the
people, all would have been well; but such was not their character or
policy. Judge Brocchus especially was a vain and ambitious man, full of
self-importance, fond of intrigue, corrupt, revengeful, hypocritical.
Between

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

the 7th and 10th of September, a general conference of the church was
held, at which the judge obtained permission to address the assembly.
During his remarks he drifted into the subject of polygamy, directing
this part of his discourse to the women, whom he exhorted to a life of
virtue. <span id="fr_671"></span>[38](#fn_671) He also took to task some
of the Mormon leaders, who on a previous occasion had spoken
disrespectfully of the government, one of them having gone so far as to
consign the late President Zachary Taylor to the nether regions.

    The Mormons were sorely exasperated, and but that they were held in
restraint by Brigham, would have done violence to the judge. "If," said
the former, "I had but crooked my little finger, he would have been used
up; but I did not bend it. If I had, the sisters alone felt indignant
enough to have chopped him in pieces." <span
id="fr_672"></span>[39](#fn_672) The governor contented himself with
rebuking the judge, who, he declared, must be either profoundly ignorant
or perversely wicked. It had become a matter of history throughout the
enlightened world, he declared, that the government of the United States
regarded the persecution of the saints with indifference, and by their
silence gave sanction to such proceedings. Hundreds of women and
children had in consequence gone to their graves prematurely, and their
blood cried to heaven against those who had caused or consented to their
death. Nevertheless, he loved the government and the constitution of the
United States; but he did not love corrupt ministers of the government.
He was indignant that such men as Brocchus should come there to lecture
the people on morality and virtue, and should make such insinuations as
he had done; and he repeated the statement that Zachary Taylor was then
in to-phet. At this last remark, Brocchus jumped to his feet and
protested angrily, whereupon Heber C. Kimball

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

touched him lightly on the shoulder, and told him that he need have no
doubt of it, for he would see him when he went there.

    A few days later Brigham invited the judge to attend a meeting, to
be held on the 19th, and explain or apologize for his conduct. The
latter declared that he had neither apology nor explanation to make;
that he did not intend any insult, especially to the women, but that his
remarks were deliberate and premeditated, and that his purpose was to
vindicate the government. Then followed a lengthy reply from the
governor, in which Brocchus was severely handled, the judge and his
colleagues being thereafter condemned to social ostracism.

    Soon afterward it was reported to Brigham that the secretary,
together with Brocchus and the chief justice, intended to return to
Washington, whereupon the governor called on them to ascertain if this
was so. He was assured that such was their purpose, and that the
secretary would also take with him the funds placed in his hands, and
the seal, records, and documents pertaining to his office. The governor
considered this course illegal, and immediately issued a proclamation
declaring the result of the election, <span
id="fr_673"></span>[40](#fn_673) and ordering the assembly to convene on
the 22d of September, only four days later. <span
id="fr_674"></span>[41](#fn_674) On the 24th a

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

resolution was passed, enjoining the United States marshal to take into
his custody all the government funds and other public property in
possession of the secretary. <span id="fr_675"></span>[42](#fn_675) This
resolution was presented to Harris, together with an order for $500 to
defray the incidental expenses of the assembly. The secretary ignored
the resolution and refused to pay the order, under the plea that the
members were not legally elected.

    Among the grounds on which the secretary declared the election
illegal was, that before the votes were cast the governor had failed to
take a census of the territory, as provided in the organic act; this the
latter attributed to the miscarriage of instructions and blanks, which
had not even yet arrived. <span id="fr_676"></span>[43](#fn_676) On the
other hand, it was clearly the duty of the secretary, as stated in that
act, to remain in the territory during his tenure of office. Moreover,
the judges organized and held a session of the supreme court before any
time or place was appointed for such session by the executive or
legislative authorities, and apparently for the purpose of shielding the
secretary. On the 26th Brigham addressed a letter to the court, asking
their opinion as to his duty with reference to the organic act, which
required that the governor should take care that the laws were
faithfully executed, and that the secretary should reside within the
territory. No answer was returned; and after the district attorney had
been

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

ordered to file a petition, in which the request was couched in legal
form and phrase, no further action was taken. Finally, on the 28th of
September, the secretary, and judges Brandebury and Brocchus, set forth
for Washington, taking with them the territorial seal, the records,
documents, and funds, which were returned to the proper
authorities. <span id="fr_677"></span>[44](#fn_677) On the following

<span id="img_46000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TERRITORIAL
SEAL.](tn/46000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/46000.jpg)  
TERRITORIAL SEAL.  
</span>

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

day the legislative assembly signed a memorial praying that the
vacancies be filled as soon as possible from residents of the
territory. <span id="fr_678"></span>[45](#fn_678) Meanwhile, to prevent
further derangement, and for the safe-keeping of the territorial
records, Willard Richards was temporarily appointed secretary.

    The successors to the runaway officials were Lazarus H. Reid of New
York, who was appointed chief justice; Leonidas Shaver, who succeeded
Brocchus; and as secretary, Benjamin G. Ferris. The new officials
enjoyed but a brief tenure of office. After remaining in Utah for about
a year, Reid returned to New York, where he died in 1855. <span
id="fr_679"></span>[46](#fn_679) Shaver retiring to rest one night, soon
after his arrival, was found dead in his room next morning, thereby
giving rise to an unfounded rumor that he had been poisoned on account
of a supposed difficulty with the governor. <span
id="fr_680"></span>[47](#fn_680) Secretary Ferris, after a six months'
residence, proceeded

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

to California. The next batch of officials were, as chief justice, John
F. Kinney; associate judges, George P. Stiles and W. W. Drummond; and
secretary, Almon W. Babbitt, who were appointed in 1854-5. Of these,
Stiles and Babbitt were Mormons, though the former was not in harmony
with the priesthood, and, as we shall see, Kinney and Drummond play a
prominent part in the history of the saints.

    Although there were no funds wherewith to pay the members, the
sessions of the legislature were continued, with occasional
adjournments, until February 1852, when a special session was ordered by
the governor, <span id="fr_681"></span>[48](#fn_681) and lasted until
the 6th of March. The laws enacted by the assembly of the state of
Deseret were declared to be in force, so far as they did not conflict
with the organic act. <span id="fr_682"></span>[49](#fn_682) Other laws
were passed relating to the punishment of crime, the organization of
courts, the administration of estates, the training of the militia, the
incorporation of cities, the distribution of lands, the construction of
roads, bridges, and canals, and such matters as lay within the range of
territorial legislation. <span id="fr_683"></span>[50](#fn_683) It was
determined to remove the site of the capital from Salt Lake City <span
id="fr_684"></span>[51](#fn_684) to some point in the Pahvan Valley, and
a committee appointed for that purpose selected the town of Fillmore.

    Memorials to congress were also adopted, one of which asked that
provision be made for the construction of "a national central railroad
from some eligible point on the Mississippi or Missouri River to San
Diego, San Francisco, Sacramento, Astoria, or such

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

other point on or near the Pacific coast as the wisdom of your honorable
body may dictate." The memorialists stated that for want of proper means
of transport about five thousand persons had perished on the different
routes within the three preceding years; that there was no great
obstacle to the construction of a road between Salt Lake City and San
Diego; that at various points on the route iron, coal, and timber were
abundant; that on the completion of the line the entire trade of China
and the East Indies would pass through the United States; and that the
road would consolidate the relations of the country with foreign powers
in times of peace, and furnish means of defence in times of war. <span
id="fr_685"></span>[52](#fn_685) In 1854 a second memorial was
presented, stating the opinion of the Mormons as to the best route for
an overland railroad, and a demonstration was held in favor of the
project, the inhabitants, male and female, attending en masse. In the
preceding year congress had also been petitioned to provide for the
construction of a telegraph line from some convenient point on the
Mississippi or Missouri to a suitable port on the Pacific.

 

    As early as April 1849 Captain Howard Stunsbury, of the
topographical engineers, had been ordered to Fort Leavenworth, for the
purpose of making a survey of the Great Salt Lake and an exploration of
its valley, with a view to the construction of a transcontinental
railroad. Among his party was Lieutenant J. W. Gunnison, who was placed
in charge of the astronomical department. Before reaching Salt Lake City
the captain was informed that no survey would be permitted, and it was
even hinted that his life would be in danger should he attempt it.
Giving no heed to these warnings, he at once called on Brigham, aware
that if the good-will of the governor were not

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

obtained every obstacle, short of open resistance, would be thrown in
his way, that neither provisions nor labor would be furnished, and that
no information would be afforded. At first Brigham demurred. He was
surprised, he said, that the valley should be thus invaded so soon after
the Mormons had established their settlements; he had heard of the
expedition since its departure from Fort Leavenworth, and the entire
community was anxious to know what was the purpose of the government.
Moreover, an attaché of General Wilson, the newly appointed Indian agent
for California, whose train had passed through the city a few days
before, had boasted that the general was authorized to expel the Mormons
from the territory. They supposed, therefore, that the arrival of the
two parties was a concerted movement, and that Stansbury was sent for
the purpose of dividing the land into townships and sections, and of
establishing thereto the claims of government. Upon all these subjects
Brigham was undeceived, and, the true object of the expedition being
explained, he laid the matter before the council. Stansbury was then
informed that the authorities were well pleased with the proposed
exploration, that they had themselves contemplated such a measure, but
could not yet afford the expense, and that they would cheerfully render
all the assistance in their power. <span
id="fr_686"></span>[53](#fn_686)

    After exploring a route to Fort Hall, and making a reconnoissance of
Cache Valley and the western shore of the lake, Stansbury and his men
returned to Salt Lake City, and there passed the winter of 1849-50.
During this winter Lieutenant Gunnison gathered most of the material for
his well-known book on the Mormons, one of the most valuable and
impartial works yet published by a gentile writer. <span
id="fr_687"></span>[54](#fn_687)

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

    Early in the spring the captain and his staff again took the field,
and on the 16th of April were engaged in surveying both sides of Bear
River Bay, Gunnison with several of the men being out in a storm all

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

night in the mud-flats on the eastern shore. On the 12th of August
Stansbury had completed his survey, which included Great Salt Lake with
its islands, Lake Utah, the Jordan, and several of its tributaries, his
observations extending over an area of more than five

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

thousand square miles. <span id="fr_688"></span>[55](#fn_688) He then
resolved to search out on his return journey some practicable route to
the southward of South Pass, though a part of it lay through the
territory where Sioux, Blackfoot, Snake, and Utah were used to meet in
conflict. Disposing of his wagons and spare instruments to the Mormons,
by whom he was furnished with a sufficient escort, he bade them a kindly
farewell, and returned by way of Bridger's and Cheyenne passes to Fort
Leavenworth.

    The route recommended by Stansbury for the portion of a
transcontinental railroad between the Missouri, near Independence, and
Salt Lake City was by way of the Republican fork and the south fork of
the Platte; thence by way of Lodge Pole Creek, and skirting the southern
extremity of the Black Hills to the Laramie Plains; thence crossing the
north fork of the Platte to South Pass; thence by way of Bear River
Valley to Fort Bridger; from that point by way of Black Fork and turning
the Uintah Range to the Kamas prairie, whence the route to the capital
lay through the valley of the Timpanogos. <span
id="fr_689"></span>[56](#fn_689)

    In 1853 Gunnison, who had now been promoted to the rank of captain,
was ordered to survey a route farther to the south, by way of the
Huerfano River and the pass of Coochetopa; thence through the valleys of
the Grand and Green rivers; thence to the vegas de Santa Clara and the
Nicollet River; thence northward on a return route to Lake Utah, from
which point he was to explore the most available

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

passes and cañons of the Wasatch Range and South Pass. The party
included Lieutenant E.G. Beckwith, R. H. Kern as topographer and artist,
Sheppard Homans astronomer, Dr James Schiel surgeon and geologist, F.
Creutzfeldt botanist, J. A. Snyder assistant topographer, a number of
employés, and an escort of mounted riflemen in charge of Captain R. M.
Morris. On the 24th of October the party was encamped on the Sevier
River, fifteen or eighteen miles from the point where it discharges into
the lake of that name, and on the following day Gunnison started out to
explore the lake, accompanied by Kern, Creutzfeldt, the guide, and a
corporal with six men of the escort, the remainder of the party, under
Captain Morris, proceeding up the river in a north-easterly direction.
The following day several men of Morris’ detachment were sent to
ascertain whether a route were practicable northward from that point to
Great Salt Lake. While the men were yet within a hundred yards of camp,
the corporal came running toward them, breathless and exhausted, and
sinking to the ground, gasped out a few broken sentences, the purport of
which was that Gunnison and his party had been massacred by Indians, and
that, as far as he knew, he was the only survivor. Morris at once
ordered his men to arm and mount, and within half an hour was on his way
to the scene of the disaster; meanwhile a second member of Gunnison's
escort reached camp on horseback, and two other survivors came in later.

    Gunnison had encamped, with no thought of danger, in a sheltered
nook under the river bank, where wood and pasture were abundant. He was
aware that a large band of Pah Utes was in the neighborhood, and their
camp-fires had been seen daily since entering the valley of the Sevier.
A recent quarrel with an emigrant band had resulted in the killing of
one of the natives and the wounding of two others, but they had made no
raids on the Mormon settlements, and peace had recently been confirmed
at a parley held

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

with some of them by an agent of Brigham. At daybreak all arose and
prepared for their day's work, but while seated quietly at breakfast the
men were startled by a volley of rifles, a flight of arrows, and the
yells of a band of Pah Utes, who had crept, under cover of the bushes,
to within twenty-five yards of the spot. The surprise was complete. In
vain Gunnison, running forth from his tent, called out to them that he
was their friend. He fell, pierced by fifteen arrows, and of the rest
only four escaped, after being pursued for several hours by the
Indians. <span id="fr_690"></span>[57](#fn_690)

<span id="img_46900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SITE OF THE
GUNNISON MASSACRE.](tn/46900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/46900.jpg)  
SITE OF THE GUNNISON MASSACRE.  
</span>

    When Captain Morris reached the scene of the massacre no bodies were
found. There was hope, therefore, that others were still alive, and a
signal-fire was lighted to assure them of safety; but all the night long
no response was heard, nor any sound save the howling of wolves. Still
the men remained at their post, though not more in number than the party
that had been massacred. At daylight the corpses were discovered, and
though none were scalped, they were mutilated with all the atrocity
common to the most savage tribes. Some of them, among whom was that of
Captain Gunnison, had their arms hacked off at the

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

elbow, their entrails cut open and torn by wolves, and were in such
condition that they were buried where they lay. It is related that
Gunnison's heart was cut out while he was yet alive, and that it was so
full of blood that it bounded on the ground.

    By many the Gunnison massacre has been and is still ascribed to the
agency of the Mormons; and it has even been asserted that Mormons,
disguised as Indians, were among those who committed the deed. Here we
have a fair specimen of the hundreds of defamatory stories which have
been told about the Mormons from the beginning. In this instance not
only is there no valid proof against them, but there are many
circumstances pointing in the opposite direction, <span
id="fr_691"></span>[58](#fn_691) one of them being that among the slain
was a Mormon guide. The Gunnison massacre was brought on by gentiles; it
was the direct result of the killing of the Pah Ute by California
emigrants. As no compensation had been made to his tribe, they avenged
themselves, as was their custom, on the first Americans—for thus they
termed all white men, other than Mormons—whom they found in their
territory. <span id="fr_692"></span>[59](#fn_692) The

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

survey of which Gunnison was placed in charge was completed by Beckwith
and the other survivors of the party, who reached Salt Lake City by way
of Nephi, Payson, and Provo.

 

    The Mormon maxim with regard to the Indians was that it was cheaper
to feed than to fight them. Hence their intercourse with the Utes and
Shoshones <span id="fr_693"></span>[60](#fn_693) was generally
peaceable. <span id="fr_694"></span>[61](#fn_694) They taught them

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

how to till their lands; they assured them that they would suffer no
wrong; but they also told them that if they inflicted wrong, punishment
would follow. Nevertheless, when the tide of gentile emigration set in
for California, outbreaks among the Indians were of frequent occurrence.
The troubles caused to the early settlers in the Utah Valley in 1849-50
have already been mentioned. In the autumn of the latter year, a
disturbance occurred in the northern part of the territory, caused by a
party of emigrants, who, while encamped on the Malade River, shot two
Shoshone women as they were crossing the stream on horseback, stole
their horses, and then set forth on their journey. Thereupon the
warriors of the tribe began to commit depredations on the northern
settlements, slaying a Mormon named Campbell, who was engaged in
building a saw-mill, near Ogden, and threatening to massacre the
inhabitants of that village. General Eldredge of the Nauvoo legion,
being sent with a detachment to the scene of action, found that the
Shoshones had moved northward, carrying off a number of horses

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

and cattle. A number of Utahs were on the ground, and a portion of them
were made prisoners and retained as hostages, the tribe being advised to
move south to their usual place of abode and avoid all further
intercourse with the Shoshones. Thus the matter was settled without
further bloodshed. <span id="fr_695"></span>[62](#fn_695)

    No serious outbreaks occurred among the Indian tribes during 1851-2,
though emigrant parties, both Mormon and gentile, were sometimes
molested, <span id="fr_696"></span>[63](#fn_696) and in October of the
former year, the mail for California was captured within a few days
after leaving Salt Lake City. <span id="fr_697"></span>[64](#fn_697)

    During 1853 and a portion of the following year occurred what was
known as the Walker war, in which the Mormons suffered serious loss of
life and property throughout their territory. Walker, a favorite chief
of the Utahs, was at this time a man in the prime of life, one versed in
all manly exercises, an excellent shot, and a capital judge of
horse-flesh. In addition to several of the native dialects, he could
converse fluently in Spanish, and make himself understood in English.
Long before the advent of the Mormons he made frequent raids into the
Mexican states, where he laid the people under contribution, and took
captive persons of rank and condition whom he held to ransom. When
setting forth on one of these forays he was attired in a suit of the
finest broadcloth, cut

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

in the latest fashion, and donned a cambric shirt and a beaver hat. Over
this costume he wore his gaudy Indian trappings, and as he rode at the
head of his braves, with their gayly accoutred steeds and embroidered
saddles glittering with metal ornaments, he might have been taken for a
Soldan among the dusky Painims of the west. <span
id="fr_698"></span>[65](#fn_698)

    At first Walker received the exiled saints with open arms, gave them
information as to the nature of the country, advised them where to
establish settlements, and guarded them from depredation. But when he
saw that they had occupied his choicest lands; when game disappeared
from the cañons and mountain sides; and when his people were shot down
without provocation, and their cattle stolen by bands of emigrants, his
friendship turned to hate, and he longed to rid himself of the white
man. On the 17th of July, 1853, hostilities broke out, and continued
with little interruption until winter. During this year twelve Mormons
were killed and a number wounded; about four hundred cattle and horses
were stolen, and the expense incurred in building forts and removing
settlements amounted to $200,000. <span id="fr_699"></span>[66](#fn_699)
That the loss was not still greater was due to the vigilance of

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

the governor, for in the spring an émeute had already been threatened,
and was only prevented by the prompt measures of Brigham, who visited
the Indian camps in person, and for a time averted the outbreak.

    Among the causes that led to disturbance with the Utahs was the
presence of trading parties from New Mexico, who supplied the Indians
with horses, firearms, and ammunition, often taking in exchange Indian
women and children, who were afterward sold into slavery. <span
id="fr_700"></span>[67](#fn_700) To remedy this evil, an act was passed
by the Utah legislature in 1852, legalizing the enforced apprenticeship
of Indian children, but only for the purpose of inducing the brethren to
purchase those who would otherwise have been sold to the Mexicans or
abandoned by their parents. <span id="fr_701"></span>[68](#fn_701) So
frequent were

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

the visits of the slave-traders, that in April 1853 a proclamation was
issued by the governor, ordering the arrest of all strolling parties of
Mexicans, and forbidding any Mexican to leave the territory until
further advised. <span id="fr_702"></span>[69](#fn_702)

    Between 1854 and 1856 troubles with the Indians were less
frequent, <span id="fr_703"></span>[70](#fn_703) and these were mainly
with the

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Utahs. On the 7th
of August, 1855, a treaty was negotiated by the Indian agent with the
Shoshones, whereby, for a consideration of $3,000, peace and friendship
were to be confirmed with the United States, and the passage of United
States citizens through their territory without molestation was to be
guaranteed. <span id="fr_704"></span>[71](#fn_704) In January of this
year the chief Walker died, <span id="fr_705"></span>[72](#fn_705) at
peace, as it seems, with the Mormons,

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

and was succeeded by his brother Arapeen. <span
id="fr_706"></span>[73](#fn_706) Thus the leading spirit of the Utahs
was taken from their midst, and starved though the Indians were, <span
id="fr_707"></span>[74](#fn_707) they ceased for a time from open
hostility, contenting themselves with occasional raids on the Mormons’
cattle and horses, and accepting with thankfulness such small presents
as the Indian agents were pleased to give them. <span
id="fr_708"></span>[75](#fn_708)

    It is worthy of note that the United States should have deemed Utah
fit to be organized as a territory, and should yet have considered the
sum of $3,000 a fair compensation to the Indian tribes for its
occupation. Though no territory was of course acquired by the informal
treaty with the Shoshones, Utah was then the abode of more than forty
thousand

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

citizens, and on the highway of travel between the verges of the
continent. Between July 1853 and August 1856 more than $11,000,000 were
expended for the occupation or acquisition of Indian territory. <span
id="fr_709"></span>[76](#fn_709) Of this total less than the
three-hundredth part of one per cent was paid to the Shoshones, and to
the Utahs nothing. For the five years ending the 30th of June, 1855, the
sum paid to the Mormons for losses incurred through Indian depredations,
for the expense of suppressing Indian outbreaks, and of negotiating
treaties, amounting probably to not less than $300,000 was $95,940.65;
and, small as it was, when drafts were presented at the treasury,
excuses were found for not paying them. <span
id="fr_710"></span>[77](#fn_710)

    The occupation of territory under such conditions was of course
resented by the original owners of the soil, and it is no matter for
surprise that the small detachments of United States troops lost more in
number between the years 1853 and 1856 than did the Mormons. <span
id="fr_711"></span>[78](#fn_711) The saints seldom used their rifles

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

except in case of need, and treated their Indian neighbors as human
beings. The emigrants had no such scruples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_634"></span>[440:1](hou20.htm#fr_634) The president desired
no litigation among his people. 'Most of them,' he said, 'have learned
that it is a condescension far beneath them, and that it opens a wide
door, when indulged in, for the admission of every unclean spirit.'
*Hist. B. Young*, 1852, MS., 15.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[440:2](hou20.htm#fr_635) Albert Carrington,
Joseph L. Heywood, William W. Phelps, David Fullmer, John S. Fullruer,
Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, John M. Bernhisel, and
Erastus Snow. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 51.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[440:3](hou20.htm#fr_636) The word 'Deseret' is
taken from the book of Mormon, and means honey-bee. As it is written in
the book of Ether of the people who came over the great water from the
old world to the new: 'And they did also carry with them "deseret,"
which, by interpretation, is a honey-bee.'

<span id="fn_637"></span>[441:4](hou20.htm#fr_637) After the preamble,
in which it is stated that since the treaty with Mexico all civil
organization originating with that republic was abrogated, and that
congress had failed to provide for the civil government of the territory
lying in the great interior basin of Upper California, or any portion of
it, the constitution declares: 'We, the people, grateful to the supreme
being for the blessings hitherto enjoyed, and feeling our dependence on
him for a continuation of those blessings, do ordain and establish a
free and independent government by the name of the State of Deseret,
including all the territory of the United States within the following
boundaries, to wit: commencing at the 33d degree of north latitude,
where it crosses the 108th degree of longitude west of Greenwich; thence
running south and west to the northern boundary of Mexico; thence west
to and down the main channel of the Gila River, on the northern line of
Mexico, and on the northern boundary of Lower California to the Pacific
Ocean; thence along the coast north-westerly to 118° 30' of west
longitude; thence north to where the said line intersects the dividing
ridge of the Sierra Nevada Mountains; thence north along the summit of
the Sierra Nevada Mountains to the dividing range of mountains that
separates the waters flowing into the Columbia River from the waters
running into the great basin; thence easterly along the dividing range
of mountains that separates said waters flowing into the Columbia River
on the north from the waters flowing into the great basin on the south,
to the summit of the Wind River chain of mountains; thence south-east
and south by the dividing range of mountains that separates the waters
flowing into the gulf of Mexico from the waters flowing into the gulf of
California, to the place of beginning, as set forth in a map drawn by
Charles Preuss, and published by order of the senate of the United
States in 1848.' *Id*., 52-4; Hist. B. Young, MS., passim; Burton's City
of the Saints, 350-1; Mackay's The Mormons, 258-9.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[441:5](hou20.htm#fr_638) Annual sessions of
the general assembly were to be held, the first one to convene on the
first Monday in July 1849, and thereafter on the first Monday in
December, unless summoned by the governor of the state during the
interim. Members of the house of representatives were elected
biennially. They must be at least twenty-five years of age, free white
male citizens of the United States, residents of the state for one year
preceding their election, and of the district or county 30 days
preceding. Senators were elected for four years, must be at least 30
years of age, and possess, as to residence and citizenship, the same
qualifications as representatives. The number of senators must not be
less than one third, nor more than one half that of the representatives.
Each house was to choose its own officers, and a majority in each house
was to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Each member
of the assembly must take an oath or affirmation to support the
constitution of the United States and of the state of Deseret, the oath
to be administered by the members to each other. To the governor was
granted the usual power of veto. Utah Early Records, MS., 54-6.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[441:6](hou20.htm#fr_639) The qualifications,
powers, and duties of the governor were similar to those of the
governors of other states.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[442:7](hou20.htm#fr_640) The returns of each
election for executive officials were to be sealed up and transmitted to
the speaker of the house of representatives, who, during the first week
of the session, must open and publish them in the presence of both
houses. They were required to take the same oath or affirmation as did
the members of the assembly. *Id*., 60.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[442:8](hou20.htm#fr_641) The judges were to
hold office for four years, or until their successors were elected.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[442:9](hou20.htm#fr_642) No person in the
service of the U.S. government was to be considered a resident on
account of his being stationed within the territory, unless otherwise
provided by law. Vote was of course by ballot. *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed.
1855), 53.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[442:10](hou20.htm#fr_643) Military districts
were organized, one in each county. At the first there were only
sufficient men in each district for a company or battalion. As the
number increased, a brigade was formed, with a brigadier-general in
command, and afterward a division, in charge of a major-general. Each
district made returns direct to the adjutant-general's office. *Wells’
Narr.*, MS., 10. In May, Charles C. Rich and Daniel H. Wells of the
committee on military affairs reported that they had organized the
legion. Grant was brigadier-general of the first cohort, John S. Fullmer
being colonel of the first regiment, Willard Snow major of the first
battalion, and George D. Grant captain of the first company, first
battalion. The first regiment consisted entirely of cavalry, and the
first company, first battalion—termed life-guards—of selected men, whose
duty it was to protect Salt Lake City and its vicinity from Indian
depredations. Eldredge was in command of the second cohort, with John
Scott as colonel of the first regiment, Andrew Little major of the first
battalion, and Jesse P. Harmon captain of the first company, first
battalion, called the silver grays, and composed of men over 50 years of
age. The second and third companies of this battalion were artillery.
The second company, second battalion, of this regiment was termed the
juvenile rifle company, and consisted of youths under eighteen. *Hist.
B. Young*, MS., 79; <span id="page_443">p. 443</span> *S. L. City
Contributor*, ii. 177. In the *Deseret News* of Oct. 19, 1850, is an
account of a three days' muster of the legion. In *Id*., Sept. 14, 24,
1850, Feb. 22, 1851, July 30, 1853, are copies of general orders issued
to the legion during certain Indian troubles, of which more later. Other
general orders will be found in *Id*., Dec. 8, 1853, Jan. 26, 1854, Oct.
3, 1855, July 11, Sept. 10, 1856, Apr. 1, 15, June 17, 1857. For
additional items concerning the legion, see *Id*., Jan. 25, March 21,
Apr. 4, 1855; *S. F. Herald*, Feb. 22, 1854; *Sen. Doc*., 32d Cong. 2d
Sess., no. 33; *Fisher's Am. Star. Ann*., 1854, 120; *Burton's City of
the Saints*, 408.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[443:11](hou20.htm#fr_644) *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 66; *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS., 5-6; *S. L.
City Contributor*, ii. 177; *Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 19.
At the same election 25 magistrates or bishops of wards were elected.
The number of votes polled was 674. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1849, p. 38.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[444:12](hou20.htm#fr_645) In the preamble we
read: 'Whereas we are so far removed from all civilized society and
organized government, and also by natural barriers of trackless deserts,
everlasting mountains of snow, and savages moro bloody than either, so
that we can never be united with any other portion of the country, in
territorial or state legislature, with advantage to ourselves or
others;…and whereas we have done more by our arms and influence than any
other equal number of citizens to obtain and secure this country to the
government of the United States;…and whereas a large portion of this
territory has recently been ceded to the United States'—then follows the
body of the petition, which was signed by Brigham on the 30th, 2,270
signatures having been appended at that date. *Utah Early Records*, Ms.,
75-7.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[445:13](hou20.htm#fr_646) Then follow two
clauses in the preamble in which are mentioned the natural barriers
between the state of Deseret and other portions of the Union, and the
importance of meeting out the boundaries of states and territories in
such a manner that the heads of departments may be able to communicate
with all parts of the U.S. territory with as little delay as possible.
Next comes a brief homily on the science of government and its
application to the state of Deseret. A copy of the memorial will be
found in *Id*., 87-90.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[445:14](hou20.htm#fr_647) The assembly at S.
L. City resolved that 2,000 copies of the memorial, together with copies
of the constitution, and an abstract of all records, journals, <span
id="page_446">p. 446</span> and other documents pertaining to the
organization of the state, be printed and furnished to members of
congress. *Id*., 90-1.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[447:15](hou20.htm#fr_648) *Cal. Sen. Jour*.
1850, 429-42, 1296; *Frontier Guardian*, May 29, 1850; *Deseret News*,
July 6, 1850; *Utah Early Records*, MS., 94-5; *Hist. B. Young*, MS.,
1850-1.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[447:16](hou20.htm#fr_649) R. L. Campbell,
Oliver G. Workman, and Edgar Blodgett. *Utah Early Records*, MS., 93.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[447:17](hou20.htm#fr_650) Lieut Gunnison and
Capt. Stansbury, who may be considered impartial observers, both state
that this was the case. The former says: 'There was every appearance of
impartiality and strict justice done to all parties.' *The Mormons*, 65.
The latter remarks: 'Justice was equitably administered alike to saint
and gentile.' *Expedition to Valley of G. S. Lake*. 130.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[448:18](hou20.htm#fr_651) Although we read in
*Doctrine and Covenants*, 332, 'We believe that all governments
necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws
of the same.'

<span id="fn_652"></span>[448:19](hou20.htm#fr_652) Gunnison relates an
instance where an emigrant, on his way to California, took in his train,
at her own request, a woman who represented that the person to whom she
was sealed had not visited or provided for her for three years, and that
she wished to join a young man in California to whom she had been
betrothed. When about 100 miles from Salt Lake City he was overtaken by
a party of Mormons and compelled to surrender the woman. *The Mormons*,
72.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[448:20](hou20.htm#fr_653) At the trial of a
man named Egan for killing the seducer of a Mormon <span
id="page_449">p. 449</span> woman, during the husband's absence, the
judge declared: 'The principle, the only one that beats and throbs
through the heart of the entire inhabitants of this territory, is simply
this: The man who seduces his neighbor's wife must die, and her nearest
relative must kill him.' *Id*., 72. See also *Utah Early Records*, MS.,
159-60.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[449:21](hou20.htm#fr_654) *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 117.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[449:22](hou20.htm#fr_655) *Third General
Epistle of the Twelve*, in *Frontier Guardian*, June 12, 1850, where the
two last are spelled Yoab and Tuille. In *Smith's Rise, Progress, and
Travels*, 20, it is stated that Juab county was not organized Until
1852. The same statement is made in *Utah Sketches*, 106. Juab is a Ute
word, signifying flat or level. San Pete, sometimes called Sanpitch, was
the name of an Indian chief. Weber is named after an explorer along the
river of that name. *Richards’ Utah Miscell*., MS., 1.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[450:23](hou20.htm#fr_656) *Utah, Compend.
Laws*, 113-18. For organization of Millard co., see *Utah, Acts Legisl*.
(ed. 1855), 224. It was called after Millard Fillmore; Davis co. after
Capt. Davis of the Morm. battalion; Iron co., of course, from the
deposits of iron ore found thereabout; and Box Elder from the trees on
Box Elder creek. *Richards’ Utah Miscell*., MS., 7.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[450:24](hou20.htm#fr_657) Jedediah M. Grant
was appointed mayor; Nathaniel H. Felt, William Snow, Jesse P. Harmon,
and Nathaniel V. Jones, aldermen; Vincent Shirtleff, Benjamin L. Clapp,
Zera Pulsipher, William G. Perkins, Lewis Robinson, Harrison Burgess,
Jeter Clinton, John L. Dunyon, and Samuel W. Richards, councillors.
*Deseret News*, Jan. 11, 1851. See also *Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*,
77, where the name of Lewis Robinson does not appear in the list of
councillors.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[450:25](hou20.htm#fr_658) *Utah, Acts Legisl*.
(ed. 1855), 64-72; *Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 72-7. In 1860 this
charter was repealed, and a new act of incorporation passed. In 1864 'an
act amending the charter of Great Salt Lake City' passed the legislative
assembly, and was approved by the governor. *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed.
1866), 113-20.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[450:26](hou20.htm#fr_659) *Id*. (ed. 1855),
74-102, 321-57; (ed. 1866), 120-72; *Utah, Comp. Laws*, 770, 823-42;
*Deseret News*, Feb. 19, 1853.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[451:27](hou20.htm#fr_660) *Utah, Acts Legisl*.
(ed. 1855), 63-4, 72-3.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[451:28](hou20.htm#fr_661) On Dec. 31st, Joseph
R. Underwood of Kentucky presented a memorial from William Smith and
Isaac Sheen—the former a brother of the prophet—representing themselves
to be the legitimate presidents of the church of Jesus Christ of
latter-day saints, and from twelve members of that church. It is there
set forth that, prior to the migration from Nauvoo, 1,500 of the Mormons
had taken the following oath: 'You do solemnly swear, in the presence of
almighty God, his holy angels, and these witnesses, that you will avenge
the blood of Joseph Smith upon this nation, and so teach your children;
and that <span id="page_452">p. 452</span> you will from this day
henceforth and forever begin and carry out hostility against this
nation, and keep the same a profound secret now and ever. So help yea
God.' The memorial was referred to the committee on territories. *Cong.
Globe*, 1849-50, xxi. 92. A second memorial from the same parties was
presented to Mr Underwood on March 14, 1850, preferring grievous
complaints against the people of Deseret, and stating that the Mormons
around Council Bluffs controlled the post-office in that district and
obstructed the free circulation of newspapers. It was referred to the
committee on post-offices and post-roads. *Id*., 524.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[452:29](hou20.htm#fr_662) On Jan. 22d. On the
same date a bill introduced by Henry S. Foote of Mississippi to
establish suitable territorial governments for California, Deseret, and
New Mexico, and for other purposes, was referred to the committee on
territories. *Id*., 212-13.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[452:30](hou20.htm#fr_663) *House Jour*., 31st
Cong. 1st Sess., 414.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[452:31](hou20.htm#fr_664) A report of the
debates in the senate and house with regard to the admission of Utah as
a state or territory will be found in *Cong. Globe*, 1849-50, passim. In
*Id*., xxi. 1221, is a copy of a memorial drawn up by James J. Strung,
George J. Adams, and William Marks, and presented to the senate. It sets
forth that ten thousand men, women, and children were illegally expelled
from Missouri, plundered of their effects, exiled from their homes,
driven in destitution, hunger, and want in midwinter to a distant land,
passing much of the way in the midst of foes who not only refused them
shelter and food <span id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> but kept them in
continual danger. 'If you tell us, as some of your predecessors told our
martyred prophets while they were yet alive, that you have no power to
redress our wrongs, then there is presented to the world the melancholy
spectacle of the greatest republic on earth, a christian nation,
acknowledging itself powerless to judge; unable to protect the right; a
nation on whose righteousness half the earth rest the hopes of man,
confessing that there is a power above the law.' The memoralists beg
that congress pass a law granting the saints the right to settle on and
forever occupy the uninhabited lands in the islands of Lake Michigan.
Although there probably were no unoccupied lands in these islands in
1850, the petition was referred to the committee on public lands.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[454:32](hou20.htm#fr_665) Copies of it will be
found in *U. S. Public Laws*, 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 453-8; *U. S.
Charters and Const*., ii. 1236-40; *U. S. Acts and Res*., 31st Cong. 1st
Sess., 53-8; *Utah, Acts Legist*. (ed. 1866), 25-8; (ed. 1855), 111-19;
*Deseret News*, Dec. 30, 1850; *Frontier Guardian*, Oct. 16, 1850.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[454:33](hou20.htm#fr_666) Ten days before, the
governor had formally notified the assembly, in a special message, of
the passing of the organic act. 'Upon the dissolving of this
legislature,' he says, 'permit me to add, the industry and unanimity
which have ever characterized your efforts, and contributed so much to
the pre-eminent success of this government, will, in all future time, be
a source of gratification to all; and whatever may be the career and
destiny of this young but growing republic, we can ever carry with us
the proud satisfaction of having erected, established, and maintained a
peaceful, quiet, yet energetic government, under the benign auspices of
which unparalleled prosperity has showered her blessings upon every
interest.' *Linforth's Route from Liverpool*, 107-8; *Tullidge's Hist.
S. L. City*, 79. On March 28th the legislature, in joint session, passed
resolutions cordially accepting the legislation of congress and
appropriating the union square for the public buildings. *Id*., 80.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[455:34](hou20.htm#fr_667) The first or Parvan
agency included all that lay within the limits of the territory north of
the Parvan Valley and west of the Shoshones. The second, or Uintah
agency, included the Shoshones, Ewintes or Uintahs, Yampas, 'and all
other tribes south within said territory, and east of the eastern rim of
the great basin.' The third or Parowan agency included 'all the country
lying west of the eastern rim of the great basin, and south of the south
line of the Parvan Valley, to the western bounds of the territory.'
*Governor Young's Proclamation*, in *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 1851-2, 160.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[455:35](hou20.htm#fr_668) The first judicial
district included the city and county of G. S. Lake, Tootle county, and
the region east and west to the limits of the territory. Two terms were
to be held each year at S. L. City, commencing on the second Tuesday of
April and October. The second district included Davis and Weber
counties, and the region east, west, and north. Semiannual terms were to
be held at Ogden, commencing on the second Tuesday in May and December.
Utah, San Pete, and Iron counties, with the country east, west, and
south, formed the third district, and sessions were to be held twice a
year at Provo, beginning on the second Tuesday of August and February.
Each term in the several districts was to continue one week, if
necessary, after which the court might adjourn to any other county if
business should require it. *Id*., 160-1.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[456:36](hou20.htm#fr_669) Stenhouse, *Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 275, says that Brigham owed his appointment to the
recommendation of Kane. He took the oath of office Jan. 3, 1851. On the
same day a special session of the county court was held, and a grand
jury impanelled for the first time. The prisoners, who were emigrants en
route for California, were convicted of stealing, and sentenced to hard
labor, but were afterward pardoned by the executive, and sent out of the
country. *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1851, 28.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[456:37](hou20.htm#fr_670) Brandebury was
assigned to the first district, Snow to the second, and Brocchus to the
third. *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 1851-2, 161.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[457:38](hou20.htm#fr_671) *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 134-5; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 276.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[457:39](hou20.htm#fr_672) *Journal of
Discourses*, ii. 186-7. After this occurrence, Brigham frequently warned
the troublesome of the danger they incurred should he but crook his
finger. *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 277.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[458:40](hou20.htm#fr_673) The members of the
council were Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Dan. H. Wells, Jedediah
M. Grant, Ezra T. Benson, and Orson Spencer for Salt Lake co.; John S.
Fullmer for Davis co.; Loren Farr and Chas R. Dana for Weber co.; Alex.
Williams and Aaron Johnson for Utah co.; Isaac Morley for San Pete co.;
and Geo. A. Smith for Iron co. Representatives: Wilford Woodruff, David
Fullmer, Dan. Spencer, Willard Snow, W. W. Phelps, Albert P. Rockwood,
Nathaniel H. Felt, Edwin D. Woolley, Phinehas Richards, Jos. Young,
Henry G. Sherwood, Ben. F. Johnson, and Hosea Stout for Salt Lake co.;
Andrew L. Lamoreaux, John Stoker, and Wm Kay for Davis co.; Jas Brown,
David B. Dille and Jas G. Browning for Weber co.; John Rowberry for
Tooele co.; David Evans, Wm Miller, and Levi W. Hancock for Utah co.;
Chas Shumway for San Pete co.; and Elisha H. Groves for Iron co. *Utah,
Jour. Legisl*., 1851-2, 162. Thus it will be seen there were 13 members
of the council and 25 representatives. In the organic act it was
provided that there should be 26 representatives, the number of members
for either house being based on the census of 1850. George Brimhall, the
remaining member for Iron co., was elected Nov. 15, 1851.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[458:41](hou20.htm#fr_674) This proceeding did
not conflict with the organic act, which provides—section iv.—that the
first election shall be held and the members elected shall <span
id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> meet at such places and on such day as the
governor shall appoint, but that thereafter the time, place, and manner
of conducting elections, and the day for the opening of the regular
sessions, shall be prescribed by law.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[459:42](hou20.htm#fr_675) *Hist. B. Young*,
MS., 1851, p. 99.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[459:43](hou20.htm#fr_676) In a letter to
Willard Richards, president of the council, and W. W. Phelps, speaker of
the representatives, dated Sept. 25, 1851, Harris declares the election
illegal on the grounds—lst. That no census had been taken; 2d. That the
governor's proclamation was faulty in form and substance; 3d. That
'aliens voted indiscriminately with American citizens, and those
recognized as such by the treaty with Mexico;' 4th. That 'aliens acted
as officers at the polls, and were elected to office;' 5th. That
'officers not authorized to be chosen were voted for and elected;' 6th.
That legal and timely notice of the election was not given; 7th. That
the time and place for the first meeting were not duly appointed. *House
Ex. Doc*., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 25, pp. 25-6. Albert Carrington was
chosen clerk of the representatives, and James Cragun sergeant-at-arms;
Howard Coray secretary of the council, and Wm H. Kimball
sergeant-at-arms. *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 1851-2, pp. 5, 46.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[460:44](hou20.htm#fr_677) *Young's Despatch to
Fillmore in House Doc*., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., v. no. 25, pp. 28-32. See
also *Utah Early Records*, MS., 249-51. Stenhouse says that on their
return Harris and his colleagues published an account of the matter,
remarking 'that polygamy monopolized all the women, which made it very
inconvenient for the federal officers to reside there.' This remark
disgusted the authorities, and the officials met with a cool reception
at Washington. *Rocky Mountain Saints*, 277-8. Their official report
will be found in *House Ex. Doc*., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., v. no. 25, pp.
8-22. The principal charge alleged against the Mormons was that a
citizen of Utica, N. Y., named James Munroe, while on his way to S. L.
City, was murdered by one of the Saints, that his remains were brought
into the city and buried without an inquest, and that the murderer was
not arrested. There is no proof of this statement. In the *Utah Early
Records*, MS., 161-3, we have a synopsis of their report, which was
afterward circulated among the people. They alleged that they had been
compelled to withdraw in consequence of the lawless acts and seditious
tendencies of Brigham Young and the majority of the residents, that the
Mormon church overshadowed and controlled the opinions, actions,
property, and lives of its members—disposing of the public lands on its
own terms, coining and issuing money at will, openly sanctioning
polygamy, exacting tithes from members and onerous taxes from
non-members, penetrating and supervising social and business circles,
and requiring implicit obedience to the council of the church as a duty
paramount to all the obligations of morality, society, allegiance, and
law. On the other side, we have in *Id*., 148-158, a copy of the letter
addressed by Brigham to the president. After reviewing his proceedings
and policy since taking the oath of office the governor says: 'Mr Harris
informed me, in a conversation which I had with him, that he had private
instructions designed for no eye but his own, to watch every movement
and not pay out any funds unless the same should be strictly legal,
according to his own judgment.' He states that there are none more
friendly <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> toward the government than
the people of Utah, that they revere the constitution, seek to honor the
laws, and complain only of their non-execution, and the abuse of power
at the hands of those intrusted with them. He states that Brocchus had
never even been in his district, and that, so far as the public
interests were concerned, it would have been quite as well if neither
the judges nor the secretary had troubled themselves to cross the
plains. 'What good and substantial reason can be given that the people
of this territory should be deprived, for probably near a year to come,
of a supreme court, of the official seal of a secretary of state, of the
official publication of the laws, and other matters pertaining to the
office of secretary? Is it true that officers coming here by virtue of
any appointment by the president have private instructions that so far
control their actions as to induce the belief that their main object is
not the strict and legal performance of their respective duties, but
rather to watch for iniquity, to catch at shadows, and make a man "an
offender for a word," to spy out our liberties, and by manifold
misrepresentations seek to prejudice the minds of the people against us?
If such is the case, better, far better, would it be for us to live
under the organization of our provisional government, and entirely
depending upon our own resources, as we have hitherto done, until such
time as we can be admitted as a state.' A copy of the report will be
found in *House Ex. Doc*., 32d Cong. 1st Seas., v. no. 25, pp. 28-32. It
is also mentioned in *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1851, p. 136.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[461:45](hou20.htm#fr_678) *Utah Jour.
Legisl*., 1851-2, p. 53; *Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1851, p. 109.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[461:46](hou20.htm#fr_679) At his home in Bath,
Steuben co., *Waite's The Morm. Prophet*, 25; in his 40th year.
*Richards’ Incidents in Utah Hist*., MS., 5.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[461:47](hou20.htm#fr_680) *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 279. Brigham said of him: 'One of our judges, Judge
Shaver, has been here during the winter, and, as far as he is known, he
is a straightforward, judicious, upright man.' The heads of the church
took great pains to investigate the matter, and came to the conclusion
that 'he had died of some disease of the head.' See *Richards’ Incidents
in Utah Hist*., MS., 78. Beadle, *Life in Utah*, 170, says that the
Mormons believed him to be an opium-eater, and that he died from being
suddenly deprived of that drug.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[462:48](hou20.htm#fr_681) As the 40 days
allowed by the organic act were about to expire, and further time was
required for the completion of the necessary business of the session.
For copy of proclamation, see *Utah, Jour. Legisl*., 1851-2, 166.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[462:49](hou20.htm#fr_682) By joint resolution,
approved Oct. 4, 1851. *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1866), 108.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[462:50](hou20.htm#fr_683) They will be found
in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 120-232. 'It is questionable,' says
Richards in his *Hist. Incidents of Utah*, MS., 8, 'whether any of the
sister territories had a code of laws framed by its own legislature that
would compare favorably with those enacted during this session.'

<span id="fn_684"></span>[462:51](hou20.htm#fr_684) The foundation for a
state-house was laid in S. L. City Sept. 1, 1851. *Utah Early Records*,
MS., 133.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[463:52](hou20.htm#fr_685) A copy of the
memorial will be found in *Tullidge's Life of Young*, 213-14; *Smith's
Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 22. For other memorials passed during the
sessions of 1851-2, see *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed. 1855), 401-5.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[464:53](hou20.htm#fr_686) *Stansbury's Exped.
to Valley of G. S. Lake*, 84-6.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[464:54](hou20.htm#fr_687) *The Mormons or
Latter-day Saints in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake: A History of
their Rise and Progress, Peculiar Doctrines, Present Condition, and
Prospects, Derived from Personal Observation during a Residence among
Them. By Lieut J. W. Gunnison of the Topographical Engineers.
Philadelphia, 1857*. <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> The first six
chapters of this work are mainly devoted to a description of the valley
of G. S. Lake, the civil and theocratic system of the Mormons, and the
tenets of the Mormon church. In chapter vi.-vii., which complete the
first part, we have an interesting description of the social condition
of the settlers, and of the influence of the priesthood. The second part
contains a sketch of the rise and early progress of Mormonism. Unlike
most writers on this topic, Mr Gunnison appears to have given the
subject some thought. 'This treatise on the faith and condition of the
Mormons,' he says, 'results from a careful observation of that strange
and interesting people during more than a year's residence among them in
an official capacity. The writer has undertaken neither the task of
criticism nor controversy. His aim is not "to shoot folly as it flies,"
but to let folly tire on its own pinions, and reason regain its sway
over erratic feeling, when the mists of prejudice on one side and of
fanaticism on the other are dispelled by the light of knowledge. For
those who desire facts in the history of humanity on which to indulge in
reflection, is this offered.' The book is dedicated to Captain
Stansbury.

    *An Expedition to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake of Utah,
including a Description of its Geography, Natural History, and Minerals,
and an Analysis of its Waters; with an Authentic Account of the Mormon
Settlement. Illustrated by numerous beautiful plates from drawings taken
on the spot. Also a Reconnoissance of a New Route through the Rocky
Mountains, and two large and accurate maps of that region. By Howard
Stansbury, Captain Corps Topographical Engineers, U. S. Army.
Philadelphia, 1855*. The first six chapters of this work contain an
account of the captain's journey to the valley of G. S. Lake, and of the
explorations mentioned above. Travelling, as he did, during the early
days of the gold-fever, his narrative is full of interest. Leaving the
valley of Warm Spring Branch near Fort Laramie on July 19, 1849, he
writes: 'We passed to-day the nearly consumed fragments of about a dozen
wagons that had been broken up and burned by their owners; and near them
was piled up in one heap from six to eight hundred weight of bacon,
thrown away for want of means to transport it farther. Boxes, bonnets,
trunks, wagon-wheels, whole wagon-bodies, cooking utensils, and in fact
almost every article of household furniture, were found from place to
place along the prairie, abandoned for the same reason.' Two days later
he found the road strewn with immense quantities of white beans, which
seemed to have been thrown out of the wagons by the sackful, their
owners being tired of carrying them farther, or afraid to eat them from
danger of cholera. Crossing a spur of the Red Buttes on the 27th, he
says: 'To-day we find additional and melancholy evidence of the
difficulties encountered by those who are ahead of us. …Bar iron and
steel, large blacksmith's anvils and bellows, crowbars, drills, augers,
gold-washers, chisels, axes, lead, trunks, spades, ploughs, large
grindstones, baking-ovens, cooking-stoves without number, kegs, barrels,
harness, clothing, bacon, and beans were found along the road in pretty
much the order in which they have been here enumerated.' In the seventh
chapter is a description of the settlements and industrial condition of
the Mormons in the winter of 1849-50, together with some excellent
remarks on the polity of the state of Deseret. In the remainder of the
volume we have an account of various explorations and adventures in the
valley and on the return journey. In the appendices are tables of
distances, papers on zoölogy, botany, geology, and paleontology,
meteorological observations, and chemical analyses of mineral waters.
The work is well written, sketchy and entertaining in style, and
impartial in its comments on the Mormons. A German edition of it on a
smaller scale was published at Stuttgart in 1854, entitled <span
id="page_466">p. 466</span> *Die Mormonen—Ansiedlungen, die
Felsengebirge und der grosse Salzsee, nebst einer Beschreibung der
Auswanderer—Stratze und der interessanter Abenteuer der Auswanderungen
nach jeuen Gegenden Geschildert auf einer Untersuchungs Expedition*.

    Among other works covering about the same period as Lieut Gunnison's
book, may be mentioned the following: *The Mormons, or Latter-day
Saints; with memoirs of the Life and Death of Joseph Smith., the
American Mahomet*. Edited by Charles Mackay. Fourth edition, London,
1856. The first edition of this work was published in 1851. It claims to
have been, as indeed it was, the first work upon the subject which could
justly be entitled a historical statement of the case. It is a work full
of valuable information, much of it of an original character and nowhere
else existing. It is written with marked ability, and in a spirit of
exceeding fairness, though taking decidedly an anti-Mormon view. Yet the
author says: 'It presents the history of Joseph Smith, a great impostor
or a great visionary, perhaps both, but in either case one of the most
remarkable persons who has appeared on the stage of the world in modern
times.' In the fourth edition, 'the whole of the doctrinal chapter,
which formed the conclusion of the work in the previous editions, has
been excluded in the present instance to make room for matter of a more
historical character. Polygamy, which the Mormons attempted to deny, or
explain by the euphemism of the spiritual-wife doctrine, has now been
unblushingly avowed; and this practice, which has become the most
distinctive, as it is the most odious, characteristic of the sect, has
received more notice in this edition than was bestowed upon it in the
original publication.'

    *The Religious, Social, and Political History of the Mormons, or
Latter-day Saints, from their Origin to the Present Time; containing
full statements of their Doctrines, Government, and Condition, and
memoirs of their founder, Joseph Smith; edited with important additions,
by Samuel M. Smucker. New York, 1860*. What it is that Mr Smucker edits,
and to what he makes additions, does not appear, but the student with
this book and that of Mackay's before him soon discovers that the former
is taken almost verbatim from the latter, and without a word of credit.
Smucker evidently worked at so much a day for the publishers, who
desired something by that name to sell. Considering the circumstances,
the work is fairly done; the saints are abused with moderation and
decorum, and the publishers probably made money out of it.

    *Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism. Biography of its Founders
and History of its Church. Personal Remembrances and historical
collections hitherto unwritten. By Pomeroy Tucker. Palmyra, N. Y.,
1867*. This author claims a personal acquaintance with Joseph Smith and
the Smith family since their arrival at Palmyra, the birthplace of the
writer, in 1816. He also knew Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and others
of the first converts. He was editorially connected with the Wayne
Sentinel when the book of Mormon was printed in the office of that
journal. His book is published for the purpose of proving Joseph Smith
an impostor and the book of Mormon a fraud. The author has ability, and
is accustomed to writing; he has done his work well. He employs with no
small skill and success that most powerful of weapons in the hand of a
ready writer—sarcasm. Much space is devoted to sustaining the Spaulding
theory. Historically, the book is of little value after the departure of
the Mormons from the vicinity of the writer's home; but up to that
point, and not forgetting that it is the plea of an advocate rather than
the decision of a judge, it may be called a first-class authority.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[467:55](hou20.htm#fr_688) Stansbury's
field-work is thus summarized: 1. The selection and measurement of a
base-line 6 miles in length; 2. The erection of 24 principal
triangulation stations; 3. The survey of G. S. Lake, the shore-line of
which is stated at 291 miles; 4. The survey of the islands, 96 miles; 5.
The survey of Lake Utah, 76 miles; 6. The survey of the Jordan and some
of its tributaries, 50 miles, making in all 513 miles; 7. The
observations from different triangular stations extending from the
northern extremity of G. S. Lake to the southern boundary of the valley
of Lake Utah. *Exped. to Valley of G. S. Lake*, 216.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[467:56](hou20.htm#fr_689) *Id*., 227, 261-3;
*Gunnison's The Mormons*, 152. There is little difference in the line of
route laid down by either. Stansbury suggests that from Kamas prairie
the road might fork, one branch descending the Wasatch Range by the
Golden Pass, and the other following the Timpanogos Valley.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[469:57](hou20.htm#fr_690) One of the survivors
was thrown from his horse into a bush, where he lay for several hours,
the Indians passing him on every side. *Beckwith*, in *Rept. Explor. and
Surveys*, ii. 74.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[470:58](hou20.htm#fr_691) A full account of
Gnnnison's survey, prepared mainly by himself, and of the massacre will
be found in *Beckwith's Reports*, in *Id*., ii. Lieut Beckwith writes:
'The statement which has from time to time appeared or been copied in
various newspapers of the country, since the occurrence of these sad
events, charging the Mormons or Mormon authorities with instigating the
Indians to, if not actually aiding them in, the murder of Captain
Gunnison and his associates is, I believe, not only entirely false, but
there is no accidental circumstance connected with it affording the
slightest foundation for such a charge.' Captain Morris, in his official
report to the adjutant-general, says nothing about the Mormons being
implicated in the matter. See *House Ex. Doc*., 33d Cong. 1st Sess., no.
18, pp. 5-6. The names of those who were killed, besides Captain
Gunnison, were R. H. Kern, F. Creutzfeldt, William Potter, a Mormon
guide, privates Caulfield, Liptoote, and Mehrteens, mounted riflemen,
and an employé named John Bellows. *House Ex. Doc*., 33d Cong. 1st.
Sess., no. 18, pp. 6. For other accounts and comments on the Gunnison
massacre, see *Möllhausen, Tagelbuch*, 429-30; *Carvalho's Incidents of
Travel*, 196-9; *S. F. Alta*, June 25, 1854, Nov. 11, 1857; *S. F.
Herald*, May 7, 1855.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[470:59](hou20.htm#fr_692) On hearing of the
massacre, Brigham took measures for the recovery of the property and the
disposal of the bodies. Gunnison was somewhat of a favorite among the
Mormons. In the Deseret Nrews of Nov. 12, 1853, where is a copy of
Beckwith's report of the massacre, is the following: 'We feel to
commiserate deeply with the friends of those who have been so suddenly
and unexpectedly cut off, but more especially with the wife and children
of Captain Gunnison, who was endeared to us by a former and fondly
cherished acquaintanceship in 1849-50, while he was engaged with Captain
Howard Stunsbury in the survey of the Great Salt and Utah lakes.' The
following is <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> a sworn statement from
the private journal of Anson Call, a Mormon residing in Fillmore City in
1853, and in 1883 one of the most prominent citizens of East Bountiful,
Davis co.: 'From Fillmore to the site of the Gunnison massacre is about
35 miles. The settlements were in a state of alarm on account of the
"Walker war," and just before the massacre a party of emigrants from
Missouri, on their way to California, came to Fillmore. During their
stay they made many threats concerning the Indians, and declared
repeatedly that they would kill the first one who came into their camp.
I remonstrated with them and cautioned them. After this party had left,
I learned that some Indians around had gone into their camp, and that
they had killed two of them and wounded three others. This so enraged
the Indians that nothing short of blood would appease their wrath. At
this time Capt. Gunnison and his exploring party came along. I told him
what had happened, and spoke of the exasperation of the Indians. He
expressed deep regret, and remarked: "The Indians are sure to take their
revenge."' Then follows an account of the massacre, and of the burial of
the dead. Call states that Captain Gunnison's remains were interred at
Fillmore. At Lieut Beckwith's request he furnished men for an express to
Brigham with news of the massacre. *Utah Co. Sketches*, MS., 163-8.
Call's statement is confirmed by Wells in his *Narr*., MS., 15-19. Wells
states that Capt. Gunnison's brother at first believed the report that
the Mormons were implicated, and met Call by appointment at S. L. City.
The latter produced his diary, from which he read extracts, and after a
full investigation, declared himself satisfied that the Mormons had
nothing to do with the massacre, F. D. Richards says that he and Erastus
Snow rescued four of the survivors near Cedar Springs. *Hist. Incidents
of Utah*, MS., 42-3.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[471:60](hou20.htm#fr_693) Although the Indian
tribes of Utah were at this period very numerous, the word 'Utahs' was
commonly applied to those south of G. S. Lake, and 'Shoshones' or
'Snakes' to those north and west of the lake, especially in the valley
of the Humboldt River. The Snakes and Utahs were both Shoshone tribes.
See my *Native Races*, i. passim.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[471:61](hou20.htm#fr_694) *Richards’ Narr*.,
MS., 47; Wells’ Narr., MS., 23; *Young's Early Experiences*, MS., 5-6.
In the latter MS. it is related that when the pioneers entered the
valley Indians were very numerous, but that the only trouble which
occurred in early times was with a lame and vicious savage whom the
Mormons named 'the old cripple.' One day this man entered Mrs Young's
cabin during her husband's absence, and asked for some biscuits. She
gave him all that she could spare, and when he demanded more replied
that she had none. The Indian then strung his bow and threatened to
shoot her. 'Wait a moment,' said Mrs Young, and I will bring more
biscuits. Stepping into an adjoining shed, she let loose at him a huge
mastiff, which seized him by the leg, causing him to howl with pain. The
savage now gave up his arrows, whereupon his wound was dressed and he
was sent about his business. He was never seen again in that
neighborhood. This incident is also related in *Tullidge's Women of
Morm*., 442.

    Lorenzo Dow Young, brother to Brigham, by whom this MS. was
presented to me, arrived in the valley on the 24th of July, 1847, with
the pioneer <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> band, and encamped near
the present site of Main Street, S. L. City. During my visit to Utah, in
August 1884, he described to me the cabin that he built soon after his
arrival near the spot where the 'Beehive' later stood. Its roof was of
dirt, and its flooring of planks, sawn by his own hands. This was the
first house built in the city, and as it had glass for windows, was long
considered one of the most comfortable. Around this residence locust
trees were planted, but only those were saved which were covered with
buckets. At the time of my visit I found Mr Young living at his country
home, within two or three miles of the capital, in company with the
eldest of his three wives, Harriet Page Wheeler Young, a native of
Hillsborough, N.H., who was baptized into the faith in Feb. 1836, and
was married to Lorenzo at Nauvoo in 1844, a few weeks before the
assassination of Joseph Smith. The house was long and narrow, plainly
built and furnished, indicating no surplus of this world's goods. Mrs
Harriet Young is the heroine of the story related above. In a double
brick house near by lived the other wives of Mr Young. They were honest,
good-natured, credulous people, and were thoroughly contented with their
lot. Their simple needs were all supplied; their barn was filled with
hay, and the yard well stocked with poultry. All the wives addressed
Lorenzo as 'father,' and the entire party seemed to form one patriarchal
family, living quietly, happily, and in accordance with their faith. At
this date Mr Young was 77 years of age; he was a man of medium height,
ruddy, and cheerful of countenance, with kindly blue eyes, thin, white,
curly locks, and except for a slight deafness, showed little trace of
age. He said that on his 75th birthday he counted 122 living
descendants, but had since lost track of the number of his
grandchildren. He expressed a wish that the doctrine of polygamy should
be studied in the light of the old testament, and the facts laid bare by
some honest and impartial inquirer.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[473:62](hou20.htm#fr_695) *Deseret News*,
Sept. 21, 1850; *Smith's Rise, Progress and Travels*, 28. Smith states
that on arriving at the spot, the detachment ascertained the cause of
the outbreak from some friendly Indians, and restored peace by
reimbursing the Shoshones.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[473:63](hou20.htm#fr_696) When near a branch
of the Loupe fork of the Platte, Orson Hyde and his party were robbed by
a band of 300 Pawnees, the plunder amounting to about $1,000. *Frontier
Guardian*, Aug. 22, 1851. In 1852 there was also some trouble in Tooele
co. between the settlers and the Indians, and a company of the legion
was sent there, but the Indians got the best of it, carrying away the
Mormons’ cattle. *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 13.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[473:64](hou20.htm#fr_697) The party with the
mail left S. L. City on Oct. 1st, and reached Goose Creek on the 6th.
Here they encamped and lighted a fire for the first time. In the
morning, when ready to start, 200 or 300 Indians made their appearance,
and pressed so closely on the mail-wagon that the men were forccd to
abandon it and retreat, some on mules and some on foot, keeping up a
fight with the Indians for several miles. At least five of the
assailants were killed. *S. F. Alta*, Nov. 2, 1851. In *Id*., June 2, 5,
1852, are reports of murders committed by Indians.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[474:65](hou20.htm#fr_698) Richards and others
state that even after the gold discovery Walker made raids into
California, and that on one occasion, about the year 1849, the people
turned out en masse to capture him and his band in their lurking place
among the mountains. The chief quietly secured their horses and
trappings at dead of night and returned with them to Utah. *Utah Notes*,
MS., 8. *Wells, Narr*., MS., 17, says that Walker did not inherit the
chieftainship, but obtained it through the success of his raids into
California. When an Indian possessed cattle and horses enough to mount
and feed others, he was at once regarded as a big man among the Utahs,
and thus Walker obtained his prestige. Ora, now dead, was the head chief
of the Ute nation, and Uintah was a great chief among the Utahs.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[474:66](hou20.htm#fr_699) Governor's message,
in *Utah, Jour. Legisl.*, 1853-4, 121-2. On July 17th the Utahs made a
raid on Springville, but, the inhabitants being forewarned, no damage
was done. On the 18th Alexander Keele, who was on sentry near Payson,
was shot dead by Arapeen, Walker's brother. The Indians then moved up
Peteetneet Cañon, firing on the settlers as they passed. On the 19th Col
Conover started from Provo with 150 men to assist the smaller
settlements. On the same day the savages attempted to surprise the
settlement at Pleasant Creek, and stoic horses and cattle at Manti and
Nephi. On the 20th the guard at Nephi was fired upon. On the 24th Clark
Roberts and John Berry were wounded at Pleasant Creek, while on their
way to Provo, in charge of an express. On the 23d Conover sent forth a
scouting party<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> which encountered a band
of 20 or 30 Indians near Pleasant Creek, and killed six of them. On the
night of August 10th a party under Lieut Burns, encamped on Clover
Creek, was attacked, and one of them wounded, several animals being
lost. On the 17th four men, who were hauling lumber near Parley Park,
were fired on and two of them killed. *Deseret News*, July 30, Aug. 25,
1853; *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 56. Sept. 30th, four men on their way to
Manti with ox teams loaded with wheat were killed and mutilated at
Uintah Springs. Oct. 2d, eight Indians were killed and others captured
in a skirmish at Nephi. Oct. 4th, two Mormons named John E. Warner and
William Mills were killed at the grist-mill near Manti. *Id*., Oct. 15,
1853. Oct. 31st, news of the Gunnison massacre was received at Salt Lake
City by letter from Capt. Morris. *Id*., Nov. 12, 1853. For other
accounts of Indian disturbances, see *S. F. Herald*, Sept. 30, Dec. 24,
1853; *S. F. Alta*, Aug. 27, Sept. 30, 1853; *Olshausen's Mormonen*,
186-7.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[475:67](hou20.htm#fr_700) In the *Deseret
News* of Nov. 15, 1851, it is stated that a copy of a license granted to
one Pedro Leon, dated Santa Fé, Aug. 14, 1851, and signed by James S.
Calhoon, superintendent of Indian affairs, was shown to Willard
Richards, who states that on the 3d of that month Leon, with 20
Mexicans, was at Manti, for the purpose of trading horses for Indian
children, and that two other companies were about to follow. Wells,
*Narr*., MS., 23, and Richards, *Hist. Incidents of Utah*, MS., 25-6,
state that the Utahs were in the habit of stealing children from the
Piutes and selling them to Mexican traders. The latter relates that
Arapeen had a stolen child who was taken sick, and as the savage could
not sell it, he took it by the heels, swung it round his head, and
dashed out its brains. The act was witnessed by several Mormons, who
were only prevented from shooting him on the spot through fear of
provoking a general uprising. By virtue of his authority as governor and
superintendent of Indian affairs, Brigham Young forbade all trading of
this nature, and told the Mexicans that their license was not valid.
*Hist. B. Young*, MS., 1851, 115.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[475:68](hou20.htm#fr_701) In the preamble it
is stated that the purchase of Indian women and children by Mexican
traders has been carried on from time immemorial; that it is a common
practice with Indians to gamble away their women and children; that the
captives thus obtained, or obtained by war or theft, were often carried
from place to place, packed on horses or mules, lariated out to subsist
on grass or roots, bound with thongs of rawhide, until their feet and
hands were <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> swollen; and when they fell
sick, were frequently slain by their masters. It was therefore enacted
that whenever any white person within the territory should have in his
possession an Indian prisoner, whether by purchase or otherwise, he
should immediately take his captive before the probate judge or one of
the selectmen, and if in their opinion the applicant was a fit person to
retain and educate him, he was to be bound by indenture for a term not
exceeding 20 years, during which he must be decently clad at the owner's
expense, and attend school for three months in each year. Selectmen were
authorized to obtain such prisoners and have them trained to useful
vocations. A copy of the act will be found in *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed.
1866), 87-8, and *Burton's City of the Saints*, 297-9, note. In a
message to the legislature, dated Jan. 6, 1852, Brigham, reviewing at
length the internal policy of the territory, said that the system of
slavery was obnoxious to humanity, but that the negro should serve the
seed of Abraham, and not be a ruler nor vote for men to rule over him.
'My own feelings are, that no property can or should be recognized as
existing in slaves, either Indian or African.' *Utah, Jour. Legisl*.,
1851-2, pp. 108-10. Nevertheless, a few years later, there were slaves
in Utah. Horace Greeley, during an interview with Brigham, in 1859,
asked him, 'What is the position of your church in regard to slavery?'
'We consider it,' he answered, 'of divine institution.' 'Are any slaves
now held in this territory?' 'There are.' 'Do your territorial laws
uphold slavery?' 'These laws are printed—you can read for yourself. If
slaves are brought here by those who owned them in the states, we do not
favor their escape from the service of those owners.' *Greeley's
Overland Journey*, 211-12. 'The constitution of Deseret is silent upon
this; we mean it should be. The seed of Canaan cannot hold any office,
civil or ecclesiastical. They have not wisdom to act like white men…The
day will come when the seed of Canaan will be redeemed.' *Hist. B.
Young*, MS., 1852, p. 2.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[476:69](hou20.htm#fr_702) A copy of the
proclamation will be found in the *Deseret News* of April 30, 1853.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[476:70](hou20.htm#fr_703) On Jan. 1, 1854, a
wagon-train on its way from S. L. City to California for supplies was
attacked by Indians, and three Mormons were wounded. When the party
arrived at San Bernardino they had only 30 out of nearly 100 head of
stock remaining. *S. F. Alta*, Feb. 22, 1854. In Sept. certain Indians
were arrested for killing two boys, named William and Warren Weeks. On
Sept. 4th Brigham returned from an official visit to the Shoshones. The
Indians declared that they desired peace, and had always done so, except
when maltreated by passing emigrants. *Deseret News*, in *Id*., Oct. 19,
1854. During this trip Brigham met the chief Walker at Chicken Creek,
made a truce with him, and gave him presents. Walker afterward became
very friendly to the Mormons. During the negotiations Walker said,
through an interpreter, that Brigham was a great chief, and that he was
himself as great—holding up both thumbs to indicate that both were
equally great. By the terms of the truce Walker agreed to give up all
the stolen horses, or all that could be found. *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 21.
On the 17th of August, while a train of Mormon emigrants was passing a
Sioux encampment near Fort Laramie, one of their cattle strayed into the
Indian camp and was killed. The Mormons complained to the commandant,
who ordered Lieut J. L. Grattan to <span id="page_477">p. 477</span>
proceed to the camp with two howitzers and 29 men of the sixth infantry,
and arrest the offender, if it could be done without unnecessary risk.
This at the instance of a Sioux chief named The Bear, who stated that
the culprit would doubtless be surrendered. Arriving at the outskirts of
the camp, Grattan sent for The Bear, who said that his people had
determined not to deliver up the accused; whereupon the lieutenant
resolved to enter the camp and arrest him at all hazards. Thus far the
statements of witnesses agree, but from this point there is a conflict
of testimony. It can only be stated with certainty that a fight ensued,
in which the lieutenant and his entire command were killed. The whole
matter wears the appearance of a well-planned attempt on the part of the
Indians to gain possession of Fort Laramie, and of the warehouses of a
trading company near by, where the Sioux were awaiting the arrival of
the Indian agent to distribute their annuity goods. In the latter
attempt they were successful. Various reports of the massacre will be
found in *House Ex. Doc.*, 33d Cong. 2d Sess., viii. no. 63. See also
*Rept of Sec. of Inter.*, in *Id*., i. pt i. 224-5. Toward the end of
the year a party of Crows captured the mail from S. L. City, destroyed
the mail-bags, and secured plunder to the amount of $12,000. *S. F.
Alta*, Jan. 1, 1855. In Sept. three Mormons were murdered near the Elk
Mountains. For particulars, see *Deseret News*, Oct. 10, 17, 1855;
*S. F. Alta*, Nov. 8, 1855; *S. F. Bulletin*, Nov. 9, 1855. In Feb. 1856
there was some trouble with Indians in the Utah and Cedar valleys,
during which a Mormon named George Carson was mortally wounded, and two
herdsmen killed. *Deseret News*, Feb. 27, March 5, 1856. In May of this
year Carlos Murray and his family were massacred in Thousand Spring
Valley. *Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1856, 227-30. It is probable that this
massacre was caused by the misconduct of California-bound emigrants. In
*House Ex. Doc*., 34th Cong. 1st Sess., i. pt i. 519, Garland Hurt, then
Indian agent, in his report to Brigham dated Sept. 30, 1855, says: 'On
our return trip we were exceedingly anxious to meet with some Indians
whom we had reason to believe were haunting the road between the
Humboldt and Bear River. In Thousand Spring Valley we saw but one, and
had to chase him on horseback before we came up with him. I asked him
why he and his people were so wild when I came so far just to see them
and give them presents. He said they were afraid we were Californians
and would kill them.'

<span id="fn_704"></span>[477:71](hou20.htm#fr_704) *Id*., 267. The
treaty was not ratified, and only a copy of it was received at
Washington.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[477:72](hou20.htm#fr_705) At Meadow Creek,
near Fillmore. In a letter to Brigham, dated Fillmore City, Jan. 29th,
David Lewis says that on the previous day he met Walker, who was so
feeble that he had to he supported on his horse. He asked whether
Brigham 'talked good.' Lewis replied that he talked very good, and gave
him a letter and a number of presents from the governor. The chieftain
then went his way, asking Lewis to visit him at Meadow Creek the next
morning. Before daybreak a number of Indians came running into the fort
(at Fillmore) with news of Walker's death. Walker, in his last words,
asked his people not to kill the cattle of the Mormons or steal from
them. *Deseret News*, Feb. 8, 1855. For biography and portrait of
Walker, see *Linforth's Route from Liverpool*, 104-5; for mention of his
death, *Incidents in* <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> *Utah Hist*.,
MS., 63; *MiIlennial Star*, 269-70; *S. F. Alta*, Apr. 6, 1855; *Sac.
Union*, Apr. 9, 1855.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[478:73](hou20.htm#fr_706) Walker had three
brothers, named Arapeen, Sanpitch, and Tabby. Sanpitch succeeded
Arapeen, and Tabby was afterward chief of the Utahs. *Wells’ Narr.*,
MS., 22. In his summary of the Walker war, Richards mentions a brother
named Ammon. *Incidents in Hist. Utah*, MS., 30.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[478:74](hou20.htm#fr_707) In his report to
Brigham Young, in *House Ex. Doc*., i. 34th Cong. 1st Sess., pt i. 518,
Garland Hurt states that while in the Humboldt Valley 400 Indians came
to his camp within three days, and that many had travelled 100 miles
without food. Again, p. 520, he mentions that a party of Utahs were put
to work on a farm at Nephi, but they had nothing to eat, and most of
them were compelled to betake themselves to the mountains and streams,
where there were fish and game.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[478:75](hou20.htm#fr_708) In 1849 John Wilson
was appointed Indian agent at Salt Lake. In *House Ex. Doc*., 17, 31st
Cong. 1st Sess., pp. 182-4, is a copy of his instructions. The total sum
allowed him for presents to Indians, rent, fuel, stationery, forage, the
purchase of two horses, travelling and incidental expenses, was $1,500.
What portion of this amount the Indians were likely to receive in the
way of presents the reader will judge for himself. In *Id*., no. 17, pp.
104-111, is a copy of the agent's report, which contains much that was
already known about the geography of the country, but very little about
the Indian tribes. Wilson states that to gain anything like a personal
knowledge of the actual situation of these tribes would require five
years’ travel. One would think that he might at least have learned
something from the Mormons. In 1851 Jacob H. Holman was appointed Indian
agent, and Henry R. Day and Stephen B. Rose sub-agents *Amer. Almanac*,
1852. Day was removed in 1852. In 1854 Garland Hurt succeeded Holman,
and Edward A. Bedell was also appointed agent. In 1855-6 the agents were
Garland Hurt and G. W. Armstrong, Brigham being still superintendent of
Indian affairs. *Id*., 1854-7. The reports of the various agents and of
the superintendent will be found in *Ind. Aff. Repts*, passim. In his
report to the secretary of the interior, dated Nov. 22, 1856, Geo. W.
Manypenny, commissioner of Indian affairs, says: 'The Indians in the
territory of Utah have, with but few exceptions, continued quiet and
peaceable.' Nevertheless, in Feb. of this year there were a few war
parties in the field. See Brigham Young's proclamation, in *Deseret
News*. Feb. 27, 1856.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[479:76](hou20.htm#fr_709) *Ind. Aff. Repts*,
1856, 264-7.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[479:77](hou20.htm#fr_710) *Linforth's Route
from Liverpool*, 108. Gen. Wells states that the cost of the Walker war,
apart from losses incurred, was $70,000; that this was cut down to
$40,000, after special agents had been sent to investigate, and was not
paid until ten years afterward. *Narr*., MS., 25. On Jan. 5, 1853, the
committee on territories transferred to the committee on military
affairs a memorial of the Utah legislature for an appropriation for the
expense of Indian expeditions. *U. S. House Jour*., 32d Cong. 2d Sess.,
104. On Jan. 29, 1855, the committee on military affairs reported that
it had not sufficient data to advise on refunding to Utah her expenses
in suppressing Indian outbreaks. *U. S. House Com. Repts*, 33d Cong. 2d
Sess., 39. On March 2, 1857, the U.S. senate voted against a motion
authorizing the secretary of war to settle the accounts of Utah
territory for moneys advanced in suppressing Indian hostilities in 1853.
*U.S. Sen. Jour*., 34th Cong. 3d Sess., 298. For copies of memorials, of
which two were forwarded to congress, see *Utah, Acts Legisl*. (ed.
1855), 409-10, 416-17.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[479:78](hou20.htm#fr_711) Garland Hurt, under
date G. S. L. City, May 2, 1855, in *Ind. Aff. Repts*, 1857, 305, says
he has become satisfied that the saints have accidentally or purposely
created a distinction in the minds of the Indian tribes of this
territory between the Mormons and the people of the U.S. that cannot act
otherwise than prejudicially to the latter. He recommends that the 13th
and 14th sections of the 'act to regulate trade and intercourse with the
Indian tribes, and to preserve peace on the frontier,' be rigidly
enforced. It is true tha t the Indians made a distinction between
Mormons and gentiles, for the former fed and clothed them, while the
latter shot them down. Richards, *Narr*., MS., 47, says that when the
saints first arrived in the valley, Brigham assured the Indians that
they would be well treated, and told them that they must not behave
toward his people as they did toward the Americans. In *Indian Aff.*
<span id="page_480">p. 480</span> *Repts*, 1837, 311, the governor
remarks that more liberal appropriations should be made, and that the
troops must be kept away, 'for it is a prevalent fact that wherever
there are the most of these, we may expect to find the greatest amount
of hostile Indians, and the least security to persons and property.'
Most of Brigham's reports bear the impress of common sense, but he had
not in his hands the appropriation of government funds or the
appointment of Indian agents. For further mention of matters relating to
Indian affairs, see *House Ex. Doc*., i. 32d Cong. 2d Sess., pt. i.,
299-300, 487-45; *Id*., i. 33d Cong. 1st Sess., pt i. 441-7; *Utah,
Jour. Legisl*., Joint Sess, 1854-5, pp. 94-7, 102; *Deseret News*, May
1, 1852, Apr. 2, 1853, May 11, June 22, Sept. 7, Oct. 15, 26, Nov. 16,
1854, Oct. 15, 1856; *Front. Guardian*, Oct 3, 1849; *Tullidge's Quart.
Mag*., July 1884, 235-41; *Mackay's The Mormons*, 233, 238-40;
*Olshausen's Gesch. de Morm*., 184-7; *Carvalho's Incidents of Travel*,
188-94; *Ward's Husband in Utah*, 39-60, 64-7; *Marshall's Through
Amer*., 192; *Hunt's Merchants' Mag*., xxx. 639; *Pacific R. R. Rept*,
ii. 26-7; *Sac. Union*, June 16, 1855; *S. F. Bulletin*, Dec. 11, 1855;
*S. F. Alta*, July 4, 1854, Dec, 9, 1856; *San José Times*, Nov. 23,
1879; *S. F. Herald*, June 25, 1854.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Government in Arms. 1853-1857.](hou21)
