[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou28)  [Next](hou30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_691">p. 691</span>

### CHAPTER XXVI. SETTLEMENTS, SOCIETY, AND EDUCATION. 1862-1886.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Population and
Statistics—Salt Lake City—The Temple—The New Tabernacle—The
Museum—Condition of the Inhabitants—Distinctive Features—Salt Lake
County—Davis County—Ogden—Cache County—Rich County—Summit County—Brigham
City—Nephi—Provo—Uintah, Emery, San Juan, Garfield, and Piute
Counties—Sanpete and Sevler Counties—Iron, Kane, and Washington
Counties—Schools—The University of Deseret—The Deseret
Alphabet—Libraries—Journals and Journalism.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">In</span> all the stages of her existence,
Utah has been constantly expanding, her growth, far from depleting her
resources, only adding to her strength. Originally one of the most
barren spots on the face of nature, with nothing to attract even
attention, the land has become as fruitful a field, and her people as
busy a commonwealth, as can be found, with few exceptions, elsewhere on
the Pacific slope. With her unkindly soil, her extremes of temperature,
the thermometer varying between 110° above and 20° below zero, <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[1](#fn_1148) her slight and uncertain rainfall,
without foliage, except such as was found here and there in narrow,
rock-ribbed gorges, with fuel almost inaccessible at points where
habitation was possible, with no nearer sources of general supply than
the small and scattered communities on the Pacific coast, and with all
sources of supply often practically cut off—amid this forbidding and

<span id="page_692">p. 692</span>

inhospitable region, the Mormons built up their settlements, which,
nevertheless, grew with a steady and stalwart growth. As year followed
year, the magic wand of progress touched into life these barren and
sand-girt solitudes, and in their place sprang up a country teeming with
the wealth of gardens and granaries, of mines and mills, of farms and
factories. To show how this has been accomplished, and more especially
to explain the industrial and social condition of the people during the
first years of the present decade, will be my task in the concluding
chapters of this volume.

    At the close of 1883 the population of Utah was estimated at
178,121, of whom 92,081 were males, 86,040 females, 123,506 of native
and 54,615 of foreign birth. <span id="fr_1149"></span>[2](#fn_1149) In
1880 there were 14,550 persons employed in agriculture, 4,149 in trade,
and 10,212 miners, mechanics, and factory operatives; though
notwithstanding the industrial activity of the settlers, the percentage
of bread-winners was smaller than in any state or territory of the union
with the exception of West Virginia, this fact being due mainly to the
large proportion of women and young children. A noteworthy feature in
the community was the small amount of debt, crime, and pauperism, the
entire public debt, city, county, and territorial, being in 1879 only
$116,251, and the number of criminals and paupers being, as elsewhere
noticed, much below the average throughout the United States. <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[3](#fn_1150) The death-rate for a series of years
averaged about sixteen per thousand, though for 1880 it was somewhat
higher on account of the prevalence of diphtheria. <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[4](#fn_1151)

<span id="page_693">p. 693</span>

    Of the progress of settlement up to the close of 1862 mention has
already been made. <span id="fr_1152"></span>[5](#fn_1152) At that date
nearly all the available land in Utah had been taken up, and in 1883
colonies had been pushed forward into adjoining territories, until they
extended from north to south in an unbroken line of about 1,000 miles,
all of them under the religious and political control of the Mormon
priesthood. <span id="fr_1153"></span>[6](#fn_1153)

<span id="page_694">p. 694</span>

    As Paris is said to be France, so it has been said of Salt Lake City
that it is Utah, for there the commerce,

<span id="page_695">p. 695</span>

arts, industries, and interests of the territory are mainly centred. In
1883 the capital contained a fixed population of about 25,000, its
corporate limits including about fifty square miles, <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[7](#fn_1154) divided into five municipal and
twenty-one ecclesiastical wards. The city was well supplied with all
modern comforts and conveniences, including gas and electric
lights, <span id="fr_1155"></span>[8](#fn_1155) street-railroads, <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[9](#fn_1156) hotels, <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[10](#fn_1157) markets, libraries, theatres, <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[11](#fn_1158) clubs, and saloons, where men might
drink, smoke, and discuss politics and religion. Through all the
streets, which were about double the usual width, ran the limpid waters
of City Creek, the Jordan, Red Butte,

<span id="page_696">p. 696</span>

and Emigration cañons, <span id="fr_1159"></span>[12](#fn_1159) cooling
the air, cleansing the thoroughfares, and giving life to verdure. The
adjacent lands were cultivated, and most of the houses were surrounded
with orchards, so that in early summer Zion wore the appearance of Eden
in bloom. The flowers were full of beauty and fragrance, surpassing, if
possible, in this respect, the ancient towns of Mexico, or the modern
capital in the days of Cortés.

    Aside from the temple and the tabernacle, Salt Lake City thus far
had little to boast of in the way of architecture, nor was that little
interesting. The temple, when finished, was to cost several
millions, <span id="fr_1160"></span>[13](#fn_1160) and the walls of gray
granite, more than six feet in thickness, with a length of 200 and a
width of 100 feet, were to reach a height of 100 feet. <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[14](#fn_1161) It was determined that this building
should be of elegant design, magnificent proportions, and unique
pattern, a marvel of beauty, strength, and solidity. <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[15](#fn_1162) As a structure in which a vast
assemblage can see and hear, the new tabernacle, west of the temple,
completed in 1870, is a remarkable edifice. It is elliptical in shape,
with a primitive diameter of 233 feet, a conjugate of 133 feet, and a
height of 70 feet, its huge dome-shaped, or as some term it, dish-cover
roof of heavy, bolted lattice-work resting on sandstone pillars.

<span id="page_697">p. 697</span>

Its seating capacity is about 9,000, <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[16](#fn_1163) and in the building are twenty doors,
some nine feet in width, and all of them opening outward, so that in
case of fire a full congregation can make its exit in three or four
minutes. As was the case in the old tabernacle, <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[17](#fn_1164) the acoustic properties are
remarkably good, and it is said that one standing in the east end of the
gallery and uttering a few words in his lowest tone can be distinctly
heard in the amphitheatre where the church dignitaries are seated, at
the opposite end of the building. <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[18](#fn_1165)

    On the site of the old tabernacle now stands the new assembly
hall, <span id="fr_1166"></span>[19](#fn_1166) which is also the stake
house for the Salt Lake stake of Zion. It is built of rough-hewn
granite, the rock being taken from the same quarry that supplies
material for the temple, and with frescoed ceiling, representing
important events in church history. Though church-like in appearance, it
is considered one of the most sightly structures in the city. <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[20](#fn_1167) Of the endowment house and other
buildings on temple block mention has been made elsewhere.

    On South Temple street is the museum, where are specimens of home
art, in painting and sculpture, also home products and manufactures, as
in cotton, wool, silk, cloth, paper; gold and silver bullion and coins,
with samples of the ores and minerals of Utah;

<span id="page_698">p. 698</span>

petrifactions, fossils, and obsidian; Indian weapons, scalps, ornaments,
pottery, wampum, and the boat in which Kit Carson crossed the waters of
great Salt Lake—the first craft launched by white man into the Dead Sea
of the West. <span id="fr_1168"></span>[21](#fn_1168)

    Other prominent buildings in Salt Lake City, and many points of
interest within easy reach of the capital, as Great Salt Lake, the
mineral springs, Fort Douglas, Parley's park, the Cottonwoods, Ensign
and Twin peaks, Echo cañon, American Fork cañon—the so called Yosemite
of Utah—have been described for the most part in other portions of this
volume, and in many of the countless volumes that have been written
concerning the Mormons.

    In order to see Salt Lake City at its best, one should stroll about
three o'clock in the afternoon through Main and Temple streets, which
are to this city what Market and Kearny streets are to San Francisco. At
that time the spacious sidewalks are crowded with well-dressed women
passing to and fro among the shops, prominent among which stands out the
Zion's coöperative store, or, as it is usually termed, "Zion's Coöp." In
no part of the city, or elsewhere in Utah, are there signs of abject
poverty, and there are few beggars, tramps, or drones, the idle and
dissolute being discountenanced by the community. <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[22](#fn_1169)

<span id="page_699">p. 699</span>

    While not communists, the elements of socialism enter strongly into
all their relations, public and private, social, commercial, and
industrial, as well as religious and political. This tends to render
them exclusive, independent of the gentiles and their government, and
even in some respects antagonistic to them. They have assisted each
other until nine out of ten own their farms, while commerce and
manufacturing are to a large extent coöperative. The rights of property
are respected; but while a Mormon may sell his farm to a gentile, it
would not be deemed good fellowship for him to do so.

 

    Salt Lake county contained, in 1883, nearly one fifth of the
population of Utah, the eastern side of the valley, where the streams of
the Wasatch Mountains are utilized for irrigation, being the principal
farming section; while the western portion, in the neighborhood of the
Oquirrh Range, was but sparsely settled. In this county were found, with
the exception perhaps of coal, nearly all the minerals that contribute
to the wealth of communities. Alta, the mining town of Little
Cottonwood, contained a considerable population until the spring of
1878, when it was almost destroyed by fire. Bingham, about thirty miles
south-west of the capital, was surrounded by productive mines; and
Sandy, where the Bingham cañon and Cottonwood ores were forwarded for
sampling, was a thriving village. <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[23](#fn_1170)

<span id="page_700">p. 700</span>

    Of the establishment and progress of other settlements, up to the
close of 1862, mention has already been made. <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[24](#fn_1171) Davis county, north of Salt Lake, was
settled by quiet pastoral and agricultural communities of the
old-fashioned type. Farmington, Centreville, Kaysville, <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[25](#fn_1172) and the three towns named
Bountiful, <span id="fr_1173"></span>[26](#fn_1173) were, in 1886,
reasonably prosperous, resembling somewhat small English villages,
except for the fact that no ale-houses were to be seen in their midst.

    Ogden, or, as it was sometimes erroneously called, Junction City,
the site of which was purchased, as the reader will remember, in 1848,
for some $2,000 or $3,000, ranked in 1883 next to Salt Lake City in
population. <span id="fr_1174"></span>[27](#fn_1174) In the centre of a
network of railroads and of a prosperous agricultural region, with
excellent

<span id="page_701">p. 701</span>

manufacturing facilities, and with many of the attractions and
conveniences of modern cities, including a theatre <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[28](#fn_1175) and one of the best hotels in the
country, with gentile churches and schools, both protestant and
catholic, the western terminus of the Union Pacific was probably the
most cosmopolitan town in Utah. <span id="fr_1176"></span>[29](#fn_1176)
Among the other settlements of Weber county the most prominent were
North Ogden, <span id="fr_1177"></span>[30](#fn_1177) Harrisville,
Huntsville, <span id="fr_1178"></span>[31](#fn_1178) Lynne, <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[32](#fn_1179) Slaterville, Uintah, Plain City,
Hooperville, and West Weber. <span id="fr_1180"></span>[33](#fn_1180)

<span id="page_702">p. 702</span>

    In Cache county were added to the settlements already mentioned
Richmond, a farming town <span id="fr_1181"></span>[34](#fn_1181) on the
line of the Utah and Northern railroad; Lewiston on the west bank of
Bear River, opposite Richmond; Benson, eight miles south-west of Logan;
and Newton, a thriving village a little to the north-west of the same
town. <span id="fr_1182"></span>[35](#fn_1182) The corner-stones of the
Logan temple were laid in 1877, its site being chosen by Brigham a few
weeks before his death. The structure is of stone, painted and plastered
in variegated tints, and capped with an iron roof. <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[36](#fn_1183)

    Rich, or as it was first termed Richland, county, in the
north-eastern corner of the territory, was organized in 1864, being
carved out of Cache county, <span id="fr_1184"></span>[37](#fn_1184)
Randolph, the county seat, near its centre, and surrounded with
excellent pasture-land, Garden City at its extreme north-west, and
Woodruff <span id="fr_1185"></span>[38](#fn_1185) on Bear River, being
now the principal settlements. The limits of Summit county on the south
were extended in 1872 by an act of the Utah legislature, and in 1886 it
was bounded on the north by Wyoming and Morgan county, and on the south,
east, and west by Uintah, Wasatch, Morgan, and Salt Lake counties. In
1883 Park City, the centre of supply for the Ontario and other mines,
was the most considerable town. <span id="fr_1186"></span>[39](#fn_1186)

    Brigham City, the county seat of Box Elder, west of Cache county,
and on the line of the Utah and

<span id="page_703">p. 703</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Northern railroad,
together with Willard City, seven miles farther to the south, had in
1886 become places of note. The site of the former was remarkably
picturesque. <span id="fr_1187"></span>[40](#fn_1187) Tooele and
Grantsville, in Tooele county, south of Box Elder, had each in 1880 a
population of about 1,200, and Corinne, incorporated in 1870, about
400. <span id="fr_1188"></span>[41](#fn_1188) Nephi, the county seat of
Juab county, <span id="fr_1189"></span>[42](#fn_1189) contained in 1880
a thriving population of about 2,500, most of them farmers, though the
manufacturing interests of this town were not inconsiderable, the Tintic
mines furnishing a market for surplus lumber and produce. <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[43](#fn_1190)

    Utah county, with two lines of railroad, <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[44](#fn_1191) excellent farming-lands <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[45](#fn_1192) and manufacturing facilities, and the
largest fresh-water lake in the territory, <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[46](#fn_1193) ranked second in population to Salt
Lake county, <span id="fr_1194"></span>[47](#fn_1194) and first in its
yield of cereals and fruits. By persistent effort, the

<span id="page_704">p. 704</span>

inhabitants of Provo, the county seat, built up a settlement that ranked
among the leading towns of Utah, with handsome public and private
buildings, a theatre, a large tabernacle, and, as will presently be
mentioned, the largest woollen-mill in the territory. Prominent among
its industries was the drying of fruit, of which several hundred tons
were forwarded yearly to market. <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[48](#fn_1195) In 1883 the other principal towns
were fairly prosperous, several of them, as Payson, <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[49](#fn_1196) Spanish Fork, <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[50](#fn_1197) and Springville, <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[51](#fn_1198) having wealth and population
sufficient to support a number of schools and churches, a theatre, <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[52](#fn_1199) and the inevitable young men's and
young women's mutual improvement associations. <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[53](#fn_1200)

    Uintah county, in the eastern portion of Utah, was organized in
1880, <span id="fr_1201"></span>[54](#fn_1201) with Ashley as the county
seat.

<span id="page_705">p. 705</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the same year
Emery and San Juan counties, and in 1882 Garfield county, were
organized, with Castle Dale, Bluff City, and Panguitch as their several
seats. <span id="fr_1202"></span>[55](#fn_1202) Emery county was noted
as an agricultural and mineral district, full of inherent wealth and
resource. In Garfield county, below the junction of the Green and Grand
rivers, is first encountered the weird scenery of the Colorado. Toward
the south and in San Juan county the traveller, standing on the cliffs
that overhang its banks, after making his way over leagues of sandstone,
where there is no blade of grass or drop of water, sees below him the
stream which Captain Cárdenas discovered in 1540, <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[56](#fn_1203) still gliding peaceably, after a
lapse of more than three centuries, through valleys as yet untrodden by
man. Near the point below which the waters of the Green and Grand are
named the Colorado, ran the eastern boundary line of Piute county,
organized in 1865, <span id="fr_1204"></span>[57](#fn_1204) and of which
Junction was the county seat. <span id="fr_1205"></span>[58](#fn_1205)
Beaver City, in the county of that name west of Piute, had in 1883 a
population of about 2,000, and was one of the principal manufacturing
centres of southern Utah. <span id="fr_1206"></span>[59](#fn_1206)

    In Sanpete county, <span id="fr_1207"></span>[60](#fn_1207) south of
Utah and Uintah counties, Manti was in 1883 the largest and one of the
most prosperous towns. Built on a solid rock near its suburbs, and at an
elevation of several hundred feet, stood the walls of an unfinished
temple, facing toward the west, and destined when finished to be one

<span id="page_706">p. 706</span>

of the finest in existence. <span id="fr_1208"></span>[61](#fn_1208)
Ephraim City, incorporated in 1868, <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[62](#fn_1209) contained in 1883 about 2,500
inhabitants, and rivalled the county seat in aggregate wealth, all its
citizens being men of means, though none very rich. Among other towns
and villages may be mentioned Spring City, nine miles north-east of
Ephraim, incorporated in 1870; Mount Pleasant, second to Manti in
population, incorporated in 1868; and Fairview, in the northern section
of the county, incorporated in 1872, with an area of twenty square
miles. <span id="fr_1210"></span>[63](#fn_1210)

    In 1864 Albert Lewis and ten other citizens from Manti pitched their
tents on a spot later forming a portion of Main street in Richfield,
Sevier county, Lewis soon afterward building a hut of cottonwood logs,
cedar posts, and mud. During this and the following year it is related
that 600 bushels of wheat were harvested from 10 acres of land. In 1865,
the settlement being then reënforced, a canal was made, eleven miles in
length, tapping the waters of the Sevier. In this year, also, Sevier
county was organized. <span id="fr_1211"></span>[64](#fn_1211) After the
cessation of Indian raids in 1865-6, of which mention has already been
made, other portions were occupied, several villages, among them Salina,
Glenwood, Vermilion, and Joseph, being built on the banks of the river.

    Parowan, the seat of Iron county, south of Sevier, had in 1883 a
population of 800, the leading interests being farming and lumbering.
Cedar City had about the same number, <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[65](#fn_1212) and Summit, six miles south-west of
Parowan, and Kanarra, formerly in Washington

<span id="page_707">p. 707</span>

county, were prosperous farming villages. In Kane county, south of Iron,
the first settlement, named Kanab, was established in 1870. <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[66](#fn_1213) St George, the county seat <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[67](#fn_1214) of Washington, and a few miles north
of the Arizona line, was in 1886 one of the principal cities in southern
Utah, and though built on alkaline sands and artificial soil, was one of
the garden spots of the country. In its suburbs was a temple built of
red sandstone, and dedicated in 1875, its baptismal font being presented
by Brigham. <span id="fr_1215"></span>[68](#fn_1215)

 

    In common with all the leading towns of Utah, St George was well
supplied with schools, containing in 1883 no less than five
school-houses, one of which belonged to the presbyterian mission. At
that date there were in the territory 411 district schools, <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[69](#fn_1216) and the total expenditure for school
purposes was in 1879 about $293,500, or some $6 per capita of the school
children, <span id="fr_1217"></span>[70](#fn_1217) the term lasting on
an average little more than four months in the year.

    Upon the establishment of schools belonging to other religious
denominations, or as they were usually termed in Utah, mission schools,
educational results were more satisfactory, and if much was professed,
much was actually taught. The Saint Mark's grammar-school, founded in
1867 in connection with the

<span id="page_708">p. 708</span>

episcopal church, the Salt Lake seminary, established by the methodists
in 1870, and others founded later by various denominations, <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[71](#fn_1218) received so much of patronage that it
became necessary for the Mormons to bestir themselves in the matter, and
there was afterward more efficiency in the school system, private
institutions being also founded by the saints, among them the academy at
Provo, <span id="fr_1219"></span>[72](#fn_1219) and the Brigham Young
college at Logan. <span id="fr_1220"></span>[73](#fn_1220)

    For many years a great advantage to Mormon as against gentile
schools was the fact that they were allowed to use their meeting-houses
for public school purposes. In 1880, when the legislature passed an act
creating school districts, <span id="fr_1221"></span>[74](#fn_1221) and
authorized a tax for the erection and repair of school buildings, these
meeting-houses were constituted legal district schools, though retained
for religious purposes, the gentiles, none of whose children, with rare
exceptions, attended them, being also axed for this purpose. Hence,
legal conflicts arose, the decision of the courts being that Mormon
school trustees could not collect such taxes

<span id="page_709">p. 709</span>

while the buildings stood on record as church property. Many of the ward
meeting-houses, therefore, were transferred to school trustees. <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[75](#fn_1222)

    The University of Deseret, founded, as we have seen, in 1850, and
incorporated the same year, <span id="fr_1223"></span>[76](#fn_1223) the
curriculum of which was to include all living languages and sciences,
had but a nominal existence until 1869. At the former date there were no
efficient private schools in the territory, no public-school law had as
yet been passed by the legislature, and there were few competent
teachers. As the university

<span id="page_710">p. 710</span>

could be of little service without preparatory schools, and the grant of
$5,000 a year had been made from an empty treasury, it was converted
into a parent school, of which mention has before been made, <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[77](#fn_1224) the attendance being invited of all
who wished to qualify themselves as teachers, or for other reasons to
acquire a somewhat liberal education. <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[78](#fn_1225) In 1852 the parent school was closed
for lack of funds, <span id="fr_1226"></span>[79](#fn_1226) and from
that date until fifteen years later nothing further was attempted,
although meanwhile valuable tracts of land had been set apart for the
future state by congress for the establishment of a university. <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[80](#fn_1227) During most of this interval,
however, the board of regents exercised a general supervision over the
schools of the territory. <span id="fr_1228"></span>[81](#fn_1228)

    In the autumn of 1867 an educational institute was established by
the board, and conducted at the council-house, mainly as a commercial
academy, <span id="fr_1229"></span>[82](#fn_1229) until 1869, when
classical, scientific, and normal departments were added, though at this
date it was in fact rather a high-school than a university. <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[83](#fn_1230) Students of

<span id="page_711">p. 711</span>

both sexes were admitted, the total attendance in 1870 being 546, <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[84](#fn_1231) while in 1884 the number was but 298,
the decrease being due to want of sufficient appropriations, suitable
buildings, <span id="fr_1232"></span>[85](#fn_1232) and preparatory
schools. In 1882 the university included an academic, a normal, and a
preparatory department. In the first the courses included elementary
mathematics, a little Greek and Latin, and a smattering of ancient,
mediæval, modern, and natural history, physical science, political
economy, logic, and English literature. On completing any one course,
and keeping only three terms, the student was entitled to a certificate
of graduation. In the normal department the curriculum, apart from the
theory of teaching, was about the same as in the junior classes of a San
Francisco high-school, and in the preparatory department almost
identical with the subjects usually taught in the lower grades of a
grammar-school. <span id="fr_1233"></span>[86](#fn_1233) Although the
standard is somewhat low, it is probable that in the University of
Deseret more has been accomplished, at an average cost for each pupil of
$50 or $60 a year per capita, than in many similar institutions, where
the pretensions were greater and the expense in proportion. <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[87](#fn_1234)

<span id="page_712">p. 712</span>

    At a meeting of the board of regents, held in October 1853, Parley
P. Pratt, Heber C. Kimball, and George D. Watt were appointed a
committee to prepare a small school-book in characters founded on some
new system of orthography, whereby the spelling and pronunciation of the
English language might be made uniform and easily acquired. A further
object was exclusiveness, a separate people wishing to have a separate
language, and perhaps in time an independent literature. After some
previous discussion, it was agreed that each regent should prepare an
alphabet of his own contrivance and present it to the board. Parley
Pratt was in favor of adopting one in which each letter should represent
a single sound, but as some of the letters represent no sound except
when in combination with other letters, and others are of uncertain
sound, depending on such combination, the task would seem a difficult
one. Finally, at a session held in December of this year, characters
were adopted, under the style of the Deseret alphabet, the number of
letters, or rather sounds, being thirty-two, of which the so-called
vocal sounds were eleven, including six long, with short sounds to
correspond, four double and one aspirate, and twenty-one articulate
sounds. Thus the long sound of the letter *e* in meter was represented
by a character resembling the Greek *sigma* reversed, the double sound
of *woo* in wood by one resembling *omega*, the aspirate by *phi*, and
the articulate sound of *f* by *rho*. While these characters are
apparently borrowed from the Greek, this is also the case in the plates

<span id="page_713">p. 713</span>

<span id="img_71300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![CHARACTERS OF THE
DESERET ALPHABET.](tn/71300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/71300.jpg)  
CHARACTERS OF THE DESERET ALPHABET.  
</span>

<span id="page_714">p. 714</span>

from which the book of Mormon is said to have been translated, where the
letters *pi*, *rho*, *tau*, *phi*, *chi*, some of them as in manuscript,
and others as in printed Greek, can be distinctly traced.

    Type was ordered, and with a view to durability, made so as to
contain neither the top nor tail extensions of the letters. At a meeting
of the board of regents, held in March 1854, some of it was presented to
the members; and between that date and 1869 were published in the
Deseret alphabet a primer, the book of Mormon, and the first book of
Nephi. Some attempt was made to introduce into the public schools books
thus printed, but without success. The tailless characters, and the
monotonous evenness of the lines, made the words difficult to
distinguish, and it was found impossible to insure uniform pronunciation
and orthography. Within a few years the alphabet fell into disuse, and
is now remembered only as a curiosity. <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[88](#fn_1235)

    In connection with the university may also be mentioned its library,
containing at the close of 1875 about 10,000 volumes, later reserved for
the use of students, but for many years open to the public. <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[89](#fn_1236) The territorial library, for which,
as we have seen, an appropriation was made by congress in 1850, further
grants being made by the Utah legislature from time to

<span id="page_715">p. 715</span>

time, <span id="fr_1237"></span>[90](#fn_1237) contained in 1883 about
4,500 volumes. At the same date the masonic library, established in
1873, contained nearly 6,000 volumes, the odd-fellows’ about 1,500, and
there were smaller libraries in connection with various literary,
benefit, secret, and mutual improvement societies. <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[91](#fn_1238)

 

    Like citizens of the United States elsewhere, the settlers of Utah
have always been patrons of newspapers—and except that their columns are
cumbered with church matters, interesting only to the saints, their
journals compare very favorably with others published on the Pacific
slope. The news is fairly reliable, but the editorial and other comments
must be taken at the reader's own valuation. In freedom from
journalistic scandal-mongering, they certainly rank among the foremost,
and if sometimes dull, they are never silly or obscene. As a rule, the
Mormon journals are less rabid in politics and religion than the gentile
newspapers. Of several of the former mention has already been made. In
1867 was first published and issued daily the *Deseret Evening News*,
the weekly having been first issued in 1850. *The Daily Telegraph* first
appeared on the 4th of July, 1864, under the parentage of T. B. H.
Stenhouse, <span id="fr_1239"></span>[92](#fn_1239) and in 1869 was
removed to Ogden, where it expired during that year. The *Juvenile
Instructor*, an illustrated Sunday-school periodical published
semi-weekly at Salt Lake City, was established by George Q. Cannon, the
first number appearing January 1, 1866. *The Salt Lake Daily Herald*
came into existence in June 1870,

<span id="page_716">p. 716</span>

Edward L. Sloan being the first editor. The *Woman's Exponent*, a
semi-monthly woman's-rights paper, was first issued June 1, 1872, under
the care of Mrs Louise L. Green Richards, and afterward transferred to
Mrs Emeline B. Wells. The *Salt Lake Daily Times*, a theatrical and
advertising sheet of which John C. Graham was editor and proprietor,
commenced December 24, 1875, and in March 1881 its publication ceased.
The first number of *Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine* appeared in October
1880. This publication is embellished with steel engravings, and has
been favorably received, not only in Utah, but in the eastern states and
in England. Considerable sums have been subscribed for the publication
therein of city and county histories.

    The *Ogden Junction* was first issued as a semiweekly in charge of
F. D. Richards on the 1st of January 1870. Mr Richards associated with
himself C. W. Penrose, to whom he resigned the editorship, subsequent
editors being John Nicholson, Joseph Hall, and Leo Haefli. Soon after
its first appearance the paper became a daily and its name was changed
to the *Ogden Herald*. <span id="fr_1240"></span>[93](#fn_1240) The
*Provo Daily Times*, which started into being August 1, 1873, has had a
varied experience, being successively called the *Provo Tri-Weekly
Times*, the *Utah County Times*, the *Utah County Advertiser*, and the
*Territorial Inquirer*, the last being its present name. <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[94](#fn_1241) The *Beaver Enterprise* was
instituted early in 1874, Joseph Field being editor; the *Southern
Utonian* was also published at Beaver City in March 1881, with F. R.
Clayton as editor, <span id="fr_1242"></span>[95](#fn_1242) and the
*Beaver County Record*, at first a

<span id="page_717">p. 717</span>

weekly and afterward a semi-weekly, in 1883, with F. R. Clayton and R.
Maeser as editors. In addition to the above, and to those already
mentioned, numerous daily, weekly, monthly, semi-weekly, and
semi-monthly publications were issued at the capital and elsewhere in
the territory, some of them having but an ephemeral existence, and some
being in existence to-day. For an account of them, I refer the reader to
the note subjoined, <span id="fr_1243"></span>[96](#fn_1243) where it
will be seen that

<span id="page_718">p. 718</span>

about one hundred newspapers and periodicals have been published since
June 15, 1850, when the first

<span id="page_719">p. 719</span>

number of the Deseret News announced to the saints the death of John C.
Calhoun. <span id="fr_1244"></span>[97](#fn_1244)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[691:1](hou29.htm#fr_1148) On Feb. 5, 1849,
the mercury stood at 33° below zero at S. L. City. The mean temperature
for 19 years was 51° 9´, and the highest 104° in 1871. For
meteorological tables, see *Meteor Reg*., passim; *Surgeon-Gen. Circ*.
8, 1875, pp. 339-40, 345; *Wheeler's Surveys*, ii. 535 et seq.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[692:2](hou29.htm#fr_1149) *Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, p. 300, where the population is given by counties. In the census
report for 1880 the total population is given at 143,963, nearly 20,000
of the foreigners being English, and about 8,000 Scandinavians.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[692:3](hou29.htm#fr_1150) In 1879 there were
33 paupers and 60 criminals. The number of prisoners at the Utah
penitentiary for each year, with various statistics, will be found in
the reports of the warden and directors in *Utah Jour. Legisl*., passim.
In later years we hear little of such outrages as were alleged to have
been committed about the time of the Utah war.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[692:4](hou29.htm#fr_1151) In 1877-8
diphtheria was also common. See *Utah Sketches*, MS., 27. *Description
of Huntstville*, MS., 6. For mortality in S. L. City between 1870 <span
id="page_693">p. 693</span> and 1878, see *Deseret News*, Jan. 8, 1879.
In 1870 there were 281 deaths in S. L. City, in 1878, 497, the latter
being the largest number recorded during the interval. The principal
hospitals at S. L. City were the Deseret, Holy Cross, and St Mark's, the
last two being mainly supported by the contributions of miners, who are
entitled to its benefits. It was not until 1880 that a territorial
insane asylum was established, though one was projected in 1869. See
*Utah Laws*, 1880, 57-65; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1869, 124-5; and for grand
jury report on asylum, which is built on a high bluff of the Wasatch
near Provo, *S. L. C. Tribune*, Nov. 22, 1884.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[693:5](hou29.htm#fr_1152) See caps. xiii. and
xxii., this vol.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[693:6](hou29.htm#fr_1153) In 1880 there were,
according to the census report, 3,205 Mormons in Idaho, 1,338 in
Arizona, 800 in Nevada, 234 in Washington Terr., and 241 in Colorado.
There were also 1,131 in California, 451 in Wyoming, 554 in Montana, 394
in Iowa, 208 in Nebraska, and 260 in New York. These are probably below
the actual figures at that date, and certainly much below the figures
for 1885. The Bannack stake, in the Snake River country, Idaho, alone
contained, for instance, on January 31, 1885, 1,770 souls, being divided
into eight wards—Louisville, Menan, Lyman, Rexburg, Teton, Wilford,
Parker, and Salem. The first Mormon who visited the Snake River country
with a view to settlement was John R. Poole of Ogden, who went there in
Feb. 1879, and on his return reported favorably to Franklin D. Richards.
The first family to settle there was that of Jos. C. Fisher, who in
March 1879 located at Cedar Buttes Island, being joined soon afterward
by Poole and others. *Ricks, Banaack Stake*, MS., passim. For account of
Mormons in Oneida co., see *Silver City Avalanche*, Sept. 17, 1870,
March 27, 1875; in Bear Lake Valley, *Boisé City Statesman*, Oct. 16,
1879; for agitation on the polygamy question in Idaho, *Id*., Sept. 3,
1870, Dec. 6, 19, 1879; *Ogden Freeman*, Feb. 28, 1879. The first
attempt to settle the country bordering on the Little Colorado in
Arizona was made in 1873, but the party returned, discouraged by the
forbidding aspect of the place. Some three years later missionaries were
ordered to make permanent settlements in this region, and at a meeting
held at Salt Lake City in January 1876, companies were organized and
captains appointed for this purpose. The first teams arrived at the
Sunset crossing of the Little Colorado on the 23d of March, and after
the brethren had explored the neighborhood, W. C. Allen and his company
resolved to form a settlement about 20 miles to the south-east of the
crossing, to be named after the captain; Geo. Lake and his band settled
on the opposite side of the river, two miles to the south-west of Allen,
on a spot which they called Obed, near which were springs and
meadow-land; Lot Smith and his company formed a colony three miles
north-east of the crossing, at a place which was called Sunset, and
Jesse O. Ballinger, with his party, settled about four miles north of
the crossing on the west side of the river, the settlement being named
Ballinger. The brethren proceeded to plough, construct dams, and put in
crops, but encountered many difficulties, the river-bottom being
treacherous and full of quicksands. At Obed chills and fever prevailed,
the settlers being forced to abandon the place and join the other
colonies. In November 1877 a number of proselytes arrived from the
southern states in a destitute condition; but <span id="page_694">p.
694</span> though all the camps were scantily supplied, their wants were
at once relieved. During this season sufficient grain had been raised to
last with economy until the following harvest, and meanwhile other
settlements had been started, one 25 miles up the river from Allen, to
which was given the name of Woodruff, and one 50 miles south of
Woodruff, which was called Forest Dale, the name Ballinger being now
changed to Brigham City, and Allen to St Joseph. In this year, also, the
colonies of eastern Arizona were divided into two presidencies, those on
the Little Colorado being west of the dividing line. According to a
stake report, dated Aug. 31, 1878, there were at Sunset 114 souls, at
Brigham City 230, at St Joseph and Woodruff each 67, and including other
small settlements, a total of 587. The harvest of 1878 was severely
damaged by floods, but that of 1879 was a bountiful one. In 1880 the
crops again suffered from excessive rains and freshets. *Settlements on
the Little Colorado*. MS. The St Joseph stake at Pima, Ar., was
organized in Feb. 1883, the place being first settled in 1879 by
families from eastern Arizona. St David was founded in 1878, Philemon C.
Merrill being the first settler; Curtis in 1881 by the Curtis family;
Graham, so named from the peak a few miles to the south, in 1881;
Thatcher, named after Apostle Moses Thatcher, in 1882, by John M. Moody;
Central, in the same year, by Joseph Cluff and others; McDonald, named
in honor of A. F. McDonald, president of the Maricopa stake, by Henry J.
Horne and others; Layton, named after President C. Layton, by John and
Adam Welker, Ben. Peel, and a few others. All these settlements are in
Arizona. The Mesa settlement, belonging to the Maricopa stake, was
founded by companies from Bear Lake co., *Id*., and S. L. co., Utah.
Leaving S. L. City immediately after the death of Brigham Young, they
reached Salt River in Jan. 1878, and soon afterward began the
construction of a canal to the present site of the town. After a year's
labor, only a small stream of water was obtained, barely sufficient for
planting gardens, as the ditch was cut through a very difficult
formation. The settlers persevered, however, their labors diminishing as
their numbers increased, and in 1885 a canal had been built carrying
5,000 inches of water, at a cost of $43,000. Lehi, formerly Jonesville,
also near Salt River, was founded in 1877 by a party of 71 settlers. In
the autumn of this year a few members of the company became dissatisfied
with the location, and set forth for San Pedro River, where they founded
the settlement of St David, so named by Prest A. F. McDonald after David
Patten, whom the Mormons regard as a martyr. *Maricopa Stake*, MS. In
the Gila Valley the settlers bought squatter claims of Mexicans, and in
1885 had constructed over 60 miles of canals from 8 to 16 feet wide,
besides a number of smaller ditches. The soil is a fertile, sandy loam,
producing two crops or more a year, excellent for grapes and fruit, and
of fair quality for all farm products. Sorghum produces three cuttings
from one planting, and lucern is cut five or six times a year. Not more
than five per cent of the land is arable, the remainder being
grazing-land. *Martineau's Settlements in Arizona*, MS. For monogamic
settlements in Montana, see *Galveston News*, Dec. 1, 1884. In the fall
of 1877 Elder John Morgan led a colony of saints from the southern
states to Pueblo, Colorado, where they wintered. In March of the
following year, James G. Stuart, being ordered to visit the colonists,
found them living as best they could, and working at whatever they could
find to do. Mainly through the elder's efforts, two settlements were
founded, to which were afterward given the names of Ephraim and Manassa.
*Stuart's Colonization in Colorado*, MS. In 1884 the Mormons established
a colony at Las Cruces, Sonora, Mex. At the same time their leaders
issued a proclamation stating that no general migration to Mexico was
intended. The Mexican Financier, Jan. 31, 1885. In *La Nueva Era*, Paso
del Norte, Chihuahua, Apr. 8, 1885, p. 2, it is stated that 200 Mormons
had established a colony at Corralitos, Galeana, in that state.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[695:7](hou29.htm#fr_1154) Ten from east to
west, and five from north to south, allowing for two square miles
occupied by the Fort Douglas reservation. By act of Jan. 18, 1867, the
western boundary was removed from the banks of the Jordan to a line
running due north and south about two miles west of the river. By act of
1872 the south line was removed to Tenth South street.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[695:8](hou29.htm#fr_1155) In 1877 George Erb
organized the Rocky Mountain Electric Light Co. at Salt Lake City,
afterward extending his operations to Ogden, Albuquerque, Cheyenne,
Silver City, and Tucson, where, in 1884, all the works were in
successful operation. *Erb's Electric Lights*, MS. Erb, a native of
Penn., enlisted as a volunteer in the union army in 1861, being then 18
years of age. After serving for three years he removed to southern Utah,
and in 1877 to S. L. City. For account of city gas-works, see *Deseret
News*, Aug. 27, 1873. The city was first lighted by gas July 7, 1873.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[695:9](hou29.htm#fr_1156) In 1872 the S. L.
C. Street Railroad Co. was organized. It was in running order in June of
the same year, its length being about seven miles. R. R. Anderson, in
*Utah Jottings*, MS. In 1883 horse-cars ran every half-hour in eight
different directions. *Graham's Utah Direct*., 1883-4, 184.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[695:10](hou29.htm#fr_1157) Among the
principal hotels in S. L. City in 1883 were the Walker House and the
Continental, formerly the Townsend House. The former was built in 1872,
at a cost of $140,000. *Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS. For
description, see *Deseret News*, Sept. 4, 1872; *S. L. C. Tribune*,
Sept. 7, 1872; *Sala's America Revisited*, 290-4; for mention of the
Garde House, sometimes nicknamed the Amelia Palace, see *Dall's First
Holiday*, 101-3; *Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie*, 113.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[695:11](hou29.htm#fr_1158) An account of the
various libraries is given later in this chapter. The theatre at the
corner of First South and First East streets was 175 by 80 ft, with a
stage 62 by 32 ft. It was of rock and adobe, with granite finish, fluted
pillars, and massive cornices, cost $200,000, and had a seating capacity
of at least 1,500. In 1882 the Walker Bros built the opera-house, at a
cost of $136,000, within a few yards of their bank. Its dimensions were
167 by 67 feet, with a height of 60 feet. The interior was tastefully
decorated and upholstered, and the stage well supplied with scenery and
appointments, the drop-scene being remarkably handsome. *Walker's
Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS.; *Graham's Utah Direct*., 1883-4,
193. For further mention of theatres and theatricals, see p. 584-5, this
vol.; *Cooke's Theatr. and Soc. Affairs in Utah*, MS.; *Ward's
Lectures*, 40; *Hubner's Round the World*, 80; *Bowles’ Our New West*,
229-31; *Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi*, 358-9; *Rusling's Across
Amer*., 178-81; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 245-6; *Ludlow's Heart of the
Continent*, 334-7, 365-7; *Rae' s Westward by Rail*, 108-10; *Millennial
Star*, xxix. 70-3; *Deseret News*, March 27, 1867; *Overland Monthly*,
v. 276-9.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[696:12](hou29.htm#fr_1159) By act of Feb. 20,
1880, in *Utah Laws*, 1880, 55-6, amending the city charter, the city
council was authorized to borrow $250,000 for the construction of a
canal, tapping the Jordan at a point 25 miles south of the city, for
irrigation purposes, thus releasing nearer and better sources of supply
for domestic use. It was finished in 1881, at a cost of $200,000. In
1884 there were 13 miles of main pipes, which were tapped at regular
intervals by hydrants, so as to insure a sufficient supply in case of
fire. The city had a very efficient fire department. See *Utah Direct.
and Gaz*., 1874, 177, 1879-80, 56.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[696:13](hou29.htm#fr_1160) In 1886 it had
already cost some $2,500,000.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[696:14](hou29.htm#fr_1161) In 1884 they were
over 60 feet above the ground.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[696:15](hou29.htm#fr_1162) Under President
Taylor's administration more work in the same time was done on the
temple than ever before. *Utah Notes*, MS. For condition of the temple
building in 1860, see p. 582, this vol.; at other dates, *Deseret News*,
Nov. 20, 1867, Aug. 20, 1873, May 27, 1874, Aug. 23, 1876, July 3, Nov.
20, 1878; *Millennial Star*, xxxvi. 273-5; *Harper's Mag*., Aug. 1883.
In quarrying the granite at Little Cottonwood cañon, the workmen
dislodged huge bowlders from the mountain side, and sent them crashing
down to the railroad track, a descent of 700 feet. One of these bowlders
weighed 21,000 tons.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[697:16](hou29.htm#fr_1163) *Richards’ Utah
Miscell., MS. In Utah Notes*, MS., 2, it is given as low as 7,000. Other
authorities say 12,000 to 13,000, but recent estimates show this to be
an exaggeration, though including standing-room, the former figure is
about correct.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[697:17](hou29.htm#fr_1164) For mention of the
old tabernacle and its organ, see [p. 292](hou15.htm#page_292), this
vol.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[697:18](hou29.htm#fr_1165) For further
descriptions of this tabernacle, see, among others, *Sala's Amer.
Revisited*, 296-8; *Bonwick's Mormons and Silver Mines*, 10-17;
*Marshall's Through Amer*., 1658; *Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities and
Prairie*, 113-15; *De Rupert's Cal. and Morm*., 138-46; *Deseret News*,
May 4, 1870, on which date were delivered the inaugural addresses.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[697:19](hou29.htm#fr_1166) The corner-stones
were laid Sept. 28, 1877, and it was dedicated Jan. 9, 1882, though
public meetings were held in it as early as Apr. 4, 1880. Until Apr.
1879 it was called the new or little tabernacle, its name being changed
at that date to the Salt Lake Assembly Hall. It is 120 by 68 feet, and
can seat 3,033 people. *Richards’ Utah Miscell*., MS.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[697:20](hou29.htm#fr_1167) *Utah Notes*, MS.,
2; *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 204. The building is 120 by 68 ft,
the height of the tower which rises from the centre being 130 ft. It has
excellent acoustic properties, contains a large organ, rich and sweet in
tone, and was dedicated in the spring of 1880.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[698:21](hou29.htm#fr_1168) *Sala's America
Revisited*, ii. 295; *Bonwick's Mormons and Silver Mines*, 18-21; *Gaz.
of Utah*, 1874, 178; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Jan. 1, 5, 1878; *S. L. C.
Herald*, Sept. 13, 1878. In 1882 occurred the death of Joseph L.
Barfoot, for several years curator of the museum. Born at Warwick
Castle, England, and, as he claimed before his decease, legitimate heir
to one of the greatest earldoms in the realm, his ancestry being traced
back on the father's side to Robert Bruce of Scotland, and on the
mother's to Bishop Ridley, he enlisted in the marines, probably on
account of some family quarrel. His discharge being procured, he joined
his father, who was superintendent of the Mormon Mission in London, and
in 1856 Joseph joined the Mormon church. *S. L. City Contributor*, iii.
250-2; *Campbell, Circular Notes*, i. 62, states that his father was
merely tutor at Warwick Castle.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[698:22](hou29.htm#fr_1169) For descriptions
of S. L. City in 1883-4, see *The Mormon Metropolis*; in 1881, *Sala's
Amer. Revisited*, 290-317 (with cut); *Hollister's Res. and Attract. of
Utah*, 73-6; in 1879, *N. Y. Observer*, in *Portland Wkly Christ.
Advoc*., Feb. 6, 1879; in 1878, *Marshall's Through Amer*., 163-82; in
1877, *Boyer's from Orient to Occident*, 61-3; *Musser's Fruits of
Mormonism*, 3, 11; *Leslie's Cal*., 74-5, 91-5, 103; *Taylor's Summer
Savory*, 20-1; in 1876, *Jackson's Bits of Travel at Home*, 19-22; in
1875, *Williams’ Pac. Tourist*, 132-40, 150-2; <span id="page_699">p.
699</span> *Curtis' Dottings*, 18-28; in 1872, *Bonwick's Mormons and
Silver Mines*, 8-10; *Washington Star*, in *Deseret News*, July 10,
1872; *Oakland Monthly Rev*., i. no. l, 18-19; in 1871, *Hubner's Round
the World*, 76-80; *Greenwood's New Life*, 137-8, 142-4; in 1870,
*Nordhoff"s Cal*., 40-2; *Nelson's Pict. Guide-Book*, 10-25; *Kneeland's
Wonders of Yosemite*, 19-21; *Overland Monthly*, v. 270-3, 275; in 1869,
*Rae's Westward by Rail*, 104-12; in 1868, *Goddard's Where to
Emigrate*, 152-3; *Bowles’ Pac. Railroad*, 40-51; *Ludlow's Heart of the
Continent*, 315-28; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 240-7; in 1867, *Hepworth
Dixon's New Amer*., 133-41; *McClure's 3,000 Miles Through the Rocky
Mts*, 165-6 (with cut); in 1866, *Rusling's Across Amer*., 163-6; *Life
among the Mormons*, 88-97; in 1865, *Bowles’ Our New West*, 202-3, 206,
219-22 (with cut); *Barnes' From Atlantic to Pacific*, 54-5;
*Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi*, 347 (with cut); in 1860-2, pp.
[577](hou24.htm#page_577)-90, this vol. (with plan).

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[699:23](hou29.htm#fr_1170) Among other
growing settlements in Salt Lake co. at this time were <span
id="page_700">p. 700</span> Mill Creek, East Mill Creek, Big Cottonwood,
South Cottonwood, Union, North Jordan, South Jordan, West Jordan,
Brighton, Butlerville, Granite, Draper, Herriman, Mountain Dell, and
Pleasant Green.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[700:24](hou29.htm#fr_1171) See caps xiii.,
xxi., this vol.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[700:25](hou29.htm#fr_1172) So called after a
bishop and early settler named William Kay, who owned a large portion of
its site. About the year 1857 the bishop's interest was purchased by
John S. Smith, an Englishman by birth, who, landing in Canada in 1841,
afterward proceeded to Nauvoo, and was one of those who took part in the
exodus. Mr Smith is now one of the principal farmers in Davis co. Among
other prominent men in that county may be mentioned the following:
Joseph Barton, a native of St Helens, Lancashire, England, settled at
Kaysville, his present home, in 1862, being then only 14 years of age.
In 1869 he was elected county surveyor, and since that date has held the
appointments of city recorder of Kaysville, county clerk, and
prosecuting attorney, the last two of which offices he filled in 1885.
In 1884 he was a member of the territorial legislature, and almost
throughout his career in Utah has occupied positions of trust, though
they have come to him unsought, and somewhat against his will. N.T.
Porter, a native of Vermont, was one of the first settlers in
Centreville, where he took up his abode in 1849, after suffering all the
hardships of the expulsion, and of a long residence at Winter Quarters.
Jos. Egbert, a native of Salina co., Ind., was a pioneer, sharing the
blanket of Orson Pratt during the jonrney, and driving the first team
that entered the valley. John R. Baines of Kaysville, a native of
Bedfordshire, England, arrived in Utah with a capital of l0 cents, and
afterward accumulated a fortune of $100,000 by farming and traffic. The
president of the Davis stake was W. R. Smith, who was for several years
a member of the legislature, and for nine years probate judge. He was
born in Ontario, Canada.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[700:26](hou29.htm#fr_1173) South, East, and
West Bountiful. The last was sometimes called Wood's Cross. Bountiful
was a city in the book of Mormon. *Richards’ Utah Misc*., MS., 4-5.
Prominent among the citizens of West Bountiful was W. S. Muir, a
Scotchman by birth, who, accepting the Mormon faith, set forth for
Nauvoo, and in 1847 was a corporal in the Mormon battalion. In the
following year he started, in connection with Sam. Brannan, the first
store ever opened at the mines of California.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[700:27](hou29.htm#fr_1174) In 1883 it
contained about 8,000 inhabitants.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[701:28](hou29.htm#fr_1175) Opened Jan. 4,
1870. *Stanford's Ogden*, MS., 10.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[701:29](hou29.htm#fr_1176) For act to
incorporate Ogden, see *Utah Compiled Laws*, 746-54; *Deseret News*,
Jan. 30, 1861. For act amending charter of incorporation, see *Utah
Laws*, 1880, 4-5. In 1885 the mayor of Ogden was David H. Peery, a
Virginian, who during the civil war served as assistant commissary under
General Marshall. In 1864, after being honorably discharged from the
confederate army, he arrived in Utah with the sum of $1,400, saved from
the wreck of his property. In 1885 he was the owner of several blocks of
business buildings, and was worth about $150,000, being at that date a
member of the territorial legislature. In 1880 the city and county built
a bridge over the Weber, at a cost of $16,000, and in the same year the
city constructed a reservoir on Court-house hill to collect the waters
of several small springs which were conveyed in pipes to Main street.
*Stanford's Ogden*, MS., 15-16. For sketch of the business growth of
Ogden, see *Tullidge's Mag*., i 478-84. For description of town at
various dates, see *Bonwick's Silver Mines*, 22-3; *Millennial Star*,
xxxi. 518; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Jan. 1, 1878, July 6, 1879, Jan. 1, 1881;
*Telegraph*, May 18, July 8, Dec. 19, 1869; *Herald*, Dec. 12, 1877.
Topographical plan, in *Wheeler's Surveys*, ii. 471.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[701:30](hou29.htm#fr_1177) With a population
in 1880 of 956. *Stanford's Ogden*, MS., 8; about 900. Amos Maycock, in
*Utah Sketches*, MS., 115. In 1883 it was about 1,200, and in 1886 some
1,500.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[701:31](hou29.htm#fr_1178) Harrisville was an
agricultural Settlement containing in 1880 about 60 families, most of
them Scandinavians. Though subject to early frosts, cereals were raised,
with the exception of wheat, and in the neighborhood was good pasture. A
considerable income was also derived from the sale of shingles and
railroad ties. *Stanford's Weber Co*., MS., 5, 11-12. In the
*Description of Huntsville*, MS., 1-6, and *Utah Sketches*, MS., are
particulars as to the resources and growth of Huntsville from 1860, when
it was founded, until 1880.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[701:32](hou29.htm#fr_1179) An agricultural
settlement two miles north of Ogden, containing in 1880 about 500
inhabitants. *Stanford's Weber Co*., MS., 1.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[701:33](hou29.htm#fr_1180) Slaterville was
organized as a county precinct in 1864. Population in 1880 about 400.
Uintah, at the western entrance of Weber cañon, was first known as East
Weber, the name being changed to Easton early in 1867, and in the same
year to Uintah. At Plain City the raising of fruit and vegetables,
especially strawberries, was the principal industry. Hooperville,
settled in 1869, had in 1880 about 100 families. West Weber, organized
as a ward in 1877, mustered at the same date nearly 700 inhabitants.
There were also small settlements at Mound Fort, a mile north of the
Weber; Eden, near Huntsville; Marriotsville, three miles north-west of
Ogden; Riverdale, two miles south of Ogden; and several others. *Id*.,
passim.

    In the *Brief Historical Sketch of the Settlements in Weber County,
by Joseph Stanford*, MS., are given in minute detail the leading
incidents in the history of all the principal settlements of Weber co.
from their foundation until the year 1880. *The Historical Sketch of
Ogden City*, MS., by this author, covers <span id="page_702">p.
702</span> the same period, commencing with the time when its site was
purchased by Captain Brown from Miles Goodyear.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[702:34](hou29.htm#fr_1181) Incorporated Feb.
6, 1868.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[702:35](hou29.htm#fr_1182) At the southern
end of Cache Valley is the town of Paradise, and scattered throughout
the valley are several small settlements. For descriptive sketch of
Cache co. settlements, see *S. L. C. Herald*, Nov. 3, 10, 1877. In 1880
Paradise had 490 inhabitants. Orson Smith, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 1-2.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[702:36](hou29.htm#fr_1183) See, for ceremony
of laying the corner-stones, *Deseret News*, Sept. 26, 1877; for
dedication, *Biog. Lorenzo Snow*, 452-3; for act incorporating Logan
City, *Utah Compiled Laws*, 711-18; for description of the city,
*Deseret News*, Oct. 15, 1873, July 23, 1879; *S. L. Weekly Herald*,
March 31, 1881.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[702:37](hou29.htm#fr_1184) For organic act,
see *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1863-4, 18-19. The county was named after
Apostle Chas C. Rich.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[702:38](hou29.htm#fr_1185) Named after
Apostle Wilford Woodruff. *Richards’ Utah Miscell*., MS., 4.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[702:39](hou29.htm#fr_1186) The other
principal settlements besides those mentioned elsewhere were Echo and
Wanship, both on the line of the Utah Eastern railroad. Wanship was
named after an Indian who was much respected. *Richards’ Utah Miscell*.,
MS., 3.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[703:40](hou29.htm#fr_1187) Willard City is
named after Willard Richards. *Richards’ Utah Miscell*. MS., 7; Brigham,
of course, after President Young. Both were incorporated in 1867. See
*Utah Compiled Laws*, 737-9, 743-5. At Brigham City choice fruit was
raised in abundance. In 1880 there was a large tannery and a woollen
factory in operation. Near Willard City grain, fruit, and vegetables
were raised, but the facilities for manufacture were meagre. A.
Christensen and G. W. Ward, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 45-104. For
descriptions of Brigham City at various dates, see *McClure's 3,000
Miles beyond the Rocky Mountains*; *Deseret News*, July 24, 1862, Jan.
16, 1878. In 1883 Call's Fort, already mentioned, had only 35 families.
Among other settlements were Honeyville on the line of the Utah and
Northern railway, organized as a ward in 1877, and Snowville, a
stock-raising centre, fifty miles north-west of Corinne, settled by A.
Goodliffe and others in 1876.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[703:41](hou29.htm#fr_1188) For acts
incorporating these towns, see *Utah Compiled Laws*, 740, 843-52.
Grantsville was named after Col. Geo. D. Grant. *Richards’ Utah
Miscel*., MS., 6. In the neighborhood of Tooele many kinds of farm and
orchard products were raised. At Grantsville, also a farming settlement,
there were 25 artesian wells. F. M. Lyman, John Rowberry, and Harrison
Severe, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 29, 151. For historical sketch of
Corinne, see *Tullidge's Mag*., ii. 243-6.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[703:42](hou29.htm#fr_1189) Juab is Indian or
Spanish-Indian for flat. For acts defining and extending the limits of
the county, see *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1868, pp. 41-2; 1870, 127.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[703:43](hou29.htm#fr_1190) Mona, eight miles
north of Nephi, Juab, on the Utah Central, and Levan, seven miles east
of Juab, were also promising settlements. At Nephi there were in 1880
two hotels, a furniture factory, and a large coöperative store. Geo.
Teasdale, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 112.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[703:44](hou29.htm#fr_1191) The Utah Central
and Denver and Rio Grande.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[703:45](hou29.htm#fr_1192) In 1880 there were
over 40,000 acres in tilth.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[703:46](hou29.htm#fr_1193) Utah Lake is 40
miles in length, with an average width of 10 miles.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[703:47](hou29.htm#fr_1194) In 1883 Salt Lake
co. had 41,890 and Utah co. 23,472 inhabitants. *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884,
300.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[704:48](hou29.htm#fr_1195) See, for act
incorporating Provo, *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1866, 120-5; for names of
municipal officers between 1861 and 1877, see *Provo City Revised
Ordinances*, iv.-v.; in 1880, *Utah Sketches*, MS., where is a brief
historical sketch of the town. Among the most prominent men in Provo may
be mentioned Abraham O. Smoot, a native of Owen co., Ky, who joined the
church in 1835, being then in his 21st year, and a few months later was
ordained an elder. Of his missionary labors, and the part that he played
during the exodus and the Utah war, mention has already been made.
Chosen mayor of Salt Lake City in 1857, he was reappointed to that
office at each election until 1866, when, declining the mayoralty, he
served for twelve years in the legislature. In 1868 he removed to Provo,
where he was also elected mayor, holding that office for twelve years,
and receiving no pay for his services in that capacity in either city.
In 1884 he was president of the Provo Manufacturing Company, the Provo
Bank, the Provo branch of Zion's Coöporative Mercantile Institute, and
the Utah county stake. *Utah Early Scenes in Church Hist*., 17-31;
*Tullidge's Mag*., iii. 297-9.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[704:49](hou29.htm#fr_1196) At Payson there
was a coöperative store established, mainly by the efforts of Wm
Douglas, who arrived in Utah in 1848. See for act incorporating Payson,
*Utah Acts Legisl*., 1865, 42; for act extending limits, *Utah Laws*,
1882, pp. 18-19.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[704:50](hou29.htm#fr_1197) Among the
prominent citizens of Spanish Fork may be mentioned the bishop of ward,
Geo. D. Snell, a descendant of one of the pilgrim fathers and a native
of New Brunswick, whence he removed to Utah in 1854. In 1878 he was
elected a member of the legislature. Wm Creer of the same city, and an
Englishman by birth, was also a member of the legislature in 1883, and
served on some of the most important committees. In 1882 the limits of
Spanish Fork City were altered. *Utah Laws*, 1882, 8.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[704:51](hou29.htm#fr_1198) The first mayor of
Springville was G. D. Wood, who came to Utah in 1848, and in 1884 was
still mayor, though 76 years of age. His son, L. S. Wood, was also one
of the prominent men of Springville.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[704:52](hou29.htm#fr_1199) The Payson theatre
was the second largest in Utah, and had a seating capacity of 800.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[704:53](hou29.htm#fr_1200) Midway between
Payson and Utah Lake, on the line of the Utah Central, the settlement of
Benjamin was founded in 1870. *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 156.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[704:54](hou29.htm#fr_1201) For organic act,
see *Utah Laws*, 1880, 11-12.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[705:55](hou29.htm#fr_1202) For organic acts,
see *Utah Laws*, 1880, 4-5, 10-11, 1882, 98-101. Emery co. was named
after Gov. Emery, and Garfield after President Garfield. Emery and San
Juan were both bounded on the east by Colorado.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[705:56](hou29.htm#fr_1203) See p.
[1](hou04.htm#page_1)-5, this vol.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[705:57](hou29.htm#fr_1204) *Utah Acts
Legisl*., 1865, 16.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[705:58](hou29.htm#fr_1205) *Utah Laws*, 1878,
48. Circleville, settled in 1860, was the county seat until 1868, when
it was removed to Bullion. *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1874, 6; thence to
Marysville, and again to Junction.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[705:59](hou29.htm#fr_1206) Beaver was
incorporated in 1867. *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1867, 4-5. For plan, see
*Wheeler's Geog. Surveys*, ii. 491.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[705:60](hou29.htm#fr_1207) For act changing
the limits of Sanpete, Utah, and Wasatch counties, see *Utah Laws*,
1880, 18-19. By act of 1864 the county seat of Sanpete co. was removed
from Manti to Moroni, and by act of 1865 again fixed at Manti. *Utah
Acts Legisl*., 1863-4, 21; 1865, 16.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[706:61](hou29.htm#fr_1208) The site of Manti
temple was chosen by Brigham, and ground was broken Apr. 30, 1877. The
corner-stones were laid Apr. 14, 1879. *Deseret News*, May 7, 1879. For
condition in 1882, see *Robinson's Sinners and Saints*, 163-5.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[706:62](hou29.htm#fr_1209) *Utah Compiled
Laws*, 828.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[706:63](hou29.htm#fr_1210) Chester, about
four miles west of Spring City, was settled in 1882 by R. N. Allred and
others; Mayfield, ten miles south of Manti, by families from Ephraim and
Fort Gunnison in 1873-5. In 1880 there were 16 considerable towns and
villages in Sanpete co. J.B. Maiben, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 173.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[706:64](hou29.htm#fr_1211) Wm Morrison, Paul
Poulson, and James M. Peterson, in *Utah Sketches*, MS., 134-6; *Utah
Acts Legisl*., 1865, 16.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[706:65](hou29.htm#fr_1212) For acts
incorporating Parowan and Cedar, Bee *Utah Compiled Laws*, 1868, 808-11.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[707:66](hou29.htm#fr_1213) *Utah Sketches*,
MS., 100. Among other settlements were Johnson, some ten miles east of
Kanab, Pahreah, near the junction of Pahreah River and Cottonwood Creek,
settled in 1872, and Orderville, on the west bank of the Virgen, in
1875. In 1869 the seat of Kane co. was removed from Rockville to
Toquerville. *Utah Acts*, 1869, 17.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[707:67](hou29.htm#fr_1214) For act to
incorporate St George, see *Utah Compiled Laws*, 814-20. It was made the
county seat in 1863. *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1862-3, 5-6.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[707:68](hou29.htm#fr_1215) For dedication and
description, see Millennial Star, xxxvi. 252-5; *Deserst News*, Apr. 8,
1874, Jan. 17, Apr. 26, Sept. 13, 1876. For plan of St George, see
*Wheeler's Geog. Surveys*, it. 491. Six miles from St George was the
village of Washington. and three miles north of Harrisburg the town of
Leeds, first settled in 1868-9 by R. H. Ashley and others. Pinto, in the
northern part of the county, was settled by Jacob Hamblin and others in
1856. The mining camp of Silver Reef was about one mile from Leeds.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[707:69](hou29.htm#fr_1216) Of these 111 were
primary, 60 intermediate, and 240 mixed. *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 293.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[707:70](hou29.htm#fr_1217) *Rept Dist
Schools*, 1880, p. 11. The value of district school property was in 1879
$393,984.57, of private school property $175,000.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[708:71](hou29.htm#fr_1218) Presbyterians,
congregationalists, and catholics. *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*,
MS., 63. Among them was the Salt Lake Collegiate Institute founded by
the presbyterians, the Salt Lake Academy by the congregationalists, and
St Mary's Academy by the catholics. The presbyterians a one had in 1883
33 schools and 2,200 pupils. *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 280.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[708:72](hou29.htm#fr_1219) Opened Jan. 1876,
burned Jan. 1884, and rebuilt the same year. *Id*., 278-9, Albert Jones,
in *Utah Co. Sketches*, MS., 59-60, 64, states that it was founded for
the children of members of the church in good standing, though others
are admitted, and that in 1880 it had 431 pupils. See also, for faculty,
course of instruction, etc., *Contributor*, ii. 179-80, 241-2, 272-3;
*Deseret News*, April 17, 1878, Feb. 5, 1879; *Utah Jour. Legisl*.,
1880, 461-5, 489-93. among the professors in 1883 was Elder Karl G.
Mæser, formerly of the Budig institute, Dresden. While presiding over
the European mission in 1855, F. D. Richards heard that he was desirous
of being informed as to the fath and doctrine of the saints, and a few
months later visited that city by invitation in company with elders Win
H. Kimball and Wm Budge, baptizing eight persons and organizing the
first branch of the church in Saxony. Mæser was left in charge, and when
the government banished the saints from fatherland, as we have seen, he
and most of the other converts gathered to Utah. *Richards’ Miscell*.,
MS. Mr Richards states that the B. Y. academy is one of the best and
most popular educational institutes in the territory.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[708:73](hou29.htm#fr_1220) Opened in Sept.
1878, the number of pupils in 1880-1 being 160. In 1877 a tract of
nearly 10,000 acres south of Logan City was deeded for this purpose to a
board of trustees by Brigham. *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 283-4. In 1883
Mariner W. Merrill presided over the educational affairs of Logan
temple.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[708:74](hou29.htm#fr_1221) A copy of it will
be found in *Rept Dist Schools*, 1880, 71-80.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[709:75](hou29.htm#fr_1222) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 67-71. The first gentile elected school trustee in
Utah was Benjamin Grundy Raybold, a native of Birmingham, England, who
came to Utah in 1862. Finding no other occupation, he began his career
among the saints as a hod-carrier; then he turned carpenter; then
postmaster; then journalist; and finally, in 1866, found employment with
the Walker Bros, to whom in 1885 he was confidential clerk. A brief
history of the Mormon school system from 1850 to 1875 will be found in
*U.S. Educ. Rept*, 44th Cong. 2d Sess., 458-60. See also, for further
information, *Id*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 21, 383-4, 600-4; 42d Cong. 3d
Sess., 377-80, 416, 608-13, 942-97; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., xxii.-cxxiii.
460-3, 475, 510-12, 728; 43d Cong. 3d Sess., xiii., cxxv., 500-2, 507,
526-34, 733; 44th Cont. 1st Sess., xxvi.-ccxxiii. 510-14, 548-54; 44th
Cong. 2d Sess., passim; *H. Ex. Doc*., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., vol. xi.,
cxxvii.; *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1859-60, 22-6; 1860-1, 78-9; 1861-2, 65;
1863-4, 96-9; 1864-5, 110-14; 1865-6, 17-18, 170 -3; 1869, 14-15, 108,
176-8; 1870, 191-9; 1872, 228-30; 1876, 28-9, 78-9; 1878, 33-4, 345-80;
1880, 442-60; *Utah School Bepts*, passim; *Bien. Rept Supt Dist
Schools*, 1880, 1882, 1884; *Utah Sketches*, MS., passim; *Stanford's
Weber Co*., MS., 1-23; *Linforth's Route from Liverpool*, 104, l10-11;
*Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City*, ii. 177-94; *Burton's City of the
Saints*, 512-16; *Gunnison's The Mormons*, 80-1; *Ward's Husb. in Utah*,
264-6; *Hollister's Res. of Utah*, 72-3; *Utah Pioneers*, 33d ann.,
30-4; *Utah Besources*, 55-8; *Todd's Sunset Land*, 179; *Utah
Gazetteer*, 39-40, 175-6; 1884, 278-94; *Contributor*, i. 84; ii. 240,
270; iv. 182-3, 352-3; *Millennial Star*, xxxiii. 551; *Deseret News*,
Oct. 19, Nov. 16, 1850, Feb. 22, 1851, March 19, 1853, Jan. 11, 1855,
Apr. l, 1857, Apr. 11, Oct. 24, Dec. 5, 1860, Jan. 15, 1868, Apr. 17,
1872, Feb. 13, 1878, March 26, 1879; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Nov. 1, 1873,
March 25, Aug. 29, 1876, March 3, 20, Apr. 21, 1877, March 20, Sept. 21,
1878, Apr. 23, May 22, Sept. 6, Nov. 20, 1879; *Herald*, Jan. 30, Apr.
13, 1878. For disbursement of school revenue, see *Utah Jour. Legisl*.,
1880, 469-81; for evening-schools, *Deseret News*, Dec. 28, 1854, Dec.
5, 12, 1860; Sunday-schools, *Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS.,
71-3; *Cannon's Sunday-schools in Utah*, MS., 3; *Juv. Inst*., xv. 89;
*Deseret News*, Apr. 14, 1869. Mr Harrison states that until there were
gentile churches in Utah the Sunday-school was almost unknown. This the
Mormons deny, saying that Sunday-schools have been taught in Salt Lake
City since 1857, the Sunday-school Union being established in 1866. For
gentile churches and missionary work in Utah, see *Hand-Book of
Mormonism*, 77-86; *Utah Gaz*., 208-11; *Marshall's Through Amer*., 230.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[709:76](hou29.htm#fr_1223) With Orson Spencer
as chancellor, Dan. Spencer, Orson Pratt, Jno. M. Bernhisel, Sam. W.
Richards, W. W. Phelps, Albert Carrington, Wm I. Appleby, Dan. H. Wells,
Robt L. Campbell, Hosea Stout, Elias Smith, and Zerubbabel Snow as
regents, and David Fullmer as treasurer. *Des. Univ*., MS., 3.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[710:77](hou29.htm#fr_1224) See [p.
324](hou17.htm#page_324), this vol.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[710:78](hou29.htm#fr_1225) It was opened Nov.
11, 1850, at the house of Mr Pack, in the 17th ward of S. L. City, Cyrus
Collins being appointed teacher, but succeeded the same year by Orson
Spencer and W. W. Phelps. The terms were $3 a quarter. *Id*., 6, 10;
*Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 287.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[710:79](hou29.htm#fr_1226) *Des. Univ*., MS.,
24; *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1853-4, 115.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[710:80](hou29.htm#fr_1227) By act of 1855 a
grant was confirmed of nearly a section of land lying east of S. L.
City. By contributions of labor and produce, nearly all of it was
enclosed with a stone wall. A building was also commenced in the 13th
ward for the use of the parent school. *Des. Univ*., MS., 8-9; *Utah
Acts Legisl*., 1866, 110. By act of congress, approved Jan. 21, 1855,
two sections, including 46,080 acres, were reserved for a university,
said lands to be disposed of under the direction of the territorial
legislature. *Utah Laws*, 1878, 172. In 1859 the legislature passed an
act to provide for the selection of two townships for this purpose.
*Utah Acts Legisl*., 1866, 93-4.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[710:81](hou29.htm#fr_1228) By act of 1851 the
chancellor and board of regents were authorized to appoint a
superintendent of primary schools, to be under their control, his salary
not to exceed $1,000 a year. By act of 1866 the right of making such
appointment was transferred to the legislature. *Des. Univ*., MS., 4-5,
24.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[710:82](hou29.htm#fr_1229) Of which David O.
Calder was principal.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[710:83](hou29.htm#fr_1230) The course lasted
four years in the classical and two in the normal department. In
connection with the normal department was a 'model school,' where pupils
were prepared for the college course. The charges were $20 per term for
the classical, $15 for the normal and commercial, and $8 for the
preparatory course, with extra charges for modern languages, music, etc.
The rates for tuition were afterward reduced. For studies and faculty,
see *Catal. Univ. of Deseret*, 1868-9, 5, 14-16; for list of text-books,
*Id*., 1869-70, 25-6.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[711:84](hou29.htm#fr_1231) There were 307
males and 239 females. *Id*., 1869-70, 21. *Des. Univ*., MS., 27.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[711:85](hou29.htm#fr_1232) At the session of
1879-80 the legislature appropriated $20,000 for the university, and
soon afterward the city council donated to the regents the finest public
square in the city. A building was at once commenced, but the
appropriation was almost expended before the basement was finished,
under the expectation that the legislature of 1881-2 would vote a sum
sufficient to complete it. Such a bill was passed, but failed to receive
the governor's signature. At the beginning of 1884 the walls and roof
had been completed, and a portion of the building was ready to be
occupied, the money being raised by contribution. For the two years
ending Dec. 31, 1879, the receipts were $18,151.44, of which $9,200 was
from territorial appropriations, and $5,986.80 from tuition fees. The
salary of the president, J.R. Park, was $2,400 a year. At this date the
institution was $5,384.14 in debt. *Bienn. Rept Chancellor Univ.
Deseret*, 1878-9, 11-13. In 1854 Orson Hyde was appointed chancellor, in
1857 and 1861 Albert Carrington, the interim being filled by Orson
Pratt, elected in 1858; in 1869 Dan. H. Wells and in 1878 Geo. Q. Cannon
were appointed. *Des. Univ*., MS., 35.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[711:86](hou29.htm#fr_1233) See *Circ. Acad.
Dept Univ. of Deseret*, 1880-2, 9-10.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[711:87](hou29.htm#fr_1234) In 1870 a school
in connection with the university was established at Provo, with Myron
Tanner of that city, A. K. Thurber of Spanish Fork, and L. E. Harrington
of American Fork as executive committee, and Warren <span
id="page_712">p. 712</span> Dusenberry principal. It lasted only a few
years. *Deseret Univ*., MS., 27-8. In 1884 a deaf-mute department was
opened in connection with the university. *Annual of Univ. of Deseret*,
1884-5, 36-7. For further items concerning the university, see the
circulars and reports above quoted. *Deseret Univ*., MS., passim; *Utah
Jour. Legisl*., 1870, 168-72, 1876, 121-7, 1878, 295-6, 355-7, 381-91;
*Ann. Univ. Deseret*, 1884-5, 7-38; *Smith's Rise, Progress, and
Travels*, 24-5; *S. L. C. Contributor*, ii. 13-16, 48, 82, 110, 142;
*Deseret News*, June 9, 1869, Jan. 5, 1871: *S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug. 13,
1876, March 9, 1878; *Herald*, Nov. 17, 1877, Nov. 22, 1878, Jan. 30,
1881.

    Most of the details given in the text are taken from the *Deseret
University*, MS., 1-35, which, besides a brief historical sketch of that
institution, contains some valuable items concerning the district
schools and the district school system of Utah.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[714:88](hou29.htm#fr_1235) *Richards’ Utah
Misc*., MS., 13-16; *Des. Univ*., MS., 16-18; *Richards’ Incidents in
Utah Hist*., MS., 63. The preparation and use of the alphabet were
ordered, or at least suggested, by Brigham Young, who, in his address to
the legislature of 1853, thus gives his reasons: 'While the world is
progressing with steam-engine power and lightning speed in the
accumulation of wealth, extension of science, communication, and
dissemination of letters and principle, why may not the way be paved for
the easier acquisition of the English language, combining, as it does,
great extension and varied expression with beauty, simplicity, and
power, and being unquestionably the most useful and beautiful in the
world. But while we freely admit this, we also have to acknowledge that
it is perhaps as much abused in its use, and as complex in its
attainment, as any other.' In the *Deseret News*, Aug. 19, 1868, the
weeding-out of objectionable literature is stated as an additional
reason. In 1855 $2,500 was voted by the legislature for the new type and
for printing books in the Deseret characters. *Utah Acts Legisl*.,
110-11. In 1859-60 the Deseret alphabet was used in keeping Brigham's
ledger, and to some extent in the historian's office and in journalism.
In 1877 an attempt was made to have the book of Mormon printed in
Pitman's phonoype, and Orson Pratt started for England for this purpose,
but returned at the death of Brigham in August of that year. No further
effort was made.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[714:89](hou29.htm#fr_1236) *Des. Univ*., MS.,
29; *Utah Gazetteer*, 228.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[715:90](hou29.htm#fr_1237) The last one in
1882.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[715:91](hou29.htm#fr_1238) For mention of
such societies, see *Contributor*, ii. 27-9, 31-2, 61, 92-4, 159, 222,
287, 350; *Deseret News*, Aug. 7, Nov. 20, 1878; *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884,
218-25. For further details as to libraries, see *Id*., 228-30;
*Burton's City of the Saints*, 286-7; *Deseret News*, Aug. 20, 1862;
*S. L. C. Tribune*, March 15, Nov. 22, 1873, Dec. 18, 1875; *Reno
Gazette*, Dec. 6, 1880; *Bonanza City* (*Id*.), *Yankee Fork Her*.,
Sept. 25, 1879; observatories, *Wheeler's Geog. Surveys*, ii. 7-9,
461-7, 469-71. The office of superintendent of meteorological
observations created by act of 1857 was abolished by act of 1870. *Utah
Jour. Legisl*., 1876, 179-80.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[715:92](hou29.htm#fr_1239) The author of
*Rocky Mountain Saints*. His decease occurred in 1882.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[716:93](hou29.htm#fr_1240) Among those who
early took an interest in newspapers may be mentioned Sidney Stevens,
who in 1885 was still one of the largest proprietors of the *Herald*. Mr
Stevens, a native of Somersetshire, England, came to Utah in 1863,
settling two years later at North Ogden, where, and at Ogden City, he
has ever since been actively engaged in business. Among other ventures,
he has been largely interested in the shipment of produce to the eastern
states, forwarding as many as 470 car-loads in a single year. To his
enterprise the terminus of the Union Pacific is in no small degree
indebted for its recent growth.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[716:94](hou29.htm#fr_1241) It has been edited
at various dates by R. T. McEwan, R. G. Sleater, J. T. McEwan, and John
C. Graham. *Richards’ Bibliog. of Utah*, MS., 18.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[716:95](hou29.htm#fr_1242) Later Dan. Tyler
became editor. *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[717:96](hou29.htm#fr_1243) Additional list of
publications, showing name, where located, frequency of issue, and,
where possible, date of establishment and suspension:

<div align="center">

|                                   |                                             |                        |
|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------|
| Location.                         | Name.                                       | Established.           |
| Alta City                         | Cottonwood Observer, s.w.                   | 1870 et seq.           |
| Beaver                            | Enterprise, w.                              | 1873\.                 |
| ”                                 | Beaver County Record, s.w                   | June 8, 1883, et seq.  |
| ”                                 | The Southern Utonian, w.                    | March 1881 et seq.     |
| Bear Lake                         | Democrat, w. (Mor. pub., but pub. in Idaho) | Oct. 1880 et seq.      |
| Bloomington.                      | The Union and Village Echo, m.              | 1882\.                 |
| Camp Douglas                      | Union Vedette, d. (trans. to S. L. City)    | 1864-7.                |
| Corinne                           | Daily Reporter, d.                          | 1867\.                 |
| ”                                 | Daily Journal, d.                           | 1871\.                 |
| ”                                 | Mail, d.                                    |                        |
| ”                                 | Utah Reporter, d., s.w. (changed to)        |                        |
| ”                                 | Corinne Republican, t.w., w                 |                        |
| Diamond                           | Rocky Mountain Husbandman, w                |                        |
| Frisco                            | Times, w.                                   |                        |
| Logan                             | Leader, w. (changed to)                     | Sept. 1879-82.         |
| ”                                 | Utah Journal, s.w                           | Aug. 1, 1882, et seq.  |
| ”                                 | The Northern Light, w                       | May 1879.              |
|                                   | (Transferred and changed to)                |                        |
| Oxford, Id.                       | Idaho Banner, w.                            | 1879\.                 |
| Ogden                             | Amateur                                     |                        |
| ”                                 | Daily Morning Rustler, d.                   |                        |
| ”                                 | Evening Dispatch, d.                        |                        |
| ”                                 | Ogden Herald, d., s.w.                      | 1881 et seq.           |
| ”                                 | Ogden Freeman, d., s.w                      |                        |
| ”                                 | Ogden Junction, d., s.w                     | Jan. 1870.             |
| ”                                 | Ogden Pilot, d.                             |                        |
| ”                                 | Ogden Telegraph, s.w.                       |                        |
| ”                                 | Ogden Times, s.w.                           |                        |
| ”                                 | Utah Talsmand                               |                        |
| Park City                         | Record, w.                                  |                        |
| Provo City                        | Territorial Inquirer, s.w.                  |                        |
| ”                                 | Times, d.                                   |                        |
| ”                                 | Utah County Times, t.w.                     |                        |
| ”                                 | The Utah County Advertiser                  | Jan. 13, 1876.         |
| Richfield                         | Sevier Valley Echo, w                       | Aug. 1884 et seq.      |
| Salt Lake City                    | Anti-Polygamy Standard, m.                  | Apr. ’80 to Sept. ’82. |
| ”                                 | Bikuben, w.                                 | Aug. 1, 1876 et seq.   |
| ”                                 | Circular, w                                 | 1874\.                 |
| ”                                 | City Review                                 |                        |
| ”                                 | College Lantern, m.                         | May, 1870.             |
| ”                                 | Deseret News, d., s.w., w.                  | June 1850 et seq.      |
| ”                                 | Deseret Home, in                            | Jan. ’82 to Aug. ’84.  |
| ”                                 | Diogenes                                    | Jan. 1871.             |
| <span id="page_718">p. 718</span> |                                             |                        |
| Location.                         | Name.                                       | Established.           |
| Salt Lake City                    | Enoch's Advocate                            | 1874\.                 |
| ”                                 | Evening Chronicle, d                        |                        |
| ”                                 | Evening Mail, d                             |                        |
| ”                                 | Foot-Lights                                 |                        |
| ”                                 | Grocer and Trade Journal, m                 | May 1,1881, et seq.    |
| ”                                 | Juvenile Instructor, s.m.                   | Jan. 1, 1866, et seq.  |
| ”                                 | Keep-a-Pitchin-in, s.m                      | 1869\.                 |
| ”                                 | Kirk Anderson's Valley Tan, w.              | Nov. ’58 to Feb. ’60.  |
| ”                                 | Life and Home, m.                           | Aug. 1884.             |
| ”                                 | Mining Gazette, w.                          | 1873 et seq.           |
| ”                                 | Monthly Record, m.                          |                        |
| ”                                 | Morgenstjernen, s.m                         | 1882 et seq.           |
| ”                                 | Mormon Expositor                            |                        |
| ”                                 | Mormon Tribune, w.                          |                        |
| ”                                 | Mountaineer, w.                             | Aug. 27, 1859.         |
| ”                                 | Mormonen Zeitung, w.                        | Aug. 26, 1882.         |
| ”                                 | New Endowment, d.                           | Feb. 17, 1873.         |
| ”                                 | Parry's Literary Journal, m.                | Oct. 1884 et seq.      |
| ”                                 | Peep O’Day, w.                              | Oct. 20, 1864.         |
| ”                                 | Press, d.                                   | 1874\.                 |
| ”                                 | Real Estate Circular                        |                        |
| ”                                 | Real Estate and Min’g Gazette, s.m., m.     |                        |
| ”                                 | Rocky Mt Christian Advocate, m.             | 1876\.                 |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Herald, d., s.w.                  | June 5, 1870, et seq.  |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Independent, d.                   |                        |
| ”                                 | Lake Journal, d.                            | 1872\.                 |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Leader, w.                        |                        |
| ”                                 | Lake Reporter, d.                           | May 11, 1868.          |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Review, d.                        | 1871\.                 |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Telegraph, d., s.w., w.           | July 4, 1864.          |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Times, d.                         |                        |
| ”                                 | Salt Lake Tribune, d., w.                   | 1870 et seq.           |
| ”                                 | Skandinav                                   |                        |
| ”                                 | The Contributor, m.                         | Oct. 1879 et seq.      |
| ”                                 | The Utah Farmer, m.                         | Feb. ’80 to Sept. ’81. |
| ”                                 | Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, qty.         | 1880 et seq.           |
| ”                                 | Union Vedette, d., w                        | 1864\.                 |
| ”                                 | (Trans. fr. Camp Douglas in 1867.)          |                        |
| ”                                 | Commercial, m.                              |                        |
| ”                                 | Utah Educational Journal, m.                | July 1875.             |
| ”                                 | Utah Mail, d.                               |                        |
| ”                                 | Utah Magazine, w.                           | 1867\.                 |
| ”                                 | Utah Miner                                  |                        |
| ”                                 | Mining Journal, d.                          | June, 1872.            |
| ”                                 | Utah Posten                                 | Dec. 1873.             |
| ”                                 | Woman's Exponent, s.m.                      | June 1, 1872, et seq.  |
| Silver Reef                       | Silver Reef Echo, s.w                       |                        |
| ”                                 | Reef Miner, s.w., chgd to w.                | 1879\.                 |
| Spring Lake Villa.                | Farmer's Oracle, s.m.                       | May 22, 1863.          |
| St George.                        | Cactus, w.                                  | 1862\.                 |
| ”                                 | Enterprise, m.                              | 1869\.                 |
| ”                                 | Our Dixie Times, w. (changed to)            | Jan. 22, 1868.         |
| ”                                 | Rio Virgen Times, w.                        |                        |
| ”                                 | Pendologist, m.                             |                        |
| ”                                 | Pomologist and Gardener, m.                 | 1870\.                 |
| ”                                 | The Union                                   | 1878\.                 |

</div>

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[719:97](hou29.htm#fr_1244) For further
mention of Utah journalism, see *Richards’ Bibliog. of Utah*, MS.;
*Millennial Star*, xxxvi. 731-2; xxxix. 127; *Remy's Jour. to G. S. L.
City*, i. 189-90; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 534-8; *Richardson's Beyond
the Mississippi*, 351; *Smith' s Rise, Progress, and Travels*, 27;
*Bonwick' s Mormons and Silver Mines*, 160-2; *Tucker's Mormonism*,
246-7; *S. L. C. Contributor*, ii. 209-10, iv. 352; *Pettengell's Newsp.
Direct*., 1856.

    In connection with Utah literature may be mentioned Eliza R. Snow,
the sister of Apostle Lorenzo Snow, and the second of the seven children
of Oliver Snow, a native of Mass., and a farmer by occupation, though
one much occupied by public business and holding many responsible
positions. While still almost a young girl, Sister Snow commenced
writing for various publications, under an assumed signature, and later
in life published nine volumes, two of them being of poetry, and several
reaching a second edition. Miss Snow was baptized as a Mormon in 1835,
and the following year removed to Kirtland, residing in the family of
Joseph Smith and teaching his children. After a brief residence at
Adam-on-Diahman and Quincy, she repaired to Nauvoo, and, at the
expulsion, crossed the Mississippi with the first parties, reaching the
valley of Great Salt Lake with Parley P. Pratt's companies. *Snow's
Autobiog*., MS., passim; *Richards’ Narr*., MS., 116-7; *Tullidge's
Mag*., 116-17.

    In connection with the press of Utah may be mentioned Chas W.
Penrose, who was called to the ministry at the London conference of
1850, being then only in his 18th year. Mr Penrose commenced his
literary career as a contributor to the *Millennial Star*, of which he
was editor about 1867, having before that date passed several years in
Utah, where, however, he found little encouragement as a journalist.
Returning in 1870, he was appointed to the editorial charge of the
*Ogden Junction*, which position he filled for seven years, after which
he became editor of the *Deseret News*. In 1876 he was elected member of
the legislature for Weber co., in which body he was for several sessions
a tireless worker. Among the measures that he introduced was one to
remove the political disabilities of women, which passed both houses,
but failed to receive the governor's signature. *Tullidge's Mag*., ii.
27-30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. Agriculture, Stock-Raising, Manufactures, and
Mining. 1852-1886.](hou30)
