[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou21)  [Next](hou23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

### CHAPTER XIX. THE UTAH WAR. 1857-1858.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Opening of the
Campaign—Burning of Supply Trains—Strategic Movement of Colonel
Alexander—His Retreat—Arrival of Albert Sidney Johnston—the March to
Fort Bridger—Winter at Camp Scott—Mission of Colonel Kane—Governor
Cumming at Salt Lake City—Pardon Proclaimed—the Peace Commissioners—the
Army of Utah Advances on Zion—the City Deserted—the Mormons Return to
Their Homes—the Troops Cantoned at Camp Floyd—Conduct of the Soldiery
and Camp Followers—Judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh—the Reformation in
Utah.</span></span>

    "<span class="smallcaps">I am</span> ordered there, and I will
winter in the valley or in hell," exclaimed General Harney, who had now
joined the expedition, when Van Vliet on his way to Washington reported
to him the condition of affairs among the Mormons. With such prospects
before them, it was probably fortunate for the army of Utah that the
command changed hands early in the campaign, the general's services
being again required in Kansas, Colonel Albert Sidney Johnston, then at
Fort Leavenworth, being appointed his successor, and Colonel Alexander,
the senior officer, meanwhile assuming command.

    About the middle of August, Colonel Robert Burton with seventy men
from the first regiment of the Nauvoo legion, afterward joined by a
company from Provo, had already been sent eastward as a corps of
observation, with instructions to follow the main emigrant trail,
protect incoming Mormon trains, ascertain the number, equipments, and
materiel of the

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

United States troops, and report to headquarters. On the 22d of
September the colonel, accompanied by three others, the remainder of his
command being ordered to return slowly toward Salt Lake City, selecting
on their way the best points for a defensive campaign, encountered the
vanguard of the army of Utah, in the vicinity of Devil's Gate, thence
accompanied them to Camp Winfield, on Ham Fork, and afterward proceeded
to Fort Bridger.

    A few days later General Wells, in command of 1,250 men, supplied
with thirty days’ rations, established his headquarters at Echo Cañon, a
defile some twenty-five miles in length, and whose walls are in places
almost within pistol-shot of each other. Through this cañon, the Mormons
supposed, lay the path of the invading army, the only means of avoiding
the gorge being by a circuitous route northward to Soda Springs, and
thence by way of Bear River Valley, or the Wind River Mountains. On the
western side of the cañon dams and ditches were constructed, by means of
which the road could be submerged to a depth of several feet; at the
eastern side

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

stone heaps were collected and bowlders loosened from the overhanging
rocks, so that a slight leverage would hurl them on the passing troops,
and parapets were built as a protection for sharp-shooters. <span
id="fr_769"></span>[1](#fn_769.md) Leaving his men in charge of
staff-officers, <span id="fr_770"></span>[2](#fn_770.md) the general set
forth with a small escort for Fort Bridger, where he was informed by
Burton as to the movements and strength of the invading force and the
location of its supply trains. It had been ascertained that the army had
pressed forward on Fort Winfield to protect the trains, which had been
left insufficiently guarded, and it was now feared that the men would be
ordered to pack a few days’ provisions in their knapsacks and make a
forced march on Salt Lake City.

    At this juncture a letter from General Wells was delivered to
Colonel Alexander, together with copies of the organic act, the laws of
Utah, the proclamation forbidding the entrance of armed forces into the
territory, and a despatch from Brigham. The last was a remarkable
document, and must have been somewhat of a surprise to the colonel, who
had proved himself one of the most gallant soldiers of the Mexican war.
He was informed that Brigham Young was still governor of Utah, and that
he had disregarded his prohibition. He was ordered to withdraw by the
same route that he had entered. Should he desire, however, to remain
until spring in the neighborhood of his present encampment, he must
surrender his arms and ammunition to the Mormon quartermaster-general,
in which case he would be supplied with provisions, and would not be
molested. <span id="fr_771"></span>[3](#fn_771.md) The colonel replied in
brief and business-like phrase. He addressed Brigham Young as governor;
stated that he would

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

submit his letter to the commanding officer immediately on his arrival;
that meanwhile the troops were there by order of the president, and that
their future movements and operations would depend on orders issued by
competent military authority.

    On receiving the answer of Colonel Alexander, Wells determined to
open the campaign, a plan of which had been before arranged at Salt Lake
City. Inviting to dinner Major Lot Smith, who had conveyed the
despatches to and from the enemy's camp, he asked him whether he could
take some forty men, the only available force then at the Mormon camp at
Cache Cave, where Wells was now encamped, and, passing in rear of the
foe, turn back or burn the supply trains still on the road. "I think I
can," replied Lot Smith; and the next evening he started out. Wells then
addressed to Major Joseph Taylor the letter of instructions already
quoted.

    Riding all night at the head of his detachment, Smith came in sight
of a westward-bound government train on the morning of October 3d, and
ordered the drivers to go back. This they did, but turned round when out
of sight. During the day a party of troops passed them, and relieving
the wagons of their freight, left them standing. Smith then started for
Sandy Fork, sending a few of his men under Captain Haight in another
direction. Soon he observed a cloud of dust in the direction of the old
Mormon trail, and was informed by his scouts that a train of twenty-six
wagons was approaching. Halting and feeding his men, he approached them
at dusk, while encamped at a spot known as Simpson's Hollow, on Green
River, and there lay in ambush for several hours. Meanwhile he
ascertained, as he relates, that there were two trains, each of
twenty-six wagons—there being, in fact, three, with seventy-five wagons
in all. <span id="fr_772"></span>[4](#fn_772.md)

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

    It was now near midnight; but a few of the wagoners were still
gathered round the camp-fires, some of them drinking and some smoking,
when armed and mounted men, as it seemed in endless procession,
noiselessly emerged from the darkness, their leader quietly asking for
'the captain.' Most of the teamsters were asleep, their weapons fastened
to the awnings of the wagons, and resistance was almost hopeless. The
captain of the wagoners, Dawson by name, stepped forward, surrendered
his charge, and bade his men stack their arms and group themselves on a
spot pointed out by Smith, who dealt with the other trains in like
manner. Then, lighting two torches, the major handed one of them to a
gentile in his party, dubbed Big James, remarking that it was proper for
the gentiles to spoil the gentiles. Riding from wagon to wagon they set
fire to the covers, which caught rapidly in the crisp air of this
October night. "By Saint Patrick, ain't it beautiful!" exclaimed Big
James; "I never saw anything go better in my life." Dawson meanwhile was
sent to the rear of the trains to take out provisions for his captors.
When all the wagons were fairly in a blaze, the Mormons rode away,
telling their panic-stricken captives that they would return as soon as
they had delivered the spoils to their comrades near by, and instantly
shoot any one who should attempt to extinguish the flames. <span
id="fr_773"></span>[5](#fn_773.md)

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

    The army of Utah was now in evil case. Harney had accepted the
command reluctantly, and returned to Kansas as soon as possible.
Alexander was un-fitted for it, and Johnston had not yet arrived. Winter
was at hand; forage was almost exhausted; provisions would fail within a
few months; and if the troops could not move into quarters within
fourteen days, there would be no animals left alive to convey their
supplies. The pitiful strait that had now over-taken them is explained
in a letter addressed by Colonel Alexander, four days after the Green
River catastrophe, to the officers in command of forces en route for
Utah. "No information of the position or intentions of the commanding
officer has reached me," he writes, "and I am in utter ignorance of the
objects of the government in sending troops here, or the instructions
given for their conduct after reaching here. I have had to decide upon
the following points: First, the necessity of a speedy move to winter
quarters; second, the selection of a point for wintering; third, the
best method of conducting the troops and supplies to the point
selected." A council of war was held, and the point selected was Fort
Hall, on Beaver Head Mountain, 140 miles from Fort Bridger. So little
did the colonel know even about the disposition of the command, that, at
the time and place when he expected to be joined by Colonel Smith, in
charge of supply trains, this officer was still at South Pass, with an
escort of two hundred men.

    On the 11th of October the troops commenced their march. Snow was
falling heavily, and for several days they were compelled to cut a path
for their

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

wagons through the dense brush, their trains being still of such
unwieldy length that the vanguard had reached its camping-ground at
nightfall before the rear-guard had moved from its camp of the preceding
day. Meanwhile bands of Mormons, under their nimble and ubiquitous
leaders, hung on their flanks, just out of rifle-shot, harassing them at
every step, 700 oxen being captured and driven to Salt Lake City on the
13th. There was as yet no cavalry in the force. A few infantry companies
were mounted on mules and sent in pursuit of the guerrillas, but the
saints merely laughed at them, terming them jackass cavalry. The grass
had been burned along the line of route, and the draught-animals were so
weak that they could travel but three miles a day. When the point was
reached where Smith's detachment was expected to join the army, the
commander, disappointed and sore perplexed, called a second council, at
which many of the officers were in favor of cutting their way through
the cañons at all hazard.

    At this juncture a despatch was received from Johnston, who was now
at South Pass, ordering the troops to proceed to Fontenelle Creek, where
pasture was abundant; and a few days later a second despatch directed
them to march to a point three miles below the junction of Ham and Black
forks, the colonel stating that he would join them at the latter point.
On the 3d of November they reached the point of rendezvous, where
Johnston arrived the following day, with a reënforcement of cavalry and
the supply trains in charge of Smith. <span
id="fr_774"></span>[6](#fn_774.md)

    Albert Sidney Johnston was a favorite officer, and had already given
earnest of the qualities that he displayed a few years later in the
campaigns of the civil war. The morale of the army was at once restored,
and at the touch of this great general each man put forth his utmost
energy. But their troubles were

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

not yet ended. The expedition was now ordered to Fort Bridger, and at
every step difficulties increased. There were only thirty-five miles to
be traversed, but, except on the margin of a few slender streams, the
country through which lay their route was the barest of desert land.
There was no shelter from the chill blasts of this mountain solitude,
where, even in November, the thermometer sometimes sank to 16° below
zero. There was no fuel but the wild sage and willow; there was little
pasture for the half-frozen cattle.

    The march commenced on the 6th of November, and on the previous
night 500 of the strongest oxen had been stolen by the Mormons. The
trains extended over six miles, and all day long snow and sleet fell on
the retreating column. Some of the men were frost-bitten, and the
exhausted animals were goaded by their drivers until many fell dead in
their traces. At sunset the troops encamped wherever they could find a
particle of shelter, some under bluffs, and some in the willow copses.
At daybreak the camp was surrounded with the carcasses of frozen cattle,
of which several hundreds had perished during the night. Still, as the
trains arrived from the rear, each one halted for a day or more, giving
time for the cattle to rest and graze on such scant herbage as they
could find. To press forward more rapidly was impossible, for it would
have cost the lives of most of the draught-animals; to find shelter was
equally impossible, for there was none. There was no alternative but to
proceed slowly and persistently, saving as many as possible of the
horses, mules, and oxen. Fifteen days were required for this difficult
operation. <span id="fr_775"></span>[7](#fn_775.md) Meanwhile Colonel St
George Cooke, who arrived on the 19th by way of Fort Laramie, at the
head of 500 dragoons, had fared no better than the main body, having
lost nearly half of his cattle. <span id="fr_776"></span>[8](#fn_776.md)

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

    A length the army of Utah arrived at Fort Bridger—to find that the
buildings in and around it, together with those at Fort Supply, twelve
miles distant, had been burned to the ground by Mormons, and the grain
or other provisions removed or destroyed. All that remained were two
enclosures surrounded by walls of cobblestone cemented with mortar, the
larger one being a hundred feet square. This was appropriated for the
storage of supplies, while on the smaller one lunettes were built and
mounted with cannon. A sufficient garrison was stationed at this point;
the cattle were sent for the winter to Henry Fork, in charge of Colonel
Cooke and six companies of the second dragoons, and about the end of
November, the remainder of the troops went into winter quarters on Black
Fork of the Green River, two or three miles beyond Fort Bridger, and a
hundred and fifteen from Salt Lake City. The site, to which was given
the name of Camp Scott, was sheltered by bluffs,

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

rising abruptly at a few hundred yards distance from the bed of the
stream. Near by were clumps of cotton-wood which the Mormons had
attempted to burn; but the wood being green and damp, the fire had
merely scorched the bark. Tents of a new pattern <span
id="fr_777"></span>[9](#fn_777.md) were furnished to the men, the poles, to
which was attached a strong hoop, being supported by iron tripods. From
the hoops the canvas depended in the shape of a cone, somewhat in the
fashion of an Indian wigwam. Even when the tents were closed fires could
be lighted without discomfort beneath the tripods, a draught being
created by the opening at the top. The civil officials, who arrived
about this time, dwelt apart in structures resembling the Alaskan
barabara—holes dug in the ground over which were built huts of
mud-plastered logs. To this part of the encampment was given, in honor
of the chief justice, the name of Eckelsville.

    Though most of the beef cattle had been carried off by Mormons or
Indians, a sufficient number of draught-animals remained to furnish meat
for seven months during six days in the week, while of bacon there was
enough for one day in the week, and by reducing the rations of flour,
coffee, and other articles, they might also be made to last until the
1st of June. <span id="fr_778"></span>[10](#fn_778.md) Parties were at once
sent to New Mexico and Oregon <span id="fr_779"></span>[11](#fn_779.md) to
procure cattle and remounts for the cavalry. Meantime shambles were
built, to which the starved animals at Fort Henry were driven, and
butchered as soon as they had gathered a little flesh, their meat being
jerked and stored for future use.

    In loading the wagons at Fort Leavenworth the quartermaster had
packed into each train such goods as were at hand, taking no trouble to
procure for them

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

their due proportion of other stores. The trains destroyed at Simpson
Hollow, for instance, were laden entirely with provisions, while three
others that followed contained the tents and all the clothing.
Fortunately the latter did not fall into the hands of the Mormons,
though when unpacked it was found that they contained more of utterly
useless supplies than of what was really needed. For an army of about
2,400 men, wintering in a region 7,000 feet above the sea-level, where
at night the thermometer always sinks below zero, there had been
provided 3,150 bedsacks—articles well suited for a pleasure camp in
summer—and only 723 blankets; there were more than 1,500 pairs of
epaulets and metallic scales, but only 938 coats and 676 great-coats;
there were 307 cap covers, and only 190 caps; there were 1,190 military
stocks; but though some of the men were already barefooted, and others
had no covering for their feet except moccasins, there were only 823
pairs of boots and 600 pairs of stockings. <span
id="fr_780"></span>[12](#fn_780.md) One of the wagons had been freighted
entirely with camp kettles, but brine could not be had, for at this time
there was not a pound of salt in the entire camp, a supply proffered as
a gift from Brigham, whom Johnston now termed the great Mormon rebel,
being rejected with contempt. <span id="fr_781"></span>[13](#fn_781.md)

    Thus did the army of Utah pass the winter of 1857-8, amid privations
no less severe than those endured at Valley Forge eighty-one years
before; but this army was composed of seasoned veterans, under able
leadership, and the men were confident and even

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

cheerful. The festivities of christmas and new year were celebrated with
song and dance and martial music, in pavilions for which the timber had
been hauled by hand through miles of snow. Over each one waved the
regimental colors, and over that of the fifth infantry fluttered the
remnants of the flag that had been torn to shreds at Molino del Rey, and
borne in triumph up the slopes of Chapultepec.

    Meanwhile the Mormon militia had returned to the valley, as soon as
the snow had closed up the mountain cañons. The saints of course
regarded the disasters of the federal army as a righteous judgment of
providence on a nation that took arms against Zion, and welcomed their
returning warriors with pæans of triumph, <span
id="fr_782"></span>[14](#fn_782.md) stigmatizing the foe in sorry and
insulting doggerel. <span id="fr_783"></span>[15](#fn_783.md) At the
tabernacle elders waxed bold, and all their remonstrances and overtures
of peace being now rejected, <span id="fr_784"></span>[16](#fn_784.md) they
openly avowed, sometimes in braggart phrase, their contempt for the
United

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> States government
and its army, <span id="fr_785"></span>[17](#fn_785.md) and declared that
Israel should now be free.

    Meanwhile Governor Cumming declared the Mormons in a state of
rebellion, warned them that proceedings would be instituted against the
ringleaders by Judge Eckels, and bade the militia disband; but
throughout the United States and throughout Europe the question was
asked, this winter, "What has become of the army of Utah?" The
expedition became known as Buchanan's blunder, and there were many who
believed that a harsher phrase would have been more appropriate.

    In February 1858 a messenger from Washington arrived at Salt Lake
City by way of Los Angeles, <span id="fr_786"></span>[18](#fn_786.md) and
introducing himself under the name of Doctor Osborne, asked for an
interview with Brigham Young. He was pale and travel-worn, but his
request was immediately granted, for he was indeed a welcome visitor. It
was Colonel Thomas L. Kane. The council was summoned, and as the elders
recognized their old friend of the days of Nauvoo, every eye was fixed
on him, for it was hoped that his mission would put a new aspect on
affairs. "Governor Young, and gentlemen," he said, "I come as an
ambassador from the chief executive of our nation, and am prepared and
duly authorized to lay before you most fully and definitely the feelings
and views of the citizens of our common country, and of the executive,
towards you, relative to the present position of the territory, and
relative to the army of the United States now upon your borders.

    "After giving you the most satisfactory evidence

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

in relation to matters concerning you now pending, I shall then call
your attention, and wish to enlist your sympathies in behalf of the poor
soldiers who are now suffering in the cold and snow of the mountains. I
shall request you to render them aid and comfort, and to assist them to
come here, and to bid them a hearty welcome to your hospitable valley.
Governor Young, may I be permitted to ask a private interview for a few
moments with you?" The purport of this conversation has never yet been
ascertained, but at its close the governor remarked: "Friend Thomas, you
have done a good work, and you will do a greater work still." <span
id="fr_787"></span>[19](#fn_787.md)

    On the 12th of March the colonel arrived at Camp Scott, and was
entertained as the guest of Governor Cumming. Being presented to Judge
Eckels, he displayed credentials from the president and letters from
Brigham authorizing him to act as a negotiator. He came as a
peace-maker, but was received almost as a spy. An invitation to dinner
from Colonel Johnston was construed by the sergeant who delivered
it—whether in malice or mischief does not appear—as an order for his
arrest. The blunder was, of course, rectified; but Kane, who was now
classed as a Mormon, <span id="fr_788"></span>[20](#fn_788.md) challenged
the commander-in-chief, and a duel was only prevented by the
intervention of the chief justice. Nevertheless, he received a fair
hearing from the governor. His mission was to induce him to proceed to
Salt Lake City under a Mormon escort, and at once

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

assume his functions. The officers remonstrated, stating that he would
surely be poisoned; but Cumming was a high-spirited man, anxious only
that matters should be adjusted, if possible without loss of life. He
resolved to trust himself to the colonel's guidance, and on the 5th of
April set forth from Camp Scott.

    After passing through the federal lines, Cumming was met by an
escort of Mormon militia, and on his way to Salt Lake City, where he
arrived a week later, was everywhere acknowledged as governor and
received with due honors. <span id="fr_789"></span>[21](#fn_789.md) Several
interviews were held with Brigham, during which he was assured that
every facility would be afforded him. The territorial seal, the records
of the supreme and district courts, and other public property, the
supposed destruction of which had helped to bring about the war, were
found intact. On the second sabbath after his arrival Cumming attended
the tabernacle, where he addressed three or four thousand of the saints,
declaring that it was not intended to station the army in close contact
with any of the settlements, and that the military would not be used in
making arrests until other means had failed. After touching on the
leading questions at issue, remembering, meanwhile, that he was

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

addressing a people embittered by many real and many imaginary wrongs,
he stated that he had come among them to establish the sovereignty of a
nation whose laws he was sworn to uphold, and to which he would require
their absolute submission. Then followed harangues from certain of the
elders, in which were repeated the oft-told story of the prophet's
assassination, the services of the Mormon battalion, and the exodus from
Nauvoo. One of the speakers declared that the government intended to
occupy the territory with its troops, whether they were needed to
support the civil officials or not. This remark caused the wildest
uproar; and, writes the governor, "I was fully confirmed in the opinion
that this people, with their extraordinary religion and customs, would
gladly encounter certain death rather than be taxed with a submission to
the military power, which they consider to involve a loss of
honor." <span id="fr_790"></span>[22](#fn_790.md)

    The tumult was stayed by Brigham, and no further symptoms of
rebellion occurred during the governor's visit. About the middle of May
he returned to Fort Scott, accompanied by Colonel Kane, and reported
that the people of Utah acknowledged his authority, and that, before
long, the transit of mails and passengers between the Missouri and the
Pacific might be

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

resumed without fear of interruption. the colonel then took his leave
and set out for Washington, to lay before the president the result of
his mission. It was admitted that by his mediation he had prevented a
collision between the Mormons and the federal troops, and in Buchanan's
message to congress in the following December he was thus complimented:
"I cannot refrain from mentioning the valuable services of Colonel
Thomas L. Kane, who, from motives of pure benevolence, and without any
official character or pecuniary compensation, visited Utah during the
last inclement winter for the purpose of contributing to the
pacification of the territory." <span id="fr_791"></span>[23](#fn_791.md)

    The delay caused by Kane's mission was most opportune. The army was
now ready to take the field. At Fort Leavenworth three thousand
additional troops <span id="fr_792"></span>[24](#fn_792.md) had been
assembled, and it was intended that the entire force should be
concentrated in Utah in two divisions, one under the command of Colonel,
now brevet brigadier-general, Johnston, and the other under Harney. As
elsewhere mentioned, money without stint had been voted for the
expedition, subsistence being provided for eight thousand persons for a
period of twenty months. <span id="fr_793"></span>[25](#fn_793.md) On the
9th and 10th of June Colonel Hoffman arrived with a detachment at Camp
Scott, in charge of the supply trains that had been parked at Fort
Laramie during winter, and on the 8th 1,500 horses and mules, with an
escort of infantry and mounted riflemen, had reached headquarters from
New Mexico. The cattle at Henry Fork had thriven

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

well, and from that point mules could be furnished sufficient for a
train of 200 wagons. By dismounting a portion of the cavalry, horses
could also be spared for the field batteries. All was in readiness, and
orders were given that the army of Utah should advance. There could be
no longer a doubt, if ever there were any, that the troops would make
short work of the Mormon militia. Behold, the days of the Utah rebellion
were numbered!

 

    But meanwhile events had occurred which promised a peaceable
solution of the difficulty. The spirited resistance of the saints had
called forth unfavorable comments on Buchanan's policy throughout the
United States and throughout Europe. He had virtually made war upon the
territory before any declaration of war had been issued; he had sent
forward an army before the causes of offence had been fairly
investigated; and now, at this critical juncture in the nation's
history, he was about to lock up in a distant and almost inaccessible
region more than one third of the nation's war material and nearly all
its best troops. Even the soldiers themselves, though in cheerful mood
and in excellent condition, had no heart for the approaching campaign,
accepting, as they did, the commonly received opinion that it was merely
a move on the president's political chess-board. In a word, Buchanan and
the Washington politicians and the Harney-Johnston army must all confess
themselves beaten, hopelessly beaten, before a blow was struck. The army
was as powerless before the people it had come to punish as was
Napoleon's at Moscow. All that remained to be done was to forgive the
Mormons and let them go.

    Through the pressure brought to bear, coupled with the
expostulations of Kane, Van Vliet, and Bernhisel, Buchanan was induced
to stop the threatened war, and on the 6th of April signed a
proclamation promising amnesty to all who returned to their

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

allegiance. After dwelling at length on the past offences of the Mormons
and the malign influence of their leaders, he declares the territory to
be in a state of rebellion. "This rebellion," he continues, "is not
merely a violation of your legal duty; it is without just cause, without
reason, without excuse. You never made a complaint that was not listened
to with patience. You never exhibited a real grievance that was not
redressed as promptly as it could be…But being anxious to save the
effusion of blood, and to avoid the indiscriminate punishment of a whole
people for crimes of which it is not probable that all are equally
guilty, I offer now a free and full pardon to all who will submit
themselves to the authority of the government." <span
id="fr_794"></span>[26](#fn_794.md)

    The proclamation, though it served its purpose, gave offence to both
parties. The Mormons did not regard themselves as rebels; but claimed
that when Colonel Alexander was ordered to withdraw his forces no
successor to Brigham had been legally appointed and qualified, nor had
he been removed by the president, and that in obstructing the entrance
of an armed force into the territory he had not exceeded his powers as
commander-in-chief of the militia. <span
id="fr_795"></span>[27](#fn_795.md) Moreover, that their complaints had
been ignored instead of receiving a patient hearing, and that none of
their grievances had been redressed, were among the causes that led to
the disturbance. On the other hand, the gentile world declared that if
the Mormon question was ever to be settled, now was the time to settle
it. If the president had excepted from

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

his amnesty the Mormon leaders, this result might have been accomplished
without bloodshed, and the proclamation would at least have been deemed
an act of judicious clemency; but by purging their leaders of offence,
he had rendered nugatory the purpose of the expedition, save to imprison
the troops, during 'King' Buchanan's pleasure, in this western Siberia.

    The document was intrusted to two peace commissioners—L. W. Powell,
ex-governor and senator elect for Kentucky, and Major B. McCulloch, a
soldier of the Mexican war. They were ordered to set out at once for
Utah, circulate the proclamation throughout the territory, and point out
to the Mormons their unfortunate relations with the government, and how
greatly it would be to their interest to submit promptly and peacefully
to its laws. They were to assure them that the despatch of the
expedition had no reference to their religious tenets, and that if they
resumed their allegiance no power in the United States had either the
right or the will to interfere with their religion. "To restore peace in
this manner," writes the secretary of war in his instructions, "is the
single purpose of your mission." <span id="fr_796"></span>[28](#fn_796.md)

    On the 29th of May the commissioners arrived at Camp Scott, where
they remained four days, gathering information as to the condition of
affairs. On the 7th of June they reached Salt Lake City, where Governor
Cumming arrived the next day. On the evening of the 10th they held an
informal interview with Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Daniel H.
Wells, who constituted the first presidency of the church. During the
two following days conferences were held, some in private, and some in
public at the council-house, the apostles and many leading citizens
being present at the latter. The result was that the Mormon authorities
admitted the burning of the army trains and the stampeding of cattle,
and for those acts accepted the president's pardon. All other charges

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

they denied. <span id="fr_797"></span>[29](#fn_797.md) At the same time
they avowed their esteem for the constitution and government of the
United States, and declared that under this constitution they desired to
dwell in peace.

    This concession, slight as it was, the commissioners accepted, and,
at the close of the conference, Powell addressed a large number of
Mormons, expressing his gratification at the result, and declaring that
the army, which would arrive in the valley within a few days, had strict
orders to molest no peaceable citizens in person or property. <span
id="fr_798"></span>[30](#fn_798.md) On the same evening a despatch was sent
to Johnston stating the result of the negotiations, and suggesting that
he issue a proclamation to the people of Utah and march to the valley at
his earliest convenience. An answer was immediately returned, in which
the general expressed his surprise

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

at the uneasiness felt by the Mormons as to their treatment at the hands
of the troops, and enclosed a proclamation wherein he assured the
Mormons that none would be molested, but that all would be protected in
person, rights, and the peaceful pursuit of their vocations. This
proclamation, together with one from Governor Cumming, declaring that
peace was restored, and that the laws, both federal and territorial,
must be strictly obeyed by all, was immediately published. <span
id="fr_799"></span>[31](#fn_799.md)

    The army had marched from Camp Scott on the 13th of June in three
columns, a sufficient garrison being left at Fort Bridger, near which a
score of tents and a few stacks of turf chimneys still marked the site
where the men had passed the winter. On the 14th the command was
encamped on Bear River, where the express arrived from the peace
commissioners, and thence moved slowly forward.

    The scene is impressive, and not without elements of the
picturesque. At Fort Bridger the westward-bound traveller has passed
only the portal of the Rocky Mountains. Between that point and the
valley of Great Salt Lake there is scenery of surpassing loveliness. The
ridges that divide the cañons are richly carpeted with wild flowers,
among which, in midsummer, still linger traces of snow. Thence appear
glimpses of the Bear and Weber rivers, their streams, though swollen and
turbulent at this season, flowing through valleys whose tranquil beauty
recalls the fabled realm of Rasselas. Thence also the silver-crested
lines of the Wasatch and Uintah ranges can be distinctly traced, while
on every side snow-capped peaks are seen in endless perspective, so that
one asks, Whither hurry the swift running rivers? Along the gorges the
path winds here and there through densely interlaced thickets of alder,
hawthorn, and willow,

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

where silence reigns unbroken, save for the rush of waters and the
twittering of birds, whose nests are built in the crevices of cliffs
high overhead.

    Now all is astir throughout this solitude. Among the cañons and
ridges appears for the first time the gleam of sabres and rifle-barrels,
and the stillness of the valley is broken by the measured tramp of armed
men and the rumble of artillery-wagons. Up the steep mountain sides
bands of horsemen are seen spurring to the summit, whence they can
observe the advance of the troops; while groups of half-clad Indians
stand gazing at the pageant, or gallop to and fro with the wonderment of
astonished children.

    On the 26th of June, 1858, the army of Utah enters the valley of the
Great Salt Lake. The day following is the sabbath, and the fourteenth
anniversary of the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. "We will go
far enough into the wilderness," said Brigham before the expulsion from
Nauvoo, "so far that never again will we come in conflict with our
persecutors." They had journeyed some two thousand miles, subsisting at
times on herbs and roots, seeking but to be left alone. After years of
patient toil and self-denial they had built up their new Zion, a city in
which, whatever the faults of its denizens, there was less of gross
dissipation, of lewdness and drunkenness, than among the gentiles. They
had seen their wives and daughters coerced by a militia rabble. They had
not as yet forgotten the days of Nauvoo and the posse comitatus of
Governor Ford. And now the posse comitatus of Governor Cumming was
debouching from the mouth of Emigration Cañon, the spot whence, twelve
years before, the president of their church had selected for them an
abiding-place.

    The rays of the rising sun slant athwart the bayonets of the 5th
infantry as, forming the van of the Union army, it approaches the
outskirts of Salt Lake City. At dusk is still heard in its streets the
rumble of caissons and baggage-wagons. But no other sound

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

is heard, save the murmur of the creek; nor is there sign of life in the
city of the saints. Zion is deserted! <span
id="fr_800"></span>[32](#fn_800.md)

 

    Thirty thousand of the Mormons had left their homes in Salt Lake
City and the northern settlements, taking with them all their movable
effects, and leaving only in the former a score of men, with
instructions to apply the torch if it should be occupied by the troops.
The outer doors were locked, and in the vacant dwellings were heaps of
straw, shavings, and wood ready for the work of destruction. In April,
when Cumming first arrived in the city, he reported that the people were
already moving from the northern settlements. The roads were filled with
wagons laden with provisions and household furniture. By their side
women and children, many of them so thinly clad that their garments
barely concealed their nakedness, some being attired only in sacking,
some with no covering but a remnant of rag-carpet, and some barefooted
and bleeding, <span id="fr_801"></span>[33](#fn_801.md) tramped through the
deep snow, journeying they knew not whither, no more than at the exodus
from Nauvoo; but it was "the will of the Lord," or rather of their
prophet. <span id="fr_802"></span>[34](#fn_802.md) Returning with the peace
commissioners, the governor repaired to the house of Elder Staines, and
found the

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

place abandoned, <span id="fr_803"></span>[35](#fn_803.md) Brigham and
those who took part in the conference with the peace commissioners being
summoned from some unknown point to the southward.

    "What has become of the Mormons?" was a question asked throughout
Europe and America when this second exodus became known. "We are told
that they have embarked for a voyage over five hundred miles of
untracked desert," said the London *Times*. "We think it would be unwise
to treat Mormonism as a nuisance to be abated by a posse comitatus,"
declared the *New York Times*. Meanwhile the Mormons were quietly
sojourning at Provo, some sixty miles to the south of Salt Lake City.
That they would have followed their prophet implicitly whithersoever he
might have led, does not admit of doubt; but after some further
negotiation, Brigham with the members of the first presidency and
certain of the elders returned to their homes on the 1st of July, <span
id="fr_804"></span>[36](#fn_804.md) followed, soon afterward, by the
remainder of the community, and the Utah war was practically at an end.
Two days later the commissioners started for Washington, having
faithfully carried out the spirit and letter of their instructions.

    After remaining for three days on the banks of the

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jordan, the troops
were removed to Cedar Valley, where a site had been selected for an
encampment about midway between Salt Lake City and Provo, <span
id="fr_805"></span>[37](#fn_805.md) from which the forces could operate in
either direction. To this was given the name of Camp Floyd. <span
id="fr_806"></span>[38](#fn_806.md) In the valley there were but two small
settlements, one of them, which was near the camp, containing only ten
families. "I was desirous," writes Johnston, "to avoid proximity to any
settlements, if possible; but this was not practicable, for every
suitable position where there is water is occupied."

    During the march of the army not a house was disturbed, not a
citizen harmed or molested, and during its sojourn of nearly two years
in the territory, instances were rare indeed of gross misconduct on the
part of the soldiery. <span id="fr_807"></span>[39](#fn_807.md) The
Mormons, who had before been eager to fight the troops, were now
thankful for their arrival. Many of the former were still very poor;
they had a few cattle, and a few implements of husbandry, but little
else of this world's goods save their farms and farm-dwellings. They
were ill clad and fed, their diet consisting chiefly of preparations of
corn, flour, and milk, with beet molasses, and the fruits and vegetables
of their gardens. Now they had an opportunity to exchange the products
of their fields and dairies for clothing, for such luxuries as tea,
coffee, sugar, tobacco, and for money—an article still scarce among
them.

    Accompanying the troops, however, was the usual crowd of hucksters
and camp-followers, and a more

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

villanous throng was never gathered from the sweepings of the frontier
states. At Camp Scott and on the march they were kept under strict
surveillance, but here they found a safe field for their operations.
Many of the younger Mormons were corrupted by their example, and in 1859
gambling, theft, drunkenness, and even murder were as common in Salt
Lake City as they became in later years among the mining towns of Nevada
and Colorado. Seldom were the offenders brought to justice, the
authorities being only too glad to let these desperadoes kill each other
off during their drunken carousals; but if arrests were made, resistance
to an officer or any attempt to escape were considered a sufficient
pretext for a free use of the revolver. Thus the community was relieved
from the cost of the prisoner's trial and his support at the
penitentiary, compared with which the expense of a coroner's inquest was
an insignificant item. This was the anti-polygamous civilization which
Buchanan and his army introduced into Utah!

 

    The Utah war was an ill-advised measure on the part of the United
States government. In this, as in other crises, from the time when the
latter-day saints mustered six members until now when they counted
nearly sixty thousand, the Mormons, hated as they were by their
fellow-men, won the respect and almost the esteem of a large portion of
the gentile world. The Utah war cost several hundred lives, and at least
$15,000,000, at a time in the nation's history when men and money could
least be spared, and accomplished practically nothing, save that it
exposed the president and his cabinet to much well-deserved ridicule.
That the Mormons had displayed contempt for Judge Drummond, who had made
himself altogether contemptible, that their treatment of Judge Stiles
was verging on sedition, that they intermeddled with politics and strove
to gain political ascendancy, that they pushed forward their settlements

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

vigorously, <span id="fr_808"></span>[40](#fn_808.md) cannot be disputed;
but here was no cause for a military expedition to uphold the authority
of the government.

 

    With the army of Utah came also the recently appointed officials,
Chief Justice Eckles taking up his quarters at Camp Floyd, Judge
Sinclair being assigned to the first, or as it is now termed the third,
district, which included Salt Lake City, and Judge Cradlebaugh to the
southern counties. <span id="fr_809"></span>[41](#fn_809.md) Alexander
Wilson of Iowa had been chosen United States attorney, and Jacob Forney
of Pennsylvania superintendent of Indian affairs, which office was now
separated from that of governor. John Hartnett as secretary and Peter K.
Dotson as marshal completed the list of officials.

    Convening his court in November 1858, Sinclair, in his charge to the
grand jury, urged the prosecution of Brigham Young, Daniel H. Wells, and
other leading Mormons for treason, polygamy, and intimidation of the
courts. The district attorney refused to present bills of indictment for
treason, on the ground that pardon had been proclaimed by the president
and accepted by the people. To ask a Mormon grand jury to indict the
leading dignitaries of their church for polygamy was, of course, little
better than a farce; while as to the charge of intimidation, referring
to the occasion when Judge Stiles held court at Salt Lake City in 1854,
all the bills were thrown out, with one

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

exception. <span id="fr_810"></span>[42](#fn_810.md)

Thus Sinclair's judicial career resulted in failure, and to this day he
is only remembered in Utah as the judge who appointed a Sunday for the
first execution of a white man that had occurred as yet in the
territory. <span id="fr_811"></span>[43](#fn_811.md)

    To Judge Cradlebaugh belonged a wider sphere of operations; but, as
will presently appear, his proceedings and those of his colleague
wellnigh brought about a renewal of the Utah war, hostilities being
prevented only by the timely interference of the government. The matters
which he proposed to investigate included several outrages, commonly
ascribed to the Mormons, among them being the Mountain Meadows
massacre. <span id="fr_812"></span>[44](#fn_812.md)

    Before presenting this episode, it may be well to make some mention
of a religious movement known in Utah as the reformation, though more in
the nature of a revival, and attended with all the excitement and
bitterness of denunciation common to such movements elsewhere in the
world. On the 13th of September, 1856, Jedediah M. Grant, Joseph Young,
and a few others held a conference at Kaysville, at which the saints
were exhorted to repent, and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance,
to pay their tithing faithfully,

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

to dedicate themselves and their substance to the Lord, to set their
families in order, to purify their houses, their persons, and their
lands. <span id="fr_813"></span>[45](#fn_813.md)

    At the bowery in Salt Lake City, on the morning of the 21st, the day
being a sabbath, Brigham declared that he would no longer dwell among a
people filled with contention, covetousness, pride, and iniquity. Unless
they put away their sins a separation must take place, and the righteous
be forever parted from the ungodly. At the beginning of his discourse he
requested that all who desired to obey the Lord Jesus and live to his
glory, denying themselves of worldly lusts, would signify their
intention by rising to their feet. As a matter of course, the entire
congregation responded. He then asked if there was a man among them who
knew how to handle this world's goods without setting his heart upon
them, using and distributing them only to the glory of God, that that
man would stand up. There was no response. "I tell you," he said, "that
this people will not be suffered to walk as they have walked, to do as
they have done, to live as they have lived." He was followed by Jedediah
M. Grant who declared that there were some among them who, having
received the priesthood, dishonored their cause by committing adultery,
and every other abomination under heaven.

    For many weeks the reformation was preached at the bowery and the
tabernacle, the saints being ordered to renew their covenants, and many
of them were rebaptized by the elders under the direction of Grant, who,
on one occasion, remained so long in the water that he contracted the
disease of which he died toward the close of the year. <span
id="fr_814"></span>[46](#fn_814.md) Meetings held by the home missionaries
throughout the territory were crowded, and full and frank confession was
made, followed in most instances by amendment. Some benefit

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

was wrought by the movement, especially with regard to cleanliness; but
as in other religious agitations, the effect was mainly emotional, the
people being worked up to a state of frenzy, and most of them believing
that the coming of Christ was at hand. The revival lasted well into the
following year, and coupled with the excitement of the approaching war,
may serve to explain the abnormal condition of the community at this
critical period. <span id="fr_815"></span>[47](#fn_815.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_769"></span>[514:1](hou22.htm#fr_769.md) For cut of Echo
Cañon, see *Hayden's The Great West*, 313; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 363. The remains of the breastworks and darts were to be seen
ten years later. *Kirchoff, Reisebilder*, i. 107-8.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[514:2](hou22.htm#fr_770.md) Colonels N. V. Jones
and J. D. T. McAllister.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[514:3](hou22.htm#fr_771.md) For copies of both
letters, see *Secretary of War's Rept House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st
Sess., ii. pt 2, pp. 31-3.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[515:4](hou22.htm#fr_772.md) *Rept of Commissary
Clarke*, in *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, p. 63.
Col. Alexander, however, in his official report to the adjutant-general,
dated Camp Winfield, Oct. 9, 1857, says that only two trains were
destroyed on Green River, but that one was burned on the Big Sandy,
together <span id="page_516">p. 516</span> with a few wagons belonging
to the sutler of the tenth infantry, a few miles behind the latter.
Probably the colonel was for the moment misinformed as to the train
abandoned on the morning of the 4th. The destruction of the sutler's
wagons was perhaps wrought by Haight's party, as Smith states that they
were sent after the convoy of the tenth infantry. Otherwise I find no
evidence that this was the case.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[516:5](hou22.htm#fr_773.md) Lot Smith's
narrative, in *Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 173-5, when stripped of the
braggadocio common to the saints militant—and thus I have given
it—appears to be the best detailed account of this incident. The
portions of it which conflict with the testimony of United States
officials I have omitted. For instance, Smith says: 'His \[Dawson's\]
orders to the train men were from the commander at Camp Winfield, and
were to the effect that the Mormons were in the field, and that they
must not go to sleep, but keep guard on their trains, and that four
companies of cavalry and two pieces of artillery would come over in the
morning to escort them into camp.' The truth appears to be, that Col
Alexander knew nothing about the projected raid. In his report, ut
supra, he mentions that Van Vliet had assured him no armed resistance
would be offered if he did not proceed farther than Fort Bridger and
Fort <span id="page_XXX">p. XXX</span> Supply, and that 100 wagons had
been parked for three weeks on Ham Fork without being molested. On the
other hand, he states in the same report that Col Waite of the fifth
infantry, though not anticipating any trouble, was preparing to send a
detachment to the trains when he heard of their destruction. For other
accounts and comments on the disaster on Green River, see *Hickman's
Destroying Angel*, 117-21; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 189; *Burton's City
of the Saints*, 208-9; *S. F. Bulletin*, Dec. 11, 1857; *S. F. Alta*,
Dec. 17, 30, 1857; *Sac. Union*, Dec. 11, 1857. The list of stores
destroyed is given in *Commissary Clarke's Report*, in *H. Ex. Doc*.,
35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 71, p. 63.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[518:6](hou22.htm#fr_774.md) Johnston's despatch,
in *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 71, pp. 65-6;
*Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 369.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[519:7](hou22.htm#fr_775.md) Rept of Col Johnston,
dated Camp Scott, Nov. 30, 1857, in *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st
Sess., x. no. 71, p. 77.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[519:8](hou22.htm#fr_776.md) *Ibid*. On the 5th
the command passed Devil s Gate, and on the following <span
id="page_520">p. 520</span> day, while erossing what he terms a
four-mile hill, Colonel Cooke writes: 'The north wind and drifting snow
became severe; the air seemed turned to frozen fog; nothing could be
seen; we were struggling in a freezing cloud. The lofty wall at Three
Crossings was a happy relief; but the guide, who had lately passed
there, was relentless in pronouncing that there was no grass… As he
promised grass and other shelter two miles farther, we marched on,
crossing twice more the rocky stream, half choked with snow and ice;
finally he led us behind a great granite rock, but all too small for the
promised shelter. Only a part of the regiment could huddle there in the
deep snow; whilst the long night through the storm continued, and in
fearful eddies from above, before, behind, drove the falling and
drifting snow.' Meanwhile the animals were driven once more across the
stream to the base of a granite ridge which faced the storm, but where
there was grass. They refused to eat, the mules huddling together and
moaning piteously, while some of the horses broke away from the guard
and went back to the ford. The next day better camping-ground was
reached ten miles farther on. On the morning of the 8th, the thermometer
marked 44° below freezing-point; but in this weather and through deep
snow the men made eighteen miles, and the following day nineteen miles,
to the next camping-grounds on Bitter Creek, and in the valley of the
Sweetwater. On the 10th matters were still worse. Herders left to bring
up the rear with the stray mules could not force them from the valley,
and there three fourths of them were left to perish. Nine horses were
also abandoned. At night the thermometer marked 25° below zero; nearly
all the tent-pins were broken, and nearly forty soldiers and teamsters
were on the sick-list, most of them being frost-bitten. 'The earth,'
writes the colonel, 'has a no more lifeless, treeless, grassless desert;
it contains scarcely a wolf to glut itself on the hundreds of dead and
frozen animals which for thirty miles nearly block the road.' *Rept* in
*Id*., pp. 96-9. See also *Rodenbough's From Everglade to Cañon with the
Second Dragoons*, 214-18.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[521:9](hou22.htm#fr_777.md) The Sibley pattern.
Aide-de-camp Lay's despatch to General Harney, in *Rept*, ut supra, 8.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[521:10](hou22.htm#fr_778.md) Capt. H. F. Clarke,
in *Id*., p. 105, gives a statement of the supplies stored at Fort
Bridger, Nov. 28, 1857. There were 150 days’ rations of flour for 2,400
men, 144 of tea or coffee, 217 of sugar, 222 of beans, rice, or
desiccated vegetables, 28 of bacon or ham, 137 of vinegar, and 83 of
molasses.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[521:11](hou22.htm#fr_779.md) The first under
Captain Marcy.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[522:12](hou22.htm#fr_780.md) *Assistant
Quartermaster Dickerson's Rept*, dated Camp Scott, Nov. 29, 1857, in
*Id*., pp. 106-7, where will be found a list of all the clothing on hand
at that date.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[522:13](hou22.htm#fr_781.md) A copy of Brigham's
letter, dated S. L. City, Nov. 26, 1857, stating that he has forwarded a
load of about 800 lbs, to which Col Johnston is welcome as a gift, but
for which payment will be accepted if preferred, will be found in *Id*.,
pp. 110-11 Tullidge says that the salt was secretly brought into camp,
but'that the commander would not eat of it, and that the officers’ mess
was soon afterward supplied by Indians at the rote of $5 per lb. *Hist.
S. L. City*, 196.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[523:14](hou22.htm#fr_782.md) In a song of welcome
composed by W. G. Mills, and published in the Deseret News, Jan. 13,
1858, are the following lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Strong in the power of Brigham's God,  
Your name's a terror to our foes;  
Ye were a barrier strong and broad  
As our high mountains crowned with snows.

.       .       .       .       .

Sing! fellow-soldiers in our cause,  
For God will show his mighty hand:  
Zion shall triumph, and her laws  
The standard be to every land.

</div>

<span id="fn_783"></span>[523:15](hou22.htm#fr_783.md) In *Id*., Jan. 27,
1858, is a song composed by Matthew Rowan of South Cottonwood,
commencing:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Who in all Deseret's afraid  
Of Uncle Sam, and a’ that?</span>

</div>

    A lengthy, and if possible mere silly, effusion appears in *Id*.,
Feb. 17, 1858. Stenhouse relates that after partaking of the sacrament
at the tabernacle the saints concluded divine service with a chorus sung
to the tune of ' Du dah day,' and commencing:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Old Sam has sent, I understand,  
          Du dah,  
A Missouri ass to rule our land,  
          Du dah, du dah day.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 372. I find no mention of such a song in the files of the
*Deseret News*. In the issue of Oct. 21, 1858, is an adapted translation
of the Marseillaise, also rendered by W. G. Mills, who afterward
apostatized.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[523:16](hou22.htm#fr_784.md) For copies of
further correspondence between Brigham and Col Alexander, see
*Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City*, 176-84; for letter addressed by John
Taylor to Capt Marcy. *Id*., 184-9. They are also given with some
additions in the *Deseret News*, Jan. 13, 1858, and in *House Ex. Doc*.,
35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, p. 48 et seq.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[524:17](hou22.htm#fr_785.md) In a sermon
delivered at the tabernacle Dec. 13, 1857, Lorenzo D. Young remarked:
'If our enemies—I do not mean those few out yonder: a swarm of
long-billed mosquitoes could eat them up at a supper spell; I mean the
whole United States and the whole world—if they should come upon us,
they can not prevail.' *Deseret News*, Dec. 23, 1857. The remarks of
other elders, as reported in *Id*., Dec. 16th, were, however, for the
most part rational.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[524:18](hou22.htm#fr_786.md) Overtaking in
southern California the Mormons who had broken up their settlement at
that point and were en route for Utah. *Utah Notes*, MS.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[525:19](hou22.htm#fr_787.md) Col Kane arrived
Feb. 25th. *Deseret News*, March 3, 1858. On March 2d Major Van Vliet
reached S. L. City from Washington at 4 A. M., and started four hours
later, probably for Camp Scott. *St Louis Republican*, Dec. 14th, in
*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[525:20](hou22.htm#fr_788.md) Hyde, *Mormonism*,
146; Waite, *The Mormon Prophet*, 52, and others claim that Col Kane had
actually been baptized at Council Bluffs in 1847. The colonel himself
never made any such statement; and, as Stenhouse remarks, if this had
been the case he would surely have been treated by Brigham with less
respect, for implicit obedience was always required from those who
embraced the faith. *Rocky Mountain Saints*, 382. The truth appears to
be that Kane's Mormon proclivities were due to the kind treatment and
excellent nursing which he received from them in 1847, whereby his life
was saved when he sojourned in one of their camps near Winter Quarters,
as already related. There is no reliable evidence that he was a Mormon.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[526:21](hou22.htm#fr_789.md) It was arranged with
the Mormon officer in charge of the escort that the party should pass
through Echo Cañon at night, the object being, as Cumming supposed, to
conceal the barricades and defences; but bonfires were lighted by the
Mormons, illuminating the valley and the mountain-tops. *Cumming's Rept
to General Johnston, in House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., xiii. no.
138, p. 3. According to some accounts of Cumming's journey to S. L.
City, Col Kimball, who with Porter Rockwell was in command of the
escort, caused a plentiful repast to be prepared for the governor at
Cache Cave, the first halting-place on the route. About 150 men of the
legion were then ordered out and reviewed; and as the party passed other
stations, troops drawn up on both sides of the road saluted the
governor. At one point a mock attempt was made to arrest him, but Col
Kimball interfered. At Echo Cañon hundreds of camp-fires were lighted,
in order to deceive him as to the numbers of the Mormon soldiery.
Cumming supposed that there were 2,000 to 3,000 of them in or near the
cañon, whereas, in fact, there were but the 150 men whom he had first
seen, a portion of them being halted at each stage, while the rest were
ordered to pass by unobserved and await him at the next station. When
within a few miles of S. L. City, he was met by a strong detachment of
the legion, and escorted, amid martial music and salvos of artillery, to
the residence of Elder W. C. Staines. *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*,
53-5; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 389-90. These statements are
not confirmed by *Tullidge in his Hist. S. L. City*.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[527:22](hou22.htm#fr_790.md) On the same sabbath
Cumming, having been informed that many persons desired to leave the
territory but were unlawfully restrained from doing so, caused a notice
to be read in the tabernacle asking them to forward their names and
places of residence. He states that 160 persons, most of whom were of
English birth, claimed his protection, asking to be forwarded to the
eastern states. They were sent to Camp Scott, where they arrived in a
destitute condition, some of them without apparel except for garments
made from the canvas of their wagon-covers. The soldiers shared with
them their rations and clothing. In his report the governor also calls
attention to the depredations of Indians, and says he has been informed
that Garland Hurt had roused to acts of hostility the Indians of Uintah
Valley. Hurt, who, as will be remembered, was the only gentile official
remaining in Utah after the departure of Judge Drummond, states that
when martial law was proclaimed he was unwilling to apply to Brigham for
a passport, and, with the aid of Uintah Indians, made his escape, after
much privation, to Johnston's camp, then on the Sweetwater. He declares
that he was surrounded by Mormons and escaped at great risk of life.
Brigham, on the other hand, offered him safe and speedy transportation,
and tried to dissuade him from exposing himself to needless risk and
hardship. Copies of the correspondence will be found in *House Ex.
Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71. pp. 205-10, passim.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[528:23](hou22.htm#fr_791.md) *House Ex. Doc*.,
35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. pt 1, p. 10. A complimentary letter was handed
to the colonel by Buchanan on the eve of his departure for Utah. Whether
Kane was intrusted with any direct communication from the president to
Brigham, and if so what was its purport, does not appear.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[528:24](hou22.htm#fr_792.md) The sixth and
seventh infantry, first cavalry, and two batteries of artillery.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[528:25](hou22.htm#fr_793.md) At a cost of
$1,220,000, the estimate being for 4,880,000 rations, at 25 cents per
ration. This, of course, does not include freight. The effective force
numbered 5,606, and there were 1,894 employes, 300 servants, and 200
women, for whom rations were also allowed, making 8,000 in all. *Letter
from the Secretary of War*, in *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess.,
ix. no. 33. A statement of all contracts made in connection with the
expedition for 1858 will be found in *Id*., xii. no. 99.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[530:26](hou22.htm#fr_794.md) For copies of the
proclamation, see *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. 1, pt 1,
pp. 69-72; *Deseret News*, June 16, 1858.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[530:27](hou22.htm#fr_795.md) It does not appear
that Brigham had been officially notified of Cumming's appointment when
he sent his despatch to Alexander by the hands of Wells. In his answer
Alexander addresses him as governor, it will be remembered; and in his
official report, in *House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. pp. 24-6,
Van Vliet also speaks of him as governor. Cumming did not receive his
appointment until the 11th of July, 1857, and in view of the
interruption of the mails, it is probable that no official intimation
had reached S. L. City as early as Oct. 4th, when the baggage trains
were burned at Simpson Hollow.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[531:28](hou22.htm#fr_796.md) *Sen. Doc*., 35th
Cong. 2d Sess., ii. p. 161.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[532:29](hou22.htm#fr_797.md) The commissioners’
rept to the secretary of war, in *Id*., 168-72. The Mormon version of
these negotiations, as given in the *Deseret News*, June 23, 1858,
confirms that of the commissioners. A concise statement of what was said
at the conference on the 11th and 12th, addressed by the commissioners
to the secretary of war after their return to Washington, in the report,
pp. 175-7, is also signed by Brigham, who declares it to be
substantially correct. Tullidge, *Hist. S. L. City*, 215-6, has a
sensational account of the matter, in brief as follows: During the
conference of the 11th he relates that O. P. Rockwell entered the
council-chamber and whispered to the ex-governor. Brigham rose and said
sharply, 'Governor Powell, are you aware, sir, that those troops are on
the move towards the city?' 'It cannot be,' exclaimed Powell. 'I have
received a despatch that they are on the march for this city. My
messenger would not deceive me.' The commissioners were silent. 'Is
brother Dunbar present?' inquired Brigham. 'Yes, sir,' was the response.
'Brother Dunbar, sing "Zion."' Zion was sung—a favorite song with the
Mormons—in which occur the lines:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Sacred home of the prophets of God;  
  Thy deliverance is nigh,  
  Thy oppressors shall die,  
And the gentiles shall bow ’neath thy rod.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cumming and
McCulloch then withdrew. 'What would you do with such a people?' asked
the governor, 'Damn them! I would fight them if I had my way,' answered
the major. 'Fight them, would you? Did you notice the snap in those
men's eyes to-day? They would never know when they were whipped!' The
'gentile yoke' recurs ad nauseam in Mormon song and hymn. In their
national anthem we read:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Hosanna, hosanna, to God! He has broke  
From off our necks the gentile yoke.'</span>

</div>

and in their national hymn:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'All hell has combin’d with this world's bitter
hatred  
Usurped men's best rights, all our freedom supprest.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Snow's Poems*, i.
261,265.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[532:30](hou22.htm#fr_798.md) On the 16th the
commissioners addressed a large number of people at Provo, and on the
17th at Lehi. *Rept*, ut supra, 171. Their speeches at Provo are given
in the *Deseret News*, July 14, 1858.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[533:31](hou22.htm#fr_799.md) For copies of both
proclamations. see *Sen. Doc*., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. pp. 113, 121;
*Deseret News*, June 23, July 7, 1858; and of Johnston's proclamation,
*New York Herald*, July 15. 1858, in *Millennial Star*, xx. 532.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[535:32](hou22.htm#fr_800.md) Johnston's despatch,
in *Sen. Doc*., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. p. 122. Tullidge says that
Colonel Cooke, who had commanded the Mormon battalion in 1847, rode
through the city bareheaded. *Hist. S. L. City*, 224.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[535:33](hou22.htm#fr_801.md) *Jennings’ Mat.
Progr. in Utah*, MS., 2, where it is stated that, during the spring of
1858, the stock of clothing became exhausted and there were no means to
replenish it. Among those who set forth from S. L. City was Mrs Jos.
Horne, who started on the 1st of May for Parowan, her husband being
employed in raising cotton about 100 miles to the south of that
settlement. She had two teams for herself, her ten children, and her
husband's second wife and baby. They were one month on the journey,
sleeping in their wagons, and cooking at the roadside, were scantily
clad and provisioned, and almost without money. On arriving at Parowan
Mrs Horne earned the means for clothing her children comfortably by
sewing, a party of Mormons having arrived there from San Bernardino,
with a load of dry goods. *Horne's Migr. and Settlem. L. D. Saints*,
MS., 36.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[535:34](hou22.htm#fr_802.md) Cummmg states that
at the tabernacle, on Apr. 11th, Brigham mentioned Sonora as their goal.
*House Ex. Doc*., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., xiii. p. 6, note. I find no
mention of this in the files of the *Deseret News*. Between May 12 and
Sept. 1, 1858, this paper was published at Fillmore City.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[536:35](hou22.htm#fr_803.md) Tullidge relates
that at the elder's house a cold lunch was spread for the governor, and
in the garden loads of straw were significantly heaped up. Inquiring the
cause of the silence that pervaded the city, Mrs Cumming was told that
the Mormons had resolved to burn it if the army should attempt its
occupation. 'How terrible!' she exclaimed, 'it has the appearance of a
city that has been afflicted with a plague. Every house looks like a
tomb of the dead. For two miles I have seen but one man in it. Poor
creatures! And so all have left their hard-earned homes.' Bursting into
tears, she turned to her husband: 'Oh Alfred!' she said, 'something must
be done to bring them back! Do not permit the army to stay in the city.
Can't you do something for them?' 'Yes, madam,' he replied, 'I shall do
all I can, rest assured.' A few days after the conference with the
commissioners Cumming followed the Mormons 50 miles to the southward,
pleaded with them, at first in vain, but finally induced them to return.
*Hist. S. L. City*, 213, 225-6.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[536:36](hou22.htm#fr_804.md) *Deseret News*, July
14, 1858. The peace commissioners, whose last report from S. L. City is
dated July 3d, also mention that the ex-governor and other leading
Mormons had then returned with their families. *Sen. Doc*., 35th Cong.
2d Sees., ii. 173. Stenhouse, *Rocky Mountain Saints*; 399, and
Tullidge, *Hist. S. L. City*, 226, state that Brigham did not start from
Provo till the 5th.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[537:37](hou22.htm#fr_805.md) Salt Lake City was
36 miles north and Provo about the same distance south-east of the camp.
Johnston's despatch in *Sen. Doc*., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. 122. Grass
was abundant in Cedar Valley, and also in Rush and Tintic valleys near
by.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[537:38](hou22.htm#fr_806.md) So named after John
B. Floyd, then secretary of war.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[537:39](hou22.htm#fr_807.md) The men were seldom
allowed to leave camp, and only one serious affair occurred, a sergeant
named Pike being accused of cracking the skull of a Mormon with his
musket. During the sergeant's trial in Salt Lake City he was shot on the
public street, and afterward died. His assassin escaped. *Stenhouse's
Rocky Mountain Saints*, 419. Waite, *The Mormon Prophet*, 73, says that
the culprit, whose name was Spencer, was lauded for his courage in the
next issue of the *Deseret News*. I find no mention of it in the files
of that paper.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[539:40](hou22.htm#fr_808.md) Tullidge, *Hist.
S. L. City*, 138-9, says it was feared they would settle territory which
'would come within the political boundaries of half a dozen states, in
which they would cast their potent united vote,' and that immigration
and the rapid increase of offspring would, within the century, give them
a million of people. In a leading article, the *New York Herald* stated
that the Mormons held the whip-handle over the U.S., Fillmore and Pierce
having given it into the hands of Brigham. Much similar nonsense may be
found by turning over the newspaper files of this period.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[539:41](hou22.htm#fr_809.md) By act approved Dec.
27, 1865, the judicial districts were altered, Millard, Piute, Sevier,
San Pete, Juab, Utah, and Wasatch counties forming the first district;
Kane, Washington, Iron, and Beaver counties the second; and Great Salt
Lake, Tooele, Summit, Green River, Davis, Morgan, Weber, Box Elder,
Cache, and Richland, afterward Rich, counties the third. *Utah Acts
Legisl*. (ed. 1866), 194.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[540:42](hou22.htm#fr_810.md) That of James
Ferguson. See chap. xvii., note [18](hou20.htm#fn_651.md), this vol.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[540:43](hou22.htm#fr_811.md) That of Thomas H.
Ferguson for murder. The execution was, of course, postponed, and took
place on Friday, Oct. 28, 1859. An account of it will be found in the
*Deseret News*, Nov. 2, 1859, and the *Sac. Union*, Nov. 17, 1859.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[540:44](hou22.htm#fr_812.md) Stenhouse, *Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 402-3, states that the judges were supported by the
*Valley Tan* newspaper, the first number of which appeared Nov. 5, 1858.
This was the first gentile newspaper published in Utah; it ran for only
about a year and a half. The phrase 'valley tan' was first applied to
leather tanned in the valley, and afterward to other articles of home
production. Taylor, *Reminiscences*, MS., 14-15, says that the term was
applied to crockcry, medicines, whiskey, furniture, and even to gold
coin made in S. L. City. In fact, it became synonymous, as I have said,
with home-made or Utah-manufactured. As to the manufacture of whiskey,
President Taylor states that alcohol was first n made by the saints for
bathing, pickling, and medicinal purposes, and was little used for
drinking. Stills were afterward obtained from emigrants, and the
manufacture and sale of alcohol were later controlled by the city
councils. The first bar-room in S. L. City, and the only one for years,
was in the Salt Lake House, owned by President Young and Feramorz
Little. It was opened for the accommodation of travellers, whose
requirements would be supplied by some one, and it was thought by the
brethren that they had better control the trade than have outsiders do
so.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[541:45](hou22.htm#fr_813.md) For proceedings of
conference, see *Deseret News*, Sept. 24, 1856. 'Saints, live your
religion,' was the text of a sermon delivered by Brigham at the
tabernacle.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[541:46](hou22.htm#fr_814.md) For a description of
his obsequies, see *Deseret News*. Dec. 10, 1856.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[542:47](hou22.htm#fr_815.md) In *Stenhouse's
Rocky Mountain Saints*, 292-305, and *Stenhouse's Tell It All*, 310-23,
are sensational accounts of the reformation, the former by an
eye-witness, who appears to have witnessed things which no one else
observed. He states that teachers were appointed for each ward, whose
duty was to pry into every secret, and learn the private history of
every family, men, women, and children being asked the most indelicate
questions about private actions and secret thoughts. He declares that a
catechism of all obscene nature was printed by authority of Brigham and
put into the hands of every elder, bishop, missionary, and teacher,
those who refused to answer the questions being in danger of the ban of
the church, and those who answered them being reported to the
authorities and roundly abused at the public meetings. At a gathering
held at the social hall, attended only by men, Brigham bid all who had
been guilty of adultery to stand up. More than three fourths of the
audience rose to their feet. This Mr Stenhouse explains on the
supposition that the crime was admitted as having occurred at any time
during the whole course of their lives as Mormons. He also states that
during his twenty-five years’ connection with Mormonism he knew only of
two or three cases of adultery. The account of the reformation as given
in the text is taken principally from the files of the *Deseret News*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Mountain Meadows Massacre. 1857.](hou23.md)
