[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou27)  [Next](hou29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_677">p. 677</span>

### CHAPTER XXV. CHURCH AND STATE. 1877-1885.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Conference of the
Church—Reorganization of the First Presidency—John Taylor Appointed
President—His Appearance and Mien—the Edmunds Bill—Its Penalties—An Ex
Post Facto Law—Polygamists Disfranchised—Utah Again Refused Admission As
a State—Operations of the Utah Commission—Govenor Murray's Message—His
Administration.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">Many</span> years before the death of
Brigham Young it was predicted that whenever that event should happen
dissensions would occur among the Mormons, if not entire disintegration
of the sect; for die when he would, or succeed him who might, such
absolute power as he possessed would never be tolerated in another. He
was elected at a time when his people were in distress, and accepting
him as their deliverer, they had almost sunk their individuality,
vesting him with all the powers of pope and potentate. But now, it was
said, all was changed. Contact with the gentile world, the establishment
of gentile schools and churches, together with other influences that had
long been at work, were telling gradually upon their faith. Already they
had grown weary of the yoke, and once Brigham was laid in the tomb, his
followers would no longer exist as a people. Never was anticipation so
ill-founded. The world was now to learn that the inherent vitality of
Mormonism depended not on the existence of any one man or body of men,
not even on the existence of the twelve. "If every apostle was slain but
one," remarked George Q. Cannon at

<span id="page_678">p. 678</span>

the October conference of 1877, "that one had the right and authority to
organize the church, and ordain other apostles and a first presidency to
build up the kingdom of God."

    On the decease of the president of the church, there was for the
second time in its history no quorum of the first presidency, to which
authority, and to no other, as the prophet Joseph had declared, the
twelve were subject. Once more, therefore, until the presidency was
reorganized, the apostles must step forward and take its duties upon
themselves. <span id="fr_1122"></span>[1](#fn_1122.md) At a meeting of the
quorum, held two days after the obsequies of Brigham, ten of the number
being present, <span id="fr_1123"></span>[2](#fn_1123.md) it was
unanimously resolved that John Taylor, the senior apostle and acting
president of the apostles, should be sustained in his office, and that
the quorum should be the presiding authority of the church. <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[3](#fn_1124.md) But this resolution, as well as the
election of all the authorities of the church, from the twelve down to
the deacons and teachers, must be indorsed by a vote of each quorum of
the priesthood and of the people assembled in conference.

    The forty-eighth semi-annual conference of the church was held, as
was now the custom, in the great tabernacle; <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[4](#fn_1125.md) and in addition to the general
congregation, there were present more than five thousand of the
priesthood. First was presented the name of John Taylor; then in their
order and separately those of each member of the twelve, together with
councillors John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells, <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[5](#fn_1126.md) the

<span id="page_679">p. 679</span>

patriarch of the church, <span id="fr_1127"></span>[6](#fn_1127.md) the
presidents of the seventies, and other church dignitaries, concluding
with the lesser priesthood. The votes were cast first by the twelve,
then by the patriarchs, presidents of stakes, and high councils, after
whom followed the high priests, the seventies, the elders, the bishops,
with their councillors, the priests, deacons, and teachers,

<span id="page_680">p. 680</span>

and finally the entire congregation. During the proceedings there was no
haste. Ample time was allowed for objection to be made to any of the
names proposed or to any of the propositions offered; but throughout
this vast gathering there was not a dissenting vote. As the quorums rose
to their feet, and with uplifted hand vowed to sustain those whom their
leaders had chosen, the choice was in every instance confirmed by
assembled Israel. It was evident that, as yet, the church was in no
danger of dissolution. <span id="fr_1128"></span>[7](#fn_1128.md)

    Addressing the congregation, President Taylor remarked that the
apostles were thankful for the confidence and faith that had been
manifested. For several reasons he had said little since the death of
the president, who for thirty-three years had stood prominently before
the church. In common with the rest of the community, he felt sad at
heart. Moreover, a multiplicity of cares now devolved upon the twelve,
and, so far as his position was concerned, he did not wish to say
anything that might influence their choice, but desired to leave the
minds of all perfectly unbiased. "If," he said, "we could carry out in
our lives what we have made manifest this day by our votes, the kingdom
of God would roll forth, and the favor and blessing of God would rest
upon us." "No man need think this work would stop. It would go on and
increase until the purposes of Jehovah were accomplished, and no power
on earth or in hell could stay its progress." Three years
afterward <span id="fr_1129"></span>[8](#fn_1129.md) John Taylor was
elected president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as councillors. The vacancies
which thus occurred in the quorum of the twelve were partially filled by
the election of Francis M. Lyman <span id="fr_1130"></span>[9](#fn_1130.md)
and

<span id="page_681">p. 681</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> John Henry
Smith, <span id="fr_1131"></span>[10](#fn_1131.md) George Teasdale and
Heber J. Grant being chosen to the apostolate on the death of Orson
Pratt, which occurred in October 1881. <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[11](#fn_1132.md)

<span id="page_682">p. 682</span>

    Says Mr Burton in 1861: "Austin Ward describes John Taylor as 'an
old man, deformed and crippled,' and Mrs. Ferris as a 'heavy, dark
colored, beetle-brewed man.' Of course I could not recognize him from
these descriptions—a stout, good-looking, somewhat elderly personage,
with a kindly gray eye, pleasant expression, and a forehead of the
superior order." <span id="fr_1133"></span>[12](#fn_1133.md) When I was
introduced to him in 1884, Mr Taylor being then in his seventy-seventh
year, there stepped forward with a quick, decisive, nervous tread,
greeting me with a smile and a cordial shake of the hand, a
white-haired, benevolent-looking man of medium height and well-knit
figure, long, oval face, gray, deep-set, penetrating eye, square, broad
forehead, and firmly clasped lips, displaying a fixed determination,
slightly tinged with melancholy, such as might be expected from one who
had passed through many trying scenes, not the least among which was the
escape, as by a miracle, from the tragedy of Carthage jail, and who knew
that he had still many trials to undergo. <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[13](#fn_1134.md)

    Days of tribulation were indeed at hand. The saints, who for so many
years had been buffeted, afflicted, tormented for opinion's sake, were
again, after a brief respite, to be subjected to so-called christian
influence. The anti-polygamy law of 1862 was, as we have seen,
inoperative, although declared constitutional

<span id="page_683">p. 683</span>

by the supreme court of the United States. Under the Poland bill only
one conviction was made, that of George Reynolds, private secretary to
Brigham, the man being sentenced to fine and imprisonment. <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[14](#fn_1135.md) Both these measures were sufficiently
ill-advised, and rank, perhaps, among the clumsiest specimens of
legislation as yet devised by man; but it remained for the Edmunds bill
to cap the climax of absurdity by virtually setting aside the statute of
limitations, and providing for the punishment of persons living at any
time with other than their legal wives.

    By the provisions of this bill, approved March 22, 1882. and of
which brief mention has already been made, <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[15](#fn_1136.md) polygamists were made liable to
punishment by fine not exceeding $500 and imprisonment not exceeding
five years, the president being authorized to grant amnesty on such
conditions as he saw fit to those who might have offended before the
passage of the act, provided the conditions were afterward complied
with. Cohabitation with more than one woman in any territory of the
United States, whether in the marriage relation or otherwise, was
declared a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $300, or
by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both, at the
discretion of the court. In all prosecutions for bigamy, polygamy, or
unlawful cohabitation—the three offenses being classed together, though
differing widely in law—it was to be deemed sufficient cause for
challenge that a juryman lived or had ever lived in these practices, or
believed it right for one so to live. No polygamist was to be entitled
to vote at

<span id="page_684">p. 684</span>

any election, or to hold any position of public trust, honor, or
emolument.

    All the registration and election offices throughout the territory
were declared vacant, and all duties relating to the registration of
voters, the conduct of elections, the receiving, rejection, canvassing,
and return of votes, and the issuing of certificates, were to be
performed by persons selected by a board of five commissioners, of whom
three might belong to the same political party. <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[16](#fn_1137.md) After scrutiny by the board of the
returns of all votes for members of the legislative assembly,
certificates were to be issued to those who had been legally elected,
and on or after the first meeting of an assembly, the members of which
had been so elected, that body might make such laws as it saw fit
concerning the offices declared vacant, provided they were not
inconsistent with the organic act and with the laws of the United
States. <span id="fr_1138"></span>[17](#fn_1138.md)

    The Edmunds act, intended to be supplementary to the act of 1862 and
to the Poland bill, is virtually a penal statute, as indicated by its
title, "A bill to amend section 5352 of the revised statutes of the
United States, in reference to bigamy, and for other purposes." It is
also an ex post facto law, a bill of pains and penalties, wherein the
judicial function, after being misinterpreted, is usurped by the
legislature and the executive—one that might not have

<span id="page_685">p. 685</span>

been amiss in the days of the star-chamber, but is directly at variance
with the spirit and letter of the American constitution; and the more so
when we consider that the Mormons, driven by persecution out of the
United States, settled in what was then no portion of the territory of
the United States, though aiding in the conquest and settlement of that
territory, as did the colonists of Rhode Island, in 1636, when they fled
from the sectional intolerance of Massachusetts.

    But not only were the Mormons to be judged as criminals by an ex
post facto law—one that barred the statute of limitations, and if
strictly enforced would bring within its pale no inconsiderable portion
of the adult male population of the United States—they were also to be
stripped of the franchise, and made ineligible for office. It was argued
in the senate that this was no penalty, and it may be admitted that, as
a rule, to deprive men of the suffrage, and disqualify them for office,
is not a severe punishment; but in Utah, where at least five hundred
lucrative positions would have been laid open to a hungry horde of
gentile office-seekers, the suffrage was worth more than houses and
lands, for by the ballot alone could be held in check the greed of
demagogues, who sought the control of the territory as a field for
plunder and oppression. The bill virtually proposed to disfranchise a
people, and to govern them by a committee of five men, or at least to
create a government by a minority over a large majority; for it was not
to be expected that these five men, of whom a quorum belonged to the
same political faction, would decide impartially on the electoral
qualifications of the people. It was so expressed, and its measures were
indorsed by the congress and president of the United States, the
question being not whether congress had power to repeal any or all of
the laws in each of the territories, and intrust the legislative,
executive, and judicial functions to whomsoever it pleased—this was

<span id="page_686">p. 686</span>

not disputed—but whether it was at liberty to violate for any purpose
the rights guaranteed in the constitution.

    If there be anything sacred in the American constitution, or in the
annals of American jurisprudence, it is that in criminal prosecutions
the accused should be tried by an impartial, and not by a packed,
jury—by men opposed to him through interest or prejudice, and on whom a
religious test is imposed as a qualification. Under the Poland bill it
was ordered that grand and petit juries should, if possible, be composed
in equal proportions of Mormons and gentiles, or non-Mormons. The latter
included, in 1874, about twenty-two per cent of the entire population,
and as this measure gave to them the same representation in juries as
was allowed to the remaining seventy-eight per cent, its injustice is
sufficiently apparent. But under the Edmunds act juries might be
composed entirely of gentiles, thus giving to twenty-two, or at that
date perhaps twenty-five, per cent of the population the control of the
entire criminal proceedings in Utah, although more than seven eighths of
the arrests made in the territory were among gentile citizens. <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[18](#fn_1139.md)

    Before striving to regenerate the Mormons, it would seem that
congress should have attempted the regeneration of the gentile portion
of the population of Utah. At the time when the Edmunds bill was passed,
all the keepers of brothels, and nearly all the gamesters and
saloon-keepers, were gentiles. Two hundred out of the two hundred and
fifty towns and villages in the territory contained not a single
bagnio. <span id="fr_1140"></span>[19](#fn_1140.md) Until gentiles settled
in Salt Lake City there were seldom heard in its streets or dwellings
oaths, imprecations, or expletives; there were no place-hunters or
beggar-politicians; there was no harlotry;

<span id="page_687">p. 687</span>

and there was neither political nor judicial prostitution. The Mormons
were a people singularly free from vice—unless that can be called a vice
which forms part of the tenets of their church—and they were one of the
most industrious, sober, and thrifty communities in the world.

 

    Partly with a view to avoid the operation of the Edmunds act, the
Mormons once more asked that Utah be admitted as a state. Seventy-two
delegates from the different counties met at Salt Lake City, and during
a nine days’ session drew up a constitution, <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[20](#fn_1141.md) which was duly presented by Delegate
John T. Caine, but with the usual result; and now the Mormons were left
to the tender mercies of the commission. The members <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[21](#fn_1142.md) went to work vigorously; between 1882
and 1884 some twelve thousand persons were disfranchised, <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[22](#fn_1143.md) and at the latter date all the
municipal and other officers in the territory living in polygamy or
unlawful cohabitation were superseded, each elector being also required
to swear that he was not so living. It would be a curious subject for
speculation to estimate how many voters would be disqualified if the law
against illicit cohabitation were enforced in other portions of the
United States.

    The commission was seconded by Governor Eli H. Murray, who succeeded
Emery, arriving in Salt Lake

<span id="page_688">p. 688</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> City on the 28th
of February, 1880, and in 1884 was again appointed. His message for 1882
was in the mood of former governors of Utah. "In no sense, even in the
slightest degree," he remarked, "is the sovereignty of church over state
in unison with the language or spirit of the constitution, or your
country's laws. That political power is wielded by church authority
throughout Utah is a fact; that officers of the church exercise
authority in temporal affairs is a fact; that the sovereignty of the
church is supreme, and its practices followed, the laws and courts of
the United States to the contrary, is a fact. These being true in whole
or in part, I submit: Do you believe that the government of the United
States, with all its humanity, will much longer forbear to assert its
authority in support of its absolute and undoubted sovereignty? Abiding
peace, so much needed, and abundant prosperity, with its attendant
blessings, can never belong to the good people of Utah until the symbol
of the United States is universally regarded as the symbol of absolute
sovereignty." Touching the matter of tithing, he said: "The poor man who
earns a dollar by the sweat of his brow is entitled to that dollar. It
is the reward of honest toil, and he should be protected in the full
enjoyment of it. Any exaction or undue influence to dispossess him of
any part of it, in any other manner than in payment of a legal
obligation, is oppression." <span id="fr_1144"></span>[23](#fn_1144.md) One
would think that after two years’ residence in Utah the governor ought
to have learned at least that, among the saints, the payment of tithes
is an optional matter.

    Among the first important acts of Governor Murray was to grant to
Allan G. Campbell a certificate of election as delegate to congress,
although he received only 1,350 votes as against 18,568 polled for
George Q. Cannon, <span id="fr_1145"></span>[24](#fn_1145.md) and to
declare that the latter

<span id="page_689">p. 689</span>

was not a citizen of the United States, <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[25](#fn_1146.md) notwithstanding that he held a
certificate of citizenship. Thus the chief magistrate took upon himself
a function altogether

<span id="page_690">p. 690</span>

outside the intent of the national legislature as expressed in the
Edmunds act, which was at best but a temporary and ill-judged measure,
and one that in the opinion of some of the ablest lawyers in the United
States was unconstitutional.

    Not content with this puerile display of authority, the governor, at
the conclusion of what he terms "the faithful labors of the
commissioners appointed under the Edmunds act," recommended that the
legislature be abolished, and that Utah be placed entirely under control
of a commission to be selected by the president, not as was done with
the territory of Louisiana and the District of Columbia, but to reduce
its inhabitants to the condition of serfs; "for," he remarks, "I
confidently believe that from such action by congress and a council
composed of men loyal to the constitution and the laws, there would come
that adjustment of wrongs and termination of contentions so earnestly
prayed for by those in Utah who possess the intelligence and one third
of the wealth of the territory." <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[26](#fn_1147.md) To the Mormons, as it would seem, he
denied the attribute of intelligence; and by such rulers, with scarce an
exception, has this people been misgoverned—a people which to impartial
observers has been subjected to abuse, calumny, and persecution such as
are almost without parallel, even in their Hebrew prototype.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[678:1](hou28.htm#fr_1122.md) At the conference
above mentioned, George Q. Cannon remarked that some had been much
exercised about the organization of a first presidency, 'but he wished
them distinctly to understand that whenever God commanded a first
presidency to be appointed it would not be revealed through any one but
his servant, who was now God's mouthpiece.' *Deseret News*, Oct. 10,
1877.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[678:2](hou28.htm#fr_1123.md) Apostles Orson
Pratt and Joseph F. Smith were in England at the time. *Millennial
Star*, xxxix. 682. They arrived two or three weeks later. See *Deseret
News*, Oct. 10, 1877.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[678:3](hou28.htm#fr_1124.md) General Epistle of
the Twelve, in *Millennial Star*, xxxix. 680-4. See also *Deseret News*,
September 12, 1877; *Mormon Pamphlets, Religious*, no. 16.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[678:4](hou28.htm#fr_1125.md) Completed in 1870.
A description of it is given elsewhere in this vol.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[678:5](hou28.htm#fr_1126.md) Daniel H. Wells was
a native of Oneida co., N.Y., his father, who was a direct descendant of
the fourth governor of Connecticut, having served in the <span
id="page_679">p. 679</span> war of 1812, while his mother, née Catherine
Chapin, was the daughter of a revolutionary soldier who fought under
Washington. In the spring of 1834, being then in his twentieth year, he
settled at Commerce (Nauvoo), and purchased a tract of 80 acres, a
portion of which he afterward donated to the Mormons as a site for their
temple. He was among the foremost to aid and welcome the saints after
their expulsion from Nauvoo, and indignation at their maletreatment,
rather than sympathy with their sect, caused him to join the church a
few weeks before the commencement of the exodus. Arriving in the valley
of Great Salt Lake in September 1848, he was appointed superintendent of
public works, and was chosen a member of the legislative council of the
provisional state of Deseret. In 1857 he was elected second councillor
to Brigham Young. In 1864-5 he was in charge of the European missions,
and was afterward mayor of Salt Lake City for several terms. The part
that he played in the history of Utah as lieut-gen. of the Nauvoo legion
is mentioned elsewhere in these pages. *Wells’ Narr.*, MS., 1-8;
*Tullidge's Life of Brig. Young*, suppl. 13-17; *The Mormons at Home*,
114-15; *Beadle's Western Wilds*, 93.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[679:6](hou28.htm#fr_1127.md) John Smith, son of
Hyrum Smith, was a native of Kirtland, where he was born in 1832. Nearly
two years after the assassination of his father in Carthage jail the boy
set forth from Nauvoo in company with Heber C. Kimball's family.
Reaching the encampment on the Little Papillon, he became acquainted
with Col Thos L. Kane, whom he nursed through a dangerous sickness,
probably saving his life. In April 1848 he started for Great Salt Lake
in company with his brothers and sisters, and though only 15 years of
age, performed a man's work, or rather the work of several men, driving
a team composed of wild steers, cows, and oxen, with two wagons tied
together, standing guard sometimes day and night, bringing in wood and
water, herding cows, or assisting other teams as occasion needed. In the
spring of 1850 he was enrolled in the battalion of life-guards, and for
several years thereafter was frequently called on at dead of night to
set forth in pursuit of marauding Indians. In 1852 occurred the decease
of his step-mother, whereby he was left alone to provide for a family of
eight persons, three of them being aged and infirm. In 1855 he was
ordained patriarch, this being the only office in the church which is
handed down from father to son in direct lineage. Ten years later he was
sent on a mission to Scandinavia, and arriving in Liverpool with a
single guinea in his pocket, about sufficient to procure him a meal and
pay his railroad fare to London, borrowed the money for the remainder of
his passage. After two years of missionary labor he returned to Salt
Lake City, taking charge of a company of 300 emigrants on board the ship
*Monarch of the Sea*. During his journey across the plains he had under
his care a large party of Scandinavian emigrants, and was frequently
urged by the officers at government posts which he passed en route to
remain with them for a season, as the Indians were at that time
extremely troublesome. His answer was: 'I am used to Indian warfare, and
have only provisions enough to take us home if we keep moving; We had
better run the risk of fighting Indians than starve on the plains.'
After his return the patriarch was engaged in the duties of his calling
and in attending to his business interests. *Autobiog. of John Smith*,
MS.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[680:7](hou28.htm#fr_1128.md) For account of this
conference, see *Deseret News*, Oct. 10, 17, 1877.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[680:8](hou28.htm#fr_1129.md) At the general
conference, commencing on the 6th of October, 1880.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[680:9](hou28.htm#fr_1130.md) Francis Marion, the
eldest son of Amasa Lyman, a pioneer, who was excommunicated in 1870,
was but seven years of age at the date of the exodus from Nauvoo. As an
instance of the experience of Mormon evangelists, it may be mentioned
that when ordered on mission to England in 1859, he was compelled to
leave his newly married wife almost destitute, building for her <span
id="page_681">p. 681</span> with his own hands a log hut of green
timber. In the spring of 1863 he settled at Fillmore, and there remained
until 1877, when he was appointed president of the Tooele stake. In 1860
he was elected a member of the legislature, and on the death of Orson
Pratt was appointed speaker of the house of representatives.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[681:10](hou28.htm#fr_1131.md) The son of George
A. Smith, and a native of Winter Quarters, where he was born Sept. 18,
1848. The first portion of his life was spent mainly at Provo, where he
worked on a farm until 1874, when he was sent on a mission to Europe,
returning the following year on account of the sickness of his father,
whose decease occurred a few days after his arrival. In 1875, also, he
was ordained bishop of the 17th ward at S. L. City, in which capacity he
served until called to the apostolate. For six years he was a member of
the city council, and in August 1881 was elected a member of the
legislature, where he soon became one of the most prominent debaters.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[681:11](hou28.htm#fr_1132.md) Orson Pratt, in
1881 the only surviving member of the first quorum of the twelve, was
accounted one of the most eloquent preachers in the church; and for his
championship of the cause, as a speaker and writer, was known as the
Paul of Mormonism. At a general conference held in 1874 he was appointed
church historian and recorder, retaining this position until his
decease, and was also speaker of the legislative assembly. He was well
versed in the sciences, including that of the pure mathematics, and in
addition to several elementary works, published *A New and Easy Method
of Solution of the Cubic and Biquadratic Equations*, and left in MS. a
treatise on the differential calculus. *S. L. C. Contributor*, iii.
58-61. For resolutions of respect to his memory, see *Utah Jour.
Legisl*.

    George Teasdale, a native of London, and an episcopalian by
training, joined the church in 1852 being then in his 21st year. After
several years of missionary labor, during which he was appointed in 1858
to the pastoral care of three English conferences, and in 1859 to the
charge of the Scottish mission, which comprised the Edinburgh, Glasgow,
and Dundee conferences, he was ordered to set forth for Zion. Borrowing
the necessary funds, he took a steerage passage for New York, and
journeying over the plains from Florence, accompanied by his wife, a
refined and delicate woman, arrived in Salt Lake City in 1861, and
looked about him for something to do. He was offered the 20th ward
school, a position which he at once accepted, laboring faithfully for
nearly a twelvemonth, after which he accepted a position as manager of
one of Brigham Young's stores, under the direction of Hyrum B. Clawson.
In 1867 he was intrusted with the charge of the general tithing office,
but the following year was ordered on a mission to England, in company
with Albert Carrington, and, among other duties, filled that of
sub-editor to the *Millennial Star*. Returning to Utah in 1869, he
narrowly escaped death from a railroad accident, in which several
persons were killed or fatally injured. After further labors as
merchant, missionary, and contractor, being chosen meanwhile a
high-priest, he was elected a member of the legislative council for the
sessions of 1882 and 1884. In 1885, being then in his 56th year, he was
still actively engaged in forwarding the interests of his church.
*Autobiog. of Geo. Teasdale*, MS., passim.

    Heber Jeddy Grant, the son of Jedediah M. Grant, whose decease
occurred when the former was but nine days old, is a native of S. L.
City, where he was born in 1856. At fifteen, the family being then in
straitened circumstances, he obtained a position in an insurance office,
and four years later started an agency for himself. Since that time he
has been engaged in various enterprises, in all of which he has been
successful, his income ranging from $3,000 to $8,000 a year, though in
1881 he met with a serious reverse <span id="page_682">p. 682</span>
through the destruction by fire of the Utah vinegar-works at Ogden, of
which he was proprietor. In 1884 he was a member of the legislature and
of the S. L. City council. After being called to the apostolate, he
travelled extensively, in the interest of the church, in Arizona, Idaho,
Colorado, and New Mexico. Though still but 30 years of age and in feeble
health, his average weight being only 145 lbs, while in stature he was
considerably over six feet, Mr Grant affords a striking example of the
energy displayed by the descendants of the Mormon patriarchs. *Autobiog.
of Heber J. Grant*, MS.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[682:12](hou28.htm#fr_1133.md) *City of the
Saints*, 328.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[682:13](hou28.htm#fr_1134.md) Descriptions of
President Taylor's appearance will be found in many of the books written
on Mormonism, some of them fair and accurate, as is Burton's, and others
varying in degrees of absurdity from that of Lady Duffus-Hardy, who
speaks of him as a man 'with a rather large, loose mouth, and cunning
gray eyes, which look as though they would never let you see what was
going on behind them,' down to the one given by a correspondent of the
*New York Sun*, who in 1879 stated that he was six feet high, and that
his appearance, manner, and speech were those of a member of the British
parliament. See *Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie Lands*, 117;
*Deseret News*, Nov. 12, 1879.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[683:14](hou28.htm#fr_1135.md) He was indicted
and convicted at S. L. City in 1874. An appeal was taken to the supreme
court of Utah, and the case dismissed on the ground that the grand jury
had been illegally constituted. In October 1875 he was again indicted,
convicted, and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment and fine of $500.
After a long but useless struggle, the case being argued before the
supreme court by the attorney-general for the prosecution, and by Sheeks
& Rawlins of S. L. City for appellant, Reynolds was finally committed to
jail in Jan. 1879. For review of the decision of the supreme court by
George Q. Cannon, see *Utah Pamphlets, Political*, no. 19.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[683:15](hou28.htm#fr_1136.md) See [p.
395](hou18.htm#page_395.md), this volume.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[684:16](hou28.htm#fr_1137.md) The secretary of
the territory was to be the secretary of the board, keep a journal of
its proceedings, and attest its action.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[684:17](hou28.htm#fr_1138.md) For copy of the
Edmunds act, see *United States Statutes*, 47th Cong. 1st Sess., 30-2;
*Utah Commission*, 1-5; *S. F. Call*, Feb. 17, 1882. As soon as its
passage became known in Utah, petitions asking congress to send a
deputation to investigate matters before enforcing hostile legislation
were signed by 75,000 persons, some refusing to sign the petition, among
them Fred. H. and Sam. H. Auerbach, who, though declining merely on the
ground that they did not wish to interfere with politics, suffered in
consequence. On the other hand, a mass-meeting called by the
anti-polygamy society was held at the methodist church, among the
speakers being Gov. Murray and Judge Boreman. For resolutions, see
*Hand-Book of Mormonism*, 87. For principles adopted by the liberal
party at their convention in October 1882, see *Important Doc. Bearing
on Polit Quest. in Utah*, 10-13; for declaration of principles by
people's party, *Id*., 7-9. The speeches of Vest, Morgan, Call, Brown,
Pendleton, and Lamar against the bill during the final debate in the
senate were afterward published in the form of a pamphlet entitled
*Defence of the Constitutional and Religious Rights of the People of
Utah*.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[686:18](hou28.htm#fr_1139.md) For criminal
statistics, taken mainly from the census of 1880, see [p.
394](hou18.htm#page_394.md), this vol.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[686:19](hou28.htm#fr_1140.md) *Utah and its
People*, 21. Of the gamblers 98 per cent were gentiles, and of the
saloon-keepers 94 per cent.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[687:20](hou28.htm#fr_1141.md) For copy, see
*Constit. State of Utah*. Its provisions were directed mainly against
the Edmunds bill.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[687:21](hou28.htm#fr_1142.md) Their names were
Alex. Ramsey of Minnesota, Algernon S. Paddock of Nebraska, G. F.
Godfrey of Iowa, Ambrose B. Carleton of Indiana, and James R. Pettigrew
of Arkansas. For brief biographical sketches of these men, see
*Contrib*., iii. 315-16.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[687:22](hou28.htm#fr_1143.md) *Special Rept Utah
Commission*, 1884, p. 18. In *Barclay's Mormonism Exposed*, 18, the
number is erroneously given at 16,000. *Mormonism Exposed, The Other
Side, an English View of the Case, by James W. Barclay*, is a pamphlet
originally published in the *Nineteenth Century Magazine*, and
containing a brief and impartial statement of affairs. Mr Barclay was a
member of the British parliament. Though, as he admits, he went to Utah
with strong prejudices, he comes to this conclusion: 'Mormonism, apart
from polygamy, which seems to me a temporary excrescence, will, in my
opinion, grow, and probably be the religion of the settlers or farming
classes in the mountainous country between the great plains east of the
Rocky Mountains and California on the west.'

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[688:23](hou28.htm#fr_1144.md) The governor's
messages for each year will be found in *Utah Jour. Legisl*., and of
late years have been printed in pamphlet form. See also the files of the
*Deseret News*, and other Utah journals.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[688:24](hou28.htm#fr_1145.md) *Barclay's
Mormonism Exposed*, 18-19. The certificate was rejected by <span
id="page_689">p. 689</span> congress. For papers in the case, see *House
Misc. Doc*., 47th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 25. The seat was declared vacant,
and in 1882 John T. Caine was elected. In 1884 he was reë1ected. Mr
Caine was a native of Kirk Patrick, in the Isle of Man, where he was
born in 1829. Arriving in New York in 1846, not as a proselyte, but as
an emigrant, he joined the church in the spring of 1847, about the time
when the pioneers set forth from Council Bluffs. In September 1852 he
reached Salt Lake City, and found occupation as a school-teacher at Big
Cottonwood. Soon afterward he was employed in the office of the trustee
in trust, and in that capacity won the confidence of Brigham Young. Sent
on a mission to the Sandwich Islands in 1854, he was appointed after his
return assistant secretary of the legislative council. In 1874 he was
elected a member of that body, being reëlected for the three ensuing
terms. *Tullidge's Mag*., ii. 468-73.

    For laws regulating elections, see *Utah Election Laws*, 1878, 1882.
In 1884 the Utah legislature consisted of 12 counsellors and 24
representatives, elected biennially on the first Monday in August of
every odd year, the sessions commencing on the second Monday in January
of every even year, and lasting for not more than 60 days. For list of
members elected in 1883, see *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, p. 268. In 1878 a
criminal procedure act was passed, and in 1870 a civil practice act, the
text of which is given in *Utah Laws*, 1878, 60-165; *Utah Acts
Legisl*., 17-124. For further acts, proceedings, and memorials of the
Utah legislature, see *Utah Laws and Utah Acts Legisl*., 1870, pp.
11-12, 133, 146, 148; 1872, 25-6, 41-2; 1878, 27-37, 169-70; 1880, 45,
95-6; 1882, 106, passim; *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1872, pp. 234, 1876,
24-5, 31, 104-5; 1878, 36, 45-6, 225-6, 339, passim.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[689:25](hou28.htm#fr_1146.md) *S. F. Call*, Jan.
9, 1881. As the reader is probably aware, the Edmunds act was declared
constitutional by the supreme court of the United States. For decision,
see *S. F. Alta*, March 24, 1885. For arguments against the act, see,
among others, the speech of Gen. Jos. E. Brown of Georgia, Jan. 11,
1884, in *Cong. Globe; Utah Defence Constit. and Religious Rights;
Stillman's The Mormon Question; Barclay's Mormonism Exposed; Utah and
its People* (by an ex-U. S. official); *Goodrich s Mormonism Unveiled,
Black's Federal Jurisdiction in the Territories*. Senator Brown's
argument is very forcible, though perhaps a little strained. Quoting the
clause in the constitution, which reads, 'Nor shall any person be
deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law,' he
cites *Blackstone's Comm*., 36, 'Offices which are a right to exercise a
public or private employment, and to take the fees and emoluments
thereto belonging, are also incorporeal hereditaments,' etc. So the
chief justice in 2 Ala., N. S., p. 31, remarks, 'An office is as much a
species of property as anything else capable of being held or owned.'
Comparing other provisions of the act with the U.S. constitution, he
quotes Judge Strong in the case of Huber vs Reily, in *Smith's
Pennsylvania Repts*, iii. 117. 'There are, it is true, many things which
they \[judges of election\] may determine, such as age and residence of
a person offering to vote, whether he has paid taxes.' 'But whether he
has been guilty of a criminal offence, and as a consequence forfeited
his right, is an inquiry of a different character. Neither our
constitution nor our law has conferred upon the judges of elections any
such judicial functions.' Thus with other features of the bill. As the
senator remarks, 'There are probably twenty times as many persons
practicing prostitution, or illegal sexual intercourse, in the other
parts of the union as the whole number who practice it in Utah.' For
arrests, prosecutions, and convictions under the Edmunds act, and cases
of persons committed for contempt for refusing to answer questions under
Chief Justice Zane's ruling, see *S. L. C. Tribune*, Nov. 4, 7, 1884;
*S. F. Alta*, Oct. 4, 8, 1884; Jan. 25, Apr. 14, 1885; *S. F.
Chronicle*, Jan. 31, Apr. 30, May 10, 23, 1885; *S. F. Call*, Nov. 8,
May 23, 1884, <span id="page_690">p. 690</span> May 11, 26, 1885; *S. F.
Bulletin*, Apr. 21, 1885; *Sacrarnento Rec.-Union*, Apr. 25, May 23,
Oct. 7, 1884; Jan. 21, 22, 30, Feb. 6, 9, 11, March 13, 16, Apr. 27, 28,
30, May 1, 12, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 29, 30, June 4, 29, 1885. For
prosecutions in Arizona, see *Id*., Sept. 29, Nov. 28, 1884; Apr. 8, 13,
1885. At Paris, *Id*., polygamists resisted arrest. *Id*., May 12, 15,
21, 1885. In 1880 further alterations were made in the first and third
judicial districts, for which, see *Utah Laws*, 1880, pp. 67-8.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[690:26](hou28.htm#fr_1147.md) *S. L. City
Tribune*, Nov. 28, 1883. The governor's policy was indorsed by President
Arthur, and of course by the gentile community of Utah. See *Id*., Dec.
23, 1883.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. Settlements, Society, and Education.
1862-1886.](hou29.md)
