[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou25)  [Next](hou27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_641">p. 641</span>

### CHAPTER XXIII. SCHISMS AND APOSTASIES. 1844-1869.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">The Strangites—the
Gatherers—Brannan's Followers—the Gladdenites—the Reorganized Church of
Latter-Day Saints—Alexander and David Hyrum Smith—the Utah
Magazine—Trial of Godbe and Harrison—Success of the Godbeite
Movement—the Struggle for Commercial Control—Persecution of Gentile
Merchants—Zion's Coöperative Mercantile Institution—Extent of Its
Operations—Disastrorous Effect on Gentile Trade—Reaction in Favor of the
Reformers.</span></span>

    During the life-time of Joseph Smith there was but one organized
secession from the church, though, as we have seen, apostasies were
frequent during his later years. If the words of the prophet were not
the living truth, then could no faith be placed in Mormonism, for he and
none other was regarded as the fountain-head of inspiration. But with
his death the source of infallibility was removed, and thus the way was
opened for schism and dissension, few of the diverging sects, however,
having sufficient faith in their leaders to preserve them from final
dissolution. The saints who followed Sidney Rigdon to Pittsburgh in 1844
became gradually scattered among the gentiles, a few of them, with
William Marks at their head, afterward rejoining the church. To J. J.
Strang, a prominent elder, were vouchsafed, as he claims, numerous
revelations that in Wisconsin was the true Zion, and several thousands
accompanied him to that state. Strang afterward settled at Beaver
Island, in Lake Michigan, where he retained a small

<span id="page_642">p. 642</span>

following until the time of his death. Parties also accompanied William
Smith, the only surviving brother of the prophet, to northern Illinois,
Elder Brewster to western Iowa, Bishop Heddrick to Missouri, and Bishop
Cutler to northern Iowa. All of them were soon afterward dissolved, the
remnants of Brewster's and Heddrick's disciples forming themselves into
a new sect, under the name of the Gatherers, and settling in Jackson
county, where they published a weekly periodical, styled the
*Truthteller*. During the year 1846 a large Mormon settlement was made
in Texas; and under the leadership of Apostle Lyman Wight the colony
prospered and increased rapidly. Until 1852 they acknowledged allegiance
to the first presidency, but when the doctrine of polygamy was
proclaimed, they separated from the church. After the death of Wright,
which occurred a few years later, his flock was scattered. A small
portion of the members of most of these sects found their way to Salt
Lake City, while others joined the reorganized church, as will be
mentioned later, and the remainder cast in their lot with the gentiles.

    Of the party that sailed with Brother Sam. Brannan for California,
in the *Brooklyn*, in 1846, about one fourth apostatized; their leader
laying the basis of a fine fortune by investing in real estate funds, to
a great extent at least, belonging to the Latter-day Saints. <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[1](#fn_1047) Of the Mormon colony, founded, as we
have seen, at San Bernardino, in 1851, a considerable number fell into
apostasy, though many joined the parent organization, and a few became
members of the reorganized church.

    In addition to the various sects already mentioned and to be
mentioned, numerous parties and individuals

<span id="page_643">p. 643</span>

fell away during the migration from Nauvoo, many of the stakes becoming
settlements of recusant Mormons, while numbers of the saints settled at
Omaha, Nebraska City, and other towns on the Missouri and its
tributaries. Some, as I have said, merely remained in the western states
to obtain means for their journey to Zion, but of the twenty thousand
persons who followed the apostles from Nauvoo, it is probable that
nearly one third were eventually absorbed among gentile communities.

 

    In Utah, between 1852 and 1869, four distinct and organized attempts
were made to throw off the yoke of Brigham, and establish what the
apostates claimed to be a more perfect faith. These were the Gladdenite
secession in 1852, the Josephite schism in 1860, the Morrisite movement
in 1861, and the Godbe-Harrison schism in 1869.

    When the doctrine of polygamy was openly avowed in 1852, some of the
saints were sorely offended, and accusing the hierarchy of having fallen
from grace in other respects, formed themselves into a new sect,
appointing as their leader Gladden Bishop, whence the name of
Gladdenites. Together with other recusants, Gladden, who was several
times disfellowshipped and readmitted on profession of repentance, had
again rejoined the church, <span id="fr_1048"></span>[2](#fn_1048) but
being now disgusted with this new feature in the policy of the church
dignitaries, worked with heart and soul against them. Among his
followers was one Alfred Smith from St Louis, a man of great tenacity of
purpose, and a bitter foe of Brigham, by whom, as he alleged, he had
been stripped of his property. For a time the cause flourished, but on
Sunday, the 20th of March, 1853, while Smith was holding services in
front of the council-house, the gathering, though orderly and peaceable,
was dispersed by the city marshal. Another meeting

<span id="page_644">p. 644</span>

called for the following sabbath was dispersed, Smith being taken into
custody, and detained until he promised to desist. On the same day
Brigham spoke a few words concerning the apostates in the tabernacle.
The whole matter was regarded of no great consequence by the church;
nevertheless it was deemed best to shun the very appearance of evil, and
consequently the president gave the people clearly to understand that
there must be no more of it. <span id="fr_1049"></span>[3](#fn_1049)
Such warnings from the president of the church were never uttered in
vain, and now the days of the Gladdenites were numbered. A few months
later most of them set forth for California, the rest recanted, and
after the year 1854 we hear no more of this apostasy.

 

    The most successful of the recusant sects was the one established by
Joseph Smith, the prophet's son, who, with his brothers Alexander H. and
David Hyrum, remained a Nauvoo after the exodus. <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[4](#fn_1050) A few years later the remnants of the
Strangites and Cutlerites, being in search of a leader, organized a new
church and requested Joseph to become their head. He at first refused,
but in 1860, the number of members being then considerably increased by
the breaking-up of other parties, he accepted the call as prophet, and
began to preach the faith of his father, as he affirmed, in its original
purity, repudiating the claims of Brigham and the doctrine of polygamy.
The schism spread rapidly throughout Illinois, Missouri, and Iowa, the
apostates being termed Josephites by the followers of Brigham, but
styling themselves the Reorganized

<span id="page_645">p. 645</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Church of
Latter-day Saints. In Utah it was checked by fear of persecution, and
not until the summer of 1863 did the movement become pronounced. In July
of that year two Josephite missionaries, named E. C. Briggs and
Alexander McCord, arrived in Salt Lake City, having crossed the plains,
they said, as heralds of the gospel, and calling on Brigham, told him
the object of their mission, and asked permission to preach in the
tabernacle. This was, of course, refused; <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[5](#fn_1051) nor were they allowed the use of any
other public building, whereupon the missionaries visited from house to
house, offering up prayers for the inmates, and exhorting them to join
the true faith.

    At first singly, then by dozens, and afterward by scores, converts
were gathered into this fold, and in the spring of 1864 the Josephites
in Zion mustered more than three hundred, the number of proselytes
elsewhere being at this date between two and three thousand. <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[6](#fn_1052) Persecution followed, as they claimed;
and in early summer about one half of the Josephites in Salt Lake City
started eastward, so great being the excitement that General Connor
ordered a strong escort to accompany them as far as Green River. To
those who remained protection was also afforded by the authorities.

    The excitement caused by the evangelism of Briggs and McCord was
renewed in the summer of 1869, when Alexander H. and David Hyrum Smith
arrived at Salt Lake City as advocates of the reformed faith. Their
meetings were held at Independence Hall, then the principal public
building belonging to the gentiles, and at the first service a vast
audience assembled, among the number being several of the wives of
Brigham. At first the followers of Brigham trembled

<span id="page_646">p. 646</span>

for the supremacy of their leader, and opposition meetings were
organized under the management of Joseph F., the son of Hyrum
Smith. <span id="fr_1053"></span>[7](#fn_1053) But the mantle of the
prophet had not fallen on his offspring; they were men almost without
force of character, of lamb-like placidity, and of hopelessly mediocre
ability; not shrewd enough to contend with their opponents, and not
violent enough to arouse the populace. They accomplished little for the
cause of the reorganized church.

    In 1860 the headquarters of the Josephites were established at
Plano, Illinois, where, between 1860 and 1875, was published by this
sect *The True Latter-day Saint's Herald*, and where in 1877 their
leader still resided, <span id="fr_1054"></span>[8](#fn_1054) Joseph
being at that date president of the church, and Briggs the president of
the twelve. A branch was also established at Malad in Idaho; a few of
the sect gathered at Kirtland, <span id="fr_1055"></span>[9](#fn_1055)
and the remainder were scattered throughout the states. They rapidly
increased, mustering in 1870 not less than twenty thousand in the United
States, while in Europe entire churches joined the reformed faith, the
name of the sect, and the more conventional morality of its doctrines,
being among the causes of its success. <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[10](#fn_1056)

<span id="page_647">p. 647</span>

    While the controversy between the prophet's sons and the prophet's
nephew was at its height, an article appeared in the *Utah Magazine*, a
periodical first issued in 1867, and of which elders W. S. Godbe and E.
L. T. Harrison were proprietors, wherein appeared the following passage:
"If we know the true feeling of our brethren, it is that they never
intend Joseph Smith's nor any other man's son to preside over them
simply because of their sonship. The principle of heirship has cursed
the world for ages, and with our brethren we expect to fight it till,
with every other relic of tyranny, it is trodden under foot." While
speaking thus boldly, the magazine essayed the part of umpire between
the disputants, and otherwise gave sore offence to the church
dignitaries. <span id="fr_1057"></span>[11](#fn_1057) About the same
time an article was published urging the development of the mineral
resources of Utah, a measure which found no favor with Brigham, for thus
would the flood-gates be opened to the gentiles, while the saints might
be tempted to worship at the shrine of Mammon, "I want to make a wall so
thick and so high around the territory," he once exclaimed in the
tabernacle, "that it would be impossible for the gentiles to get over or
through it." <span id="fr_1058"></span>[12](#fn_1058) Finally the elders
were summoned before the school of prophets, by

<span id="page_648">p. 648</span>

which offenders are examined before being sent for trial by the high
council, and though the most serious charge against them was the
publication of the article on mineral developments, both Godbe and
Harrison were expelled from the church. <span
id="fr_1059"></span>[13](#fn_1059)

    That the elders should have openly advocated the development of the
rich mineral resources of Utah may appear from a gentile standpoint a
slight provocation for so extreme a measure; but it should be remembered
that from the earliest occupation of the territory mining for the
precious metals had been strongly discountenanced by the priesthood.
This was in fact a most essential part of the policy in accordance with
which the Mormons had sought for seclusion in the vales of Deseret, in
order to preserve their liberty and individuality as a religious
community. From the day when news arrived of the gold discovery, their
leaders had denounced all emigration to California. Gold-seekers were
indiscriminately classed as worldlings and apostates, or at least held
to be weak in the faith. Nevertheless, the accounts received from
members of the Mormon battalion, who had witnessed the discovery and
shared in the excitement which followed it, produced a crisis that
threatened their very existence as a people, and one which, perhaps,
none but the Mormons could have withstood. When, in later years, mineral
prospects were disclosed in Utah, and prospecting largely carried on by
gentiles, all such efforts were discouraged; for they could result only
in drawing into the territory a class of men dangerous to its
institutions, and might even seduce from their allegiance the members of
the church. Thus in the light of its full history must the policy of the
Mormon hierarchy be considered in excluding from its fold this
disturbing element.

    No attempt was made, however, by either of the elders to excuse this
portion of the charges brought against them. Their defence was confined
merely to the question of their alleged apostasy, and to the authority

<span id="page_649">p. 649</span>

of the priesthood. When their case was handed to the high council, the
recusants, instead of pleading their cause, merely read a series of
resolutions touching measures of church reform, Godbe denying Brigham's
right to enforce obedience, whether in matters secular or spiritual, and
Harrison stating that if it was apostasy to differ conscientiously from
the priesthood, then he must be considered an apostate. "We claim," they
said, "the right of respectfully but freely discussing all measures upon
which we are called to act. And if we are cut off from this church for
asserting this right, while our standing is dear to us, we will suffer
it to be taken from us sooner than resign the liberties of thought and
speech to which the gospel entitles us; and against any such expulsion
we present our solemn protest before God and angels." It remained only
to pass sentence of excommunication, and in due form the elders were
delivered over to the buffetings of Satan for a thousand years.

    But a few days later there appeared in the *Utah Magazine* an
account of the trial, together with a protest and appeal to the
brethren, afterward copied in the *New York Herald* and other leading
journals. "It had been argued," remarked the recusants, "that we must
passively and uninquiringly obey the priesthood, because otherwise we
could not build up Zion. A nation built up on such a principle could be
no Zion. The only glory or beauty there could be in a Zion must result
from its being composed of people all of whom acted intelligently in all
their operations." Supported as it was by a portion of the wealth and
intelligence of Utah, the Walker brothers, the Tullidge brothers,
Stenhouse, Lawrence, and Eli B. Kelsey, <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[14](#fn_1060) the reformation gathered weight. On
Sunday, the 19th of December, 1869, services were held for the first
time by the reformers, in the chapel of the assembly-rooms in the
thirteenth ward, and in the

<span id="page_650">p. 650</span>

evening at the Masonic hall. <span id="fr_1061"></span>[15](#fn_1061)
Before a dense audience, was sung by the choir the first hymn in the
Mormon hymn-book, composed by Parley P. Pratt:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The morning breaks, the shadows flee,  
    Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled;  
The dawning of a brighter day,  
    Majestic rises on the world."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then followed
speeches by Godbe, Harrison, and Lawrence, in which the gentiles, who
formed one-third of the audience, were assured that the reformation
would be continued with a purpose that would swerve not before Brigham
and his apostles.

    The so-called Godbeite movement, however, though for a time it
excited considerable interest in business circles, was a matter of small
moment to the church generally, producing little effect on the masses of
the members. The movement in its incipiency was the immediate occasion
rather than the real cause of Godbe and his adherents leaving the
church. No man can consistently be continued a member of any church if
he persists in refusing to submit to the final decisions of the church
authorities. His arrival at that point of insubordination is almost
always the result of a growth of greater or less rapidity, and occupying
more or less time in development. Godbeism at first professed to be an
attempt to reform and purify the church, in part by the aid of
spiritualism, but the reform pretensions were evanescent, quickly fading
away, so that for many years nobody has looked upon the movement as a
religious one in any respect. In fact with the fleeting religious
pretensions the very name of the movement soon died out, and the
prominent persons connected with it early manifested a skeptical spirit
toward religion of every kind, and directed their energies more
completely into channels of business and money-making. "I have been
instrumental," writes Godbe in 1884, "in establishing and conducting
enterprises that have required an outlay of

<span id="page_651">p. 651</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> $1,000 a day for
ten years, and have given employment to many hundreds of people." <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[16](#fn_1062)

 

    The struggle for the commercial control of Utah began at an early
date in its history. Among the Mormons there were few men of business
training, and until the advent of the overland railroad made it certain
that Salt Lake City would become a commercial centre, the policy of
Brigham was to discourage commerce and commercial intercourse.
Nevertheless, gentile merchants, by whom traffic was mainly conducted,
as late as 1860 were subject to a running fire of ridicule and
condemnation directed against them from the tabernacle. The objection to
them was twofold: first, the dislike to the presence of gentiles, in
whatever capacity; and second, the fact that they absorbed the small
amount of floating capital that the brethren possessed. He who should
hold traffic with a gentile was considered weak in the faith, but as
goods could be purchased from gentile merchants

<span id="page_652">p. 652</span>

to advantage, the saints were tempted sometimes to trade with them, and
frequently did so, and that without the severe censure on the part of
the church, which has been often alleged.

    Among those who had transactions with gentile merchants were the
Walker Brothers, who in 1868 were among the prominent merchants of Salt
Lake City, and had contributed in no small degree to its commercial
prosperity. The firm subscribed liberally for all the purposes to which
the church funds were applied, but refused to pay tithes or to recognize
the right of the church to collect tithing. <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[17](#fn_1063)

    During this year, and partly with a view to placing the trade of
Utah under church control, so far at least as the brethren were
concerned, the Zion's Coöperative Mercantile Institution was
organized. <span id="fr_1064"></span>[18](#fn_1064) Aside from such
motives, however, there were good reasons for securing to the country
the benefits of the cooperative system, for, as we shall see later, the
prices of imported commodities were still extravagantly high. <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[19](#fn_1065) To protect the people from these high
prices by importing from first hands and in large quantities was the
professed, and perhaps the main, purpose of the promoters. After passing
through some financial difficulties, the enterprise seems to have
obtained a permanent foothold, and is yet a successful competitor with
gentile tradesmen, supplying at wholesale many of the settlements in
Utah, in addition to its local and retail trade. In 1883 the total sales
exceeded $4,000,000, a half-yearly dividend of five per cent being paid
in October of that year. At this date the association had a reserve fund
of about $125,000, and

<span id="page_653">p. 653</span>

a capital of $1,000,000, divided into $100 shares, and distributed among
700 or 800 stockholders. <span id="fr_1066"></span>[20](#fn_1066) The
head of the church continued president of the institution after it was
no longer under control of the church, but managed simply on business
principles, representing Mormon as against gentile trading
interests. <span id="fr_1067"></span>[21](#fn_1067) Branches were
established at Ogden, Logan, <span id="fr_1068"></span>[22](#fn_1068)
and Soda Springs, and, as we shall see later, the coöperative movement
spread rapidly throughout the country, though most of these ventures
resulted in failure, many of the stores being compelled to close during
the commercial panic of 1873.

<span id="page_654">p. 654</span>

    The first effect of this movement on the trade of gentile merchants
was disastrous, the sales of the Walker Brothers, for instance,
decreasing in a brief space from $60,000 to $5,000 per month, <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[23](#fn_1069) while those of the Auerbach Brothers
fell off in like ratio, <span id="fr_1070"></span>[24](#fn_1070) these
two firms, among others, offering to dispose of their entire property to
the directors of the Zion's Coöperatire Institute for fifty cents on the
dollar, and leave the territory. <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[25](#fn_1071) The offer was refused. Hence,
perhaps, as will presently appear, the rapid development of the mining
resources of the country after 1869, toward which purpose several
prominent merchants, among them Godbe and the Walker Brothers, applied
the remnants of their fortunes. Soon, however, even the Mormons began to
disregard the warnings of their leaders against trading with gentiles or
apostates. The spell was broken, and during the conference of 1870 the
stores of the latter, and especially of the Walker Brothers, were so
crowded with purchasers that it was almost impossible for them to serve
their patrons. The reformers preached against and wrote against the
president, and the better to support their cause, established a
newspaper named the *Salt Lake Tribune*, at first a weekly and afterward
a daily publication,

<span id="page_655">p. 655</span>

in which the church dignitaries and their policy were severely
criticised. Thus of all the apostasies the Godbeite movement, with its
attendant incidents, was the most formidable, and wrought more harm in
Zion than any which had preceded it, appealing, as it did, to the common
sense and the self-interest of the community.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[642:1](hou26.htm#fr_1047) Beadle, *Life in
Utah*, 404—5, states that Brannon afterward repaid the money with
interest, but it would be difficult to make the early Californians
believe it. About 45 adults and 65 children of the *Brooklyn* party
remained in California, a few afterward joining Mormon communities at
San Bernardino or in Arizona. Nearly 100 adults and some 40 children
reached Utah, most of them in 1848-50. See *Hist. Cal*., v. 544, this
series.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[643:2](hou26.htm#fr_1048) Ferris states that
Gladden was cut off and rebaptized nine times. *Utah and the Mormons*,
326. See also *Olshausen, Mormonen*, 182.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[644:3](hou26.htm#fr_1049) *Jour. of Disc*.,
i. 82; *Deseret News*, Apr. 2, 1853; *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*,
120-1; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 408-9; *Ferris, Utah and the Mormons*,
328-30. Brigham was followed by Parley Pratt, who said that he had known
Gladden for 20 years, and had seldom heard his name mentioned, except in
connection with some imposition or falsehood in the name of the Lord.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[644:4](hou26.htm#fr_1050) Beadle says that
the prophet left a considerable fortune, mostly in houses and lands at
Nauvoo. *Life in Utah*, 428. Even if this is true, we well know that the
houses and lands of the Mormons in Nauvoo were worth little to them when
the expulsion came.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[645:5](hou26.htm#fr_1051) In *Waite's The
Mormon Prophet*, 129, it is stated that Brigham said he would not be
responsible for Briggs’ safety if he remained in the city.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[645:6](hou26.htm#fr_1052) Bowles, *Our New
West*, 268, his work being published in 1869, incorrectly places the
entire number at 1,500. In *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 129 (published
in 1866), we read: 'In the states, those who have gone back to their
first love are to be numbered by thousands.'

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[646:7](hou26.htm#fr_1053) Stenhouse says that
debates between the two parties were held in public. *Rocky Mountain
Saints*, 629 (note).

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[646:8](hou26.htm#fr_1054) *S. Lake Herald*,
June 6, 1877.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[646:9](hou26.htm#fr_1055) *Ibid*.; *McClure's
Three Thousand Miles*, 435.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[646:10](hou26.htm#fr_1056) The Josephite
creed will be found in *Waite's The Mormon Prophet*, 130-1; *Utah
Scraps*, 16. It contains the following: 'We believe that the church in
Utah, under the presidency of Brigham Young, have apostatized from the
true order of the gospel. We believe that the doctrines of polygamy,
human sacrifice, or killing men to save them, Adam being God, Utah being
Zion, or the gathering place for the saints, are doctrines of devils.'
In other respects their creed was almost identical with the Mormon
articles of faith. Codman, who attended their services, remarks: 'They
use the same religious books in their worship, and argue from them the
prohibition of polygamy with as much earnestness as Orson Pratt displays
in its advocacy.' *The Round Trip*, 210.

    The second Joseph Smith, junior, was born at Kirtland Nov. 6, 1832.
His early life was spent in Missouri and Illinois, whither he went with
his parents. F. G. Mather received a letter from him in 1879, saying: 'I
am now pretty widely recognized as the leader of that wing of the Mormon
church declaring positive Mormonism, but denying and opposing polygamy
and Utah Mormonism.' I give herewith a copy of an inscription on one of
the pillars of the temple at Kirtland, as reported by Mather,
*Lippincott's* <span id="page_647">p. 647</span> *Mag*., Aug. 1880. 'The
Salt Lake Mormons. When Joseph Smith was killed on June 27, 1844,
Brigham Young assumed the leadership of the church, telling the people
in the winter of 1846 that all the God they wanted was him, and all the
bible they wanted was in his heart. He led or drove about two thousand
people to Utah in 1847, starting for upper California and landing at
Salt Lake, where in 1852 Brigham Young presented the polygamic
revelation to the people. The true church remained disorganized till
1860, when Joseph Smith took the leadership or presidency of the church
at Amboy, Illinois. We \[thirty thousand\] have no affiliation with the
Mormons whatever. They are to us an apostate people, working all manner
of abomination before God and man. We are no part or parcel of them in
any sense whatever. Let this be distinctly understood, we are not
Mormons. Truth is truth, wherever it is found.' For further particulars
as to apostate sects before the year 1869, see *S. F. Alta*, May 21,
1857, July 3, Aug. 2, 1867; *S. F. Bulletin*, May 22, 1857, Aug. 10,
Nov. 15, 1867; *Sacramento Union*, Apr. 22, May 20, June 8, Sept. 3, 18,
1857, Dec. 3, 1859, June 28, Aug. 5, 1867.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[647:11](hou26.htm#fr_1057) In the *Deseret
News* of Nov. 3, 1869, is a notice signed by the members of the first
presidency and three other apostles, cautioning the saints against its
teachings, and stating that it is unfit for perusal.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[647:12](hou26.htm#fr_1058) *Godbe's
Statement*, MS., 2.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[648:13](hou26.htm#fr_1059) *Ibid*.;
*Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah*, MS., 48.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[649:14](hou26.htm#fr_1060) Kelsey, who voted
against their expulsion, was also excommunicated. *Stenhouse's Rocky
Mountain Saints*, 640.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[650:15](hou26.htm#fr_1061) For account of
secret, benefit, and benevolent societies in Utah, see *Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, 218-26.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[651:16](hou26.htm#fr_1062) *Godbe's
Statement*, MS., 29. For further mention of the Godbe schism and
incidents connected with it, see *Tullidge's Mag*., i. 14-55;
*Stenhouse's Exposé of Polygamy*, 132-45; *Dixon's White Conquest*, i.
208-12.

    William S. Godbe, an Englishman by birth, began his career as a
sailor; but after being twice shipwrecked, tired of seafaring life, and
while yet a lad, betook himself to America. Having made the acquaintance
of several Mormons, and being charmed with the story of their
adventures, he decided to cast in his lot with them, and journeyed
nearly the whole distance on foot between New York and Salt Lake City,
where he arrived in 1851, and found employment with a merchant named
Thomas Williams, in a few years becoming himself a leading merchant.
Between 1857 and 1884 Mr Godbe crossed the Atlantic 21 times, and the
plains over 50 times. After his excommunication from the church, and the
consequent loss of his business, finding himself, as he says, $100,000
in debt, whereas a year before he had been worth $100,000, he followed
mining as an occupation, and in 1873 organized in London the Chicago
Silver Mining Co., one of the few English companies that have proved
successful in Utah. Of his ventures in mining, mention will be made
later. Of Mr Harrison, he remarks that he is 'a man of unusual mental
qualities, of earnest nature, and has an overruling love of truth,
honesty, and straightforwardness.'

    The *Statement of William Godbe*, MS., contains, in addition to
matter relating to the Godbeite movement and personal memoirs, some
valuable information on mining, together with much adverse comment on
the Mormon hierarchy, terse and well put, though hurriedly written.
'They don't make many converts in the United States,' he remarks; 'they
don't look for them. They make a few in the south, where the condition
of things is analagous, more or less, with that which exists in Europe;
but they make most of their converts in the latter country.'

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[652:17](hou26.htm#fr_1063) *Walker's
Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS., 2.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[652:18](hou26.htm#fr_1064) On the 16th of
October. Business was opened March 1, 1869, and the company was
incorporated Dec. l, 1870. *Zion's Coöp. Merc. Inst*., MS., 1. Brigham
Young was the principal stockholder, and Geo. Q. Cannon, Geo. A. Smith,
Wm Jennings, H. S. Eldredge, and Wm H. Hooper were among the first
directors. For constitution, by-laws, form of certificates of stock, and
incorporation, see *Utah Religious Pamphlets*, 9, 10.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[652:19](hou26.htm#fr_1065) See cap. 28, notes
[29](hou31.htm#fn_1355) and [31](hou31.htm#fn_1357), this vol.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[653:20](hou26.htm#fr_1066) *Deseret Ev.
News*, Jan. 2, 1884. The main building, on East Temple street, S. L.
City, was 318 by 100 ft, the front being of iron, and the roof
fireproof. It was furnished with hydraulic elevators, fire and burglar
proof vaults, and all modern appliances. *Zion's Coöp. Merc. Inst*.,
MS., 1-2. In connection with the institution was a tannery and
shoe-factory, in which about 170 hands were employed in 1883.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[653:21](hou26.htm#fr_1067) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 58-9. For further mention of the institution and
its origin, see *Marshall's Through Amer*., 176-7; *Stenhouse's
Englishwoman*, 371-3; *Townsend's Mormon Trials*, 41-2; *Tullidge's
Mag*., 1. 363-8; for cut of buildings, *Id*., facing p. 385. In
connection with it, it may be mentioned that Horace S. Eldredge, who has
been connected with the institute from its inception, was appointed
president in 1872, and in 1884 was superintendent. Mr Eldredge, a native
of New York, arrived in Utah in 1848, after passing through all the
tribulations of Far West, Nauvoo, and Winter Quarters. In 1868, being
then in partnership with H. B. Clawson, he sold out his stock of goods
to the institute.

    Hiram B. Clawson, a native of Oneida co., N.Y., was educated at the
Utica academy. In 1841, his father being then deceased, and the rest of
the family having joined the Mormon church, he moved with them to
Nauvoo, and in 1848 to the valley of Great Salt Lake. Though only 22
years of age, he was looked upon as a man of mark, and was employed in
superintending the construction of some of the first buildings erected
by the church in Salt Lake City. During the Utah war he figured
prominently as adjutant-general of the Nauvoo legion, and just before
the departure of the troops from Camp Floyd effected a complete
reconciliation between the military and the church authorities.
Appointed superintendent of Zion's Coöperative Mercantile Institute, in
1873 he was sent east in company with H. S. Eldredge to ask for an
extension of credit, in view of the panic then prevailing in commercial
circles. He met everywhere with a favorable response, and within eight
months the company redeemed its obligations, amounting to $1,100,000.
During his management Mr Clawson states that the losses of the
institution by bad debts did not exceed a quarter of one per cent. In
1875 he resigned the superintendency, having purchased from the
directors the agricultural department of the Z.C.M.I., to which he added
a machinery department, furnishing grist and saw mills and steam-engines
complete, together with all the different kinds of machines commonly in
use throughout the territory. During the earlier part of his career Mr
Clawson took a leading part in theatrical affairs, and to him and John
T. Caine are largely due the success and prosperity of the Salt Lake
theatre. *Tullidge's Mag*., i. 678-84.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[653:22](hou26.htm#fr_1068) For 1883 the sales
of the Ogden branch were about $800,000, and of the Logan branch, of
which Aaron Farr was manager, about $600,000.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[654:23](hou26.htm#fr_1069) *Walker's
Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS., 3. Samuel Sharp, Joseph Robinson,
David, Frederick, and Matthew Henry Walker were in 1883 the members of
this firm. Englishmen by birth, being the sons of a Yorkshire squire,
possessed in 1846 of a considerable landed estate, but who, like
thousands of others, suffered financial shipwreck during the railroad
panic of the following year, they arrived at S. L. City in 1852, at
which date there were only five business houses on Main street. They
laid the basis of their fortune during the presence of the army at Camp
Floyd, soon making their mark among the commercial community, and being
classed a few years later among the leading merchants of Utah. After
1869 their attention was chiefly given to mining, in which connection
further mention will be made of the firm. *Autobiog. of the Walker
Bros*., MS.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[654:24](hou26.htm#fr_1070) The Auerbach
Bros., a dry-goods firm, state that at this time ruin stared them in the
face, and but for the mining developments which followed almost
immediately afterward they could not have remained in the territory.
Fred. H. and Sam. H. Auerbach, natives of eastern Prussia, came to S. L.
City in 1864, after suffering heavy business reverses in Austin, Nev.,
where they afterward paid their debts in full in gold coin. Their sales
for 1885 amounted to about $500,000. *Auerback's Edmunds Bill*, MS.;
*Utah Biogr. Sketches*, MS., 9-10.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[654:25](hou26.htm#fr_1071) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 52; *Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS.,
3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. The Last Days of Brigham Young. 1869-1877.](hou27)
