[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hou29)  [Next](hou31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE8AA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*History of Utah, 1540-1886*, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_720">p. 720</span>

### CHAPTER XXVII. AGRICULTURE, STOCK-RAISING, MANUFACTURES, AND MINING. 1852-1886.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Agricultural Products and
Yield Per Acre—Irrigation—Character of the Soil—Fruit
Culture—Viticulture—Sericulture—Timber and
Timber-Lands—Bunch-Grass—Cattle-Raising—Dairy
Products—Horses—Sheep—Woollen Manufactures—Leather—Other
Manufactures—Iron-Mining—Coal-Mining—Copper—Sulphur—Gypsum and
Mica—Other Minerals—Building Stone—Gold and Silver—the West Mountain
District—the Rush Valley District—the Cottonwood District—the American
Fork District—the Tintic District—the Ontario Mine—Other Mining
Districts—Mining Products—Milling, Smelting, and
Reduction-Works.</span></span>

    <span class="smallcaps">The</span> progress of agriculture in Utah
will best be understood from the following figures: In 1849, as we have
seen, nearly 130,000 bushels of cereals were raised from about 17,000
acres of land, <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1](#fn_1245) then valued at
$6.50 per acre. In 1883, which was by no means a favorable year, more
than 1,600,000 bushels of wheat, and some 722,000 of oats, 305,000 of
barley, 193,000 of corn, together with 215,000 tons of hay, and 800,000
bushels of potatoes, were produced from about 215,000 acres, <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[2](#fn_1246) the value of which varied according to
location from $25 to $100 per acre; the yield

<span id="page_721">p. 721</span>

of wheat being in 1883 about 20 bushels, of oats 33, of barley 25, and
of corn 16 bushels, to the acre; though in Willard county the average of
wheat was 57, <span id="fr_1247"></span>[3](#fn_1247) of oats in Cache
and Utah counties 53 and 58 bushels, and of barley in the latter nearly
41 bushels. <span id="fr_1248"></span>[4](#fn_1248) When the pioneers
entered the valley in 1847 their hearts sank within them at the hopeless
prospect. The land seemed barren beyond redemption; but from less than
seventeen acres of its soil were raised, in 1880, more than 1,250
bushels of grain. <span id="fr_1249"></span>[5](#fn_1249)

    According to the census returns for 1880, there were 9,452 farms in
Utah, with a total area of 655, 524 acres, of which 416,105 were in
tilth, their value, including improvements, being estimated at
$14,015,178; the total value of all farm products at $3,337,410, and of
farming implements and machinery at $946,-753. The agricultural products
of Utah in 1883 more than sufficed for her needs, <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[6](#fn_1250) and as there was no very reliable
market for the surplus, there was little incentive to further exertion
in this direction. It was claimed, however, that with more careful
cultivation the yield could be at least doubled on the same acreage, and
it is certain that there were several million acres of farming land
untouched and almost unthought of, on

<span id="page_722">p. 722</span>

account of an insufficient rainfall, <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[7](#fn_1251) or through lack of irrigation.

    There are few parts of the world where irrigation has been pushed
forward more systematically and with better results than in Utah. In
1865, 277 canals had already been constructed, at a cost, including
dams, of $1,766,939, with a total length of 1,043 miles, irrigating
153,949 acres; and there were others in progress at this date, the cost
of which was estimated at $877,730. <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[8](#fn_1252) During each succeeding year thousands
of acres, before considered worthless, were brought under cultivation,
canals being built in all directions, the waters that had run to waste
down the mountain sides and through the cañons depositing

<span id="page_723">p. 723</span>

on the farm-lands rich particles of fertile soil. <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[9](#fn_1253) Two or three waterings a year would,
in most localities, secure good crops, and the millions devoted to
purposes of irrigation throughout the territory paid better interest,
directly and indirectly, than capital invested in any other description
of enterprise. Nevertheless, the supply was insufficient, more water
being still allowed to run to waste during the spring and winter months
than was utilized. <span id="fr_1254"></span>[10](#fn_1254)

    The winter rains swell the streams, sometimes to overflowing, when
considerable damage occurs to farming-lands along the river-bottoms.
Snow falls to a depth of from two to twenty-five feet, but does not
usually melt before summer is well advanced. Wind-storms are often
violent, and occasionally destroy growing crops. <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[11](#fn_1255) The altitude of Utah renders the high
lands liable to night frosts during the summer months, and on the more
elevated plateaus no attempt is made to plant, the surface being devoted
entirely to grazing purposes. At times in winter a very low temperature
is registered. Often the valleys are colder at night than the more
elevated adjacent regions, and

<span id="page_724">p. 724</span>

growing crops are occasionally nipped by frost when those on the
bench-lands escape altogether. <span id="fr_1256"></span>[12](#fn_1256)

    The havoc wrought, as we have seen, by crickets and grasshoppers
among the growing crops of the first settlers, and again in
1855-6, <span id="fr_1257"></span>[13](#fn_1257) was repeated at brief
intervals in later years. Seldom was a harvest gathered in Utah that was
not more or less injured by this scourge. <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[14](#fn_1258)

    Of the nature of the soil, slight mention has already been
made. <span id="fr_1259"></span>[15](#fn_1259) The early settlers
discoursed in glowing terms of its fertility, though passing emigrants
spoke of it as a "mean land," hard, dry, and fit only for the plodding,
thrifty, sober Mormon. The main drawback was the alkaline matter, which
was so abundant in spots as to form a white efflorescence on the
surface, and wherever this efflorescence appeared, vegetation died.
Otherwise its composition was favorable to fertility, being formed
principally of the disintegrated feldspathie rocks of the mountain
ranges, mingled with the débris and decomposed limestone of the
valleys. <span id="fr_1260"></span>[16](#fn_1260)

    At the annual fairs held by the Deseret Agricultural and
Manufacturing Society, discontinued after 1881 on account of inability
to secure permanent grounds and buildings, prizes were awarded for
nearly all the varieties of grain, fruits, and vegetables that

<span id="page_725">p. 725</span>

were raised in California and Oregon. <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[17](#fn_1261) With the exception of Indian corn,
all the cereals raised in Utah thrive vigorously when under irrigation,
fall wheat requiring only one watering a year. In the basin of Great
Salt Lake the fruits of the temperate zone grow to good size, and are of
excellent flavor, the crop being remarkably sure. The value of orchard
products in 1883, including apples, of which there were at least ninety
varieties, pears, quinces, cherries, peaches, currants, plums, and
berries of many descriptions, was estimated at $157,000. The yield of
apples was about 90 bushels to the acre, of pears 75, of peaches 120, of
plums 165, and of cherries 75. <span id="fr_1262"></span>[18](#fn_1262)
Production was largely in excess of the demand, most of the surplus
being dried for shipment, though for want of a market thousands of tons
were fed to hogs, or allowed to rot on the ground. <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[19](#fn_1263)

    On the Rio Virgen and elsewhere in southern Utah below the rim of
the basin were, in 1883, a few vineyards, but viticulture was not a
profitable industry, as both grapes and wine were slow of sale, the
latter

<span id="page_726">p. 726</span>

on account of its inferior quality, and because the Mormons seldom use
stimulants. In 1875 there were only 544 acres in grapes, the total yield
being about 1,700 tons, and the average a little more than three tons
per acre. <span id="fr_1264"></span>[20](#fn_1264)

    In 1883 nearly 700,000 bushels of potatoes were raised from about
8,500 acres of land, the value of market-garden produce for this year
being less than $65,000. The small volume of business in these and in
orchard products is due to the fact that most of the settlers raised
their own fruit and vegetables.

    Of experiments in the raising of cotton in southern Utah between
1855 and 1859, mention has already been made. <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[21](#fn_1265) Of flax fibre there were raised in
1879 a few thousand pounds in Washington county, and of flax straw about
1,170 tons in various counties.

    That sericulture will eventually become a leading feature in the
industries of Utah seems almost beyond a peradventure, as portions of
the country are well adapted to this industry, and nowhere else in the
United States can the labor of women and children be obtained so cheaply
and in such abundance. In 1868 a large cocoonery was built some four
miles south of Salt Lake City, <span id="fr_1266"></span>[22](#fn_1266)
and about thirty acres planted in mulberry-trees, but through
mismanagement, and also on account of the dampness of the building,
which was of adobe, the first experiments resulted in failure. After
some further efforts, a company was organized, styled the Utah Silk
Association, and incorporated under the laws of the territory. <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[23](#fn_1267) Ground was leased

<span id="page_727">p. 727</span>

at the mouth of City Creek, where a neat brick building was erected and
fitted with machinery for the manufacturing purposes. Samples of raw
silk were sent to New York, to Florence in Italy, and Florence in
Massachusetts, and were found to be well reeled and of good strength and
quality. Though the industry is as yet in its infancy, the Mormons are
confident that it will soon develop into a source of wealth. <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[24](#fn_1268)

 

    One of the main drawbacks to the industries of Utah has been the
scarcity of timber for hard and finishing woods. In the mountains and
cañons there was a fair supply of common timber for ordinary use, though
in the valleys and plains there was no forest growth, sage-brush having
been often used for fuel during the first years of settlement, willow
brush for fencing, and adobes for building. In later times the black
balsam and red pine, indigenous to the Oquirrh and other ranges, were
largely used for posts and railroad ties, the scrub cedar and piñon
pine, found in many portions of southern and western Utah, being made to
serve the same purpose. Though the people were not allowed to acquire
title to timber-lands, and were even nominally forbidden to use the
timber except on mineral lands, and then only for domestic purposes,
they obtained all that they needed without even paying stumpage, except
in a few localities. In 1883 there were a hundred or more saw-mills in
operation in various parts of Utah, the price of building and fencing
lumber generally ruling at from $20 to $25, and of flooring and
finishing lumber $40 to $45, per thousand feet. <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[25](#fn_1269)

<span id="page_728">p. 728</span>

    Bunch-grass, on which the countless flocks and herds of Utah mainly
subsist, first makes its appearance on the western slope of the Black
Hills, and thence is found at intervals as far as the eastern slope of
the Sierra Nevada. Growing in clumps, as its name implies, and on the
most unkindly soil, in thirsty sand or on barren hills, it gives value
to millions of acres which would otherwise be absolutely worthless. Its
growth commences in early spring, and though in May or June it dries up,
it is still nutritious, having then the appearance of a light-yellow
straw. Within its withered stalk it puts forth a green shoot after the
first autumnal rains, and its pyriform seed, resembling the oat but of
smaller size, is the favorite food of cattle. In winter it gathers juice
and nourishment beneath the snow, and except in the late summer months,
when it is still of fair quality on the mountains and high in the cañon
ravines, <span id="fr_1270"></span>[26](#fn_1270) serves as pasture for
stock the year round, producing large, sinewy limbs and strong, elastic
muscles, and giving to the beef and mutton an excellent flavor. <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[27](#fn_1271)

    As elsewhere on the Pacific slope, before 1886 the range for cattle
decreased, lands once common for grazing <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[28](#fn_1272) being taken up for agriculture, while
sheep-raising was found to be a more profitable industry. Hence the
introduction of alfalfa, in which many thousands of acres were seeded,
the yield being three to four tons on inferior and poorly irrigated
land, and ten tons under more favorable conditions.

<span id="page_729">p. 729</span>

    The herds which the Utah settlers brought with them from Illinois
were largely increased, as we have seen, during the California-bound
migration, especially between 1849 and 1854, when thousands of steers
and cows, broken-down and sore-footed, but of excellent breed, were
bartered for provisions, mules, and Indian ponies. The emigrant roads
from the Sweet-water to the Humboldt were lined with enterprising
traders, who secured this lame stock on their own terms; and after
fattening their cattle on the rich grasses of Utah, sent them to
California, where they were exchanged for gold-dust or for Mexican
mustangs, which were again traded off for cattle. Thus herds multiplied
rapidly in the land of the saints; moreover, the natural increase was
enormous, for as yet pasture was abundant and the inhabitants consumed
but little meat. There was no difficulty, however, in disposing of the
surplus. When California became overstocked, large numbers were driven
to Nevada, <span id="fr_1273"></span>[29](#fn_1273) afterward to Idaho
and Montana, and still more recently to Wyoming and Colorado. Gradually,
however, some of these markets became glutted, though there was still a
considerable demand, and in later years farmers who had before paid
little attention to grading, as they found that an inferior beast sold
for almost as much as a well-bred animal, made some effort toward
raising better and larger stock, such as would find ready sale in
eastern cities. <span id="fr_1274"></span>[30](#fn_1274) Short-horn,
Devon, Hereford, Jersey, or Ayrshire cattle crossed with other breeds
were then to be found on most of the principal ranges. In 1883 the total
number of cattle was estimated at about 160,000, <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[31](#fn_1275) and their value, at an average of $30
per head, at $4,800,000. At that

<span id="page_730">p. 730</span>

date there were fewer cattle in Utah than for several preceding
years, <span id="fr_1276"></span>[32](#fn_1276) the operations of large
stock companies <span id="fr_1277"></span>[33](#fn_1277) having forced
the price to a maximum figure, and caused large droves to be sent out of
the country. <span id="fr_1278"></span>[34](#fn_1278)

    The dairy products of Utah for 1883 were about 630,000 gallons of
milk, 1,300,000 pounds of butter, and 125,000 pounds of cheese. Of eggs
the yield was more than 1,100,000 dozen, of honey more than 130,000
pounds, and of wax about 2,300 pounds. The home consumption of all these
articles was very large, yet heavy consignments of eggs were made to San
Francisco, where they sold at much higher rates than eastern eggs. Some
of the butter found a market in Idaho and Montana, though imports of
eastern butter were still considerable.

    The number of horses and mules in the territory at this date was
estimated at not less than 75,000, <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[35](#fn_1279) the most prominent breeds of horses
being the Norman, Clydesdale, and Hambleton. From the cross of the
mustang with the American horse were produced animals

<span id="page_731">p. 731</span>

with remarkable powers of endurance; and it was claimed that those
raised in Utah had better lungs, hoofs, and muscles than could be found
in most parts of the United States. The lungs gain strength from the
mountain air, the hoofs from the dry climate, and the muscles from the
distance to be travelled for grass and water. <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[36](#fn_1280)

    Until 1870 most of the sheep gathered in Utah, apart from the few
herds which the early settlers brought with them, came from New Mexico.
Since that date ewes of the Spanish-merino breed have been introduced
from California, together with long-wool bucks from Canada, and
fine-wool rams from Ohio, the Cotswold, Kentucky, and other breeds being
also represented. <span id="fr_1281"></span>[37](#fn_1281) Though Utah
wool sold at higher rates than that produced in neighboring states, the
breed still might be better. The fleece was dry and dusty, readily
absorbing alkali, though after the introduction of the merino the wool
improved considerably as to fineness of texture. In value it usually
ranged from 15 to 20 cents a pound, and as the number of sheep in Utah
was estimated, in 1883, at not less than 450,000, <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[38](#fn_1282) the clip, allowing five pounds per
fleece, <span id="fr_1283"></span>[39](#fn_1283) may be estimated at
about $500,000. For many years sheep were exempt from taxation, and
hence large amounts of capital were invested in this industry, some of
the largest ranges being in Cache Valley, where they get little fodder
in winter, and under favorable conditions this industry yielded a profit
of 40 per cent a year. <span id="fr_1284"></span>[40](#fn_1284)

<span id="page_732">p. 732</span>

    About one fourth of the total clip was used for manufacturing
purposes, supplying not more than one eighth of the demand for textile
fabrics, most of the remaining three fourths being sent out of the
territory, not only unworked but even unwashed, to be returned in the
shape of clothing and blankets, with all the added charges of freight,
commissions, and manufacture. In 1882 Utah possessed ten woollen-mills,
which were worked only to half their capacity, one of which—the Rio
Virgen Manufacturing Company—also produced cotton fabrics. They
contained at that date about twenty sets of cards, with 120 looms and
perhaps 5,000 spindles, the value of goods produced being estimated at
$300,000. For several years the Provo Manufacturing Company had the
largest woollen-mill west of the Missouri. It was built in 1872, on the
coöperative plan, the people of Utah county being asked to contribute
money or labor for the purpose, and the material obtained at small
expense. <span id="fr_1285"></span>[41](#fn_1285) Utah also claims to
have established the pioneer woollen-mill of the Pacific slope, for in
the *Deseret News* of April 19, 1853, we read that Mr Gaunt "has
commenced weaving satinets at his factory at Western Jordan, and very
soon he will full and finish some cloth." <span
id="fr_1286"></span>[42](#fn_1286)

<span id="page_733">p. 733</span>

    The volume of manufactures in Utah increased from about $300,000 in
1850 to at least $5,000,000 in 1883, the value of all materials used at
the latter date being estimated at about $2,400,000, of labor at
$700,000, the number of hands employed at 2,500, and the amount of
capital invested at $3,000,000. The chief items apart from textile
fabrics were flour, lumber, furniture, leather and leathern products,
machinery, lead and leaden pipes, and malt liquors. <span
id="fr_1287"></span>[43](#fn_1287) There were at least seventy-five
flour and grist mills, 100 lumber-mills, eighteen furniture factories,
twenty boot and shoe factories, and seven founderies and
machine-shops. <span id="fr_1288"></span>[44](#fn_1288)

    A great drawback to the leather interests is that nearly all the
materials used for tanning have to be imported in the shape of extracts,
at a cost that leaves

<span id="page_734">p. 734</span>

little profit for the manufacturer. Pine barks are used to a small
extent, but chestnut, oak, hemlock, and sumac are not found in Utah.
Nevertheless there were in 1883 about 25 tanneries in operation,
producing leather valued at $250,000. During this year some 200
car-loads of hides and pelts were shipped to the eastern states,
sufficient to supply almost the entire demand of Utah for leathern
products. The leather used for harness and saddlery, trunks and valises,
of which the manufacture amounts to not less than $150,000, is almost
entirely imported. The same condition of affairs exists among the
furniture and carriage and wagon factories, which import nearly all of
their material, paying for it the same rates of freight as on imported
vehicles and furniture, while labor is considerably higher than in the
eastern states. <span id="fr_1289"></span>[45](#fn_1289)

    Under such disadvantages, it was greatly to the credit of the
settlers that they undertook to compete to any considerable extent with
eastern manufacturers, and that the production of goods should increase
steadily from year to year, with occasional set-backs caused by dull
markets and over-production. Manufacturing is seldom a profitable
industry in new countries, even from materials native to them, and under
the most favorable conditions. It is doubtful whether this branch of
enterprise, throughout the Pacific slope, yielded, on an average, six
per cent on the entire capital invested, and it is doubtful whether even
this average was obtained in Utah.

    The production of iron—not only of pig-iron, but of iron and steel
rails—and of mill, mining, smelting, and railroad machinery, bids fair
in 1886 to be foremost

<span id="page_735">p. 735</span>

among the manufactures of Utah. In 1883 the product of her founderies
and machine-shops was estimated at over $360,000, being second only to
that of her flouring and grist mills. With suitable and abundant fuel,
there is probably no state west of the Missouri with better facilities
in this direction, among them being a great variety of rich and pure
ores, labor and supplies at moderate rates, a climate that seldom
interferes with out-door work, a central location, a network of
railroads, a fair demand, and a freight tariff <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[46](#fn_1290) that almost prohibits the shipment of
crude or manufactured iron from more distant sources of supply, whether
to Utah or the surrounding states.

    At a very early date it was ascertained, as will be remembered, that
there were immense deposits of iron in various parts of Utah. At
Smithfield, in Cache county, there were beds of hematite sixty feet in
thickness. On the Provo near Kamas, on the Weber in the neighborhood of
Ogden, on the Wasatch near Willard and Bountiful, at Tintic, at City
Creek cañon in the Cottonwoods, on many of the mountain slopes, and on
much of the desert land, ores were found in almost every variety except
in the form of carbonates. The largest deposits were in Iron county, and
in what may be termed the southern prolongation of the Wasatch Range,
about two hundred miles south of Salt Lake City. The most remarkable
outcrops were in the neighborhood of Iron Springs, Iron City, and Oak
City. In the Big Blowout, as it is termed, a solid mass of magnetic ore
near Iron Springs, with a length of 1,000 feet and half that width, it
is estimated that there are 3,000,000 tons near the surface. Other
deposits have each 1,000,000 in sight, and in this district there are
probably some 50,000,000 tons above or near the surface, while the
ledges are practically inexhaustible and of excellent quality. <span
id="fr_1291"></span>[47](#fn_1291)

<span id="page_736">p. 736</span>

    Between 1872 and 1882 about 70,000 tons of coke were brought into
Utah at a cost of $1,800,000, and during the same period 500,000 tons of
coal were brought from Wyoming at a cost of nearly $4,000,000. The
future of the iron interests of Utah appears to depend mainly on the
question whether coking coal call be produced of sufficient consistency
for the smelting of pig-iron. As yet it has not been produced, or not in
considerable quantity; but the coal regions are of vast extent, have
been but slightly explored, and it would seem almost a certainty that
deposits will somewhere be found that answer the purpose. It is well
known that the best coal for coking is that which has been subjected for
ages to pressure under the application of heat. The coal-beds of Utah
are of recent and not of what is termed the true coal formation, but
such coal sometimes makes excellent coke. At Wales, in Sanpete Valley,
in Pleasant and Castle valleys to the east and south, on Cedar Mountain,
and elsewhere, coking coal has been found which serves for the smelting
of lead, but not for iron, <span id="fr_1292"></span>[48](#fn_1292)
though it is believed that coke will soon be produced that can bear the
weight of the charges in pig-iron smelting.

    In January 1854 the Utah legislature offered a reward of $1,000 to
any resident who would open a vein of coal not less than 18 inches thick
within 40

<span id="page_737">p. 737</span>

miles of Salt Lake City, and where it could be profitably worked. <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[49](#fn_1293) Between that date and 1880, 126,000
acres of coal-lands had been surveyed in various counties, <span
id="fr_1294"></span>[50](#fn_1294) and in 1883 the total area of such
lands was estimated at 20,000 square miles. The largest deposits are
found on the eastern slope of the Wasatch, extending at intervals from
the Uintah reservation through Sanpete, Pleasant, and Castle valleys, as
far south as Kanab, and its vicinity. In considerable areas the
formation is broken or destroyed by erosion, among others, in the
neighborhood of Iron City, where veins are plentiful, though too small
to be profitably worked. On the Weber and its tributaries in Summit
county, for 12 or 15 miles above Echo City, there is coal of fair
quality for household and steam-making purposes, which has been worked
since 1867, some of the mines being opened in 1883 to a depth of 1,100
or 1,200 feet. From the Coalville mines, a few miles south of Echo, were
drawn until recent years most of the supplies needed for Salt Lake City
and the northern settlements. At, Evanston, also in Summit county and on
the line of the Union Pacific, there is a vein of bituminous coal from
17 to 19 feet in thickness. In 11 out of the 24 counties of Utah
coal-lands had been surveyed in 1880, varying in extent from 120 to
35,696 acres, and in several others it was known that coal existed.
Perhaps the most valuable deposits are in the Sanpete Valley, where the
seams vary from 6 inches to 6 feet of bituminous coal, which, when a
better plant is used in the mines, may produce a serviceable coke, while
in the mountains to the

<span id="page_738">p. 738</span>

south and east veins are being worked from 10 to 12 feet in width. <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[51](#fn_1295)

    In estimating the value of these deposits, it must be remembered
that veins less than three or four feet wide can seldom be worked at a
profit, except when near to market and under favorable circumstances,
and that the Utah veins are of smaller average width. Thus the yield for
1869, though there were several mines in operation at that date, was but
4,500 tons, in 1876 and 1877 45,000 tons, and in 1878 60,000 tons, <span
id="fr_1296"></span>[52](#fn_1296) or little more than one half of the
consumption, even for the last of these years. It will be observed,
however, that there are large coal-beds in close proximity to the
principal iron deposits; and with a ready market, cheap and reliable
labor and supplies, access by railroad, and other advantages, it is
probable that the coal and iron industries of the territory, far removed
as it is from the manufacturing centres of Europe and America, will rank
among the foremost.

    There are few of the metals or minerals known to science which are
not represented in Utah. <span id="fr_1297"></span>[53](#fn_1297) Copper
is found, usually in connection with other metals, in

<span id="page_739">p. 739</span>

most of her mining districts, from the Weber to the Colorado, where, in
the sandstone formations, some very rich ores have been discovered. It
is most abundant in southern Utah, but the only mines developed in 1883
were in the extreme north-western portion of the territory, where veins
averaging seven or eight feet in width, enclosed in micacious shale and
intermingled with porphyry, yielded in spots as much as fifty per cent
of metal. <span id="fr_1298"></span>[54](#fn_1298)

    Beds of sulphur were found both in northern and southern Utah, the
largest, with an area of about 300 acres and a depth of not less than
twenty feet, being in Millard county. In the hills of Beaver county,
some fourteen miles south of Frisco, there are also large deposits of
singular purity among fissures of silicious flint; but though much of it
would yield fifty per cent, and some even 98 per cent, of pure
brimstone, it has no commercial value, and is not even utilized for
local consumption. Near Brigham City there are sulphurets of antimony,
averaging at least four feet in thickness, and yielding from twenty to
thirty per cent of metal. In Pluto and Garfield counties are purer and
larger deposits. Gypsum and mica abound in southern Utah, the latter
being found also in Salt Lake and Davis counties. East of Nephi, in Juab
county, is a vein of gypsum 1,200 feet long and 100 in width. In
Washington and Sanpete counties it is also encountered, both in the
crystallized and oxydized state. Cinnabar, cobalt, and bismuth, the last
in paying quantities, are met with in Beaver county and at Tintic. <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[55](#fn_1299) Near Salt Lake is a solid mountain of
rock salt. <span id="fr_1300"></span>[56](#fn_1300) West of the lake are
large deposits of saleratus.

<span id="page_740">p. 740</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At Emigration
cañon carbonate of soda is found on the surface, and was used by the
first settlers for making bread. In the iron-beds red and yellow ochre
are abundant. Under the shale-beds, which cover a surface of 1,000
square miles, occurs what is termed mineral wax, some of it being rich
in gases and paraffine. <span id="fr_1301"></span>[57](#fn_1301) At
Promontory Range, so called because it projects into Great Salt Lake,
and in Sanpete county, are vast beds of alum shale, alum in combination
with other minerals being found in all parts of Utah, though as yet
without value.

    Building stone is exceedingly plentiful throughout the territory,
and in great variety. At Little Cottonwood there is granite; at the Red
Buttes near Salt Lake City there is red sandstone; in Sanpete county is
white sandstone; and at Logan, limestone, easily quarried and strongly
impregnated with iron. Marbles, black, white gray, cream-colored,
variegated, and some of them capable of receiving a fine polish, are
found among other points on the islands of Great Salt Lake, near Provo,
at Logan, Tooele, Frisco, Alpine City, and Dry cañon, the Logan marbles
being in most demand. On Antelope Island, also in Great Salt Lake, there
is a large quarry of green and purple slate, which for some purposes is
preferred to eastern slate. Clays of various descriptions, as brick
clays, potter's clays, and porcelain clays, are found in Beaver, Davis,
and Sevier counties, west of Utah Lake, and at several of the mines.

    Mining of most descriptions, and especially of gold and silver, was
discouraged, as we have seen, by the dignitaries of the church, partly
with a view to prevent the rush of gentiles which would surely follow
the discovery of gold, and also because the very existence of the
Mormons as a community depended on their unremitting exertions in
producing the necessaries

<span id="page_741">p. 741</span>

of life. The first systematic efforts at prospecting, made by permission
of General Connor, when in command at Camp Douglas, were ridiculed in
the tabernacle; <span id="fr_1302"></span>[58](#fn_1302) and later, when
mining projects were brought forward by gentiles, they were steadily
discountenanced. In 1863 Captain A. Heitz and a party from Camp Douglas
discovered argentiferous galena and copper in Bingham cañon, on the east
slope of the Oquirrh Range, near the Jordan, and about thirty miles
south of Salt Lake City. A mine was located in September of that year by
a man named Ogilbie, and in December following, a mining district was
established, named the West Mountain, and including the portion of the
range between Black Rock, at the southern end of Great Salt Lake, and
the fortieth parallel. In 1871 this district contained thirty-five
mines. <span id="fr_1303"></span>[59](#fn_1303)

    The first shipment of ore from Utah was a car-load of copper ore
from Bingham cañon, hauled to Uintah on the Union Pacific, and forwarded
by the Walker Brothers to Baltimore in June 1868. In 1864 free gold was
discovered in this district by a party of Californians returning from
Montana to pass the winter in Salt Lake City. Between 1865 and 1872 the
production of gold was estimated at $1,000,000, and up to 1882 the total
product was 500,000 tons of ore and 100,000 of bullion, from which was
extracted $1,500,000 in gold, $8,800,000 in silver, and $5,000,000 in
lead. The surface was a broken quartzite formation, the mineral belt
broad and containing many fissure veins believed to be permanent, the
ore being partly galena, largely silicious, and decomposed on or near
the surface. <span id="fr_1304"></span>[60](#fn_1304)

<span id="page_742">p. 742</span>

    On the western side of the Oquirrh Range, on the margin of Rush
Lake, in Tooele county, the Rush Valley district was organized in 1863,
being segregated from the West Mountain district, and two years later
about 400 claims had been taken up, 40 of them being in what was
afterward known as the Ophir district, though both were more commonly
termed the Stockton mines, from the town built near their
location. <span id="fr_1305"></span>[61](#fn_1305) The ores were
sulphurets and carbonates of argentiferous lead, with occasionally a
trace of gold, selected specimens assaying over $1,200 per ton, and the
average being $50 to $60. In the Ophir district rich chloride ores,
assaying in spots $500 to $5,000, were afterward discovered. <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[62](#fn_1306)

    The first discovery of silver-bearing rock in the Wasatch Range was
made by General Connor in person, at the head of Little Cottonwood
cañon. The first ore encountered was galena, and afterward carbonate of
lead, both being found in chimneys. The first shipment was made by the
Walker Brothers in July 1868; but it was not until the completion of the
Utah Central to Salt Lake City, early in 1870, that the mines were
systematically opened. Among them were the Emma, of evil fame, and the
Flagstaff, the latter producing up to the close of 1882 more than
100,000 tons of ore, averaging $30 to the ton. <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[63](#fn_1307) The former was located in 1869, the
vein for the first 100 feet being only eight to twelve inches wide, but
increasing with depth to thirty-five feet, and yielding from $135 to
$250 per ton in silver, the output for the eighteen months ending with
the close of 1872 being over $2,000,000. <span
id="fr_1308"></span>[64](#fn_1308) The unsavory transactions connected

<span id="page_743">p. 743</span>

with it after its sale to a party of English capitalists, for the sum of
$5,000,000, have no parallel in the history of mining swindles, except
perhaps in connection with the Comstock lode. <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[65](#fn_1309) The Big Cottonwood district lay
immediately to the north of its namesake, both being near Alta, in Salt
Lake county, and from 8,000 to 9,000 feet above the sea-level. In 1871
none of the mines promised well, but a year later several were yielding
largely, and some hundreds of claims were located. <span
id="fr_1310"></span>[66](#fn_1310)

    In the American Fork district, south of Little Cottonwood, many
locations were taken up in 1870 and 1871, some of considerable value—one
mine, named the Pittsburg, being afterward sold for $20,000, and one
called the Miller for $190,000. The most prominent mine in 1882 was the
Silver Bell, in which a strong vein of milling ore was encountered at a
depth of 300 feet. In geologic features this district resembled the
Cottonwoods, and was on the same mineral belt. <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[67](#fn_1311) In connection with it may be
mentioned the Silver Lake district, on Deer Creek, containing several
promising locations, and now merged in the American Fork district.

    On the extreme southern end of the Oquirrh Range, and on its western
face, was the Tintic district, overlooking the Tintic Valley, where the
first mine, named the Sunbeam, was located in 1869, the district being
organized a few months later. On the Sunbeam

<span id="page_744">p. 744</span>

ledge there were in 1882 nine locations, selected ores from all of them
carrying 80 to 100 ounces of silver, besides gold, copper, and lead.
Among the leading mines at that date were the Crismon, Mammoth, and
Eureka Hill, the former with an ore-chimney 100 feet wide, averaging
about $35 per ton in gold and silver, and 7 or 8 per cent of copper, the
latter producing ores of several descriptions, which yielded about the
same average, and paying occasional dividends. <span
id="fr_1312"></span>[68](#fn_1312)

    In the Uintah and Blue Ledge districts, both at Park City, near
tributaries of the Weber and Provo rivers, is the famous Ontario mine,
discovered in 1872, <span id="fr_1313"></span>[69](#fn_1313) and in 1883
developed to a depth of 800 feet. the vein is in a quartzite formation,
the pay-chute being several hundred feet in length, and about three in
width. Up to the close of 1883 the total output exceeded $17,000,000, of
which about $6,250,000 had been disbursed in dividends, the ore
producing on an average about, $106 per ton in silver, and the yield
being remarkably uniform. The cost of mining and milling, with other
expenses, was $33 to $34 per ton, and was largely increased by the flow
of water, which was at the rate of 2,000 gallons per minute. A huge
pumping-engine of the Cornish pattern had been erected at the mine, with
power to drive a double line of 20-inch pumps at a depth of 2,000
feet. <span id="fr_1314"></span>[70](#fn_1314)

    In the San Francisco district in Beaver county, fifteen miles west
of Milford and about 240 south of Salt Lake City, the leading mine was
the Horn Silver, the outcrop of which resembled the top of a hay-cock,

<span id="page_745">p. 745</span>

and was discovered by accident. <span id="fr_1315"></span>[71](#fn_1315)
In 1882 it had been opened to a depth of 500 feet, the ore being a
decomposed argentiferous galena, some 50 feet in thickness, from which
at the close of that year about $6,000,000 worth of silver and lead had
been extracted, <span id="fr_1316"></span>[72](#fn_1316) and $1,500,000
paid in dividends. The Frisco Mining and Smelting Company, in the same
district, owned the Carbonate mine at the town of Frisco, the Cave,
Bigelow, and other locations in Granite Range, and a large tract of
auriferous ground in Osceola county, Nevada. The vein of the Carbonate
was found to be composed of one part of rich argentiferous galena to
three or four of trachyte, and it was of course necessary to concentrate
the ores. The Cave mine, which was in the neighborhood of the Horn
Silver, and consisted of a series of limestone caves, containing
limonite ore near the surface and argentiferous galena at greater depth,
produced a considerable amount of bullion, and in 1884 was capable of
yielding 100 tons a day, but was not worked to its full capacity pending
the construction of a branch railroad. <span
id="fr_1317"></span>[73](#fn_1317) The mine in Osceola county covered an
area of 700 acres, and was believed to contain very rich deposits of
gold, but lay idle for lack of water, the nearest supply being 17 miles
distant. During the year 1885 it was expected that arrangements would be
made for working the ground by the hydraulic process. <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[74](#fn_1318)

    The Harrisburg or Silver Reef district was in Washington

<span id="page_746">p. 746</span>

county, south of Milford, and in the basin of the Colorado. The town of
Silver Reef in this district was so named from a silver-bearing
sandstone reef 100 miles in length, and yielding in places $30 to the
ton. The Leeds Silver Mining Company, a San Francisco organization, was
the pioneer location of this district, and from its ground about
$800,000 have been extracted. From the Christy Mill and Mining Company's
locations, 16 in number, about 50,000 tons were taken out during the
four and a half years ending with the close of 1882, the yield of
bullion being over $1,275,000. At that date the Stormont Silver Mining
Company and the Barbee and Walker Mill and Mining Company, both New York
organizations, had produced each a round million, the former having
disbursed $145,000 in dividends. The silver-bearing part of the reef was
at least 15 miles in length, and there were hundreds of locations as yet
unworked, which, if consolidated and provided with mills, could probably
be developed into dividend-paying properties. <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[75](#fn_1319)

<span id="page_747">p. 747</span>

    For 1869 the product of all the Utah mines in gold, silver, and lead
did not exceed $200,000. In 1871 it had risen to $3,000,000, and in 1875
to $7,000,000. For 1883 it was $7,017,682. Between 1870 and 1883 there
were produced $2,150,000 in gold, $45,790,272 in silver, 258,000 tons of
lead, worth at the Atlantic seaboard $23,220,000, and 1,000 tons of
copper which sold in New York for about $300,000. The total output for
this period was $71,502,772, or an average of more than $5,500,000 a
year. <span id="fr_1320"></span>[76](#fn_1320) At the close of 1883
there were at least 95 districts in Utah where mining of various
descriptions was in progress, all of them contributing more or less to
the total yield, though the great volume of production was confined to a
few. The entire annual expense of these districts may be roughly
estimated at $10,000,000, while the output is far below that figure. It
does not follow, of course, that this industry has proved unprofitable,
for the amount of capital invested was trifling when compared with other
states on the Pacific slope, and the difference between output and
outlay may be fairly considered as so much money expended on

<span id="page_748">p. 748</span>

developments. That as a rule "it requires a mine to develop a mine," of
whatever nature, is, however, no less true of Utah than of other mineral
sections.

    Of mining at Carson Valley and other districts in Nevada which were
formerly portions of Utah, mention is made in my *History of Nevada*. It
is worthy of note that from the tailings of the Raymond and Ely mine,
near Pioche, W. S. Godbe and his associates had extracted bullion to the
amount of $750,000 up to the close of 1884, and it was believed that the
value of that which remained in the pit exceeded $1,250,000. The
tailings were worked by Russell's leaching process, the distinctive
feature of which is the use of sulphate of copper as an extract
solution. By this process, which has now been in use for several years,
it is claimed that a very high percentage of metal can be extracted, and
that ores of low grade can be profitably worked. <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[77](#fn_1321) At an earlier date Kustel's process
of leaching chloridized ores with a solution of hyposulphide of soda was
somewhat in favor, and it is the opinion of many practical miners that
the leaching process will eventually be substituted for the usual pan
amalgamation. <span id="fr_1322"></span>[78](#fn_1322)

    At the close of 1883 there were seventeen smelting and reduction
works in Utah, producing more than 2,000 tons of bullion per month, and
twenty quartz-mills, with at least 350 stamps, the cost of a
chloridizing-mill being $3,000 to $4,000 per stamp, and of a gold-mill
perhaps $1,000 per stamp. <span id="fr_1323"></span>[79](#fn_1323) All
of the

<span id="page_749">p. 749</span>

smelting and reducing works were of modern pattern, and with modern
improvements, their capacity varying from 20 to 250 tons of ore per day.
The largest in operation at this date were the Germania lead-works,
where most of the base bullion was refined, and the Francklyn
smelting-works. The former were at South Cottonwood, seven miles from
Salt Lake City, and on the line of the Utah Central and Denver and Rio
Grande railroads. Their refining capacity was forty tons a day, and they
contained all the apparatus needed for converting galena ores into Doré
bars, litharge, and marketable lead. <span
id="fr_1324"></span>[80](#fn_1324) The refining capacity of the
Francklyn works, a mile distant, was 55 tons a day, or about 250 tons of
crude ore. <span id="fr_1325"></span>[81](#fn_1325)

    The average cost of mining and hauling in Utah, including dead-work,
up to 1884, was probably not less than $10 per ton; and of milling
silver ore at least as much, though there were districts where it did
not exceed $4 per ton. <span id="fr_1326"></span>[82](#fn_1326) When
purchased at the smelting-works, the silver and lead in the base bullion
were estimated at New York prices. Five per cent on silver and ten per
cent on lead were deducted for loss in smelting; $10 to $12 per ton for
the cost of smelting, $16 to $18 for refining, and about $25 per ton for
freight to New York. When it is remembered that

<span id="page_750">p. 750</span>

the average yield of galena ores, which form the bulk of the deposits,
is less than $30 per ton, it will be seen that they could not be worked
at a profit. With the exception of the Ontario, Horn Silver, and perhaps
one or two others where the ore was exceptionally rich, none of the
mines paid steady dividends of any considerable amount.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[720:1](hou30.htm#fr_1245) See [p.
328](hou17.htm#page_328), this vol. Three fourths of the crop was wheat,
and there were 10,000 bushels each of corn and oats. Most of it was
produced on the banks of Jordan River and its affluents, and in the
neighborhood of Utah Lake. In *Utah Sketches*, MS., passim, it is stated
that land was cultivated in Sanpete co. in 1848, and in Tooele and Utah
cos. in 1849. Some 45,000 bushels of potatoes were also raised in 1849,
besides other vegetables, together with 40 pounds of hops and 70 of
tobacco.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[720:2](hou30.htm#fr_1246) For tabulated
statement of cereal and farm products for each county in 1883, see *Utah
Gazeteer*, 1884, 297-8.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[721:3](hou30.htm#fr_1247) Utah co. produced
over 30 and Cache over 29 bushels per acre.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[721:4](hou30.htm#fr_1248) Agricultural
statistics for Utah will be found in the census reports for 1850, 1860,
1870, 1880. For intervening years, see the files of the *Utah Directory
and Gazetteer*; *Utah Gazetteer*; *Deseret News*; *Smith's Rise,
Progress, and Travels*, 23; *Fabian's Utah*, 6, 8-9; *Utah Resources and
Attractions*, 18-19; *Sac. Union*, Jan. 9, 1873; *S. L. C. Tribune*,
March 30, 1879; *Deseret News*, Nov. 9, 1881; *House Ex. Doc*., 46th
Cong. 2d Sess., 46, 503.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[721:5](hou30.htm#fr_1249) By S. A. Woolley.
Of wheat, 426 bushels were obtained from 6⅔ acres, 517 of barley from 5⅔
acres, and 310 of oats from 3½ acres. *Sloan's Utah*, 4. For an essay
entitled *Utah: Her Attractions and Resources, as Inviting the Attention
of Tourists and Those Seeking Permanent Homes*, a prize was awarded in
1881 by a committee of Mormons, among whom were Joseph R. Walker and Wm
Jennings, to Robt W. Sloan of the *S. L. C. Herald*. It was afterward
published as a pamphlet, and contains much reliable information in a
compact form. Mr Sloan is also the compiler of the *Utah Gazetteer*, and
*Directory of Logan, Ogden, Provo, and Salt Lake Cities for 1884*, in
which is a valuable compendium of the agricultural, manufacturing,
mining, railroad, and commercial interests of Utah, together with a
chronological table and description and brief historical sketch of the
various counties and settlements.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[721:6](hou30.htm#fr_1250) The consumption of
wheat was estimated at 900,000 to 1,000,000 bushels a year, or about 6¼
bushels per capita of the population.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[722:7](hou30.htm#fr_1251) The average annual
precipitation at several places and periods covered by observation is as
follows: S. L. City and Camp Douglas 15.72 inches for 19 years;
Harrisburg 13.74 inches, 2 years; Saint George 11.39 inches, 3 years;
Camp Floyd 7.33 inches, 2½ years. Consult *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, p. 189; *Powell's Lands of the Arid Region*, in *H. Ex. Doc*.,
45th Cong. 2d Sess., 73, 49, 79; also *Schott's Tables of
Precipitation*, 72, 116. In the year ending June 30, 1879, 37.71 inches
of rain are reported at S. L. City. *U.S. Signal Officer*, in *H. Ex.
Doc*., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., i. pt 1, 92. The greater rain-falls at S. L.
City and Camp Douglas are due to the modifying influence of G. S. Lake,
which is only local. From May to October there is almost a total absence
of rain. *Stansbury's Expedition*, 140. Burton, who visited Great Salt
Lake City in 1860, says the rain that year extended to the middle of
June, and attributes the change to cultivation and settlement. *City of
the Saints*, 335. About two thirds of the districts under cultivation
require irrigation. *Utah Direc*., 1879-80, 17.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[722:8](hou30.htm#fr_1252) *Smith's Rise,
Progress, and Travels*, 23. For act incorporating the Big Cottonwood
Canal Co., see *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1855, 277-9; for progress of work,
*Deseret News*, Aug. 29, 1855, March 25, 1857. In 1856 the Davis Co.
Canal Co. was incorporated. *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1855-6, 34-5. For an
account of the Weber River canal, see *Deseret News*, Aug. 20, 1856,
Oct. 10, 1860; of the Logan canal, *Tullidge's Mag*., i. 534-5; and of
the Jordan cañon canal, *Id*., Sept. 21, 1864. In this year it was first
proposed to bring the waters of Utah Lake into Salt Lake co., where
there was not one third of the water needed for irrigation. The cost of
making a canal for this purpose, 32 miles in length, 20 feet broad at
the bottom, 3 feet deep, and capable of irrigating about 30,000 acres
per week, was estimated at $485,580. *Id*., Nov. 30, 1864. The
enterprise was termed the Deseret Irrigation and Navigation Co. The
governor refused to grant a franchise. See *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1864-5,
116-17; but it was incorporated in 1867. The act of incorporation will
be found in *Utah Acts Legisl*., 1867, pp. 30-2. See, for statistics of
irrigation for each county in 1865, *Pac. Coast Direct*., 1867, 151-3;
for reports on extent, cost, and value of canals at this date, with
other statistics, *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1864-5, 130-3, 1865-6, 149-53;
for various acts regulating irrigation, *Utah Compiled Laws*, 879; for
act to provide right of way for S. L. City canals, *Utah Laws*, 1880,
85-8; for act regulating water rights, *Id*., 36-41; for other acts
concerning irrigation, *Id*., 1882, 119; for names, length, and cost of
canals in Weber co., *Stanford's Brief Hist. Sketch of Weber Co*., MS.,
22.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[723:9](hou30.htm#fr_1253) The necessity for
irrigation of course reduces the size of farms, which in 1883 probably
did not average more than 25 acres. See *Hollister's Res. and Attract.
of Utah*, 16.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[723:10](hou30.htm#fr_1254) See, for remarks
on facilities for irrigation, *Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept*, 1872,
28-33; for report on water supply, character and quantity of irrigated
and irrigable land, etc., in 1876, *House Ex. Doc*., 45th Cong. 2d
Sess., 73, passim; for report on existing system of irrigation and
needed improvements, *Powell's Lands of the Arid Region*, passim.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[723:11](hou30.htm#fr_1255) The Kings of
Kingston, in Piute county, one year sowed 300 acres with wheat, and the
wind blew the crop away. What was not actually displaced was kept cut
close to the ground by the perpetual passage of waves of sand. They
planted an orchard, but some gooseberry bushes alone remained. Shade
trees were set out about their houses, but the wind worked them around
so that they could not take root. *Robinson, Sinners and Saints*, 209.
In 1880 occurred the most violent storm ever known in Utah. A
description of it is given in the *S. L. C. Herald*, July 29, 1880. For
account of flood at Parowan in 1857, see *Deseret News*, Sept. 30, 1857.
In Nov. 1860 there was a violent hurricane which caused great
destruction of property. See *Deseret News*, Nov. 21, 28, 1860; *Sac.
Union*, Dec. 1, 1860. In 1860 there were heavy floods in various parts
of Utah. See *Little's Jacob Hamblin*, 75-7; *Deseret News*, Jan. 15,
22, Feb. 12, May 7, July 9, 1862; *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1863-4. For
other remarkable storms, see *S. F. Bull*., May 25, 1877; *S. F.
Chron*., Apr. 25, 1883. The prevailing winds are westerly. *Powell's
Lands of the Arid Region*, in *H. Ex. Doc*., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 73,
68.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[724:12](hou30.htm#fr_1256) Says Burton: 'The
spring vegetation is about a fortnight later on the hanks of Jordan than
above them;' and he also asserts that the presence of saleratus or
alkaline salts is another cause of cold. *City of the Saints*, 345.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[724:13](hou30.htm#fr_1257) See pp.
[279](hou14.htm#page_279)-81, [498](hou21.htm#page_498) (note
[36](hou21.htm#fn_747)), this vol.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[724:14](hou30.htm#fr_1258) In 1859 great
injury was done to the crops in Juab co. and elsewhere. *Deseret News*,
June 29, 1859; and in Carson Valley. *Sac. Union*, June 23, 1859. For
damage by crickets and grasshoppers in other years, see *Deseret News*,
May 2, 1860; *S. F. Call*, July 22, 1864; *Deseret News*, Aug. 7, 14,
Sept. 4, 1867, May 13, 1868; *S. F. Bull*., May 21, June 30, 1868;
*Huntsville, Descript. of* MS., 6; *Utah Sketches*, MS., 27; *S. F.
Times*, Aug. 10, 1869; *S. F. Call*, Aug. 18, 1869; *Deseret News*, June
29, 1870, May 17, 1871; *S. F. Bull*., Oct. 4, 1872. In the *Second Rept
Entomol. Comm*., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., there is also a report on their
ravages, with suggestions as to their extermination.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[724:15](hou30.htm#fr_1259) See [p.
322](hou17.htm#page_322), this vol.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[724:16](hou30.htm#fr_1260) For further
mention of the soil of Utah, see *U.S. Agr. Rept*, 1869, p. 617, 1870,
557 et seq., *H. Ex. Doc*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 325; *Mess. and Doc*.,
1868-9 (abridg.), 831; *U.S. Land-Off. Rept*, 1869, 170-1; *King's Geol.
Survey*, v., p. xlviii.; *Ludlow's Heart of the Continent*, 202-3;
*Marshall's Through Amer*., 237; *S. L. Wkly Tribune*, Feb. 14, 1880;
*Musser's Fruits of Mormonism*, 27.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[725:17](hou30.htm#fr_1261) See, for list of
prizes awarded in 1879, *Deseret News*, Oct. 22, 1879; for report of
directors in 1860, *Id*., Oct. 17, 1860; for exhibition in that year,
*Sac. Union*, Oct. 20, 1860; for condition, operations, and financial
exhibits, *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1863-4, pp. 59-60; 1864-5, 79-81;
1865-6, 82-4, 123; 1870, 177 -8; 1876, 133-4; for rules and regulations,
*Deseret Agr. and Man. Soc.—List of Premiums*; *S. L. Dy Herald*, July
19, Aug. 9, 1879; for description of last fair, *S. L. Wkly Herald*,
Oct. 6, 1881; for agricultural fair held at Provo in 1870, *Deseret
News*, Oct. 12, 1870; for Utah co. fair in 1860, *Id*., Oct. 3, 1860;
for fairs at various settlements and prizes awarded, *Id*., Oct. 8,
1862; for complete list of agricultural societies, *Id*. Aug. 21, 1872.
In 1865 lands and funds were appropriated for an agricultural college.
See *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1865-6, p. 40; *Utah Acts Legisl*, 1865, p.
88.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[725:18](hou30.htm#fr_1262) *Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, p. 46. These figures are for 1875. Of late years apples, peaches,
vegetables, and grain have been infected with worms, and the trees with
noxious insects, four or five large worms being sometimes found in a
single ear of corn. *Jennings’ Mat. Progr. of Utah*, MS., 7;
*Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah* (1882), 18.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[725:19](hou30.htm#fr_1263) See, for review of
fruit culture in Utah, *Deseret News*, March 20, 1861; for tables
showing area under fruit, product, yield per acre, and sketch of
fruit-growing interest for 1875-9, *S. L. C. Tribune*, Apr. 2, 1879; for
other statistics and reports on horticulture, *Deseret News*, Dec. 31,
1856; *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1866-7, pp. 159-62; 1868, 163-8. Among the
leading men engaged in the wholesale fruit business may be mentioned H.
L. Griffin, who commenced operations in 1881 and met with fair success.
Mr Griffin, a Pennsylvanian by birth, came to Utah in 1879, having
previously resided for many years in Kansas, to which state he removed
after his father was crippled in the war of the rebellion. *Griffin's
Fruit Cult*., MS.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[726:20](hou30.htm#fr_1264) Sloan, *Utah*, 11,
says that grapes yield five tons to the acre, but this is doubtless an
exaggeration. For grape culture in Utah, see *Ogden Freeman*, Feb. 21,
1879; for wine-making, see *Sac. Union*, Nov. 2, 1861; for viticulture
at St George in 1882, see *Robinson's Sinners and Saints*, 218.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[726:21](hou30.htm#fr_1265) See [p.
599](hou24.htm#page_599), note [74](hou24.htm#fn_949), this vol. A
little cotton was raised until 1864. See *Deseret News*, Oct. 9, 1861;
*Sac. Union*, March 4, 1869; *Cal. Farmer*, March 11, 1864; but after
that date its culture seems to have been practically discontinued.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[726:22](hou30.htm#fr_1266) Experiments were
made before this date. In the *S. F. Bulletin*, Aug. 21, 1863, a
correspondent states that he saw the first silk fabric made in Utah—a
small scarf from silk raised at Centreville.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[726:23](hou30.htm#fr_1267) In 1880 William
Jennings was president, Eliza R. Snow vice-president, A. M. Musser
secretary, and Paul A. Schettler treasurer, the first three being <span
id="page_727">p. 727</span> directors. The other members of the board
were Wm H. Hooper, Zina D. Young, Alex. C. Pyper, and M. I. Horne.
*S. L. C. Contributor*, ii. 115. In 1878 $1,500 was appropriated by the
legislature for the purchase of machinery. *Snow's Autobiog*., MS.;
*Utah Laws*, 1878, 56.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[727:24](hou30.htm#fr_1268) For further
mention of sericulture in Utah, see *Id*., 115-16; *S. L. Dy Tel*., Dec.
5, 1868; *S. F. Bulletin*, July 22, 1868; *Sac. Union*, Nov. 25, 1868.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[727:25](hou30.htm#fr_1269) *Hollister's Res.
and Attract. of Utah*, 18; *Utah Gaz*., 11. See, for remarks on the
scarcity of timber, *Utah Early Records*, MS., 20; *House Ex. Doc*.,
46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., p. 504; *Beadle's Life in Utah*, 461-2; for
extent, character, and statistics of timber-lands, *Powell's Lands of
the Arid* <span id="page_728">p. 728</span> *Region*, in *House Ex.
Doc*., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., xiii. no. 73, pp. 14-19, 27-8, 98-102; *U.S.
Agr. Rept*, 1875, 331-2; for tenure of timber-lands, *House Ex. Doc*.,
46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., pp. 497-8; for depredations committed on
timber-lands, *S. L. C. Tribune*, June 26, 1875.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[728:26](hou30.htm#fr_1270) L. B. Adams, in
1884 a resident of Ogden and the owner of one of the best winter ranges
for stock about 20 miles south of Rozel, says that feed is plentiful
throughout the summer.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[728:27](hou30.htm#fr_1271) *Burton's City of
the Saints*, 171-2; *Beadle's Life in Utah*. For further mention of
pasture-lands in Utah, see *House Ex. Doc*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 325,
233 et seq., no. 326, 243 et seq. In 1877 the islands of Great Salt Lake
were used as herd-grounds.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[728:28](hou30.htm#fr_1272) In 1856 several
acts were passed granting 'herd-grounds' to various parties. See *Utah
Acts*, 1855-6, passim. In 1860 more than 30 of these grants were
revoked. *Id*., 1856-60, 26-30.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[729:29](hou30.htm#fr_1273) As early as 1856
cattle were driven to Truckee. *Huffaker's Early Cattle Trade*, MS.,
1-2.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[729:30](hou30.htm#fr_1274) *Stock-Raising in
Utah*, MS., 5. Burton remarks that stock-breeding was one of Brigham's
hobbies, and that the difference between Utah cattle and the old Spanish
herds of California was very remarkable. *City of the Saints*, 285.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[729:31](hou30.htm#fr_1275) According to a
carefully compiled table in *Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 296. In the
governor's message of 1882 the number was placed at 200,000, probably
too high; in the census report for 1880 at 93,581, certainly too low.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[730:32](hou30.htm#fr_1276) According to
statistics compiled by order of the legislative assembly in 1875, there
were at that date over 170,000 head. *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1876, 285.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[730:33](hou30.htm#fr_1277) Among them may be
mentioned the Weber Co. Land and Live-Stock Co., organized in 1884 by J.
M. Langsdorf, of which F. A. Hammond was president, and J. W. Guthrie
vice-president, with Langsdorf as secretary and treasurer. They secured
a large tract some 15 miles from Ogden, intending to raise the Hereford
breed of cattle. *Langsdorf's Stock-Raising in Weber Co*., MS.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[730:34](hou30.htm#fr_1278) For further
particulars as to the cattle interests of Utah, see *Stock-Raising in
Utah*, MS., passim; *Land-Office Rept*, 1869, 173; *Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, 47-8; *Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah*, 19-20; for
cattle-raising on Green River, in northern Utah, and Tooele co., see
*House Ex. Doc*., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii. 500, 509, 514-16; in
eastern Utah and Col., *Id*., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., xv. 248-57; for
general sketch of cattle and sheep interests, *S. L. C. Tribune*, Apr.
2, July 18, 1879; for act equalizing taxes on passing herds, *Utah
Laws*, 1878, 49. In 1860 there was a recorder of marks and brands, who
rendered annual accounts to the legislature. *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1869,
68. In 1874 the church owned large herds of stock. *Tullidge's Mag*., i.
560. In 1879 church sales of stock amounted to $58,557.85. *S. L. C.
Tribune*, Apr. 7, 1880. In 1873 the epizootic appeared in Utah. *S. F.
Alta*, Jan. 25, 1873. Among the prominent stockmen of Utah may be
mentioned Ezra T. Clark of Farmington, Davis co. Mr Clark came to Utah
in 1848, crossing the plains in charge of a company, and the same year
settled on his farm. About 1869 he engaged in stock-raising in Idaho. He
was the owner of a fiouring mill in Morgan co. He crossed the plains
eleven times, and travelled 50,000 miles as a missionary, always paying
his own expenses.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[730:35](hou30.htm#fr_1279) In *Stock-Raising
in Utah*, MS., 4, the number of homes alone is given at 70,000.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[731:36](hou30.htm#fr_1280) In a letter of H.
J. Faust to the *Spirit of the Times*, it is stated that one of these
horses travelled 113 miles in 14 hours, over plains and mountains where
there was no road; another made 65 miles in 6½ hours, and a third,
belonging to the pony express, 22 miles in 1 hr 20 min. *Stock-Raising
in Utah*, MS.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[731:37](hou30.htm#fr_1281) In 1869 $5,000 was
appropriated for importing improved breeds. *Utah Compiled Laws*, 186.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[731:38](hou30.htm#fr_1282) *Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, 296. *Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah*, 1882, 20, places the
number at about 400,000; the governor, in his message of 1882, at
600,000. In *Stock-Raising in Utah*, MS., 6,800,000 is given as the
number.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[731:39](hou30.htm#fr_1283) Although there are
many herds that shear 10 lbs to the fleece. *Id*., 6, where the average
is placed at 6 lbs. For wool-clip of 1884, see *S. L. Dy Tribune*, Aug.
16, 1884.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[731:40](hou30.htm#fr_1284) In former years,
especially in 1860-1, sheep were sometimes almost destroyed <span
id="page_732">p. 732</span> in winter. Later, people learned how to take
care of them. *Jennings’ Mat. Progr. of Utah*, MS., 3. For clip and
value between 1875 and 1879, see *Hollister's Res. and Attract. of
Utah*, 1879, 21-2; for account of the sheep industry between 1870 and
1879, *S. L. Dy Tribune*, Apr. 2, 1879; for sheep-raising on White
River, *House Ex. Doc*., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., p. 495; for damage
done by wolves, *Deseret News*, March 12, 1862. In 1871 the Utah
Cashmere Goat Company was organized. For description of its operations,
see *Deseret News*, Oct. 28, 1874.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[732:41](hou30.htm#fr_1285) For further
mention of the Provo Manufacturing Company, see *Stanford' s Ogden*,,
MS., 7; *Hittell's Com. and Ind. Pac. Coast*, 447-8; *Utah Sketches*,
MS., 60-1; for grant of water rights, *Provo City Revised Ordinances*,
129-30.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[732:42](hou30.htm#fr_1286) For further
mention of woolien-mills, see *Deseret News*, Sept. 14, 1881. In
*Sloan's Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 53, it is stated that Brigham brought
the first carding-machine into Utah in 1849. Others were imported
between 1852-4. After the latter date they were manufactured in the
country. The Deseret mills, located in Parley Cañon, were built by
Brigham Young; the Wasatch woollen-mills by A. O. Smoot, Jolla Sharp,
and R. T. Burton. In 1870 mills were built at Brigham City and Beaver.
John R. Murdock took a prominent part in establishing the latter. Mr
Murdock came from California in 18t7, having been honorably discharged
from service in the Mexican war. In 1883 he was president of the Beaver
stake. In 1871 there was <span id="page_733">p. 733</span> a factory in
operation at Ogden, owned by Randall, Pugsley, & Co. There were also
mills in Cache co., in which John Stoddard was largely interested. Mr
Stoddard, a Scotchman by birth, came to Utah in 1850, settling in Iron
co., whence he moved to Cache Valley in 1860, where he also engaged in
the lumber business, removing to Ogden in 1884, to follow the same
business. During his career he was four years employed in fighting
Indians, suffering great hardships, and was also one of those who went
out to meet Johnston's army in June 1858.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[733:43](hou30.htm#fr_1287) The Utah breweries
by 1886 made about 20,000 barrels a year. In 1864 Henry Wagener started
the first large brewery in the territory, about a mile and a half from
Fort Douglas. The first year he made only 400 barrels, and in 1884 7,000
barrels. Mr Wagener, a German by birth, came to Utah in 1864, having
previously resided in California and Nevada.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[733:44](hou30.htm#fr_1288) According to the
census returns between 1850 and 1880, which cannot, however, be accepted
as the exact figures, there were in the former year 14 manufacturing
establishments, with 51 hands, $44,400 of capital, and $291,223 of
products; in 1860, 48 establishments, with 389 hands, $443,356 of
capital, and $900,153 of products; in 1870, 533 factories employing
1,534 hands, $1,491,848 of capital, and producing $2,248,519 of goods;
and in 1880, 1,066 factories, 3,221 operatives, $2,839,463 of capital,
and $4,217,434 of products. See, for list of saw-mills in 1865, *Pac.
Coast Direct*., 1867, 153-4; of gristmills in 1869, *Id*., 1871-3,
151-2; for further mention of saw and grist mills and lumber
manufactures, *Utah Sketches*, MS., passim; *S. L. Dy Tel*., Dec. 16,
1868; *Tullidge's Mag*., i. 558-9, iii. 34-6. As early as 1850 there was
a machine-shop in the temple building. *Deseret News*, Sept. 14, 1850.
For account of the Deseret Iron Co. in 1852, see *Bertrand's Mem.
Morm*., 81-2; of wagon and carriage manufactory in 1868, *S. L. Dy
Tel*., Dec. 12, 1868; of soap factory in 1878, *S. L. C. Herald*, Dec.
29, 1878; of boot and shoe factories, *Deseret Ev. News*, Jan. 2, 1884;
*S. L. C. Herald*, May 2, 1879; *Tullidge's Mag*., i. 205-8. The first
nail factory in Utah worthy the name was built under the superintendence
of James Finlayson in 1859, a little south of S. L. City. Before this
date nails sold at 50 cents a pound. Mr Payson, a Scotchman by birth and
a millwright by occupation, came to the country during this year and
settled at Payson, of which town he was elected mayor in 1882.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[734:45](hou30.htm#fr_1289) Nevertheless James
B. Glass, who opened a carriage manufactory and repository at S. L. City
in 1879, reports that between that date and 1884 his sales increased
eightfold. For further general mention of Utah manufactures, see
*Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah* (1882), 55-6; *Gov. Message*,
1882, pp. 7-8; *S. L. Wkly Herald*, Nov. 17, 1881; *Dy Telegraph*, Dec.
1, 1868; *Tribune*, May 3, 24, 1873; *Sloan's Utah*, 7, 13-14; *Utah
Gazetteer*, 1884, 50, 299. In March 1882, $5,000 was appropriated by the
legislature as a premium to be paid to the producer of 7,000 lbs of
merchantable brown sugar, made in Utah from material produced in the
country. *Utah Laws*, 1882, 44-5.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[735:46](hou30.htm#fr_1290) Varying from $20
to $40 per ton.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[735:47](hou30.htm#fr_1291) Blodgett Brittan,
a prominent Philadelphia iron-master, who analyzed five specimens of ore
from this district, the analyses being only for iron, phosphorus, and
sulphur, reports that they averaged 64 per cent of iron, 12 per cent
<span id="page_736">p. 736</span> of phosphorus, and of sulphur a trace.
W. A. Hedges of S. L. City obtained from a specimen of magnetic ore
62.60 of iron, .12 of sulphur, and 4.8 of silica; from a specimen of
hematite, 60.90 of iron, .08 of sulphur, and 5.7 of silica. *Hollister's
Res. and Attract. of Utah*, 45. For description of Great Western
iron-works at Iron City, incorporated in 1873, see *Deseret News*, Oct.
13, 1875; of the Ogden iron-works, at which operations were commenced
systematically in 1882, *Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah*, 51; for
further mention of iron deposits in Utah, see *Deseret News*, Aug. 26,
1874, Aug. 17, 1881; *S. L. Wkly Herald*, June 23, 1881; *S. L. C.
Tribune*, Oct. 24, 1874, Apr. 10, 13, 17, Nov. 2, 1879, Dec. 3, 1880,
Jan. 1, 1881; *S. F. Bull*., Jan. 17, 1882; *S. F. Alta*, Sept. 4, 1873;
*Austin Reese River Reveille*, Nov. 21, 1866; *Murphy's Min. Res. of
Utah*, 8.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[736:48](hou30.htm#fr_1292) From an analysis
of Castle Valley coal, Mr Brittan reported 48.21 per cent of fixed
carbon, 1.88 of ash, and 40.61 of volatile matter; from coke produced
from this coal, 94.05 of fixed carbon, 3.25 of ash, and 2.70 of volatile
matter. From an analysis of Sanpete Valley coal, the samples being taken
40 feet below the surface, A. P. Bouton obtained 50.7 per cent of coke,
34.2 of bitumen, 13.3 of ash, and 1.8 of moisture. *Hollister's Res. of
Utah*, 47.

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[737:49](hou30.htm#fr_1293) *Utah Acts
Legisl*., 1855, 393. The reward was claimed in 1860 by Wm H. Kimball and
John Spriggs, whose petition was referred to a committee and refused, on
the ground that the mine was more than 40 miles distant and the coal of
inferior quality. See *Utah Jour. Legisl*., 1860-1, 73, 1862-3, 65-6. In
1863 a mine had been opened 40 miles from the capital, the coal selling
at $40 per ton.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[737:50](hou30.htm#fr_1294) For list of
counties, locations, and number of acres in each, see *Utah Gazetteer*,
1884, 62. For coal-lands taken up in 1876-9, according to the
surveyor-general's report, see *S. L. C. Herald*, Nov. 26, 1879.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[738:51](hou30.htm#fr_1295) For act
incorporating the Sanpete Coal Co., see *Utah Acts*, 1855-6, 33-4; for
further mention of Sanpete mines, *S. L. C. Tribune*, May 29, 1875; for
report on condition of Utah coal mines in 1859, *Utah Jour. Legisl*.,
1859-60, 32, 64-5; for discovery of coal near Provo, *Deseret News*,
March 14, 1860; near Ogden, *Id*., Aug. 13, 1862; at Farmington, *Id*.,
May 16, 1860; for extent of coal strata in Green River basin, *King's
Surveys*, iii. 455-8; for mines opened at Coalville and their operations
in 1870, *Id*., iii. 467-73; for Pleasant Valley mines, *Reno Gazette*,
Nov. 12, 1881; for additional details as to coal mines, lands,
discoveries, and interests, *Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah*, 8;
*Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah*, 45-51; *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884,
61-2; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Jan. 18, 1873, Oct. 27, 1879; *S. L. C.
Herald*, May 12, Dec. 22, 1877, March 30, 1878, Jan. 28, 1880; *Herald*,
Nov. 17, 1881; *S. L. Mail*, May 17, 1876; *S. F. Bull*., Jan. 17, 1882;
*Alta*, March 15, 1873, April 6, 1875; *Stock Report*, April 26, 1875;
*Sac. Union*, May 30, 1860, Dec. 19, 1863; *Austin Reese River
Reveille*, July 19, 1864.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[738:52](hou30.htm#fr_1296) *House Ex. Doc*.,
46th Cong. 1st Sess., 3, 157. In *Balch's The Mines, Miners, and Mining
Int. of the U.S. in 1882*, 1040, the output for 1880 and 1881 is given
at 275,000 tons. This statement is taken from *Saward's Coal Trade*, and
is no doubt very much above the actual figures.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[738:53](hou30.htm#fr_1297) In *Utah
Gazetteer*, 1884, 67-8, is a complete list of the minerals and metals
found in Utah. It does not include tin, which, however, is said to have
been discovered near Ogden in 1871. See *S. L. Rev*., Oct. 27, 1871;
*S. F. Call*, Oct. 10, 24, 1871; *Scient. Press*, Oct. 28, 1871. Other
lists will be found in *Wheeler's Surveys*, iii. 652-61; *S. L.
Semi-Wkly Herald*, Jan. 3, 1880; *Silver Reef Miner*, Jan. 10, 1880.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[739:54](hou30.htm#fr_1298) Among other
localities, copper was found in the San Francisco district, Big
Cottonwood, the Snake district, Copper gulch, Red Butte and Bingham
cañons, Antelope Island in G. S. Lake, in many parts of Beaver co., and
in the granite range between Ogden and S. L. City. For account of copper
mines near Milford and at Grand gulch, see *Silver Reef Miner*, June 8,
Oct. 15, 1881. Murphy states that in 1872 the only places where it would
pay to work were in the Bingham, Tintic, and Lucin districts, the last
being partly in Box Elder co. and partly in Nevada. *Min. Res. of Utah*,
8.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[739:55](hou30.htm#fr_1299) For further
mention of bismuth deposits, see *S. F. Bulletin*, Apr. 27, 1872.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[739:56](hou30.htm#fr_1300) For description,
see *Niles' Register*, lxxv.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[740:57](hou30.htm#fr_1301) *Hollister's Res.
and Attract. of Utah*, 52; *S. L. C. Tribune*, May 27, 1879; *S. F.
Post*, March 18, 1879; *Silver Reef Miner*, Jan. 10, 1880.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[741:58](hou30.htm#fr_1302) *Harrison's Crit.
Notes on Utah*, MS., 48. In 1857, and perhaps at an earlier date, it was
known that there were silver mines near G. S. Lake. See *Surgeon-Gen.
Circ*. 8, 1875, 338-9; *Sac. Union*, Nov. 30, 1858.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[741:59](hou30.htm#fr_1303) A list of them
with particulars will be found in *Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah*, facing
p. 14.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[741:60](hou30.htm#fr_1304) For further
information as to this district, see *Id*., 2; *Hollister's Res. and
Attract. of Utah*, 28-30; *S. L. C. Tribune*, July 13, Aug. 3, 13, 1879,
Jan. 3, 1880; *S. L. C. Herald*, July 18, 1879; *Mining and Scientific
Press*, July 17, 1875.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[742:61](hou30.htm#fr_1305) For list and plan,
with developments, etc., in 1872, see *Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah*,
facing p. 20.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[742:62](hou30.htm#fr_1306) For further
mention of the Rush Valley and Ophir district, see *Id*., 20-1, 29-31;
*Hollister' s Res. and Attract. of Utah*, 31; *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884,
89-91. In 1882 the town of Stockton was destroyed by fire. *S. F. Call*,
Sept. 5, 1882.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[742:63](hou30.htm#fr_1307) In 1872 the
production was about 80 tons a day. *Paul's Utah Incid*., MS.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[742:64](hou30.htm#fr_1308) The first year it
paid in dividends $1,000,000. *Godbe's Statement*, MS., 4-5. The Walker
Bros purchased a fourth-interest for $30,000, and furnished money and
supplies for opening it. *Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS.,
4.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[743:65](hou30.htm#fr_1309) See further, for
history and description of Emma mine, *Beadle's Western Wilds*, 120;
*S. F. Call*, March 11, 1876; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Jan. 11, 1872, March
25, April 8, 1876; of swindle, *Id*., Nov. 30, 1875; of lawsuit, *Coast
Rev*., 1872, vol. ii., no. 5, 192, no. 6, 230-1; *S. F. Bull*., Jan. 7,
1875; *S. F. Post*, June 8, 1872.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[743:66](hou30.htm#fr_1310) For further
mention of the Cottonwood mines, see *Godbe's Statement*, MS., 4-5;
*Paul's Utah Incid*., MS.; *S. L. C. Tribune*, Jan. 1, 1881; *Tribune*,
Jan. 3, 1880; *S. L. Herald*, Jan. 3, 1880; *S. F. Alta*, Feb. 9, 26,
1873; *Hayden's Geol. Surv. Rept*, 1872, 106-8.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[743:67](hou30.htm#fr_1311) For further
details, see *Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah*, 32-4. In this work are
descriptions of all the mining districts of Utah up to 1872, and of the
leading districts to 1882, in *Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah*,
1882, 22-41. In the former are also the names of the productive mines in
each district, with no. of feet, assays, etc. In *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884,
73-104, there is also a description of the various districts.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[744:68](hou30.htm#fr_1312) The Tintic mines
are further described in the *S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug. 5, 19, 1871, Feb.
29, 1880, Jan. 1, 1881; *Wkly Tribune*, March 6, 1880.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[744:69](hou30.htm#fr_1313) For account of
discovery, see *Balch's The Mines, Miners, and Mining Int. of the U.S.
in 1882*, 788; *S. L. Wkly Tribune*, Dec. 4, 1880.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[744:70](hou30.htm#fr_1314) In Aug 1885 this
mine paid its 110th monthly dividend, the amount being $75,000, and the
total to that date $6,650,000. *S. F. Bulletin*, Aug. 28, 1885.
Additional items relating to the Ontario mine will be found in *Rept
Ontario Silver Mg Co., Apr. 1, 1881, to Nov. 30, 1883; Robinson's
Sinners and Saints*, 249-59; *Utah Gaz*., 6; *Vallejo Chronicle*, May
14, 1880. For other mines in these districts, see *S. L. Tribune*, Jan.
3, 1880.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[745:71](hou30.htm#fr_1315) The discovery of
this mine is mentioned in the *Silver Reef Miner*, July 30, 1879.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[745:72](hou30.htm#fr_1316) J. E. Dooly,
express agent at S. L. City, gives as the product for 1881, 1,259,903
oz. of silver and 16,343,995 lbs of lead, valued at $1,807,092.20. After
losing his property, W. S· Godbe obtained a contract for smelting ore
from this mine, rcducing in all some 20,000 tons. *Godbe's Statement*,
MS., 7.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[745:73](hou30.htm#fr_1317) The Cave mine
originally belonged to Mr Godbe, who in 1885 was still largely
interested in it. *Id*., 7, 9. In 1884 there were 300 men employed by
the Frisco company. Rock was shipped to the reduction-works near Salt
Lake City, and most of the bullion to Chicago. *Hill's Mines and Mg in
Utah*, MS. In 1881 the company's mines at Frisco produced 221,846 oz. of
silver and 2,023,213 lbs of lead, worth $330,329.38. For further
particulars, see *S. L. Wkly Tribune*, Jan. 3, 1880.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[745:74](hou30.htm#fr_1318) The owners of this
mine were W. S. Godbe and three others, the former being confident that
the deposit was worth several millions of dollars. *Godbe's Statement*,
MS., 10-11.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[746:75](hou30.htm#fr_1319) Silver Reef City
was incorporated in 1878. *Utah Laws*, 1878, 23-6. For further mention
of Silver Reef mines, see *S. L. C. Tribune*, March 30, 1879; *Wkly
Tribune*, Jan. 3, 1880; *Ruby Hill Mg News*, Sept. 19, 1881; *S. F.
Chronicle*, Nov. 14, 1880. In the Lucia district, on the dividing line
between Utah and Nevada, there were several good locations. Among other
gold and silver milling districts in Utah may be mentioned the Lincoln,
where was discovered the first silver mine in Utah, named the Rollins,
and containing a heavy deposit of argentiferous galena. The Star
District, a few miles west of Milford, formerly produced considerable
bullion, but the exhaustion of the surface deposits, distance from
railroads, and the fall in the price of lead caused smelting operations
to be suspended, though in 1883 development was still progressing with
good results. The Rocky and Beaver Lake districts, north of the Star,
abounded in ores containing gold, silver, and copper, the O.K. and Old
Hickory being the prominent mines in 1882. In the Timmons or Nebo
district in Juab county there were large bodies of low-grade galena ore.
At the Pine Grove district, 30 or 40 miles west of Frisco, the Carrie
Lucille mine had been opened at that date to a depth of 200 feet and
showed strong veins of high-grade ore. In the Ohio and Mount Baldy
districts, at Marysvale, in Plate county, the leading mine was the Deer
Trail, at which there were 100,000 tons of ore in sight in 1882,
averaging about an ounce of gold and 15 oz. of silver to the ton. There
were several other good mines and prospects, but capital was needed for
their development. For further mention of this district, see *Silver
Reef Miner*, May 14, 1879; for account of Clifton mining district,
*S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug. 15, 1874; of Camp Floyd district, *Utah
Gazetteer*. 1884, 80-1; of Walker River placer mines in 1857-9, *Sac.
Union*, Aug. 1, 29, Sept. 7, 1857; Apr. 26, 29, May 24, 26, Dec. 11, 17,
1858; July 23, 1859; of Ruby mines, *S. F. Alta*, Apr. 4, 1873; for gold
discoveries on Bear River, *S. F. Bulletin*, Apr. 30, 1864; on New
River, *Sac. Union*, Apr. 5, 1858; on the Sweetwater, <span
id="page_747">p. 747</span> *Deseret News*, Sept. 11, 1867; for
description of Willard mines, *S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug. 8, 1880; of
silver mines near Pahraganat Valley, *U. S. Ind. Aff. Rept*, 1865,
156-7. For historical sketches of mining in Utah, see *Tullidge's Mag*.,
i. 179-90; *Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints*, 713-34; for lists and
reports of various districts between 1870 and 1880, with operations,
prospects, etc., *Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept*, 1872, 13-26, 51;
*Sec. Int. Rept*, 42d Cong. 3d Sess., pt i. 166-7; *Fabian's Utah*, 4-5,
7-8; *Raymond's Stat. of Mines*, 1873, 242-64; *Coast Rev*. 1872-9,
passim; *Utah Direct. and Gaz*., 1879-80, passim; Raymond's ann. repts,
in *House Ex. Doc*., 42d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 10, 218-23; 43d Cong. 1st
Sess., 141, 218-23; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 141, 255-83; 43d Cong. 2d
Sess., 177, 328-57; 44th Cong. 1st Sess., 159, 269-81; Professor
Newberry's reports, in *S. L. C. Tribune*, Aug. 21, 26, 1879; Aug. 28,
1880; Delegate Cannon's statement, in *House Misc. Doc*., 45th Cong. 2d
Sess., 54, 97-100; *Wheeler's Geog. Surveys Rept*, 1878, 90-1; *Codman's
Round Trip*, 185-93, 203-6, 222-3, 250-1. For Utah mines placed on the
London market, see *London Times*, July 24, 1871; for legislation
concerning mines, see *Utah Laws*, 1878, 8, 42.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[747:76](hou30.htm#fr_1320) Professor J. E.
Clayton, in *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 56. In *Gov. Mess*., for 1882, 8,
the average output of gold, silver, and lead between 1870 and 1882 is
given at $6,500,000. This is probably too high, as between 1870 and 1874
inclusive it was less than $3,000,000 and in no year did the product
much exceed $7,000,000. For other estimates during portions of this
period, see *Balch's The Mines, Miners, and Mining Int. of the U. S. in
1882*, passim; *Hayden's Gt West*, 317-18; *New Mex. Mg World*, Dec. l,
1882, 83, Nov. l, 1884, 136; *S. F. Bulletin*, Jan. 3, 1882; *Utah
Direct. and Gaz*., 1879-80, 36.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[748:77](hou30.htm#fr_1321) *Godbe's
Statement*, MS., 8-9. Mr Godbe is of opinion that the leaching process
will, when its merits are better known, be of vast benefit to the mining
world.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[748:78](hou30.htm#fr_1322) In 1871 Joshua R.
Nichols, who came to S. L. City with the exclusive right for Krom's
patent separating and concentrating machinery, organized a company for
the introduction of this process in connection with smelting,
amalgamation, and chlorination. Mr Nichols, a native of Onondaga co. ,
N.Y., followed at Detroit, Mich., the several occupations of farm-boy,
errand-boy, clerk, and store-keeper until 1865, when he engaged in the
railroad-supply business until July 1869, being then appointed assistant
superintendent on the Union Pacific. Removing to Utah in 1871, he became
engaged in mining and railroad enterprises. *Nichols' Minting Mach*.,
MS.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[748:79](hou30.htm#fr_1323) The Pioneer
quartz-mill of 15 stamps, for the reduction of silver ore, the <span
id="page_749">p. 749</span> first one in Utah, was built by Walker Bros,
at the Ophir mining district. When that district was considered a
failure the mill was removed to the Alice mine in Montana, five stamps
being added, and a 60-stamp mill erected by its side. *Walker's
Merchants and Miners of Utah*, MS., 5. Nevertheless, at the close of
1883 there were three mills in this district, named the Pioneer,
Enterprise, and Fairview. At this date the Ontario mill, at Park City,
Uintah district, had 40 stamps, and the Marsac mill at the same city, 30
stamps. Among others may be mentioned the McHenry mill at Parley Park,
the Stewart mills in the West Mountain district, and one belonging to
the Tintic Mining and Milling Co., the last with 10 stamps.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[749:80](hou30.htm#fr_1324) Including common,
refined, white, sheet, pipe, shot, and test lead. *Hollister's Res. and
Attract. of Utah*, 43. For further mention of the Germanin works, see
*S. L. C. Tribune*, Dec. 14, 1872, Jan. 4, 1873.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[749:81](hou30.htm#fr_1325) For description of
other smelting and refining works, see *Utah Gazetteer*, 1884, 70-1. The
first smelting furnace was erected by Gen. Connor at Stockton in 1864.
*Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah*, 2. Among the sampling-works may be
mentioned these of J. C. Conklin at S. L. City, and Scott & Anderson at
Sandy, the former with a capacity of 200 and the latter of 500 tons a
day.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[749:82](hou30.htm#fr_1326) As in the Silver
Reef district.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. Commerce and Communication. 1852-1885.](hou31)
