[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn074)  [Next](enn076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Those enquiring whence Evil enters into beings, or rather into a
certain order of beings, would be making the best beginning if they
established, first of all, what precisely Evil is, what constitutes its
Nature. At once we should know whence it comes, where it has its native
seat and where it is present merely as an accident; and there would be
no further question as to whether it has Authentic-Existence.

But a difficulty arises. By what faculty in us could we possibly know
Evil?

All knowing comes by likeness. The Intellectual-Principle and the Soul,
being Ideal-Forms, would know Ideal-Forms and would have a natural
tendency towards them; but who could imagine Evil to be an Ideal-Form,
seeing that it manifests itself as the very absence of Good?

If the solution is that the one act of knowing covers contraries, and
that as Evil is the contrary to Good the one act would grasp Good and
Evil together, then to know Evil there must be first a clear perception
and understanding of Good, since the nobler existences precede the baser
and are Ideal-Forms while the less good hold no such standing, are
nearer to Non-Being.

No doubt there is a question in what precise way Good is contrary to
Evil- whether it is as First-Principle to last of things or as
Ideal-Form to utter Lack: but this subject we postpone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn076)
