[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn064)  [Next](enn066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. These Lovers, then, lovers of the beauty outside of sense, must be
made to declare themselves.

What do you feel in presence of the grace you discern in actions, in
manners, in sound morality, in all the works and fruits of virtue, in
the beauty of souls? When you see that you yourselves are beautiful
within, what do you feel? What is this Dionysiac exultation that thrills
through your being, this straining upwards of all your Soul, this
longing to break away from the body and live sunken within the veritable
self?

These are no other than the emotions of Souls under the spell of love.

But what is it that awakens all this passion? No shape, no colour, no
grandeur of mass: all is for a Soul, something whose beauty rests upon
no colour, for the moral wisdom the Soul enshrines and all the other
hueless splendour of the virtues. It is that you find in yourself, or
admire in another, loftiness of spirit; righteousness of life;
disciplined purity; courage of the majestic face; gravity; modesty that
goes fearless and tranquil and passionless; and, shining down upon all,
the light of god-like Intellection.

All these noble qualities are to be reverenced and loved, no doubt, but
what entitles them to be called beautiful?

They exist: they manifest themselves to us: anyone that sees them must
admit that they have reality of Being; and is not Real-Being, really
beautiful?

But we have not yet shown by what property in them they have wrought the
Soul to loveliness: what is this grace, this splendour as of Light,
resting upon all the virtues?

Let us take the contrary, the ugliness of the Soul, and set that against
its beauty: to understand, at once, what this ugliness is and how it
comes to appear in the Soul will certainly open our way before us.

Let us then suppose an ugly Soul, dissolute, unrighteous: teeming with
all the lusts; torn by internal discord; beset by the fears of its
cowardice and the envies of its pettiness; thinking, in the little
thought it has, only of the perish able and the base; perverse in all
its the friend of unclean pleasures; living the life of abandonment to
bodily sensation and delighting in its deformity.

What must we think but that all this shame is something that has
gathered about the Soul, some foreign bane outraging it, soiling it, so
that, encumbered with all manner of turpitude, it has no longer a clean
activity or a clean sensation, but commands only a life smouldering
dully under the crust of evil; that, sunk in manifold death, it no
longer sees what a Soul should see, may no longer rest in its own being,
dragged ever as it is towards the outer, the lower, the dark?

An unclean thing, I dare to say; flickering hither and thither at the
call of objects of sense, deeply infected with the taint of body,
occupied always in Matter, and absorbing Matter into itself; in its
commerce with the Ignoble it has trafficked away for an alien nature its
own essential Idea.

If a man has been immersed in filth or daubed with mud his native
comeliness disappears and all that is seen is the foul stuff besmearing
him: his ugly condition is due to alien matter that has encrusted him,
and if he is to win back his grace it must be his business to scour and
purify himself and make himself what he was.

So, we may justly say, a Soul becomes ugly- by something foisted upon
it, by sinking itself into the alien, by a fall, a descent into body,
into Matter. The dishonour of the Soul is in its ceasing to be clean and
apart. Gold is degraded when it is mixed with earthy particles; if these
be worked out, the gold is left and is beautiful, isolated from all that
is foreign, gold with gold alone. And so the Soul; let it be but cleared
of the desires that come by its too intimate converse with the body,
emancipated from all the passions, purged of all that embodiment has
thrust upon it, withdrawn, a solitary, to itself again- in that moment
the ugliness that came only from the alien is stripped away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn066)
