[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn076)  [Next](enn078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. If such be the Nature of Beings and of That which transcends all the
realm of Being, Evil cannot have place among Beings or in the
Beyond-Being; these are good.

There remains, only, if Evil exist at all, that it be situate in the
realm of Non-Being, that it be some mode, as it were, of the Non-Being,
that it have its seat in something in touch with Non-Being or to a
certain degree communicate in Non-Being.

By this Non-Being, of course, we are not to understand something that
simply does not exist, but only something of an utterly different order
from Authentic-Being: there is no question here of movement or position
with regard to Being; the Non-Being we are thinking of is, rather, an
image of Being or perhaps something still further removed than even an
image.

Now this \[the required faint image of Being\] might be the sensible
universe with all the impressions it engenders, or it might be something
of even later derivation, accidental to the realm of sense, or again, it
might be the source of the sense-world or something of the same order
entering into it to complete it.

Some conception of it would be reached by thinking of measurelessness as
opposed to measure, of the unbounded against bound, the unshaped against
a principle of shape, the ever-needy against the self-sufficing: think
of the ever-undefined, the never at rest, the all-accepting but never
sated, utter dearth; and make all this character not mere accident in it
but its equivalent for essential-being, so that, whatsoever fragment of
it be taken, that part is all lawless void, while whatever participates
in it and resembles it becomes evil, though not of course to the point
of being, as itself is, Evil-Absolute.

In what substantial-form \[hypostasis\] then is all this to be found-
not as accident but as the very substance itself?

For if Evil can enter into other things, it must have in a certain sense
a prior existence, even though it may not be an essence. As there is
Good, the Absolute, as well as Good, the quality, so, together with the
derived evil entering into something not itself, there must be the
Absolute Evil.

But how? Can there be Unmeasure apart from an unmeasured object?

Does not Measure exist apart from unmeasured things? Precisely as there
is Measure apart from anything measured, so there is Unmeasure apart
from the unmeasured. If Unmeasure could not exist independently, it must
exist either in an unmeasured object or in something measured; but the
unmeasured could not need Unmeasure and the measured could not contain
it.

There must, then, be some Undetermination-Absolute, some Absolute
Formlessness; all the qualities cited as characterizing the Nature of
Evil must be summed under an Absolute Evil; and every evil thing outside
of this must either contain this Absolute by saturation or have taken
the character of evil and become a cause of evil by consecration to this
Absolute.

What will this be?

That Kind whose place is below all the patterns, forms, shapes,
measurements and limits, that which has no trace of good by any title of
its own, but \[at best\] takes order and grace from some Principle
outside itself, a mere image as regards Absolute-Being but the Authentic
Essence of Evil- in so far as Evil can have Authentic Being. In such a
Kind, Reason recognizes the Primal Evil, Evil Absolute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn078)
