[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn021)  [Next](enn023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. So we come to the scope of the purification: that understood, the
nature of Likeness becomes clear. Likeness to what Principle? Identity
with what God?

The question is substantially this: how far does purification dispel the
two orders of passion- anger, desire and the like, with grief and its
kin- and in what degree the disengagement from the body is possible.

Disengagement means simply that the soul withdraws to its own place.

It will hold itself above all passions and affections. Necessary
pleasures and all the activity of the senses it will employ only for
medicament and assuagement lest its work be impeded. Pain it may combat,
but, failing the cure, it will bear meekly and ease it by refusing
assent to it. All passionate action it will check: the suppression will
be complete if that be possible, but at worst the Soul will never itself
take fire but will keep the involuntary and uncontrolled outside its
precincts and rare and weak at that. The Soul has nothing to dread,
though no doubt the involuntary has some power here too: fear therefore
must cease, except so far as it is purely monitory. What desire there
may be can never be for the vile; even the food and drink necessary for
restoration will lie outside of the Soul's attention, and not less the
sexual appetite: or if such desire there must be, it will turn upon the
actual needs of the nature and be entirely under control; or if any
uncontrolled motion takes place, it will reach no further than the
imagination, be no more than a fleeting fancy.

The Soul itself will be inviolately free and will be working to set the
irrational part of the nature above all attack, or if that may not be,
then at least to preserve it from violent assault, so that any wound it
takes may be slight and be healed at once by virtue of the Soul's
presence, just as a man living next door to a Sage would profit by the
neighbourhood, either in becoming wise and good himself or, for sheer
shame, never venturing any act which the nobler mind would disapprove.

There will be no battling in the Soul: the mere intervention of Reason
is enough: the lower nature will stand in such awe of Reason that for
any slightest movement it has made it will grieve, and censure its own
weakness, in not having kept low and still in the presence of its lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn023)
