[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn084)  [Next](enn086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. It may be suggested that Vice is feebleness in the Soul.

We shall be reminded that the Vicious Soul is unstable, swept along from
every ill to every other, quickly stirred by appetites, headlong to
anger, as hasty to compromises, yielding at once to obscure
imaginations, as weak, in fact, as the weakest thing made by man or
nature, blown about by every breeze, burned away by every heat.

Still the question must be faced what constitutes this weakness in the
Soul, whence it comes.

For weakness in the body is not like that in the Soul: the word
weakness, which covers the incapacity for work and the lack of
resistance in the body, is applied to the Soul merely by analogy-
unless, indeed, in the one case as in the other, the cause of the
weakness is Matter.

But we must go more thoroughly into the source of this weakness, as we
call it, in the Soul, which is certainly not made weak as the result of
any density or rarity, or by any thickening or thinning or anything like
a disease, like a fever.

Now this weakness must be seated either in Souls utterly disengaged or
in Souls bound to Matter or in both.

It cannot exist in those apart from Matter, for all these are pure and,
as we read, winged and perfect and unimpeded in their task: there
remains only that the weakness be in the fallen Souls, neither cleansed
nor clean; and in them the weakness will be, not in any privation but in
some hostile presence, like that of phlegm or bile in the organs of the
body.

If we form an acute and accurate notion of the cause of the fall we
shall understand the weakness that comes by it.

Matter exists; Soul exists; and they occupy, so to speak, one place.
There is not one place for Matter and another for Soul-Matter, for
instance, kept to earth, Soul in the air: the soul's "separate place" is
simply its not being in Matter; that is, its not being united with it;
that is that there be no compound unit consisting of Soul and Matter;
that is that Soul be not moulded in Matter as in a matrix; this is the
Soul's apartness.

But the faculties of the Soul are many, and it has its beginning, its
intermediate phases, its final fringe. Matter appears, importunes,
raises disorders, seeks to force its way within; but all the ground is
holy, nothing there without part in Soul. Matter therefore submits, and
takes light: but the source of its illumination it cannot attain to, for
the Soul cannot lift up this foreign thing close by, since the evil of
it makes it invisible. On the contrary the illumination, the light
streaming from the Soul, is dulled, is weakened, as it mixes with Matter
which offers Birth to the Soul, providing the means by which it enters
into generation, impossible to it if no recipient were at hand.

This is the fall of the Soul, this entry into Matter: thence its
weakness: not all the faculties of its being retain free play, for
Matter hinders their manifestation; it encroaches upon the Soul's
territory and, as it were, crushes the Soul back; and it turns to evil
all that it has stolen, until the Soul finds strength to advance again.

Thus the cause, at once, of the weakness of Soul and of all its evil is
Matter.

The evil of Matter precedes the weakness, the vice; it is Primal Evil.
Even though the Soul itself submits to Matter and engenders to it; if it
becomes evil within itself by its commerce with Matter, the cause is
still the presence of Matter: the Soul would never have approached
Matter but that the presence of Matter is the occasion of its
earth-life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn086)
