[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn094)  [Next](enn096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. We may now consider the question whether fire is the sole element
existing in that celestial realm and whether there is any outgoing
thence with the consequent need of renewal.

Timaeus pronounced the material frame of the All to consist primarily of
earth and fire for visibility, earth for solidity- and deduced that the
stars must be mainly composed of fire, but not solely since there is no
doubt they are solid.

And this is probably a true account. Plato accepts it as indicated by
all the appearances. And, in fact, to all our perception- as we see them
and derive from them the impression of illumination- the stars appear to
be mostly, if not exclusively, fire: but on reasoning into the matter we
judge that since solidity cannot exist apart from earth-matter, they
must contain earth as well.

But what place could there be for the other elements? It is impossible
to imagine water amid so vast a conflagration; and if air were present
it would be continually changing into fire.

Admitting \[with Timaeus; as a logical truth\] that two self-contained
entities, standing as extremes to each other need for their coherence
two intermediaries; we may still question whether this holds good with
regard to physical bodies. Certainly water and earth can be mixed
without any such intermediate. It might seem valid to object that the
intermediates are already present in the earth and the water; but a
possible answer would be, "Yes, but not as agents whose meeting is
necessary to the coherence of those extremes."

None the less we will take it that the coherence of extremes is produced
by virtue of each possessing all the intermediates. It is still not
proven that fire is necessary to the visibility of earth and earth to
the solidarity of fire.

On this principle, nothing possesses an essential-nature of its very
own; every several thing is a blend, and its name is merely an
indication of the dominant constituent.

Thus we are told that earth cannot have concrete existence without the
help of some moist element- the moisture in water being the necessary
adhesive- but admitting that we so find it, there is still a
contradiction in pretending that any one element has a being of its own
and in the same breath denying its self-coherence, making its
subsistence depend upon others, and so, in reality, reducing the
specific element to nothing. How can we talk of the existence of the
definite Kind, earth- earth essential- if there exists no single
particle of earth which actually is earth without any need of water to
secure its self-cohesion? What has such an adhesive to act upon if there
is absolutely no given magnitude of real earth to which it may bind
particle after particle in its business of producing the continuous
mass? If there is any such given magnitude, large or small, of pure
earth, then earth can exist in its own nature, independently of water:
if there is no such primary particle of pure earth, then there is
nothing whatever for the water to bind. As for air- air unchanged,
retaining its distinctive quality- how could it conduce to the
subsistence of a dense material like earth?

Similarly with fire. No doubt Timaeus speaks of it as necessary not to
the existence but to the visibility of earth and the other elements; and
certainly light is essential to all visibility- we cannot say that we
see darkness, which implies, precisely, that nothing is seen, as silence
means nothing being heard.

But all this does not assure us that the earth to be visible must
contain fire: light is sufficient: snow, for example, and other
extremely cold substances gleam without the presence of fire- though of
course it might be said that fire was once there and communicated colour
before disappearing.

As to the composition of water, we must leave it an open question
whether there can be such a thing as water without a certain proportion
of earth.

But how can air, the yielding element, contain earth?

Fire, again: is earth perhaps necessary there since fire is by its own
nature devoid of continuity and not a thing of three dimensions?

Supposing it does not possess the solidity of the three dimensions, it
has that of its thrust; now, cannot this belong to it by the mere right
and fact of its being one of the corporeal entities in nature? Hardness
is another matter, a property confined to earth-stuff. Remember that
gold- which is water- becomes dense by the accession not of earth but of
denseness or consolidation: in the same way fire, with Soul present
within it, may consolidate itself upon the power of the Soul; and there
are living beings of fire among the Celestials.

But, in sum, do we abandon the teaching that all the elements enter into
the composition of every living thing?

For this sphere, no; but to lift clay into the heavens is against
nature, contrary to the laws of her ordaining: it is difficult, too, to
think of that swiftest of circuits bearing along earthly bodies in its
course nor could such material conduce to the splendour and white glint
of the celestial fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn096)
