[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn028)  [Next](enn030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. But this science, this Dialectic essential to all the three classes
alike, what, in sum, is it?

It is the Method, or Discipline, that brings with it the power of
pronouncing with final truth upon the nature and relation of things-
what each is, how it differs from others, what common quality all have,
to what Kind each belongs and in what rank each stands in its Kind and
whether its Being is Real-Being, and how many Beings there are, and how
many non-Beings to be distinguished from Beings.

Dialectic treats also of the Good and the not-Good, and of the
particulars that fall under each, and of what is the Eternal and what
the not Eternal- and of these, it must be understood, not by
seeming-knowledge \["sense-knowledge"\] but with authentic science.

All this accomplished, it gives up its touring of the realm of sense and
settles down in the Intellectual Kosmos and there plies its own peculiar
Act: it has abandoned all the realm of deceit and falsity, and pastures
the Soul in the "Meadows of Truth": it employs the Platonic division to
the discernment of the Ideal-Forms, of the Authentic-Existence and of
the First-Kinds \[or Categories of Being\]: it establishes, in the light
of Intellection, the unity there is in all that issues from these
Firsts, until it has traversed the entire Intellectual Realm: then,
resolving the unity into the particulars once more, it returns to the
point from which it starts.

Now rests: instructed and satisfied as to the Being in that sphere, it
is no longer busy about many things: it has arrived at Unity and it
contemplates: it leaves to another science all that coil of premisses
and conclusions called the art of reasoning, much as it leaves the art
of writing: some of the matter of logic, no doubt, it considers
necessary- to clear the ground- but it makes itself the judge, here as
in everything else; where it sees use, it uses; anything it finds
superfluous, it leaves to whatever department of learning or practice
may turn that matter to account.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn030)
