[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn018)  [Next](enn020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. First, then, let us examine those good qualities by which we hold
Likeness comes, and seek to establish what is this thing which, as we
possess it, in transcription, is virtue but as the Supreme possesses it,
is in the nature of an exemplar or archetype and is not virtue.

We must first distinguish two modes of Likeness.

There is the likeness demanding an identical nature in the objects
which, further, must draw their likeness from a common principle: and
there is the case in which B resembles A, but A is a Primal, not
concerned about B and not said to resemble B. In this second case,
likeness is understood in a distinct sense: we no longer look for
identity of nature, but, on the contrary, for divergence since the
likeness has come about by the mode of difference.

What, then, precisely is Virtue, collectively and in the particular? The
clearer method will be to begin with the particular, for so the common
element by which all the forms hold the general name will readily
appear.

The Civic Virtues, on which we have touched above, are a principle or
order and beauty in us as long as we remain passing our life here: they
ennoble us by setting bound and measure to our desires and to our entire
sensibility, and dispelling false judgement- and this by sheer efficacy
of the better, by the very setting of the bounds, by the fact that the
measured is lifted outside of the sphere of the unmeasured and lawless.

And, further, these Civic Virtues- measured and ordered themselves and
acting as a principle of measure to the Soul which is as Matter to their
forming- are like to the measure reigning in the over-world, and they
carry a trace of that Highest Good in the Supreme; for, while utter
measurelessness is brute Matter and wholly outside of Likeness, any
participation in Ideal-Form produces some corresponding degree of
Likeness to the formless Being There. And participation goes by
nearness: the Soul nearer than the body, therefore closer akin,
participates more fully and shows a godlike presence, almost cheating us
into the delusion that in the Soul we see God entire.

This is the way in which men of the Civic Virtues attain Likeness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn020)
