[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn090)  [Next](enn092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. Supposing we accept this view and hold that, while things below the
moon's orb have merely type-persistence, the celestial realm and all its
several members possess individual eternity; it remains to show how this
strict permanence of the individual identity- the actual item eternally
unchangeable- can belong to what is certainly corporeal, seeing that
bodily substance is characteristically a thing of flux.

The theory of bodily flux is held by Plato no less than by the other
philosophers who have dealt with physical matters, and is applied not
only to ordinary bodies but to those, also, of the heavenly sphere.

"How," he asks, "can these corporeal and visible entities continue
eternally unchanged in identity?"- evidently agreeing, in this matter
also, with Herakleitos who maintained that even the sun is perpetually
coming anew into being. To Aristotle there would be no problem; it is
only accepting his theories of a fifth-substance.

But to those who reject Aristotle's Quintessence and hold the material
mass of the heavens to consist of the elements underlying the living
things of this sphere, how is individual permanence possible? And the
difficulty is still greater for the parts, for the sun and the heavenly
bodies.

Every living thing is a combination of soul and body-kind: the celestial
sphere, therefore, if it is to be everlasting as an individual entity
must be so in virtue either of both these constituents or of one of
them, by the combination of soul and body or by soul only or by body
only.

Of course anyone that holds body to be incorruptible secures the desired
permanence at once; no need, then, to call on a soul or on any
perdurable conjunction to account for the continued maintenance of a
living being.

But the case is different when one holds that body is, of itself,
perishable and that Soul is the principle of permanence: this view
obliges us to the proof that the character of body is not in itself
fatal either to the coherence or to the lasting stability which are
imperative: it must be shown that the two elements of the union
envisaged are not inevitably hostile, but that on the contrary \[in the
heavens\] even Matter must conduce to the scheme of the standing result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn092)
