[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn075)  [Next](enn077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. For the moment let us define the nature of the Good as far as the
immediate purpose demands.

The Good is that on which all else depends, towards which all Existences
aspire as to their source and their need, while Itself is without need,
sufficient to Itself, aspiring to no other, the measure and Term of all,
giving out from itself the Intellectual-Principle and Existence and Soul
and Life and all Intellective-Act.

All until The Good is reached is beautiful; The Good is
beyond-beautiful, beyond the Highest, holding kingly state in the
Intellectual-Kosmos, that sphere constituted by a Principle wholly
unlike what is known as Intelligence in us. Our intelligence is
nourished on the propositions of logic, is skilled in following
discussions, works by reasonings, examines links of demonstration, and
comes to know the world of Being also by the steps of logical process,
having no prior grasp of Reality but remaining empty, all Intelligence
though it be, until it has put itself to school.

The Intellectual-Principle we are discussing is not of such a kind: It
possesses all: It is all: It is present to all by Its self-presence: It
has all by other means than having, for what It possesses is still
Itself, nor does any particular of all within It stand apart; for every
such particular is the whole and in all respects all, while yet not
confused in the mass but still distinct, apart to the extent that any
participant in the Intellectual-Principle participates not in the entire
as one thing but in whatsoever lies within its own reach.

And the First Act is the Act of The Good stationary within Itself, and
the First Existence is the self-contained Existence of The Good; but
there is also an Act upon It, that of the Intellectual-Principle which,
as it were, lives about It.

And the Soul, outside, circles around the Intellectual-Principle, and by
gazing upon it, seeing into the depths of It, through It sees God.

Such is the untroubled, the blissful, life of divine beings, and Evil
has no place in it; if this were all, there would be no Evil but Good
only, the first, the second and the third Good. All, thus far, is with
the King of All, unfailing Cause of Good and Beauty and controller of
all; and what is Good in the second degree depends upon the
Second-Principle and tertiary Good upon the Third.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn077)
