[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn168)  [Next](enn170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 14

14\. In yet another way they infringe still more gravely upon the
inviolability of the Supreme.

In the sacred formulas they inscribe, purporting to address the Supernal
Beings- not merely the Soul but even the Transcendents- they are simply
uttering spells and appeasements and evocations in the idea that these
Powers will obey a call and be led about by a word from any of us who is
in some degree trained to use the appropriate forms in the appropriate
way- certain melodies, certain sounds, specially directed breathings,
sibilant cries, and all else to which is ascribed magic potency upon the
Supreme. Perhaps they would repudiate any such intention: still they
must explain how these things act upon the unembodied: they do not see
that the power they attribute to their own words is so much taken away
from the majesty of the divine.

They tell us they can free themselves of diseases.

If they meant, by temperate living and an appropriate regime, they would
be right and in accordance with all sound knowledge. But they assert
diseases to be Spirit-Beings and boast of being able to expel them by
formula: this pretension may enhance their importance with the crowd,
gaping upon the powers of magicians; but they can never persuade the
intelligent that disease arises otherwise than from such causes as
overstrain, excess, deficiency, putrid decay; in a word, some variation
whether from within or from without.

The nature of illness is indicated by its very cure. A motion, a
medicine, the letting of blood, and the disease shifts down and away;
sometimes scantiness of nourishment restores the system: presumably the
Spiritual power gets hungry or is debilitated by the purge. Either this
Spirit makes a hasty exit or it remains within. If it stays, how does
the disease disappear, with the cause still present? If it quits the
place, what has driven it out? Has anything happened to it? Are we to
suppose it throve on the disease? In that case the disease existed as
something distinct from the Spirit-Power. Then again, if it steps in
where no cause of sickness exists, why should there be anything else but
illness? If there must be such a cause, the Spirit is unnecessary: that
cause is sufficient to produce that fever. As for the notion, that just
when the cause presents itself, the watchful Spirit leaps to incorporate
itself with it, this is simply amusing.

But the manner and motive of their teaching have been sufficiently
exhibited; and this was the main purpose of the discussion here upon
their Spirit-Powers. I leave it to yourselves to read the books and
examine the rest of the doctrine: you will note all through how our form
of philosophy inculcates simplicity of character and honest thinking in
addition to all other good qualities, how it cultivates reverence and
not arrogant self-assertion, how its boldness is balanced by reason, by
careful proof, by cautious progression, by the utmost circumspection-
and you will compare those other systems to one proceeding by this
method. You will find that the tenets of their school have been huddled
together under a very different plan: they do not deserve any further
examination here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](enn170)
