[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn139)  [Next](enn141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. Then the question rises whether Matter- potentially what it becomes
by receiving shape- is actually something else or whether it has no
actuality at all. In general terms: When a potentiality has taken a
definite form, does it retain its being? Is the potentiality, itself, in
actualization? The alternative is that, when we speak of the "Actual
Statue" and of the "Potential Statue," the Actuality is not predicated
of the same subject as the "Potentiality." If we have really two
different subjects, then the potential does not really become the
actual: all that happens is that an actual entity takes the place of a
potential.

The actualized entity is not the Matter \[the Potentiality, merely\] but
a combination, including the Form-Idea upon the Matter.

This is certainly the case when a quite different thing results from the
actualization-statue, for example, the combination, is distinctly
different from the bronze, the base; where the resultant is something
quite new, the Potentiality has clearly not, itself, become what is now
actualized. But take the case where a person with a capacity for
education becomes in fact educated: is not potentiality, here, identical
with actualization? Is not the potentially wise Socrates the same man as
the Socrates actually wise?

But is an ignorant man a being of knowledge because he is so
potentially? Is he, in virtue of his non-essential ignorance,
potentially an instructed being?

It is not because of his accidental ignorance that he is a being of
Knowledge: it is because, ignorant though he be by accident, his mind,
apt to knowledge, is the potentiality through which he may become so.
Thus, in the case of the potentially instructed who have become so in
fact, the potentiality is taken up into the actual; or, if we prefer to
put it so, there is on the one side the potentiality while, on the
other, there is the power in actual possession of the form.

If, then, the Potentiality is the Substratum while the thing in
actualization- the Statue for example a combination, how are we to
describe the form that has entered the bronze?

There will be nothing unsound in describing this shape, this Form which
has brought the entity from potentiality to actuality, as the
actualization; but of course as the actualization of the definite
particular entity, not as Actuality the abstract: we must not confuse it
with the other actualization, strictly so called, that which is
contrasted with the power producing actualization. The potential is led
out into realization by something other than itself; power accomplishes,
of itself, what is within its scope, but by virtue of Actuality \[the
abstract\]: the relation is that existing between a temperament and its
expression in act, between courage and courageous conduct. So far so
good:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn141)
