[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn182)  [Next](enn184) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. What can this other cause be; one standing above those treated of;
one that leaves nothing causeless, that preserves sequence and order in
the Universe and yet allows ourselves some reality and leaves room for
prediction and augury?

Soul: we must place at the crest of the world of beings, this other
Principle, not merely the Soul of the Universe but, included in it, the
Soul of the individual: this, no mean Principle, is needed to be the
bond of union in the total of things, not, itself, a thing sprung like
things from life-seeds, but a first-hand Cause, bodiless and therefore
supreme over itself, free, beyond the reach of kosmic Cause: for,
brought into body, it would not be unrestrictedly sovereign; it would
hold rank in a series.

Now the environment into which this independent principle enters, when
it comes to this midpoint, will be largely led by secondary causes \[or,
by chance-causes\]: there will therefore be a compromise; the action of
the Soul will be in part guided by this environment while in other
matters it will be sovereign, leading the way where it will. The nobler
Soul will have the greater power; the poorer Soul, the lesser. A soul
which defers to the bodily temperament cannot escape desire and rage and
is abject in poverty, overbearing in wealth, arbitrary in power. The
soul of nobler nature holds good against its surroundings; it is more
apt to change them than to be changed, so that often it improves the
environment and, where it must make concession, at least keeps its
innocence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn184)
