[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn148)  [Next](enn150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Some enquiry must be made into what is known as the complete
transfusion of material substances.

Is it possible that fluid be blended with fluid in such a way that each
penetrate the other through and through? or- a difference of no
importance if any such penetration occurs- that one of them pass
completely through the other?

Those that admit only contact need not detain us. They are dealing with
mixture, not with the coalescence which makes the total a thing of like
parts, each minutest particle being composed of all the combined
elements.

But there are those who, admitting coalescence, confine it to the
qualities: to them the material substances of two bodies are in contact
merely, but in this contact of the matter they find footing for the
qualities of each.

Their view is plausible because it rejects the notion of total admixture
and because it recognizes that the masses of the mixing bodies must be
whittled away if there is to be mixture without any gap, if, that is to
say, each substance must be divided within itself through and through
for complete interpenetration with the other. Their theory is confirmed
by the cases in which two mixed substances occupy a greater space than
either singly, especially a space equal to the conjoined extent of each:
for, as they point out, in an absolute interpenetration the infusion of
the one into the other would leave the occupied space exactly what it
was before and, where the space occupied is not increased by the
juxtaposition, they explain that some expulsion of air has made room for
the incoming substance. They ask further, how a minor quantity of one
substance can be spread out so as to interpenetrate a major quantity of
another. In fact they have a multitude of arguments.

Those, on the other hand, that accept "complete transfusion," might
object that it does not require the reduction of the mixed things to
fragments, a certain cleavage being sufficient: thus, for instance,
sweat does not split up the body or even pierce holes in it. And if it
is answered that this may well be a special decree of Nature to allow of
the sweat exuding, there is the case of those manufactured articles,
slender but without puncture, in which we can see a liquid wetting them
through and through so that it runs down from the upper to the under
surface. How can this fact be explained, since both the liquid and the
solid are bodily substances? Interpenetration without disintegration is
difficult to conceive, and if there is such mutual disintegration the
two must obviously destroy each other.

When they urge that often there is a mixing without augmentation their
adversaries can counter at once with the exit of air.

When there is an increase in the space occupied, nothing refutes the
explanation- however unsatisfying- that this is a necessary consequence
of two bodies bringing to a common stock their magnitude equally with
their other attributes: size is as permanent as any other property; and,
exactly as from the blending of qualities there results a new form of
thing, the combination of the two, so we find a new magnitude; the
blending gives us a magnitude representing each of the two. But at this
point the others will answer, "If you mean that substance lies side by
side with substance and mass with mass, each carrying its quantum of
magnitude, you are at one with us: if there were complete transfusion,
one substance sinking its original magnitude in the other, we would have
no longer the case of two lines joined end to end by their terminal
points and thus producing an increased extension; we would have line
superimposed upon line with, therefore, no increase."

But a lesser quantity permeates the entire extent of a larger; the
smallest is sunk in the greatest; transfusion is exhibited unmistakably.
In certain cases it is possible to pretend that there is no total
penetration but there are manifest examples leaving no room for the
pretence. In what they say of the spreading out of masses they cannot be
thought very plausible; the extension would have to be considerable
indeed in the case of a very small quantity \[to be in true mixture with
a very large mass\]; for they do not suggest any such extension by
change as that of water into air.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn150)
