[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn142)  [Next](enn144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. How can we talk of it? How can it be the Matter of real things?

It is talked of, and it serves, precisely, as a Potentiality.

And, as being a Potentiality, it is not of the order of the thing it is
to become: its existence is no more than an announcement of a future, as
it were a thrust forward to what is to come into existence.

As Potentiality then, it is not any definite thing but the potentiality
of everything: being nothing in itself- beyond what being Matter amounts
to- it is not in actualization. For if it were actually something, that
actualized something would not be Matter, or at least not Matter out and
out, but merely Matter in the limited sense in which bronze is the
matter of the statue.

And its Non-Being must be no mere difference from Being.

Motion, for example, is different from Being, but plays about it,
springing from it and living within it: Matter is, so to speak, the
outcast of Being, it is utterly removed, irredeemably what it was from
the beginning: in origin it was Non-Being and so it remains.

Nor are we to imagine that, standing away at the very beginning from the
universal circle of Beings, it was thus necessarily an active Something
or that it became a Something. It has never been able to annex for
itself even a visible outline from all the forms under which it has
sought to creep: it has always pursued something other than itself; it
was never more than a Potentiality towards its next: where all the
circle of Being ends, there only is it manifest; discerned underneath
things produced after it, it is remoter \[from Real-Being\] even than
they.

Grasped, then, as an underlie in each order of Being, it can be no
actualization of either: all that is allowed to it is to be a
Potentiality, a weak and blurred phantasm, a thing incapable of a Shape
of its own.

Its actuality is that of being a phantasm, the actuality of being a
falsity; and the false in actualization is the veritably false, which
again is Authentic Non-Existence.

So that Matter, as the Actualization of Non-Being, is all the more
decidedly Non-Being, is Authentic Non-Existence.

Thus, since the very reality of its Nature is situated in Non-Being, it
is in no degree the Actualization of any definite Being.

If it is to be present at all, it cannot be an Actualization, for then
it would not be the stray from Authentic Being which it is, the thing
having its Being in Non-Beingness: for, note, in the case of things
whose Being is a falsity, to take away the falsity is to take away what
Being they have, and if we introduce actualization into things whose
Being and Essence is Potentiality, we destroy the foundation of their
nature since their Being is Potentiality.

If Matter is to be kept as the unchanging substratum, we must keep it as
Matter: that means- does it not?- that we must define it as a
Potentiality and nothing more- or refute these considerations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: SIXTH TRACTATE](enn144)
