[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn165)  [Next](enn167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. Now, in the first place, if the Soul has not actually come down but
has illuminated the darkness, how can it truly be said to have declined?
The outflow from it of something in the nature of light does not justify
the assertion of its decline; for that, it must make an actual movement
towards the object lying in the lower realm and illuminate it by
contact.

If, on the other hand, the Soul keeps to its own place and illuminates
the lower without directing any act towards that end, why should it
alone be the illuminant? Why should not the Kosmos draw light also from
the yet greater powers contained in the total of existence?

Again, if the Soul possesses the plan of a Universe, and by virtue of
this plan illuminates it, why do not that illumination and the creating
of the world take place simultaneously? Why must the Soul wait till the
representations of the plan be made actual?

Then again this Plan- the "Far Country" of their terminology- brought
into being, as they hold, by the greater powers, could not have been the
occasion of decline to the creators.

Further, how explain that under this illumination the Matter of the
Kosmos produces images of the order of Soul instead of mere
bodily-nature? An image of Soul could not demand darkness or Matter, but
wherever formed it would exhibit the character of the producing element
and remain in close union with it.

Next, is this image a real-being, or, as they say, an Intellection?

If it is a reality, in what way does it differ from its original? By
being a distinct form of the Soul? But then, since the original is the
reasoning Soul, this secondary form must be the vegetative and
generative Soul; and then, what becomes of the theory that it is
produced for glory's sake, what becomes of the creation in arrogance and
self-assertion? The theory puts an end also to creation by
representation and, still more decidedly, to any thinking in the act;
and what need is left for a creator creating by way of Matter and Image?

If it is an Intellection, then we ask first "What justifies the name?"
and next, "How does anything come into being unless the Soul give this
Intellection creative power and how, after all, can creative power
reside in a created thing?" Are we to be told that it is a question of a
first Image followed by a second?

But this is quite arbitrary.

And why is fire the first creation?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn167)
