[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn102)  [Next](enn104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. That the circuit of the stars indicates definite events to come but
without being the cause direct of all that happens, has been elsewhere
affirmed, and proved by some modicum of argument: but the subject
demands more precise and detailed investigation for to take the one view
rather than the other is of no small moment.

The belief is that the planets in their courses actually produce not
merely such conditions as poverty, wealth, health and sickness but even
ugliness and beauty and, gravest of all, vices and virtue and the very
acts that spring from these qualities, the definite doings of each
moment of virtue or vice. We are to suppose the stars to be annoyed with
men- and upon matters in which men, moulded to what they are by the
stars themselves, can surely do them no wrong.

They will be distributing what pass for their good gifts, not out of
kindness towards the recipients but as they themselves are affected
pleasantly or disagreeably at the various points of their course; so
that they must be supposed to change their plans as they stand at their
zeniths or are declining.

More absurdly still, some of them are supposed to be malicious and
others to be helpful, and yet the evil stars will bestow favours and the
benevolent act harshly: further, their action alters as they see each
other or not, so that, after all, they possess no definite nature but
vary according to their angles of aspect; a star is kindly when it sees
one of its fellows but changes at sight of another: and there is even a
distinction to be made in the seeing as it occurs in this figure or in
that. Lastly, all acting together, the fused influence is different
again from that of each single star, just as the blending of distinct
fluids gives a mixture unlike any of them.

Since these opinions and others of the same order are prevalent, it will
be well to examine them carefully one by one, beginning with the
fundamental question:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn104)
