[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn186)  [Next](enn188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. To make the existence and coherent structure of this Universe depend
upon automatic activity and upon chance is against all good sense.

Such a notion could be entertained only where there is neither
intelligence nor even ordinary perception; and reason enough has been
urged against it, though none is really necessary.

But there is still the question as to the process by which the
individual things of this sphere have come into being, how they were
made.

Some of them seem so undesirable as to cast doubts upon a Universal
Providence; and we find, on the one hand, the denial of any controlling
power, on the other the belief that the Kosmos is the work of an evil
creator.

This matter must be examined through and through from the very first
principles. We may, however, omit for the present any consideration of
the particular providence, that beforehand decision which accomplishes
or holds things in abeyance to some good purpose and gives or withholds
in our own regard: when we have established the Universal Providence
which we affirm, we can link the secondary with it.

Of course the belief that after a certain lapse of time a Kosmos
previously non-existent came into being would imply a foreseeing and a
reasoned plan on the part of God providing for the production of the
Universe and securing all possible perfection in it- a guidance and
partial providence, therefore, such as is indicated. But since we hold
the eternal existence of the Universe, the utter absence of a beginning
to it, we are forced, in sound and sequent reasoning, to explain the
providence ruling in the Universe as a universal consonance with the
divine Intelligence to which the Kosmos is subsequent not in time but in
the fact of derivation, in the fact that the Divine Intelligence,
preceding it in Kind, is its cause as being the Archetype and Model
which it merely images, the primal by which, from all eternity, it has
its existence and subsistence.

The relationship may be presented thus:

The authentic and primal Kosmos is the Being of the Intellectual
Principle and of the Veritable Existent. This contains within itself no
spatial distinction, and has none of the feebleness of division, and
even its parts bring no incompleteness to it since here the individual
is not severed from the entire. In this Nature inheres all life and all
intellect, a life living and having intellection as one act within a
unity: every part that it gives forth is a whole; all its content is its
very own, for there is here no separation of thing from thing, no part
standing in isolated existence estranged from the rest, and therefore
nowhere is there any wronging of any other, any opposition. Everywhere
one and complete, it is at rest throughout and shows difference at no
point; it does not make over any of its content into any new form; there
can be no reason for changing what is everywhere perfect.

Why should Reason elaborate yet another Reason, or Intelligence another
Intelligence? An indwelling power of making things is in the character
of a being not at all points as it should be but making, moving, by
reason of some failure in quality. Those whose nature is all blessedness
have no more to do than to repose in themselves and be their being.

A widespread activity is dangerous to those who must go out from
themselves to act. But such is the blessedness of this Being that in its
very non-action it magnificently operates and in its self-dwelling it
produces mightily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn188)
