[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn163)  [Next](enn165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. Wealth and poverty, and all inequalities of that order, are made
ground of complaint. But this is to ignore that the Sage demands no
equality in such matters: he cannot think that to own many things is to
be richer or that the powerful have the better of the simple; he leaves
all such preoccupations to another kind of man. He has learned that life
on earth has two distinct forms, the way of the Sage and the way of the
mass, the Sage intent upon the sublimest, upon the realm above, while
those of the more strictly human type fall, again, under two classes,
the one reminiscent of virtue and therefore not without touch with good,
the other mere populace, serving to provide necessaries to the better
sort.

But what of murder? What of the feebleness that brings men under slavery
to the passions?

Is it any wonder that there should be failing and error, not in the
highest, the intellectual, Principle but in Souls that are like
undeveloped children? And is not life justified even so if it is a
training ground with its victors and its vanquished?

You are wronged; need that trouble an immortal? You are put to death;
you have attained your desire. And from the moment your citizenship of
the world becomes irksome you are not bound to it.

Our adversaries do not deny that even here there is a system of law and
penalty: and surely we cannot in justice blame a dominion which awards
to every one his due, where virtue has its honour, and vice comes to its
fitting shame, in which there are not merely representations of the
gods, but the gods themselves, watchers from above, and- as we read-
easily rebutting human reproaches, since they lead all things in order
from a beginning to an end, allotting to each human being, as life
follows life, a fortune shaped to all that has preceded- the destiny
which, to those that do not penetrate it, becomes the matter of boorish
insolence upon things divine.

A man's one task is to strive towards making himself perfect- though not
in the idea- really fatal to perfection- that to be perfect is possible
to himself alone.

We must recognize that other men have attained the heights of goodness;
we must admit the goodness of the celestial spirits, and above all of
the gods- those whose presence is here but their contemplation in the
Supreme, and loftiest of them, the lord of this All, the most blessed
Soul. Rising still higher, we hymn the divinities of the Intellectual
Sphere, and, above all these, the mighty King of that dominion, whose
majesty is made patent in the very multitude of the gods.

It is not by crushing the divine unto a unity but by displaying its
exuberance- as the Supreme himself has displayed it- that we show
knowledge of the might of God, who, abidingly what He is, yet creates
that multitude, all dependent on Him, existing by Him and from Him.

This Universe, too, exists by Him and looks to Him- the Universe as a
whole and every God within it- and tells of Him to men, all alike
revealing the plan and will of the Supreme.

These, in the nature of things, cannot be what He is, but that does not
justify you in contempt of them, in pushing yourself forward as not
inferior to them.

The more perfect the man, the more compliant he is, even towards his
fellows; we must temper our importance, not thrusting insolently beyond
what our nature warrants; we must allow other beings, also, their place
in the presence of the Godhead; we may not set ourselves alone next
after the First in a dream-flight which deprives us of our power of
attaining identity with the Godhead in the measure possible to the human
Soul, that is to say, to the point of likeness to which the
Intellectual-Principle leads us; to exalt ourselves above the
Intellectual-Principle is to fall from it.

Yet imbeciles are found to accept such teaching at the mere sound of the
words "You, yourself, are to be nobler than all else, nobler than men,
nobler than even gods." Human audacity is very great: a man once modest,
restrained and simple hears, "You, yourself, are the child of God; those
men whom you used to venerate, those beings whose worship they inherit
from antiquity, none of these are His children; you without lifting a
hand are nobler than the very heavens"; others take up the cry: the
issue will be much as if in a crowd all equally ignorant of figures, one
man were told that he stands a thousand cubic feet; he will naturally
accept his thousand cubits even though the others present are said to
measure only five cubits; he will merely tell himself that the thousand
indicates a considerable figure.

Another point: God has care for you; how then can He be indifferent to
the entire Universe in which you exist?

We may be told that He is too much occupied to look upon the Universe,
and that it would not be right for Him to do so; yet, when He looks down
and upon these people, is He not looking outside Himself and upon the
Universe in which they exist? If He cannot look outside Himself so as to
survey the Kosmos, then neither does He look upon them.

But they have no need of Him?

The Universe has need of Him, and He knows its ordering and its
indwellers and how far they belong to it and how far to the Supreme, and
which of the men upon it are friends of God, mildly acquiescing with the
Kosmic dispensation when in the total course of things some pain must be
brought to them- for we are to look not to the single will of any man
but to the universe entire, regarding every one according to worth but
not stopping for such things where all that may is hastening onward.

Not one only kind of being is bent upon this quest, which brings bliss
to whatsoever achieves, and earns for the others a future destiny in
accord with their power. No man, therefore, may flatter himself that he
alone is competent; a pretension is not a possession; many boast though
fully conscious of their lack and many imagine themselves to possess
what was never theirs and even to be alone in possessing what they alone
of men never had.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn165)
