[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn178)  [Next](enn180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. Another theory:

The Universe is permeated by one Soul, Cause of all things and events;
every separate phenomenon as a member of a whole moves in its place with
the general movement; all the various causes spring into action from one
source: therefore, it is argued, the entire descending claim of causes
and all their interaction must follow inevitably and so constitute a
universal determination. A plant rises from a root, and we are asked on
that account to reason that not only the interconnection linking the
root to all the members and every member to every other but the entire
activity and experience of the plant, as well, must be one organized
overruling, a "destiny" of the plant.

But such an extremity of determination, a destiny so all-pervasive, does
away with the very destiny that is affirmed: it shatters the sequence
and co-operation of causes.

It would be unreasonable to attribute to destiny the movement of our
limbs dictated by the mind and will: this is no case of something
outside bestowing motion while another thing accepts it and is thus set
into action; the mind itself is the prime mover.

Similarly in the case of the universal system; if all that performs act
and is subject to experience constitutes one substance, if one thing
does not really produce another thing under causes leading back
continuously one to another, then it is not a truth that all happens by
causes, there is nothing but a rigid unity. We are no "We": nothing is
our act; our thought is not ours; our decisions are the reasoning of
something outside ourselves; we are no more agents than our feet are
kickers when we use them to kick with.

No; each several thing must be a separate thing; there must be acts and
thoughts that are our own; the good and evil done by each human being
must be his own; and it is quite certain that we must not lay any
vileness to the charge of the All.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn180)
