[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn198)  [Next](enn200) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 13

13\. And we must not despise the familiar observation that there is
something more to be considered than the present. There are the periods
of the past and, again, those in the future; and these have everything
to do with fixing worth of place.

Thus a man, once a ruler, will be made a slave because he abused his
power and because the fall is to his future good. Those that have money
will be made poor- and to the good poverty is no hindrance. Those that
have unjustly killed, are killed in turn, unjustly as regards the
murderer but justly as regards the victim, and those that are to suffer
are thrown into the path of those that administer the merited treatment.

It is not an accident that makes a man a slave; no one is a prisoner by
chance; every bodily outrage has its due cause. The man once did what he
now suffers. A man that murders his mother will become a woman and be
murdered by a son; a man that wrongs a woman will become a woman, to be
wronged.

Hence arises that awesome word "Adrasteia" \[the Inevadable
Retribution\]; for in very truth this ordinance is an Adrasteia, justice
itself and a wonderful wisdom.

We cannot but recognize from what we observe in this universe that some
such principle of order prevails throughout the entire of existence- the
minutest of things a tributary to the vast total; the marvellous art
shown not merely in the mightiest works and sublimest members of the
All, but even amid such littleness as one would think Providence must
disdain: the varied workmanship of wonder in any and every animal form;
the world of vegetation, too; the grace of fruits and even of leaves,
the lavishness, the delicacy, the diversity of exquisite bloom; and all
this not issuing once, and then to die out, but made ever and ever anew
as the Transcendent Beings move variously over this earth.

In all the changing, there is no change by chance: there is no taking of
new forms but to desirable ends and in ways worthy of Divine Powers. All
that is Divine executes the Act of its quality; its quality is the
expression of its essential Being: and this essential Being in the
Divine is the Being whose activities produce as one thing the desirable
and the just- for if the good and the just are not produced there,
where, then, have they their being?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](enn200)
