[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn172)  [Next](enn174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. But perhaps this school will maintain that, while their teaching
leads to a hate and utter abandonment of the body, ours binds the Soul
down in it.

In other words: two people inhabit the one stately house; one of them
declaims against its plan and against its Architect, but none the less
maintains his residence in it; the other makes no complaint, asserts the
entire competency of the Architect and waits cheerfully for the day when
he may leave it, having no further need of a house: the malcontent
imagines himself to be the wiser and to be the readier to leave because
he has learned to repeat that the walls are of soulless stone and timber
and that the place falls far short of a true home; he does not see that
his only distinction is in not being able to bear with necessity
assuming that his conduct, his grumbling, does not cover a secret
admiration for the beauty of those same "stones." As long as we have
bodies we must inhabit the dwellings prepared for us by our good sister
the Soul in her vast power of labourless creation.

Or would this school reject the word Sister? They are willing to address
the lowest of men as brothers; are they capable of such raving as to
disown the tie with the Sun and the powers of the Heavens and the very
Soul of the Kosmos? Such kinship, it is true, is not for the vile; it
may be asserted only of those that have become good and are no longer
body but embodied Soul and of a quality to inhabit the body in a mode
very closely resembling the indwelling. of the All-Soul in the universal
frame. And this means continence, self-restraint, holding staunch
against outside pleasure and against outer spectacle, allowing no
hardship to disturb the mind. The All-Soul is immune from shock; there
is nothing that can affect it: but we, in our passage here, must call on
virtue in repelling these assaults, reduced for us from the beginning by
a great conception of life, annulled by matured strength.

Attaining to something of this immunity, we begin to reproduce within
ourselves the Soul of the vast All and of the heavenly bodies: when we
are come to the very closest resemblance, all the effort of our fervid
pursuit will be towards that goal to which they also tend; their
contemplative vision becomes ours, prepared as we are, first by natural
disposition and afterwards by all this training, for that state which is
theirs by the Principle of their Being.

This school may lay claim to vision as a dignity reserved to themselves,
but they are not any the nearer to vision by the claim- or by the boast
that while the celestial powers, bound for ever to the ordering of the
Heavens, can never stand outside the material universe, they themselves
have their freedom in their death. This is a failure to grasp the very
notion of "standing outside," a failure to appreciate the mode in which
the All-Soul cares for the unensouled.

No: it is possible to go free of love for the body; to be clean-living,
to disregard death; to know the Highest and aim at that other world; not
to slander, as negligent in the quest, others who are able for it and
faithful to it; and not to err with those that deny vital motion to the
stars because to our sense they stand still- the error which in another
form leads this school to deny outer vision to the Star-Nature, only
because they do not see the Star-Soul in outer manifestation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE THIRD ENNEAD](enn174)
