[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn158)  [Next](enn160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. To those who assert that creation is the work of the Soul after the
failing of its wings, we answer that no such disgrace could overtake the
Soul of the All. If they tell us of its falling, they must tell us also
what caused the fall. And when did it take place? If from eternity, then
the Soul must be essentially a fallen thing: if at some one moment, why
not before that?

We assert its creative act to be a proof not of decline but rather of
its steadfast hold. Its decline could consist only in its forgetting the
Divine: but if it forgot, how could it create? Whence does it create but
from the things it knew in the Divine? If it creates from the memory of
that vision, it never fell. Even supposing it to be in some dim
intermediate state, it need not be supposed more likely to decline: any
inclination would be towards its Prior, in an effort to the clearer
vision. If any memory at all remained, what other desire could it have
than to retrace the way?

What could it have been planning to gain by world-creating? Glory? That
would be absurd- a motive borrowed from the sculptors of our earth.

Finally, if the Soul created by policy and not by sheer need of its
nature, by being characteristically the creative power- how explain the
making of this universe?

And when will it destroy the work? If it repents of its work, what is it
waiting for? If it has not yet repented, then it will never repent: it
must be already accustomed to the world, must be growing more tender
towards it with the passing of time.

Can it be waiting for certain souls still here? Long since would these
have ceased returning for such re-birth, having known in former life the
evils of this sphere; long since would they have foreborne to come.

Nor may we grant that this world is of unhappy origin because there are
many jarring things in it. Such a judgement would rate it too high,
treating it as the same with the Intelligible Realm and not merely its
reflection.

And yet- what reflection of that world could be conceived more beautiful
than this of ours? What fire could be a nobler reflection of the fire
there than the fire we know here? Or what other earth than this could
have been modelled after that earth? And what globe more minutely
perfect than this, or more admirably ordered in its course could have
been conceived in the image of the self-centred circling of the World of
Intelligibles? And for a sun figuring the Divine sphere, if it is to be
more splendid than the sun visible to us, what a sun it must be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn160)
