[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn119)  [Next](enn121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. Are the evils in the Universe necessary because it is of later
origin than the Higher Sphere?

Perhaps rather because without evil the All would be incomplete. For
most or even all forms of evil serve the Universe- much as the poisonous
snake has its use- though in most cases their function is unknown. Vice
itself has many useful sides: it brings about much that is beautiful, in
artistic creations for example, and it stirs us to thoughtful living,
not allowing us to drowse in security.

If all this is so, then \[the secret of creation is that\] the Soul of
the All abides in contemplation of the Highest and Best, ceaselessly
striving towards the Intelligible Kind and towards God: but, thus
absorbing and filled full, it overflows- so to speak- and the image it
gives forth, its last utterance towards the lower, will be the creative
puissance.

This ultimate phase, then, is the Maker, secondary to that aspect of the
Soul which is primarily saturated from the Divine Intelligence. But the
Creator above all is the Intellectual-Principle, as giver, to the Soul
that follows it, of those gifts whose traces exist in the Third Kind.

Rightly, therefore, is this Kosmos described as an image continuously
being imaged, the First and the Second Principles immobile, the Third,
too, immobile essentially, but, accidentally and in Matter, having
motion.

For as long as divine Mind and Soul exist, the divine Thought-Forms will
pour forth into that phase of the Soul: as long as there is a sun, all
that streams from it will be some form of Light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: FOURTH TRACTATE](enn121)
