[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn256)  [Next](enn258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Now the Principle this stated, all good and beauty, and everlasting,
is centred in The One, sprung from It, and pointed towards It, never
straying from It, but ever holding about It and in It and living by Its
law; and it is in this reference, as I judge, that Plato- finely, and by
no means inadvertently but with profound intention- wrote those words of
his, "Eternity stable in Unity"; he wishes to convey that Eternity is
not merely something circling on its traces into a final unity but has
\[instantaneous\] Being about The One as the unchanging Life of the
Authentic Existent. This is certainly what we have been seeking: this
Principle, at rest within rest with the One, is Eternity; possessing
this stable quality, being itself at once the absolute self-identical
and none the less the active manifestation of an unchanging Life set
towards the Divine and dwelling within It, untrue, therefore, neither on
the side of Being nor on the side of Life- this will be Eternity \[the
Real-Being we have sought\].

Truly to be comports never lacking existence and never knowing variety
in the mode of existence: Being is, therefore, self-identical
throughout, and, therefore, again is one undistinguishable thing. Being
can have no this and that; it cannot be treated in terms of intervals,
unfoldings, progression, extension; there is no grasping any first or
last in it.

If, then, there is no first or last in this Principle, if existence is
its most authentic possession and its very self, and this in the sense
that its existence is Essence or Life- then, once again, we meet here
what we have been discussing, Eternity.

Observe that such words as "always," "never," "sometimes" must be taken
as mere conveniences of exposition: thus "always- used in the sense not
of time but of incorruptibility and endlessly complete scope- might set
up the false notion of stage and interval. We might perhaps prefer to
speak of "Being," without any attribute; but since this term is
applicable to Essence and some writers have used the word "Essence" for
things of process, we cannot convey our meaning to them without
introducing some word carrying the notion of perdurance.

There is, of course, no difference between Being and Everlasting Being;
just as there is none between a philosopher and a true philosopher: the
attribute "true" came into use because there arose what masqueraded as
philosophy; and for similar reasons "everlasting" was adjoined to
"Being," and "Being" to "everlasting," and we have \[the tautology of\]
"Everlasting Being." We must take this "Everlasting" as expressing no
more than Authentic Being: it is merely a partial expression of a
potency which ignores all interval or term and can look forward to
nothing by way of addition to the All which it possesses. The Principle
of which this is the statement will be the All-Existent, and, as being
all, can have no failing or deficiency, cannot be at some one point
complete and at some other lacking.

Things and Beings in the Time order- even when to all appearance
complete, as a body is when fit to harbour a soul- are still bound to
sequence; they are deficient to the extent of that thing, Time, which
they need: let them have it, present to them and running side by side
with them, and they are by that very fact incomplete; completeness is
attributed to them only by an accident of language.

But the conception of Eternity demands something which is in its nature
complete without sequence; it is not satisfied by something measured out
to any remoter time or even by something limitless, but, in its
limitless reach, still having the progression of futurity: it requires
something immediately possessed of the due fullness of Being, something
whose Being does not depend upon any quantity \[such as instalments of
time\] but subsists before all quantity.

Itself having no quantity, it can have no contact with anything
quantitative since its Life cannot be made a thing of fragments, in
contradiction to the partlessness which is its character; it must be
without parts in the Life as in the essence.

The phrase "He was good" \[used by Plato of the Demiurge\] refers to the
Idea of the All; and its very indefiniteness signifies the utter absense
of relation to Time: so that even this Universe has had no temporal
beginning; and if we speak of something "before" it, that is only in the
sense of the Cause from which it takes its Eternal Existence. Plato used
the word merely for the convenience of exposition, and immediately
corrects it as inappropriate to the order vested with the Eternity he
conceives and affirms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn258)
