[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn213)  [Next](enn215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Some Existents \[Absolute Unity and Intellectual-Principle\] remain
at rest while their Hypostases, or Expressed-Idea, come into being; but,
in our view, the Soul generates by its motion, to which is due the
sensitive faculty- that in any of its expression-forms- Nature and all
forms of life down to the vegetable order. Even as it is present in
human beings the Soul carries its Expression-form \[Hypostasis\] with
it, but is not the dominant since it is not the whole man (humanity
including the Intellectual Principal, as well): in the vegetable order
it is the highest since there is nothing to rival it; but at this phase
it is no longer reproductive, or, at least, what it produces is of quite
another order; here life ceases; all later production is lifeless.

What does this imply?

Everything the Soul engenders down to this point comes into being
shapeless, and takes form by orientation towards its author and
supporter: therefore the thing engendered on the further side can be no
image of the Soul, since it is not even alive; it must be an utter
Indetermination. No doubt even in things of the nearer order there was
indetermination, but within a form; they were undetermined not utterly
but only in contrast with their perfect state: at this extreme point we
have the utter lack of determination. Let it be raised to its highest
degree and it becomes body by taking such shape as serves its scope;
then it becomes the recipient of its author and sustainer: this presence
in body is the only example of the boundaries of Higher Existents
running into the boundary of the Lower.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn215)
