[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn201)  [Next](enn203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 16

16\. But if all this is true, what room is left for evil? Where are we
to place wrong-doing and sin?

How explain that in a world organized in good, the efficient agents
\[human beings\] behave unjustly, commit sin? And how comes misery if
neither sin nor injustice exists?

Again, if all our action is determined by a natural process, how can the
distinction be maintained between behaviour in accordance with nature
and behaviour in conflict with it?

And what becomes of blasphemy against the divine? The blasphemer is made
what he is: a dramatist has written a part insulting and maligning
himself and given it to an actor to play.

These considerations oblige us to state the Logos \[the Reason-Principle
of the Universe\] once again, and more clearly, and to justify its
nature.

This Reason-Principle, then- let us dare the definition in the hope of
conveying the truth- this Logos is not the Intellectual Principle
unmingled, not the Absolute Divine Intellect; nor does it descend from
the pure Soul alone; it is a dependent of that Soul while, in a sense,
it is a radiation from both those divine Hypostases; the Intellectual
Principle and the Soul- the Soul as conditioned by the Intellectual
Principle engender this Logos which is a Life holding restfully a
certain measure of Reason.

Now all life, even the least valuable, is an activity, and not a blind
activity like that of flame; even where there is not sensation the
activity of life is no mere haphazard play of Movement: any object in
which life is present, and object which participates in Life, is at once
enreasoned in the sense that the activity peculiar to life is formative,
shaping as it moves.

Life, then, aims at pattern as does the pantomimic dancer with his set
movements; the mime, in himself, represents life, and, besides, his
movements proceed in obedience to a pattern designed to symbolize life.

Thus far to give us some idea of the nature of Life in general.

But this Reason-Principle which emanates from the complete unity, divine
Mind, and the complete unity Life \[= Soul\]- is neither a uniate
complete Life nor a uniate complete divine Mind, nor does it give itself
whole and all-including to its subject. \[By an imperfect
communication\] it sets up a conflict of part against part: it produces
imperfect things and so engenders and maintains war and attack, and thus
its unity can be that only of a sum-total not of a thing undivided. At
war with itself in the parts which it now exhibits, it has the unity, or
harmony, of a drama torn with struggle. The drama, of course, brings the
conflicting elements to one final harmony, weaving the entire story of
the clashing characters into one thing; while in the Logos the conflict
of the divergent elements rises within the one element, the
Reason-Principle: the comparison therefore is rather with a harmony
emerging directly from the conflicting elements themselves, and the
question becomes what introduces clashing elements among these
Reason-Principles.

Now in the case of music, tones high and low are the product of
Reason-Principles which, by the fact that they are Principles of
harmony, meet in the unit of Harmony, the absolute Harmony, a more
comprehensive Principle, greater than they and including them as its
parts. Similarly in the Universe at large we find contraries- white and
black, hot and cold, winged and wingless, footed and footless, reasoning
and unreasoning- but all these elements are members of one living body,
their sum-total; the Universe is a self-accordant entity, its members
everywhere clashing but the total being the manifestation of a
Reason-Principle. That one Reason-Principle, then, must be the
unification of conflicting Reason-Principles whose very opposition is
the support of its coherence and, almost, of its Being.

And indeed, if it were not multiple, it could not be a Universal
Principle, it could not even be at all a Reason-Principle; in the fact
of its being a Reason-Principle is contained the fact of interior
difference. Now the maximum of difference is contrariety; admitting that
this differentiation exists and creates, it will create difference in
the greatest and not in the least degree; in other words, the
Reason-Principle, bringing about differentiation to the uttermost
degree, will of necessity create contrarieties: it will be complete only
by producing itself not in merely diverse things but in contrary things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 17](enn203)
