[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn215)  [Next](enn217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. What, then, is the spirit \[guiding the present life and determining
the future\]?

The Spirit of here and now.

And the God?

The God of here and now.

Spirit, God; This in act within us, conducts every life; for, even here
and now, it is the dominant of our Nature.

That is to say that the dominant is the spirit which takes possession of
the human being at birth?

No: the dominant is the Prior of the individual spirit; it presides
inoperative while its secondary acts: so that if the acting force is
that of men of the sense-life, the tutelary spirit is the Rational
Being, while if we live by that Rational Being, our tutelary Spirit is
the still higher Being, not directly operative but assenting to the
working principle. The words "You shall yourselves choose" are true,
then; for by our life we elect our own loftier.

But how does this spirit come to be the determinant of our fate?

It is not when the life is ended that it conducts us here or there; it
operates during the lifetime; when we cease to live, our death hands
over to another principle this energy of our own personal career.

That principle \[of the new birth\] strives to gain control, and if it
succeeds it also lives and itself, in turn, possesses a guiding spirit
\[its next higher\]: if on the contrary it is weighed down by the
developed evil in the character, the spirit of the previous life pays
the penalty: the evil-liver loses grade because during his life the
active principle of his being took the tilt towards the brute by force
of affinity. If, on the contrary, the Man is able to follow the leading
of his higher Spirit, he rises: he lives that Spirit; that noblest part
of himself to which he is being led becomes sovereign in his life; this
made his own, he works for the next above until he has attained the
height.

For the Soul is many things, is all, is the Above and the Beneath to the
totality of life: and each of us is an Intellectual Kosmos, linked to
this world by what is lowest in us, but, by what is the highest, to the
Divine Intellect: by all that is intellective we are permanently in that
higher realm, but at the fringe of the Intellectual we are fettered to
the lower; it is as if we gave forth from it some emanation towards that
lower, or, rather some Act, which however leaves our diviner part not in
itself diminished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn217)
