[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn298)  [Next](enn300) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 13

13\. The Ineluctable, the Kosmic Law is, thus, rooted in a natural
principle under which each several entity is overruled to go, duly and
in order, towards that place and Kind to which it characteristically
tends, that is towards the image of its primal choice and constitution.

In that archetypal world every form of soul is near to the image \[the
thing in the world of copy\] to which its individual constitution
inclines it; there is therefore no need of a sender or leader acting at
the right moment to bring it at the right moment whether into body or
into a definitely appropriate body: of its own motion it descends at the
precisely true time and enters where it must. To every Soul its own
hour; when that strikes it descends and enters the body suitable to it
as at the cry of a herald; thus all is set stirring and advancing as by
a magician's power or by some mighty traction; it is much as, in any
living thing, the soul itself effects the fulfillment of the natural
career, stirring and bringing forth, in due season, every element-
beard, horn, and all the successive stages of tendency and of output-
or, as it leads a tree through its normal course within set periods.

The Souls go forth neither under compulsion nor of freewill; or, at
least, freedom, here, is not to be regarded as action upon preference;
it is more like such a leap of the nature as moves men to the
instinctive desire of sexual union, or, in the case of some, to fine
conduct; the motive lies elsewhere than in the reason: like is destined
unfailingly to like, and each moves hither or thither at its fixed
moment.

Even the Intellectual-Principle, which is before all the kosmos, has, it
also, its destiny, that of abiding intact above, and of giving
downwards: what it sends down is the particular whose existence is
implied in the law of the universal; for the universal broods closely
over the particular; it is not from without that the law derives the
power by which it is executed; on the contrary the law is given in the
entities upon whom it falls; these bear it about with them. Let but the
moment arrive, and what it decrees will be brought to act by those
beings in whom it resides; they fulfil it because they contain it; it
prevails because it is within them; it becomes like a heavy burden, and
sets up in them a painful longing to enter the realm to which they are
bidden from within.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](enn300)
