[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn227)  [Next](enn229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. But what are we to understand by this Zeus with the garden into
which, we are told, Poros or Wealth entered? And what is the garden?

We have seen that the Aphrodite of the Myth is the Soul and that Poros,
Wealth, is the Reason-Principle of the Universe: we have still to
explain Zeus and his garden.

We cannot take Zeus to be the Soul, which we have agreed is represented
by Aphrodite.

Plato, who must be our guide in this question, speaks in the Phaedrus of
this God, Zeus, as the Great Leader- though elsewhere he seems to rank
him as one of three- but in the Philebus he speaks more plainly when he
says that there is in Zeus not only a royal Soul, but also a royal
Intellect.

As a mighty Intellect and Soul, he must be a principle of Cause; he must
be the highest for several reasons but especially because to be King and
Leader is to be the chief cause: Zeus then is the Intellectual
Principle. Aphrodite, his daughter, issue of him, dwelling with him,
will be Soul, her very name Aphrodite \[= the habra, delicate\]
indicating the beauty and gleam and innocence and delicate grace of the
Soul.

And if we take the male gods to represent the Intellectual Powers and
the female gods to be their souls- to every Intellectual Principle its
companion Soul- we are forced, thus also, to make Aphrodite the Soul of
Zeus; and the identification is confirmed by Priests and Theologians who
consider Aphrodite and Hera one and the same and call Aphrodite's star
the star of Hera.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn229)
