[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn239)  [Next](enn241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. In answer: It must, first, be noted that there are a variety of
modes in which an object may be said to be present to another or to
exist in another. There is a "presence" which acts by changing the
object- for good or for ill- as we see in the case of bodies, especially
where there is life. But there is also a "presence" which acts, towards
good or ill, with no modification of the object, as we have indicated in
the case of the Soul. Then there is the case represented by the stamping
of a design upon wax, where the "presence" of the added pattern causes
no modification in the substance nor does its obliteration diminish it.
And there is the example of Light whose presence does not even bring
change of pattern to the object illuminated. A stone becoming cold does
not change its nature in the process; it remains the stone it was. A
drawing does not cease to be a drawing for being coloured.

The intermediary mass on which these surface changes appear is certainly
not transmuted by them; but might there not be a modification of the
underlying Matter?

No: it is impossible to think of Matter being modified by, for instance,
colour- for, of course we must not talk of modification when there is no
more than a presence, or at most a presenting of shape.

Mirrors and transparent objects, even more, offer a close parallel; they
are quite unaffected by what is seen in or through them: material things
are reflections, and the Matter on which they appear is further from
being affected than is a mirror. Heat and cold are present in Matter,
but the Matter itself suffers no change of temperature: growing hot and
growing cold have to do only with quality; a quality enters and brings
the impassible Substance under a new state- though, by the way, research
into nature may show that cold is nothing positive but an absence, a
mere negation. The qualities come together into Matter, but in most
cases they can have no action upon each other; certainly there can be
none between those of unlike scope: what effect, for example, could
fragrance have on sweetness or the colour-quality on the quality of
form, any quality on another of some unrelated order? The illustration
of the mirror may well indicate to us that a given substratum may
contain something quite distinct from itself- even something standing to
it as a direct contrary- and yet remain entirely unaffected by what is
thus present to it or merged into it.

A thing can be hurt only by something related to it, and similarly
things are not changed or modified by any chance presence: modification
comes by contrary acting upon contrary; things merely different leave
each other as they were. Such modification by a direct contrary can
obviously not occur in an order of things to which there is no contrary:
Matter, therefore \[the mere absence of Reality\] cannot be modified:
any modification that takes place can occur only in some compound of
Matter and reality, or, speaking generally, in some agglomeration of
actual things. The Matter itself- isolated, quite apart from all else,
utterly simplex- must remain immune, untouched in the midst of all the
interacting agencies; just as when people fight within their four walls,
the house and the air in it remain without part in the turmoil.

We may take it, then, that while all the qualities and entities that
appear upon Matter group to produce each the effect belonging to its
nature, yet Matter itself remains immune, even more definitely immune
than any of those qualities entering into it which, not being
contraries, are not affected by each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn241)
