[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn266)  [Next](enn268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. There is, obviously, no question here of hands or feet, of any
implement borrowed or inherent: Nature needs simply the Matter which it
is to work upon and bring under Form; its productivity cannot depend
upon mechanical operation. What driving or hoisting goes to produce all
that variety of colour and pattern?

The wax-workers, whose methods have been cited as parallel to the
creative act of Nature, are unable to make colours; all they can do to
impose upon their handicraft colours taken from elsewhere. None the less
there is a parallel which demands attention: in the case of workers in
such arts there must be something locked within themselves, an efficacy
not going out from them and yet guiding their hands in all their
creation; and this observation should have indicated a similar
phenomenon in Nature; it should be clear that this indwelling efficacy,
which makes without hands, must exist in Nature, no less than in the
craftsman- but, there, as a thing completely inbound. Nature need
possess no outgoing force as against that remaining within; the only
moved thing is Matter; there can be no moved phase in this
Nature-Principle; any such moved phase could not be the primal mover;
this Nature-Principle is no such moved entity; it is the unmoved
Principle operating in the Kosmos.

We may be answered that the Reason-Principle is, no doubt, unmoved, but
that the Nature-Principle, another being, operates by motion.

But, if Nature entire is in question here, it is identical with the
Reason-Principle; and any part of it that is unmoved is the
Reason-Principle. The Nature-Principle must be an Ideal-Form, not a
compound of Form and Matter; there is no need for it to possess Matter,
hot and cold: the Matter that underlies it, on which it exercises its
creative act, brings all that with it, or, natively without quality,
becomes hot and cold, and all the rest, when brought under Reason:
Matter, to become fire, demands the approach not of fire but of a
Reason-Principle.

This is no slight evidence that in the animal and vegetable realms the
Reason-Principles are the makers and that Nature is a Reason-Principle
producing a second Reason-Principle, its offspring, which, in turn,
while itself, still, remaining intact, communicates something to the
underlie, Matter.

The Reason-Principle presiding over visible Shape is the very ultimate
of its order, a dead thing unable to produce further: that which
produces in the created realm is the living Reason-Principle- brother no
doubt, to that which gives mere shape, but having life-giving power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn268)
