[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn217)  [Next](enn219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. But if the presiding Spirit and the conditions of life are chosen by
the Soul in the overworld, how can anything be left to our independent
action here?

The answer is that very choice in the over-world is merely an
allegorical statement of the Soul's tendency and temperament, a total
character which it must express wherever it operates.

But if the tendency of the Soul is the master-force and, in the Soul,
the dominant is that phase which has been brought to the fore by a
previous history, then the body stands acquitted of any bad influence
upon it? The Soul's quality exists before any bodily life; it has
exactly what it chose to have; and, we read, it never changes its chosen
spirit; therefore neither the good man nor the bad is the product of
this life?

Is the solution, perhaps, that man is potentially both good and bad but
becomes the one or the other by force of act?

But what if a man temperamentally good happens to enter a disordered
body, or if a perfect body falls to a man naturally vicious?

The answer is that the Soul, to whichever side it inclines, has in some
varying degree the power of working the forms of body over to its own
temper, since outlying and accidental circumstances cannot overrule the
entire decision of a Soul. Where we read that, after the casting of
lots, the sample lives are exhibited with the casual circumstances
attending them and that the choice is made upon vision, in accordance
with the individual temperament, we are given to understand that the
real determination lies with the Souls, who adapt the allotted
conditions to their own particular quality.

The Timaeus indicates the relation of this guiding spirit to ourselves:
it is not entirely outside of ourselves; is not bound up with our
nature; is not the agent in our action; it belongs to us as belonging to
our Soul, but not in so far as we are particular human beings living a
life to which it is superior: take the passage in this sense and it is
consistent; understand this Spirit otherwise and there is contradiction.
And the description of the Spirit, moreover, as "the power which
consummates the chosen life," is, also, in agreement with this
interpretation; for while its presidency saves us from falling much
deeper into evil, the only direct agent within us is some thing neither
above it nor equal to it but under it: Man cannot cease to be
characteristically Man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn219)
