[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn253)  [Next](enn255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. What, then, can this be, this something in virtue of which we
declare the entire divine Realm to be Eternal, everlasting? We must come
to some understanding of this perpetuity with which Eternity is either
identical or in conformity.

It must at once, be at once something in the nature of unity and yet a
notion compact of diversity, or a Kind, a Nature, that waits upon the
Existents of that Other World, either associated with them or known in
and upon them, they collectively being this Nature which, with all its
unity, is yet diverse in power and essence. Considering this
multifarious power, we declare it to be Essence in its relation to this
sphere which is substratum or underlie to it; where we see life we think
of it as Movement; where all is unvaried self-identity we call it
Repose; and we know it as, at once, Difference and Identity when we
recognize that all is unity with variety.

Then we reconstruct; we sum all into a collected unity once more, a sole
Life in the Supreme; we concentrate Diversity and all the endless
production of act: thus we know Identity, a concept or, rather, a Life
never varying, not becoming what previously it was not, the thing
immutably itself, broken by no interval; and knowing this, we know
Eternity.

We know it as a Life changelessly motionless and ever holding the
Universal content \[time, space, and phenomena\] in actual presence; not
this now and now that other, but always all; not existing now in one
mode and now in another, but a consummation without part or interval.
All its content is in immediate concentration as at one point; nothing
in it ever knows development: all remains identical within itself,
knowing nothing of change, for ever in a Now since nothing of it has
passed away or will come into being, but what it is now, that it is
ever.

Eternity, therefore- while not the Substratum \[not the essential
foundation of the Divine or Intellectual Principle\]- may be considered
as the radiation of this Substratum: it exists as the announcement of
the Identity in the Divine, of that state- of being thus and not
otherwise- which characterizes what has no futurity but eternally is.

What future, in fact, could bring to that Being anything which it now
does not possess; and could it come to be anything which it is not once
for all?

There exists no source or ground from which anything could make its way
into that standing present; any imagined entrant will prove to be not
alien but already integral. And as it can never come to be anything at
present outside it, so, necessarily, it cannot include any past; what
can there be that once was in it and now is gone? Futurity, similarly,
is banned; nothing could be yet to come to it. Thus no ground is left
for its existence but that it be what it is.

That which neither has been nor will be, but simply possesses being;
that which enjoys stable existence as neither in process of change nor
having ever changed- that is Eternity. Thus we come to the definition:
the Life- instantaneously entire, complete, at no point broken into
period or part- which belongs to the Authentic Existent by its very
existence, this is the thing we were probing for- this is Eternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn255)
