[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn327)  [Next](enn329) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. But Zeus- ordering all, governor, guardian and disposer, possessor
for ever of the kingly soul and the kingly intellect, bringing all into
being by his providence, and presiding over all things as they come,
administering all under plan and system, unfolding the periods of the
kosmos, many of which stand already accomplished- would it not seem
inevitable that, in this multiplicity of concern, Zeus should have
memory of all the periods, their number and their differing qualities?
Contriving the future, co-ordinating, calculating for what is to be,
must he not surely be the chief of all in remembering, as he is chief in
producing?

Even this matter of Zeus' memory of the kosmic periods is difficult; it
is a question of their being numbered, and of his knowledge of their
number. A determined number would mean that the All had a beginning in
time \[which is not so\]; if the periods are unlimited, Zeus cannot know
the number of his works.

The answer is that he will know all to be one thing existing in virtue
of one life for ever: it is in this sense that the All is unlimited, and
thus Zeus' knowledge of it will not be as of something seen from outside
but as of something embraced in true knowledge, for this unlimited thing
is an eternal indweller within himself- or, to be more accurate,
eternally follows upon him- and is seen by an indwelling knowledge; Zeus
knows his own unlimited life, and, in that knowledge knows the activity
that flows from him to the kosmos; but he knows it in its unity not in
its process.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn329)
