[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn338)  [Next](enn340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 20

20\. As with bodily pain and pleasure so with the bodily desires; their
origin, also, must be attributed to what thus stands midway, to that
Nature we described as the corporeal.

Body undetermined cannot be imagined to give rise to appetite and
purpose, nor can pure soul be occupied about sweet and bitter: all this
must belong to what is specifically body but chooses to be something
else as well, and so has acquired a restless movement unknown to the
soul and by that acquisition is forced to aim at a variety of objects,
to seek, as its changing states demand, sweet or bitter, water or
warmth, with none of which it could have any concern if it remained
untouched by life.

In the case of pleasure and pain we showed how upon distress follows the
knowledge of it, and that the soul, seeking to alienate what is causing
the condition, inspires a withdrawal which the member primarily affected
has itself indicated, in its own mode, by its contraction. Similarly in
the case of desire: there is the knowledge in the sensation \[the
sensitive phase of the soul\] and in the next lower phase, that
described as the "Nature" which carries the imprint of the soul to the
body; that Nature knows the fully formed desire which is the culmination
of the less formed desire in body; sensation knows the image thence
imprinted upon the Nature; and from the moment of the sensation the
soul, which alone is competent, acts upon it, sometimes procuring,
sometimes on the contrary resisting, taking control and paying heed
neither to that which originated the desire nor to that which
subsequently entertained it.

But why, thus, two phases of desire; why should not the body as a
determined entity \[the living total\] be the sole desirer?

Because there are \[in man\] two distinct things, this Nature and the
body, which, through it, becomes a living being: the Nature precedes the
determined body which is its creation, made and shaped by it; it cannot
originate the desires; they must belong to the living body meeting the
experiences of this life and seeking in its distress to alter its state,
to substitute pleasure for pain, sufficiency for want: this Nature must
be like a mother reading the wishes of a suffering child, and seeking to
set it right and to bring it back to herself; in her search for the
remedy she attaches herself by that very concern to the sufferer's
desire and makes the child's experience her own.

In sum, the living body may be said to desire of its own motion in a
fore-desiring with, perhaps, purpose as well; Nature desires for, and
because of, that living body; granting or withholding belongs to another
again, the higher soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 21](enn340)
