[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn304)  [Next](enn306) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 19

19\. Are we to think of the indivisible phase of the soul and the
divided as making one thing in a coalescence; or is the indivisible in a
place of its own and under conditions of its own, the divisible being a
sequent upon it, a separate part of it, as distinct as the reasoning
phase is from the unreasoning?

The answer to this question will emerge when we make plain the nature
and function to be attributed to each.

The indivisible phase is mentioned \[in the passage of Plato\] without
further qualification; but not so the divisible; "that soul" we read
"which becomes divisible in bodies"- and even this last is presented as
becoming partible, not as being so once for all.

"In bodies": we must then, satisfy ourselves as to what form of soul is
required to produce life in the corporeal, and what there must be of
soul present throughout such a body, such a completed organism.

Now, every sensitive power- by the fact of being sensitive throughout-
tends to become a thing of parts: present at every distinct point of
sensitiveness, it may be thought of as divided. In the sense, however,
that it is present as a whole at every such point, it cannot be said to
be wholly divided; it "becomes divisible in body." We may be told that
no such partition is implied in any sensations but those of touch; but
this is not so; where the participant is body \[of itself insensitive
and non-transmitting\] that divisibility in the sensitive agent will be
a condition of all other sensations, though in less degree than in the
case of touch. Similarly the vegetative function in the soul, with that
of growth, indicates divisibility; and, admitting such locations as that
of desire at the liver and emotional activity at the heart, we have the
same result. It is to be noted, however, as regards these \[the less
corporeal\] sensations, that the body may possibly not experience them
as a fact of the conjoint thing but in another mode, as rising within
some one of the elements of which it has been participant \[as inherent,
purely, in some phase of the associated soul\]: reasoning and the act of
the intellect, for instance, are not vested in the body; their task is
not accomplished by means of the body which in fact is detrimental to
any thinking on which it is allowed to intrude.

Thus the indivisible phase of the soul stands distinct from the
divisible; they do not form a unity, but, on the contrary, a whole
consisting of parts, each part a self-standing thing having its own
peculiar virtue. None the less, if that phase which becomes divisible in
body holds indivisibility by communication from the superior power, then
this one same thing \[the soul in body\] may be at once indivisible and
divisible; it will be, as it were, a blend, a thing made up of its own
divisible self with, in addition, the quality that it derives from above
itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 20](enn306)
