[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn335)  [Next](enn337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 17

17\. But how comes it that the intuitions and the Reason-Principles of
the soul are not in the same timeless fashion within ourselves, but that
here the later of order is converted into a later of time- bringing in
all these doubts?

Is it because in us the governing and the answering principles are many
and there is no sovereign unity?

That condition; and, further, the fact that our mental acts fall into a
series according to the succession of our needs, being not
self-determined but guided by the variations of the external: thus the
will changes to meet every incident as each fresh need arises and as the
external impinges in its successive things and events.

A variety of governing principles must mean variety in the images formed
upon the representative faculty, images not issuing from one internal
centre, but, by difference of origin and of acting- point, strange to
each other, and so bringing compulsion to bear upon the movements and
efficiencies of the self.

When the desiring faculty is stirred, there is a presentment of the
object- a sort of sensation, in announcement and in picture, of the
experience- calling us to follow and to attain: the personality, whether
it resists or follows and procures, is necessarily thrown out of
equilibrium. The same disturbance is caused by passion urging revenge
and by the needs of the body; every other sensation or experience
effects its own change upon our mental attitude; then there is the
ignorance of what is good and the indecision of a soul \[a human soul\]
thus pulled in every direction; and, again, the interaction of all these
perplexities gives rise to yet others.

But do variations of judgement affect that very highest in us?

No: the doubt and the change of standard are of the Conjoint \[of the
soul-phase in contact with body\]; still, the right reason of that
highest is weaker by being given over to inhabit this mingled mass: not
that it sinks in its own nature: it is much as amid the tumult of a
public meeting the best adviser speaks but fails to dominate; assent
goes to the roughest of the brawlers and roarers, while the man of good
counsel sits silent, ineffectual, overwhelmed by the uproar of his
inferiors.

The lowest human type exhibits the baser nature; the man is a compost
calling to mind inferior political organization: in the mid-type we have
a citizenship in which some better section sways a demotic constitution
not out of control: in the superior type the life is aristocratic; it is
the career of one emancipated from what is a base in humanity and
tractable to the better; in the finest type, where the man has brought
himself to detachment, the ruler is one only, and from this master
principle order is imposed upon the rest, so that we may think of a
municipality in two sections, the superior city and, kept in hand by it,
the city of the lower elements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](enn337)
