[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn361)  [Next](enn363) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 43

43\. And the Proficient \[the Sage\], how does he stand with regard to
magic and philtre-spells?

In the soul he is immune from magic; his reasoning part cannot be
touched by it, he cannot be perverted. But there is in him the
unreasoning element which comes from the \[material\] All, and in this
he can be affected, or rather this can be affected in him. Philtre-Love,
however, he will not know, for that would require the consent of the
higher soul to the trouble stiffed in the lower. And, just as the
unreasoning element responds to the call of incantation, so the adept
himself will dissolve those horrible powers by counter-incantations.
Death, disease, any experience within the material sphere, these may
result, yes; for anything that has membership in the All may be affected
by another member, or by the universe of members; but the essential man
is beyond harm.

That the effects of magic should be not instantaneous but developed is
only in accord with Nature's way.

Even the Celestials, the Daimones, are not on their unreasoning side
immune: there is nothing against ascribing acts of memory and
experiences of sense to them, in supposing them to accept the traction
of methods laid up in the natural order, and to give hearing to
petitioners; this is especially true of those of them that are closest
to this sphere, and in the degree of their concern about it.

For everything that looks to another is under spell to that: what we
look to, draws us magically. Only the self-intent go free of magic.
Hence every action has magic as its source, and the entire life of the
practical man is a bewitchment: we move to that only which has wrought a
fascination upon us. This is indicated where we read "for the burgher of
greathearted Erechtheus has a pleasant face \[but you should see him
naked; then you would be cautious\]." For what conceivably turns a man
to the external? He is drawn, drawn by the arts not of magicians but of
the natural order which administers the deceiving draught and links this
to that, not in local contact but in the fellowship of the philtre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 44](enn363)
