[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn385)  [Next](enn387) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. It can be shown also that the intellectual act would similarly be
impossible if the soul were any form of body.

If sensation is apprehension by means of the soul's employment of the
body, intellection cannot be a similar use of the body or it would be
identical with sensation. If then intellection is apprehension apart
from body, much more must there be a distinction between the body and
the intellective principle: sensation for objects of sense, intellection
for the intellectual object. And even if this be rejected, it must still
be admitted that there do exist intellections of intellectual objects
and perceptions of objects not possessing magnitude: how, we may then
ask, can a thing of magnitude know a thing that has no magnitude, or how
can the partless be known by means of what has parts? We will be told
"By some partless part." But, at this, the intellective will not be
body: for contact does not need a whole; one point suffices. If then it
be conceded- and it cannot be denied- that the primal intellections deal
with objects completely incorporeal, the principle of intellection
itself must know by virtue of being, or becoming, free from body. Even
if they hold that all intellection deals with the ideal forms in Matter,
still it always takes place by abstraction from the bodies \[in which
these forms appear\] and the separating agent is the
Intellectual-Principle. For assuredly the process by which we abstract
circle, triangle, line or point, is not carried through by the aid of
flesh or Matter of any kind; in all such acts the soul or mind must
separate itself from the material: at once we see that it cannot be
itself material. Similarly it will be agreed that, as beauty and justice
are things without magnitude, so must be the intellective act that
grasps them.

When such non-magnitudes come before the soul, it receives them by means
of its partless phase and they will take position there in partless
wise.

Again: if the Soul is a body, how can we account for its virtues- moral
excellence \[Sophrosyne\], justice, courage and so forth? All these
could be only some kind of rarefied body \[pneuma\], or blood in some
form; or we might see courage as a certain resisting power in that
pneuma; moral quality would be its happy blending; beauty would lie
wholly in the agreeable form of impressions received, such comeliness as
leads us to describe people as attractive and beautiful from their
bodily appearance. No doubt strength and grace of form go well enough
with the idea of rarefied body; but what can this rarefied body want
with moral excellence? On the contrary its interest would lie in being
comfortable in its environments and contacts, in being warmed or
pleasantly cool, in bringing everything smooth and caressing and soft
around it: what could it care about a just distribution?

Then consider the objects of the soul's contemplation, virtue and the
other Intellectual forms with which it is occupied; are these eternal or
are we to think that virtue rises here or there, helps, then perishes?
These things must have an author and a source and there, again, we are
confronted by something perdurable: the soul's contemplation, then, must
be of the eternal and unchanging, like the concepts of geometry: if
eternal and unchanging, these objects are not bodies: and that which is
to receive them must be of equivalent nature: it cannot therefore be
body, since all body-nature lacks permanence, is a thing of flux.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn387)
