[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn305)  [Next](enn307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 20

20\. Here a question rises to which we must find an answer: whether
these and the other powers which we call "parts" of the Soul are
situated, all, in place; or whether some have place and standpoint,
others not; or whether again none are situated in place.

The matter is difficult: if we do not allot to each of the parts of the
Soul some form of Place, but leave all unallocated- no more within the
body than outside it- we leave the body soulless, and are at a loss to
explain plausibly the origin of acts performed by means of the bodily
organs: if, on the other hand, we suppose some of those phases to be
\[capable of situation\] in place but others not so, we will be
supposing that those parts to which we deny place are ineffective in us,
or, in other words, that we do not possess our entire soul.

This simply shows that neither the soul entire nor any part of it may be
considered to be within the body as in a space: space is a container, a
container of body; it is the home of such things as consist of isolated
parts, things, therefore, in which at no point is there an entirety;
now, the soul is not a body and is no more contained than containing.

Neither is it in body as in some vessel: whether as vessel or as place
of location, the body would remain, in itself, unensouled. If we are to
think of some passing-over from the soul- that self-gathered thing- to
the containing vessel, then soul is diminished by just as much as the
vessel takes.

Space, again, in the strict sense is unembodied, and is not, itself,
body; why, then, should it need soul?

Besides \[if the soul were contained as in space\] contact would be only
at the surface of the body, not throughout the entire mass.

Many other considerations equally refute the notion that the soul is in
body as \[an object\] in space; for example, this space would be shifted
with every movement, and a thing itself would carry its own space about.

Of course if by space we understand the interval separating objects, it
is still less possible that the soul be in body as in space: such a
separating interval must be a void; but body is not a void; the void
must be that in which body is placed; body \[not soul\] will be in the
void.

Nor can it be in the body as in some substratum: anything in a
substratum is a condition affecting that- a colour, a form- but the soul
is a separate existence.

Nor is it present as a part in the whole; soul is no part of body. If we
are asked to think of soul as a part in the living total we are faced
with the old difficulty: How it is in that whole. It is certainly not
there as the wine is in the wine jar, or as the jar in the jar, or as
some absolute is self-present.

Nor can the presence be that of a whole in its part: It would be absurd
to think of the soul as a total of which the body should represent the
parts.

It is not present as Form is in Matter; for the Form as in Matter is
inseparable and, further, is something superimposed upon an already
existent thing; soul, on the contrary, is that which engenders the Form
residing within the Matter and therefore is not the Form. If the
reference is not to the Form actually present, but to Form as a thing
existing apart from all formed objects, it is hard to see how such an
entity has found its way into body, and at any rate this makes the soul
separable.

How comes it then that everyone speaks of soul as being in body?

Because the soul is not seen and the body is: we perceive the body, and
by its movement and sensation we understand that it is ensouled, and we
say that it possesses a soul; to speak of residence is a natural
sequence. If the soul were visible, an object of the senses, radiating
throughout the entire life, if it were manifest in full force to the
very outermost surface, we would no longer speak of soul as in body; we
would say the minor was within the major, the contained within the
container, the fleeting within the perdurable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 21](enn307)
