[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn341)  [Next](enn343) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 23

23\. A first principle is that the knowing of sensible objects is an act
of the soul, or of the living conjoint, becoming aware of the quality of
certain corporeal entities, and appropriating the ideas present in them.

This apprehension must belong either to the soul isolated, self-acting,
or to soul in conjunction with some other entity.

Isolated, self-acting, how is it possible? Self-acting, it has knowledge
of its own content, and this is not perception but intellection: if it
is also to know things outside itself it can grasp them only in one of
two ways: either it must assimilate itself to the external objects, or
it must enter into relations with something that has been so
assimilated.

Now as long as it remains self-centred it cannot assimilate: a single
point cannot assimilate itself to an external line: even line cannot
adapt itself to line in another order, line of the intellectual to line
of the sensible, just as fire of the intellectual and man of the
intellectual remain distinct from fire and man of the sensible. Even
Nature, the soul-phase which brings man into being, does not come to
identity with the man it shapes and informs: it has the faculty of
dealing with the sensible, but it remains isolated, and, its task done,
ignores all but the intellectual as it is itself ignored by the sensible
and utterly without means of grasping it.

Suppose something visible lying at a distance: the soul sees it; now,
admitting to the full that at first only the pure idea of the thing is
seized- a total without discerned part- yet in the end it becomes to the
seeing soul an object whose complete detail of colour and form is known:
this shows that there is something more here than the outlying thing and
the soul; for the soul is immune from experience; there must be a third,
something not thus exempt; and it is this intermediate that accepts the
impressions of shape and the like.

This intermediate must be able to assume the modifications of the
material object so as to be an exact reproduction of its states, and it
must be of the one elemental-stuff: it, thus, will exhibit the condition
which the higher principle is to perceive; and the condition must be
such as to preserve something of the originating object, and yet not be
identical with it: the essential vehicle of knowledge is an intermediary
which, as it stands between the soul and the originating object, will,
similarly, present a condition midway between the two spheres, of sense
and the intellectual-linking the extremes, receiving from one side to
exhibit to the other, in virtue of being able to assimilate itself to
each. As an instrument by which something is to receive knowledge, it
cannot be identical with either the knower or the known: but it must be
apt to likeness with both- akin to the external object by its power of
being affected, and to the internal, the knower, by the fact that the
modification it takes becomes an idea.

If this theory of ours is sound, bodily organs are necessary to
sense-perception, as is further indicated by the reflection that the
soul entirely freed of body can apprehend nothing in the order of sense.

The organ must be either the body entire or some member set apart for a
particular function; thus touch for one, vision for another. The tools
of craftsmanship will be seen to be intermediaries between the judging
worker and the judged object, disclosing to the experimenter the
particular character of the matter under investigation: thus a ruler,
representing at once the straightness which is in the mind and the
straightness of a plank, is used as an intermediary by which the
operator proves his work.

Some questions of detail remain for consideration elsewhere: Is it
necessary that the object upon which judgement or perception is to take
place should be in contact with the organ of perception, or can the
process occur across space upon an object at a distance? Thus, is the
heat of a fire really at a distance from the flesh it warms, the
intermediate space remaining unmodified; is it possible to see colour
over a sheer blank intervening between the colour and the eye, the organ
of vision reaching to its object by its own power?

For the moment we have one certainty, that perception of things of sense
belongs to the embodied soul and takes place through the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 24](enn343)
