[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn316)  [Next](enn318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 31

31\. But if each of the two phases of the soul, as we have said,
possesses memory, and memory is vested in the imaging faculty, there
must be two such faculties. Now that is all very well as long as the two
souls stand apart; but, when they are at one in us, what becomes of the
two faculties, and in which of them is the imaging faculty vested?

If each soul has its own imaging faculty the images must in all cases be
duplicated, since we cannot think that one faculty deals only with
intellectual objects, and the other with objects of sense, a distinction
which inevitably implies the co-existence in man of two life-principles
utterly unrelated.

And if both orders of image act upon both orders of soul, what
difference is there in the souls; and how does the fact escape our
knowledge?

The answer is that, when the two souls chime each with each, the two
imaging faculties no longer stand apart; the union is dominated by the
more powerful of the faculties of the soul, and thus the image perceived
is as one: the less powerful is like a shadow attending upon the
dominant, like a minor light merging into a greater: when they are in
conflict, in discord, the minor is distinctly apart, a self-standing
thing- though its isolation is not perceived, for the simple reason that
the separate being of the two souls escapes observation.

The two have run into a unity in which, yet, one is the loftier: this
loftier knows all; when it breaks from the union, it retains some of the
experiences of its companion, but dismisses others; thus we accept the
talk of our less valued associates, but, on a change of company, we
remember little from the first set and more from those in whom we
recognize a higher quality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 32](enn318)
