[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn370)  [Next](enn372) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. We return, then, to the question whether there could be light if
there were no air, the sun illuminating corporeal surfaces across an
intermediate void which, as things are, takes the light accidentally by
the mere fact of being in the path. Supposing air to be the cause of the
rest of things being thus affected, the substantial existence of light
is due to the air; light becomes a modification of the air, and of
course if the thing to be modified did not exist neither could be
modification.

The fact is that primarily light is no appanage of air, and does not
depend upon the existence of air: it belongs to every fiery and shining
body, it constitutes even the gleaming surface of certain stones.

Now if, thus, it enters into other substances from something gleaming,
could it exist in the absence of its container?

There is a distinction to be made: if it is a quality, some quality of
some substance, then light, equally with other qualities, will need a
body in which to lodge: if, on the contrary, it is an activity rising
from something else, we can surely conceive it existing, though there be
no neighbouring body but, if that is possible, a blank void which it
will overleap and so appear on the further side: it is powerful, and may
very well pass over unhelped. If it were of a nature to fall, nothing
would keep it up, certainly not the air or anything that takes its
light; there is no reason why they should draw the light from its source
and speed it onwards.

Light is not an accidental to something else, requiring therefore to be
lodged in a base; nor is it a modification, demanding a base in which
the modification occurs: if this were so, it would vanish when the
object or substance disappeared; but it does not; it strikes onward; so,
too \[requiring neither air nor object\] it would always have its
movement.

But movement, where?

Is space, pure and simple, all that is necessary?

With unchecked motion of the light outward, the material sun will be
losing its energy, for the light is its expression.

Perhaps; and \[from this untenable consequence\] we may gather that the
light never was an appanage of anything, but is the expressive Act
proceeding from a base \[the sun\] but not seeking to enter into a base,
though having some operation upon any base that may be present.

Life is also an Act, the Act of the soul, and it remains so when
anything- the human body, for instance- comes in its path to be affected
by it; and it is equally an Act though there be nothing for it to
modify: surely this may be true of light, one of the Acts of whatever
luminary source there be \[i.e., light, affecting things, may be quite
independent of them and require no medium, air or other\]. Certainly
light is not brought into being by the dark thing, air, which on the
contrary tends to gloom it over with some touch of earth so that it is
no longer the brilliant reality: as reasonable to talk of some substance
being sweet because it is mixed with something bitter.

If we are told that light is a mode of the air, we answer that this
would necessarily imply that the air itself is changed to produce the
new mode; in other words, its characteristic darkness must change into
non-darkness; but we know that the air maintains its character, in no
wise affected: the modification of a thing is an experience within that
thing itself: light therefore is not a modification of the air, but a
self-existent in whose path the air happens to be present.

On this point we need dwell no longer; but there remains still a
question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn372)
