[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn381)  [Next](enn383) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. Our opponents themselves are driven by stress of fact to admit the
necessity of a prior to body, a higher thing, some phase or form of
soul; their "pneuma" \[finer-body or spirit\] is intelligent, and they
speak of an "intellectual fire"; this "fire" and "spirit" they imagine
to be necessary to the existence of the higher order which they conceive
as demanding some base, though the real difficulty, under their theory,
is to find a base for material things whose only possible base is,
precisely, the powers of soul.

Besides, if they make life and soul no more than this "pneuma," what is
the import of that repeated qualification of theirs "in a certain
state," their refuge when they are compelled to recognize some acting
principle apart from body? If not every pneuma is a soul, but thousands
of them soulless, and only the pneuma in this "certain state" is soul,
what follows? Either this "certain state," this shaping or configuration
of things, is a real being or it is nothing.

If it is nothing, only the pneuma exists, the "certain state" being no
more than a word; this leads imperatively to the assertion that Matter
alone exists, Soul and God mere words, the lowest alone is.

If on the contrary this "configuration" is really existent- something
distinct from the underlie or Matter, something residing in Matter but
itself immaterial as not constructed out of Matter, then it must be a
Reason-Principle, incorporeal, a separate Nature.

There are other equally cogent proofs that the soul cannot be any form
of body.

Body is either warm or cold, hard or soft, liquid or solid, black or
white, and so on through all the qualities by which one is different
from another; and, again, if a body is warm it diffuses only warmth, if
cold it can only chill, if light its presence tells against the total
weight which if heavy it increases; black, it darkens; white, it
lightens; fire has not the property of chilling or a cold body that of
warming.

Soul, on the contrary, operates diversely in different living beings,
and has quite contrary effects in any one: its productions contain the
solid and the soft, the dense and the sparse, bright and dark, heavy and
light. If it were material, its quality- and the colour it must have-
would produce one invariable effect and not the variety actually
observed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn383)
