[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn442)  [Next](enn444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 12

12\. But why, after all, should it not be such a manifold as long as it
remains one substantial existence, having the multiplicity not of a
compound being but of a unity with a variety of activities?

Now, no doubt, if these various activities are not themselves
substantial existences- but merely manifestations of latent
potentiality- there is no compound; but, on the other hand, it remains
incomplete until its substantial existence be expressed in act. If its
substantial existence consists in its Act, and this Act constitutes
multiplicity, then its substantial existence will be strictly
proportioned to the extent of the multiplicity.

We allow this to be true for the Intellectual-Principle to which we have
allotted \[the multiplicity of\] self-knowing; but for the first
principle of all, never. Before the manifold, there must be The One,
that from which the manifold rises: in all numerical series, the unit is
the first.

But- we will be answered- for number, well and good, since the suite
makes a compound; but in the real beings why must there be a unit from
which the multiplicity of entities shall proceed?

Because \[failing such a unity\] the multiplicity would consist of
disjointed items, each starting at its own distinct place and moving
accidentally to serve to a total.

But, they will tell us, the Activities in question do proceed from a
unity, from the Intellectual-Principle, a simplex.

By that they admit the existence of a simplex prior to the Activities;
and they make the Activities perdurable and class them as substantial
existences \[hypostases\]; but as Hypostases they will be distinct from
their source, which will remain simplex; while its product will in its
own nature be manifold and dependent upon it.

Now if these activities arise from some unexplained first activity in
that principle, then it too contains the manifold: if, on the contrary,
they are the very earliest activities and the source and cause of any
multiple product and the means by which that Principle is able, before
any activity occurs, to remain self-centred, then they are allocated to
the product of which they are the cause; for this principle is one
thing, the activities going forth from it are another, since it is not,
itself, in act. If this be not so, the first act cannot be the
Intellectual-Principle: the One does not provide for the existence of an
Intellectual-Principle which thereupon appears; that provision would be
something \[an Hypostasis\] intervening between the One and the
Intellectual-Principle, its offspring. There could, in fact, be no such
providing in The One, for it was never incomplete; and such provision
could name nothing that ought to be provided. It cannot be thought to
possess only some part of its content, and not the whole; nor did
anything exist to which it could turn in desire. Clearly anything that
comes into being after it, arises without shaking to its permanence in
its own habit. It is essential to the existence of any new entity that
the First remain in self-gathered repose throughout: otherwise, it moved
before there was motion and had intellectual act before any
intellection- unless, indeed, that first act \[as motionless and without
intelligence\] was incomplete, nothing more than a tendency. And what
can we imagine it lights upon to become the object of such a tendency?

The only reasonable explanation of act flowing from it lies in the
analogy of light from a sun. The entire intellectual order may be
figured as a kind of light with the One in repose at its summit as its
King: but this manifestation is not cast out from it: we may think,
rather, of the One as a light before the light, an eternal irradiation
resting upon the Intellectual Realm; this, not identical with its
source, is yet not severed from it nor of so remote a nature as to be
less than Real-Being; it is no blind thing, but is seeing and knowing,
the primal knower.

The One, as transcending Intellect, transcends knowing: above all need,
it is above the need of the knowing which pertains solely to the
Secondary Nature. Knowing is a unitary thing, but defined: the first is
One, but undefined: a defined One would not be the One-absolute: the
absolute is prior to the definite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](enn444)
