[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn447)  [Next](enn449) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 17

17\. But what can it be which is loftier than that existence- a life
compact of wisdom, untouched by struggle and error, or than this
Intellect which holds the Universe with all there is of life and
intellect?

If we answer "The Making Principle," there comes the question, "making
by what virtue?" and unless we can indicate something higher there than
in the made, our reasoning has made no advance: we rest where we were.

We must go higher- if it were only for the reason that the maker of all
must have a self-sufficing existence outside of all things- since all
the rest is patently indigent- and that everything has participated in
The One and, as drawing on unity, is itself not unity.

What then is this in which each particular entity participates, the
author of being to the universe and to each item of the total?

Since it is the author of all that exists, and since the multiplicity in
each thing is converted into a self-sufficing existence by this presence
of The One, so that even the particular itself becomes self-sufficing,
then clearly this principle, author at once of Being and of
self-sufficingness, is not itself a Being but is above Being and above
even self-sufficing.

May we stop, content, with that? No: the Soul is yet, and even more, in
pain. Is she ripe, perhaps, to bring forth, now that in her pangs she
has come so close to what she seeks? No: we must call upon yet another
spell if anywhere the assuagement is to be found. Perhaps in what has
already been uttered, there lies the charm if only we tell it over
often? No: we need a new, a further, incantation. All our effort may
well skim over every truth and through all the verities in which we have
part, and yet the reality escape us when we hope to affirm, to
understand: for the understanding, in order to its affirmation must
possess itself of item after item; only so does it traverse all the
field: but how can there be any such peregrination of that in which
there is no variety?

All the need is met by a contact purely intellective. At the moment of
touch there is no power whatever to make any affirmation; there is no
leisure; reasoning upon the vision is for afterwards. We may know we
have had the vision when the Soul has suddenly taken light. This light
is from the Supreme and is the Supreme; we may believe in the Presence
when, like that other God on the call of a certain man, He comes
bringing light: the light is the proof of the advent. Thus, the Soul
unlit remains without that vision; lit, it possesses what it sought. And
this is the true end set before the Soul, to take that light, to see the
Supreme by the Supreme and not by the light of any other principle- to
see the Supreme which is also the means to the vision; for that which
illumines the Soul is that which it is to see just as it is by the sun's
own light that we see the sun.

But how is this to be accomplished?

Cut away everything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: FOURTH TRACTATE](enn449)
