[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn481)  [Next](enn483) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. All that comes to be, work of nature or of craft, some wisdom has
made: everywhere a wisdom presides at a making.

No doubt the wisdom of the artist may be the guide of the work; it is
sufficient explanation of the wisdom exhibited in the arts; but the
artist himself goes back, after all, to that wisdom in Nature which is
embodied in himself; and this is not a wisdom built up of theorems but
one totality, not a wisdom consisting of manifold detail co-ordinated
into a unity but rather a unity working out into detail.

Now, if we could think of this as the primal wisdom, we need look no
further, since, at that, we have discovered a principle which is neither
a derivative nor a "stranger in something strange to it." But if we are
told that, while this Reason-Principle is in Nature, yet Nature itself
is its source, we ask how Nature came to possess it; and, if Nature
derived it from some other source, we ask what that other source may be;
if, on the contrary, the principle is self-sprung, we need look no
further: but if we are referred to the Intellectual-Principle we must
make clear whether the Intellectual-Principle engendered the wisdom: if
we learn that it did, we ask whence: if from itself, then inevitably, it
is itself Wisdom.

The true Wisdom, then \[found to be identical with the
Intellectual-Principle\] is Real Being; and Real Being is Wisdom; it is
wisdom that gives value to Real Being; and Being is Real in virtue of
its origin in wisdom. It follows that all forms of existence not
possessing wisdom are, indeed, Beings in right of the wisdom which went
to their forming but, as not in themselves possessing it, are not Real
Beings.

We cannot therefore think that the divine Beings of that sphere, or the
other supremely blessed There, need look to our apparatus of science:
all of that realm, all is noble image, such images as we may conceive to
lie within the soul of the wise- but There not as inscription but as
authentic existence. The ancients had this in mind when they declared
the Ideas to be Beings, Essentials.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn483)
