[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn496)  [Next](enn498) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. We take it, then, that the Intellectual-Principle is the authentic
existences and contains them all- not as in a place but as possessing
itself and being one thing with this its content. All are one there and
yet are distinct: similarly the mind holds many branches and items of
knowledge simultaneously, yet none of them merged into any other, each
acting its own part at call quite independently, every conception coming
out from the inner total and working singly. It is after this way,
though in a closer unity, that the Intellectual-Principle is all Being
in one total- and yet not in one, since each of these beings is a
distinct power which, however, the total Intellectual-Principle includes
as the species in a genus, as the parts in a whole. This relation may be
illustrated by the powers in seed; all lies undistinguished in the unit,
the formative ideas gathered as in one kernel; yet in that unit there is
eye-principle, and there is hand-principle, each of which is revealed as
a separate power by its distinct material product. Thus each of the
powers in the seed is a Reason-Principle one and complete yet including
all the parts over which it presides: there will be something bodily,
the liquid, for example, carrying mere Matter; but the principle itself
is Idea and nothing else, idea identical with the generative idea
belonging to the lower soul, image of a higher. This power is sometimes
designated as Nature in the seed-life; its origin is in the divine; and,
outgoing from its priors as light from fire, it converts and shapes the
matter of things, not by push and pull and the lever work of which we
hear so much, but by bestowal of the Ideas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn498)
