[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn411)  [Next](enn413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. These reflections should show that there is nothing strange in that
reduction of all souls to one. But it is still necessary to enquire into
the mode and conditions of the unity.

Is it the unity of origin in a unity? And if so, is the one divided or
does it remain entire and yet produce variety? and how can an essential
being, while remaining its one self, bring forth others?

Invoking God to become our helper, let us assert, that the very
existence of many souls makes certain that there is first one from which
the many rise.

Let us suppose, even, the first soul to be corporeal.

Then \[by the nature of body\] the many souls could result only from the
splitting up of that entity, each an entirely different substance: if
this body-soul be uniform in kind, each of the resultant souls must be
of the one kind; they will all carry the one Form undividedly and will
differ only in their volumes. Now, if their being souls depended upon
their volumes they would be distinct; but if it is ideal-form that makes
them souls, then all are, in virtue of this Idea, one.

But this is simply saying that there is one identical soul dispersed
among many bodies, and that, preceding this, there is yet another not
thus dispersed, the source of the soul in dispersion which may be
thought of as a widely repeated image of the soul in unity- much as a
multitude of seals bear the impression of one ring. By that first mode
the soul is a unit broken up into a variety of points: in the second
mode it is incorporeal. Similarly if the soul were a condition or
modification of body, we could not wonder that this quality- this one
thing from one source- should be present in many objects. The same
reasoning would apply if soul were an effect \[or manifestation\] of the
Conjoint.

We, of course, hold it to be bodiless, an essential existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn413)
