[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn461)  [Next](enn463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. Still, do not, I urge you, look for The Good through any of these
other things; if you do, you will see not itself but its trace: you must
form the idea of that which is to be grasped cleanly standing to itself
not in any combination, the unheld in which all have hold: for no other
is such, yet one such there must be.

Now it is clear that we cannot possess ourselves of the power of this
principle in its concentrated fulness: so to do one must be identical
with it: but some partial attainment is within our reach.

You who make the venture will throw forward all your being but you will
never tell it entire- for that, you must yourself be the divine
Intellect in Act- and at your utmost success it will still pass from you
or, rather, you from it. In ordinary vision you may think to see the
object entire: in this intellective act, all, less or more, that you can
take to mind you may set down as The Good.

It is The Good since, being a power \[being effective outwardly\], it is
the cause of the intelligent and intellective life as of life and
intellect: for these grow from it as from the source of essence and of
existence, the Source as being One, simplex and first because before it
was nothing. All derives from this: it is the origin of the primal
movement which it does not possess and of the repose which is but its
absence of need; for neither rest nor movement can belong to that which
has no place in which either could occur; centre, object, ground, all
are alike unknown to it, for it is before all. Yet its Being is not
limited; what is there to set bounds to it? Nor, on the other hand, is
it infinite in the sense of magnitude; what place can there be to which
it must extend, or why should there be movement where there is no
lacking? All its infinitude resides in its power: it does not change and
will not fail; and in it all that is unfailing finds duration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn463)
