[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn469)  [Next](enn471) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. Another consideration is that if The Good \[and First\] is simplex
and without need, it can neither need the intellective act nor possess
what it does not need: it will therefore not have intellection.
(Interpolation or corruption: It is without intellection because, also,
it contains no duality.)

Again; an Intellectual-Principle is distinct from The Good and takes a
certain goodness only by its intellection of The Good.

Yet again: In any dual object there is the unity \[the principle of
identity\] side by side with the rest of the thing; an associated member
cannot be the unity of the two and there must be a self-standing unity
\[within the duality\] before this unity of members can exist: by the
same reasoning there must be also the supreme unity entering into no
association whatever, something which is unity-simplex by its very
being, utterly devoid of all that belongs to the thing capable of
association.

How could anything be present in anything else unless in virtue of a
source existing independently of association? The simplex \[or
absolute\] requires no derivation; but any manifold, or any dual, must
be dependent.

We may use the figure of, first, light; then, following it, the sun; as
a third, the orb of the moon taking its light from the sun: Soul carries
the Intellectual-Principle as something imparted and lending the light
which makes it essentially intellective; Intellectual-Principle carries
the light as its own though it is not purely the light but is the being
into whose very essence the light has been received; highest is That
which, giving forth the light to its sequent, is no other than the pure
light itself by whose power the Intellectual-Principle takes character.

How can this highest have need of any other? It is not to be identified
with any of the things that enter into association; the self-standing is
of a very different order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn471)
