[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn456)  [Next](enn458) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. We return to our statement that The First remains intact even when
other entities spring from it.

In the case of numbers, the unit remains intact while something else
produces, and thus number arises in dependence on the unit: much more
then does the unit, The One, remain intact in the principle which is
before all beings; especially since the entities produced in its
likeness, while it thus remains intact, owe their existence to no other,
but to its own all-sufficient power.

And just as there is, primarily or secondarily, some form or idea from
the monad in each of the successive numbers- the later still
participating, though unequally, in the unit- so the series of Beings
following upon The First bear, each, some form or idea derived from that
source. In Number the participation establishes Quantity; in the realm
of Being, the trace of The One establishes reality: existence is a trace
of The One- our word for entity may probably be connected with that for
unity.

What we know as Being, the first sequent upon The One, advanced a little
outward, so to speak, then chose to go no further, turned inward again
and comes to rest and is now the reality and hearth \[ousia and hestia\]
of the universe. Pressing \[with the rough breathing\] on the word for
Being \[on\] we have the word "hen" \[one\], an indication that in our
very form of speech we tell, as far as may be, that Being \[the weaker\]
is that which proceeds from \[the stronger\] The One. Thus both the
thing that comes to be and Being itself are carriers of a copy, since
they are outflows from the power of The primal One: this power sees and
in its emotion tries to represent what it sees and breaks into speech
"On"; "einai"; "ousia," "hestia" \[Existent: Existence: Essence: Hestia
or Hearth\], sounds which labour to express the essential nature of the
universe produced by the travail of the utterer and so to represent, as
far as sounds may, the origin of reality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn458)
