[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn438)  [Next](enn440) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. Now comes the question what sort of thing does the
Intellectual-Principle see in seeing the Intellectual Realm and what in
seeing itself?

We are not to look for an Intellectual realm reminding us of the colour
or shape to be seen on material objects: the intellectual antedates all
such things; and even in our sphere the production is very different
from the Reason-Principle in the seeds from which it is produced. The
seed principles are invisible and the beings of the Intellectual still
more characteristically so; the Intellectuals are of one same nature
with the Intellectual Realm which contains them, just as the
Reason-Principle in the seed is identical with the soul, or
life-principle, containing it.

But the Soul (considered as apart from the Intellectual-Principle) has
no vision of what it thus contains, for it is not the producer but, like
the Reason-Principles also, an image of its source: that source is the
brilliant, the authentic, the primarily existent, the thing self-sprung
and self-intent; but its image, soul, is a thing which can have no
permanence except by attachment, by living in that other; the very
nature of an image is that, as a secondary, it shall have its being in
something else, if at all it exist apart from its original. Hence this
image (soul) has not vision, for it has not the necessary light, and, if
it should see, then, as finding its completion elsewhere, it sees
another, not itself.

In the pure Intellectual there is nothing of this: the vision and the
envisioned are a unity; the seen is as the seeing and seeing as seen.

What, then, is there that can pronounce upon the nature of this
all-unity?

That which sees: and to see is the function of the
Intellectual-Principle. Even in our own sphere \[we have a parallel to
this self-vision of a unity\], our vision is light or rather becomes one
with light, and it sees light for it sees colours. In the intellectual,
the vision sees not through some medium but by and through itself alone,
for its object is not external: by one light it sees another not through
any intermediate agency; a light sees a light, that is to say a thing
sees itself. This light shining within the soul enlightens it; that is,
it makes the soul intellective, working it into likeness with itself,
the light above.

Think of the traces of this light upon the soul, then say to yourself
that such, and more beautiful and broader and more radiant, is the light
itself; thus you will approach to the nature of the
Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Realm, for it is this light,
itself lit from above, which gives the soul its brighter life.

It is not the source of the generative life of the soul which, on the
contrary, it draws inward, preserving it from such diffusion, holding it
to the love of the splendour of its Prior.

Nor does it give the life of perception and sensation, for that looks to
the external and to what acts most vigorously upon the senses whereas
one accepting that light of truth may be said no longer to see the
visible, but the very contrary.

This means in sum that the life the soul takes thence is an intellective
life, a trace of the life in the \[divine\] Intellect, in which alone
the authentic exists.

The life in the Divine Intellect is also an Act: it is the primal light
outlamping to itself primarily, its own torch; light-giver and lit at
once; the authentic intellectual object, knowing at once and known, seen
to itself and needing no other than itself to see by, self-sufficing to
the vision, since what it sees it is; known to us by that very same
light, our knowledge of it attained through itself, for from nowhere
else could we find the means of telling of it. By its nature, its
self-vision is the clearer but, using it as our medium, we too may come
to see by it.

In the strength of such considerations we lead up our own soul to the
Divine, so that it poses itself as an image of that Being, its life
becoming an imprint and a likeness of the Highest, its every act of
thought making it over into the Divine and the Intellectual.

If the soul is questioned as to the nature of that
Intellectual-Principle- the perfect and all-embracing, the primal
self-knower- it has but to enter into that Principle, or to sink all its
activity into that, and at once it shows itself to be in effective
possession of those priors whose memory it never lost: thus, as an image
of the Intellectual-Principle, it can make itself the medium by which to
attain some vision of it; it draws upon that within itself which is most
closely resemblant, as far as resemblance is possible between divine
Intellect and any phase of soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn440)
