[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn595)  [Next](enn597) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Let us consider once more how it is possible for an identity to
extend over a universe. This comes to the question how each variously
placed entity in the multiplicity of the sense order can have its share
in one identical Principle.

The solution is in the reasons given for refusing to distribute that
principle; we are not to parcel it out among the entities of the
multiple; on the contrary, we bring the distributed multiples to the
unity. The unity has not gone forth to them: from their dispersion we
are led to think of it as broken up to meet them, but this is to
distribute the controller and container equally over the material
handled.

A hand may very well control an entire mass, a long plank, or anything
of that sort; the control is effective throughout and yet is not
distributed, unit for unit, over the object of control: the power is
felt to reach over the whole area, though the hand is only hand-long,
not taking the extension of the mass it wields; lengthen the object and,
provided that the total is within the strength, the power handles the
new load with no need of distributing itself over the increased area.
Now let us eliminate the corporeal mass of the hand, retaining the power
it exerted: is not that power, the impartible, present integrally over
the entire area of control?

Or imagine a small luminous mass serving as centre to a transparent
sphere, so that the light from within shows upon the entire outer
surface, otherwise unlit: we surely agree that the inner core of light,
intact and immobile, reaches over the entire outer extension; the single
light of that small centre illuminates the whole field. The diffused
light is not due to any bodily magnitude of that central point which
illuminates not as body but as body lit, that is by another kind of
power than corporeal quality: let us then abstract the corporeal mass,
retaining the light as power: we can no longer speak of the light in any
particular spot; it is equally diffused within and throughout the entire
sphere. We can no longer even name the spot it occupied so as to say
whence it came or how it is present; we can but seek and wonder as the
search shows us the light simultaneously present at each and every point
in the sphere. So with the sunlight: looking to the corporeal mass you
are able to name the source of the light shining through all the air,
but what you see is one identical light in integral omnipresence.
Consider too the refraction of light by which it is thrown away from the
line of incidence; yet, direct or refracted, it is one and the same
light. And supposing, as before, that the sun were simply an unembodied
illuminant, the light would no longer be fixed to any one definite spot:
having no starting point, no centre of origin, it would be an integral
unity omnipresent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn597)
