[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn591)  [Next](enn593) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. But are we to think of this Authentic Being as, itself, present, or
does it remain detached, omnipresent in the sense only that powers from
it enter everywhere?

Under the theory of presence by powers, souls are described as rays; the
source remains self-locked and these are flung forth to impinge upon
particular living things.

Now, in beings whose unity does not reproduce the entire nature of that
principle, any presence is presence of an emanant power: even this,
however, does not mean that the principle is less than integrally
present; it is not sundered from the power which it has uttered; all is
offered, but the recipient is able to take only so much. But in Beings
in which the plenitude of these powers is manifested, there clearly the
Authentic itself is present, though still as remaining distinct; it is
distinct in that, becoming the informing principle of some definite
thing, it would abdicate from its standing as the total and from its
uttermost self-abiding and would belong, in some mode of accident, to
another thing as well. Still it is not the property of what may seek to
join with it; it chooses where it will and enters as the participant's
power may allow, but it does not become a chattel; it remains the
quested and so in another sense never passes over. There is nothing
disquieting in omnipresence after this mode where there is no
appropriation: in the same accidental way, we may reasonably put it,
soul concurs with body, but it is soul self-holding, not inbound with
Matter, free even of the body which it has illuminated through and
through.

Nor does the placelessness of Being make it surprising that it be
present universally to things of place; on the contrary, the wonder
would be- the more than wonder, the impossibility- if from a place of
its own it were present to other things in their place, or if having
place it were present at all- and, especially present, as we assert,
integrally.

But set it outside of place, and reason tells us that it will be present
entire where it is present at all and that, present to the total, it
must be present in the same completeness to every several unity;
otherwise something of it is here and something there, and at once it is
fragmentary, it is body.

How can we so dispart Being? We cannot break Life into parts; if the
total was Life, the fragment is not. But we do not thus sunder
Intelligence, one intelligence in this man, another in that? No; such a
fragment would not be Intelligence. But the Being of the individual?
Once more, if the total thing is Being, then a fragment could not be.
Are we told that in a body, a total of parts, every member is also a
body? But here we are dividing not body but a particular quantity of
body, each of those divisions being described as body in virtue of
possessing the Form or Idea that constitutes body; and this Idea has no
magnitude, is incapable of magnitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn593)
