[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn526)  [Next](enn528) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 21

21\. How, then, are we to recognise Passivity, since clearly it is not
to be found in the Act from outside which the recipient in turn makes
his own? Surely we must look for it in cases where the patient remains
without Act, the passivity pure.

Imagine a case where an agent improves, though its Act tends towards
deterioration. Or, say, a a man's activity is guided by evil and is
allowed to dominate another's without restraint. In these cases the Act
is clearly wrong, the Passion blameless.

What then is the real distinction between Action and Passion? Is it that
Action starts from within and is directed upon an outside object, while
Passion is derived from without and fulfilled within? What, then, are we
to say of such cases as thought and opinion which originate within but
are not directed outwards? Again, the Passion "being heated" rises
within the self, when that self is provoked by an opinion to reflection
or to anger, without the intervention of any external. Still it remains
true that Action, whether self-centred or with external tendency, is a
motion rising in the self.

How then do we explain desire and other forms of aspiration? Aspiration
must be a motion having its origin in the object aspired to, though some
might disallow "origin" and be content with saying that the motion
aroused is subsequent to the object; in what respect, then, does
aspiring differ from taking a blow or being borne down by a thrust?

Perhaps, however, we should divide aspirations into two classes, those
which follow intellect being described as Actions, the merely impulsive
being Passions. Passivity now will not turn on origin, without or
within- within there can only be deficiency; but whenever a thing,
without itself assisting in the process, undergoes an alteration not
directed to the creation of Being but changing the thing for the worse
or not for the better, such an alteration will be regarded as a Passion
and as entailing passivity.

If however "being heated" means "acquiring heat," and is sometimes found
to contribute to the production of Being and sometimes not, passivity
will be identical with impassivity: besides, "being heated" must then
have a double significance \[according as it does or does not contribute
to Being\].

The fact is, however, that "being heated," even when it contributes to
Being, involves the presence of a patient \[distinct from the being
produced\]. Take the case of the bronze which has to be heated and so is
a patient; the being is a statue, which is not heated except
accidentally \[by the accident of being contained in the bronze\]. If
then the bronze becomes more beautiful as a result of being heated and
in the same proportion, it certainly becomes so by passivity; for
passivity must, clearly, take two forms: there is the passivity which
tends to alteration for better or for worse, and there is the passivity
which has neither tendency.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 22](enn528)
