[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn528)  [Next](enn530) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 23

23\. As for Possession, if the term is used comprehensively, why are not
all its modes to be brought under one category? Possession, thus, would
include the quantum as possessing magnitude, the quale as possessing
colour; it would include fatherhood and the complementary relationships,
since the father possesses the son and the son possesses the father: in
short, it would include all belongings.

If, on the contrary, the category of Possession comprises only the
things of the body, such as weapons and shoes, we first ask why this
should be so, and why their possession produces a single category, while
burning, cutting, burying or casting them out do not give another or
others. If it is because these things are carried on the person, then
one's mantle lying on a couch will come under a different category from
that of the mantle covering the person. If the ownership of possession
suffices, then clearly one must refer to the one category of Possession
all objects identified by being possessed, every case in which
possession can be established; the character of the possessed object
will make no difference.

If however Possession is not to be predicated of Quality because Quality
stands recognised as a category, nor of Quantity because the category of
Quantity has been received, nor of parts because they have been assigned
to the category of Substance, why should we predicate Possession of
weapons, when they too are comprised in the accepted category of
Substance? Shoes and weapons are clearly substances.

How, further, is "He possesses weapons," signifying as it does that the
action of arming has been performed by a subject, to be regarded as an
entirely simple notion, assignable to a single category?

Again, is Possession to be restricted to an animate possessor, or does
it hold good even of a statue as possessing the objects above mentioned?
The animate and inanimate seem to possess in different ways, and the
term is perhaps equivocal. Similarly, "standing" has not the same
connotation as applied to the animate and the inanimate.

Besides, how can it be reasonable for what is found only in a limited
number of cases to form a distinct generic category?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 24](enn530)
