[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn518)  [Next](enn520) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 13

13\. With regard to Date:

If "yesterday," "to-morrow," "last year" and similar terms denote parts
of time, why should they not be included in the same genus as time? It
would seem only reasonable to range under time the past, present and
future, which are its species. But time is referred to Quantity; what
then is the need for a separate category of Date?

If we are told that past and future- including under past such definite
dates as yesterday and last year which must clearly be subordinate to
past time- and even the present "now" are not merely time but time-
when, we reply, in the first place, that the notion of time- when
involves time; that, further, if "yesterday" is time-gone-by, it will be
a composite, since time and gone-by are distinct notions: we have two
categories instead of the single one required.

But suppose that Date is defined not as time but as that which is in
time; if by that which is in time is meant the subject- Socrates in the
proposition "Socrates existed last year"- that subject is external to
the notion of time, and we have again a duality.

Consider, however, the proposition "Socrates- or some action- exists at
this time"; what can be the meaning here other than "in a part of time"?
But if, admitted that Date is "a part of time," it be felt that the part
requires definition and involves something more than mere time, that we
must say the part of time gone by, several notions are massed in the
proposition: we have the part which qua part is a relative; and we have
"gone-by" which, if it is to have any import at all, must mean the past:
but this "past," we have shown, is a species of time.

It may be urged that "the past" is in its nature indefinite, while
"yesterday" and "last year" are definite. We reply, first, that we
demand some place in our classification for the past: secondly, that
"yesterday," as definite past, is necessarily definite time. But
definite time implies a certain quantity of time: therefore, if time is
quantitative, each of the terms in question must signify a definite
quantity.

Again, if by "yesterday" we are expected to understand that this or that
event has taken Place at a definite time gone by, we have more notions
than ever. Besides, if we must introduce fresh categories because one
thing acts in another- as in this case something acts in time- we have
more again from its acting upon another in another. This point will be
made plain by what follows in our discussion of Place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](enn520)
