[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn649)  [Next](enn651) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 12

12\. Or take it another way: Since in our view this universe stands to
that as copy to original, the living total must exist There beforehand;
that is the realm of complete Being and everything must exist There.

The sky There must be living and therefore not bare of stars, here known
as the heavens- for stars are included in the very meaning of the word.
Earth too will be There, and not void but even more intensely living and
containing all that lives and moves upon our earth and the plants
obviously rooted in life; sea will be There and all waters with the
movement of their unending life and all the living things of the water;
air too must be a member of that universe with the living things of air
as here.

The content of that living thing must surely be alive- as in this
sphere- and all that lives must of necessity be There. The nature of the
major parts determines that of the living forms they comprise; by the
being and content of the heaven There are determined all the heavenly
forms of life; if those lesser forms were not There, that heaven itself
would not be.

To ask how those forms of life come to be There is simply asking how
that heaven came to be; it is asking whence comes life, whence the
All-Life, whence the All-Soul, whence collective Intellect: and the
answer is that There no indigence or impotence can exist but all must be
teeming, seething, with life. All flows, so to speak, from one fount not
to be thought of as one breath or warmth but rather as one quality
englobing and safeguarding all qualities- sweetness with fragrance,
wine- quality and the savours of everything that may be tasted, all
colours seen, everything known to touch, all that ear may hear, all
melodies, every rhythm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](enn651)
