[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn679)  [Next](enn681) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 42

42\. Faced by the difficulty of placing these powers, you must in reason
allocate to the secondaries what you count august: secondaries must not
be foisted upon the First, or tertiaries upon the secondaries.
Secondaries are to be ranged under the First, tertiaries under the
secondaries: this is giving everything its place, the later dependent on
their priors, those priors free.

This is included in that true saying "About the King of All, all has
being and in view of Him all is": we are to understand from the
attribution of all things to Him, and from, the words "in view of Him"
that He is their cause and they reach to Him as to something differing
from them all and containing nothing that they contain: for certainly
His very nature requires that nothing of the later be in Him.

Thus, Intellectual-Principle, finding place in the universe, cannot have
place in Him. Where we read that He is the cause of all beauty we are
clearly to understand that beauty depends upon the Forms, He being set
above all that is beautiful here. The Forms are in that passage
secondaries, their sequels being attached to them as dependent thirds:
it is clear thus that by "the products of the thirds" is meant this
world, dependent upon soul.

Soul dependent upon Intellectual-Principle and Intellectual-Principle
upon the Good, all is linked to the Supreme by intermediaries, some
close, some nearing those of the closer attachment, while the order of
sense stands remotest, dependent upon soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EIGHTH TRACTATE](enn681)
