[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn667)  [Next](enn669) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 30

30\. Whether pleasure must enter into the good, so that life in the
contemplation of the divine things and especially of their source
remains still imperfect, is a question not to be ignored in any enquiry
into the nature of the good.

Now to found the good upon the Intellect and upon that state of soul or
mind which springs from wisdom does not imply that the end or the
absolute good is the conjunction \[of Intellect and state\]: it would
follow merely that Intellect is the good and that we feel happy in
possession of that good. That is one theory; another associates pleasure
with Intellect in the sense that the Good is taken to be some one thing
founded upon both but depending upon our attaining or at least
contemplating an Intellect so modified; this theory would maintain that
the isolated and unrelated could be the good, could be an object of
desire.

But how could Intellect and pleasure combine into one mutually
complementary nature?

Bodily pleasure no one, certainly, would think capable of blending in
with Intellect; the unreasoning satisfactions of soul \[or lower mind\]
are equally incompatible with it.

Every activity, state, and life, will be followed and as it were
escorted by the over-dwelling consciousness; sometimes as these take
their natural course they will be met by hindrance and by intrusion of
the conflicting so that the life is the less self-guided; sometimes the
natural activity is unmixed, wholly free, and then the life goes
brilliantly; this last state is judged the pleasantest, the most to be
chosen; so, for lack of an accurate expression, we hear of "Intellect in
conjunction with pleasure." But this is no more than metaphor, like a
hundred others drawn by the poets from our natural likings- "Drunk with
nectar," "To banquet and feast," "The Father smiled." No: the veritably
pleasant lies away in that other realm, the most to be loved and sought
for, not something brought about and changing but the very principle of
all the colour and radiance and brightness found here. This is why we
read of "Truth introduced into the Mixture" and of the "measuring
standard as a prior condition" and are told that the symmetry and beauty
necessary to the Mixture come Thence into whatever has beauty; it is in
this way that we have our share in Beauty; but in another way, also, we
achieve the truly desirable, that is by leading our selves up to what is
best within us; this best is what is symmetry, beauty, collective Idea,
life clear, Intellective and good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 31](enn669)
