[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn668)  [Next](enn670) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 31

31\. But since Thence come the beauty and light in all, it is Thence
that Intellectual-Principle took the brilliance of the Intellectual
Energy which flashed Nature into being; Thence soul took power towards
life, in virtue of that fuller life streaming into it.
Intellectual-Principle was raised thus to that Supreme and remains with
it, happy in that presence. Soul too, that soul which as possessing
knowledge and vision was capable, clung to what it saw; and as its
vision so its rapture; it saw and was stricken; but having in itself
something of that principle it felt its kinship and was moved to longing
like those stirred by the image of the beloved to desire of the
veritable presence. Lovers here mould themselves to the beloved; they
seek to increase their attraction of person and their likeness of mind;
they are unwilling to fall short in moral quality or in other graces
lest they be distasteful to those possessing such merit- and only among
such can true love be. In the same way the soul loves the Supreme Good,
from its very beginnings stirred by it to love. The soul which has never
strayed from this love waits for no reminding from the beauty of our
world: holding that love- perhaps unawares- it is ever in quest, and, in
its longing to be borne Thither, passes over what is lovely here and
with one glance at the beauty of the universe dismisses all; for it sees
that all is put together of flesh and Matter, befouled by its housing,
made fragmentary by corporal extension, not the Authentic Beauty which
could never venture into the mud of body to be soiled, annulled.

By only noting the flux of things it knows at once that from elsewhere
comes the beauty that floats upon them and so it is urged Thither,
passionate in pursuit of what it loves: never- unless someone robs it of
that love- never giving up till it attain.

There indeed all it saw was beautiful and veritable; it grew in strength
by being thus filled with the life of the True; itself becoming
veritable Being and attaining veritable knowledge, it enters by that
neighbouring into conscious possession of what it has long been seeking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 32](enn670)
