[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn691)  [Next](enn693) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. But this Unoriginating, what is it?

We can but withdraw, silent, hopeless, and search no further. What can
we look for when we have reached the furthest? Every enquiry aims at a
first and, that attained, rests.

Besides, we must remember that all questioning deals with the nature of
a thing, its quality, its cause or its essential being. In this case the
being- in so far as we can use the word- is knowable only by its
sequents: the question as to cause asks for a principle beyond, but the
principle of all has no principle; the question as to quality would be
looking for an attribute in that which has none: the question as to
nature shows only that we must ask nothing about it but merely take it
into the mind if we may, with the knowledge gained that nothing can be
permissibly connected with it.

The difficulty this Principle presents to our mind in so far as we can
approach to conception of it may be exhibited thus:

We begin by posing space, a place, a Chaos; into this existing
container, real or fancied, we introduce God and proceed to enquire: we
ask, for example, whence and how He comes to be there: we investigate
the presence and quality of this new-comer projected into the midst of
things here from some height or depth. But the difficulty disappears if
we eliminate all space before we attempt to conceive God: He must not be
set in anything either as enthroned in eternal immanence or as having
made some entry into things: He is to be conceived as existing alone, in
that existence which the necessity of discussion forces us to attribute
to Him, with space and all the rest as later than Him- space latest of
all. Thus we conceive as far as we may, the spaceless; we abolish the
notion of any environment: we circumscribe Him within no limit; we
attribute no extension to Him; He has no quality since no shape, even
shape Intellectual; He holds no relationship but exists in and for
Himself before anything is.

How can we think any longer of that "Thus He happened to be"? How make
this one assertion of Him of whom all other assertion can be no more
than negation? It is on the contrary nearer the truth to say "Thus He
has happened not to be": that contains at least the utter denial of his
happening.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn693)
