[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn639)  [Next](enn641) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. Thus we have even here the means of knowing the nature of the
Intellectual-Principle, though, seeing it more closely than anything
else, we still see it at less than its worth. We know that it exists but
its cause we do not see, or, if we do, we see that cause as something
apart. We see a man- or an eye, if you like- but this is an image or
part of an image; what is in that Principle is at once Man and the
reason of his being; for There man- or eye- must be, itself, an
intellective thing and a cause of its being; it could not exist at all
unless it were that cause, whereas here, everything partial is separate
and so is the cause of each. In the Intellectual, all is at one so that
the thing is identical with the cause.

Even here the thing and its cause are often identical- an eclipse
furnishes an example- what then is there to prevent other things too
being identical with their cause and this cause being the essence of the
thing? It must be so; and by this search after the cause the thing's
essence is reached, for the essence of a thing is its cause. I am not
here saying that the informing Idea is the cause of the thing- though
this is true- but that the Idea itself, unfolded, reveals the cause
inherent in it.

A thing of inactivity, even though alive, cannot include its own cause;
but where could a Forming-Idea, a member of the Intellectual-Principle,
turn in quest of its cause? We may be answered "In the
Intellectual-Principle"; but the two are not distinct; the Idea is the
Intellectual-Principle; and if that Principle must contain the Ideas
complete, their cause must be contained in them. The
Intellectual-Principle itself contains every cause of the things of its
content; but these of its content are identically
Intellectual-Principle, each of them Intellectual-Principle; none of
them, thus, can lack its own cause; each springs into being carrying
with it the reason of its being. No result of chance, each must rise
complete with its cause; it is an integral and so includes the
excellence bound up with the cause. This is how all participants in the
Idea are put into possession of their cause.

In our universe, a coherent total of multiplicity, the several items are
linked each to the other, and by the fact that it is an all every cause
is included in it: even in the particular thing the part is discernibly
related to the whole, for the parts do not come into being separately
and successively but are mutually cause and caused at one and the same
moment. Much more in the higher realm must all the singles exist for the
whole and each for itself: if then that world is the conjoint reality of
all, of an all not chance-ruled and not sectional, the cause There must
include the causes: every item must hold, in its very nature, the
uncaused possession of its cause; uncaused, independent and standing
apart from cause, they must be self-contained, cause and all.

Further, since nothing There is chance-sprung, and the multiplicity in
each comprehends the entire content, then the cause of every member can
be named; the cause was present from the beginning, inherent, not a
cause but a fact of the being; or, rather, cause and manner of being
were one. What could an Idea have, as cause, over and above the
Intellectual-Principle? It is a thought of that Principle and cannot, at
that, be considered as anything but a perfect product. If it is thus
perfect we cannot speak of anything in which it is lacking nor cite any
reason for such lack. That thing must be present, and we can say why.
The why is inherent, therefore, in the entity, that is to say in every
thought and activity of the Intellectual-Principle. Take for example the
Idea of Man; Man entire is found to contribute to it; he is in that Idea
in all his fulness including everything that from the beginning belonged
to Man. If Man were not complete There, so that there were something to
be added to the Idea, that additional must belong to a derivative; but
Man exists from eternity and must therefore be complete; the man born is
the derivative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn641)
