[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn651)  [Next](enn653) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 14

14\. On the nature of the Intellectual-Principle we get light from its
manifestations; they show that it demands such diversity as is
compatible with its being a monad. Take what principle you will, that of
plant or animal: if this principle were a pure unity and not a
specifically varied thing, it could not so serve as principle; its
product would be Matter, the principle not having taken all those forms
necessary if Matter is to be permeated and utterly transformed. A face
is not one mass; there are nose and eyes; and the nose is not a unity
but has the differences which make it a nose; as bare unity it would be
mere mass.

There is infinity in Intellectual-Principle since, of its very nature,
it is a multiple unity, not with the unity of a house but with that of a
Reason-Principle, multiple in itself: in the one Intellectual design it
includes within itself, as it were in outline, all the outlines, all the
patterns. All is within it, all the powers and intellections; the
division is not determined by a boundary but goes ever inward; this
content is held as the living universe holds the natural forms of the
living creatures in it from the greatest to the least, down even to the
minutest powers where there is a halt at the individual form. The
discrimination is not of items huddled within a sort of unity; this is
what is known as the Universal Sympathy, not of course the sympathy
known here which is a copy and prevails amongst things in separation;
that authentic Sympathy consists in all being a unity and never
discriminate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](enn653)
