[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn695)  [Next](enn697) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 15

15\. Lovable, very love, the Supreme is also self-love in that He is
lovely no otherwise than from Himself and in Himself. Self-presence can
hold only in the identity of associated with associating; since, in the
Supreme, associated and associating are one, seeker and sought one the
sought serving as Hypostasis and substrate of the seeker- once more
God's being and his seeking are identical: once more, then, the Supreme
is the self-producing, sovereign of Himself, not happening to be as some
extern willed but existing as He wills it.

And when we say that neither does He absorb anything nor anything absorb
Him, thus again we are setting Him outside of all happening- not only
because we declare Him unique and untouched by all but in another way
also. Suppose we found such a nature in ourselves; we are untouched by
all that has gathered round us subjecting us to happening and chance;
all that accruement was of the servile and lay exposed to chance: by
this new state alone we acquire self-disposal and free act, the freedom
of that light which belongs to the order of the good and is good in
actuality, greater than anything Intellectual-Principle has to give, an
actuality whose advantage over Intellection is no adventitious
superiority. When we attain to this state and become This alone, what
can we say but that we are more than free, more than self-disposing? And
who then could link us to chance, hazard, happening, when thus we are
become veritable Life, entered into That which contains no alloy but is
purely itself?

Isolate anything else and the being is inadequate; the Supreme in
isolation is still what it was. The First cannot be in the soulless or
in an unreasoning life; such a life is too feeble in being; it is reason
dissipated, it is indetermination; only in the measure of approach
towards reason is there liberation from happening; the rational is above
chance. Ascending we come upon the Supreme, not as reason but as
reason's better: thus God is far removed from all happening: the root of
reason is self-springing.

The Supreme is the Term of all; it is like the principle and ground of
some vast tree of rational life; itself unchanging, it gives reasoned
being to the growth into which it enters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](enn697)
