[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn614)  [Next](enn616) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. The elements in their totality, as they stand produced, may be
thought of as one spheric figure; this cannot be the piecemeal product
of many makers each working from some one point on some one portion.
There must be one cause; and this must operate as an entire, not by part
executing part; otherwise we are brought back to a plurality of makers.
The making must be referred to a partless unity, or, more precisely, the
making principle must be a partless unity not permeating the sphere but
holding it as one dependent thing. In this way the sphere is enveloped
by one identical life in which it is inset; its entire content looks to
the one life: thus all the souls are one, a one, however, which yet is
infinite.

It is in this understanding that the soul has been taken to be a
numerical principle, while others think of it as in its nature a
self-increasing number; this latter notion is probably designed to meet
the consideration that the soul at no point fails but, retaining its
distinctive character, is ample for all, so much so that were the kosmos
vaster yet the virtue of soul would still compass it- or rather the
kosmos still be sunk in soul entire.

Of course, we must understand this adding of extension not as a literal
increase but in the sense that the soul, essentially a unity, becomes
adequate to omnipresence; its unity sets it outside of quantitative
measurement, the characteristic of that other order which has but a
counterfeit unity, an appearance by participation.

The essential unity is no aggregate to be annulled upon the loss of some
one of the constituents; nor is it held within any allotted limits, for
so it would be the less for a set of things, more extensive than itself,
outside its scope; or it must wrench itself asunder in the effort to
reach to all; besides, its presence to things would be no longer as
whole to all but by part to part; in vulgar phrase, it does not know
where it stands; dismembered, it no longer performs any one single
function.

Now if this principle is to be a true unity- where the unity is of the
essence- it must in some way be able to manifest itself as including the
contrary nature, that of potential multiplicity, while by the fact that
this multiplicity belongs to it not as from without but as from and by
itself, it remains authentically one, possessing boundlessness and
multiplicity within that unity; its nature must be such that it can
appear as a whole at every point; this, as encircled by a single
self-embracing Reason-Principle, which holds fast about that unity,
never breaking with itself but over all the universe remaining what it
must be.

The unity is in this way saved from the local division of the things in
which it appears; and, of course, existing before all that is in place,
it could never be founded upon anything belonging to that order of
which, on the contrary, it is the foundation; yet, for all that they are
based upon it, it does not cease to be wholly self-gathered; if its
fixed seat were shaken, all the rest would fall with the fall of their
foundation and stay; nor could it be so unintelligent as to tear itself
apart by such a movement and, secure within its own being, trust itself
to the insecurity of place which, precisely, looks to it for safety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn616)
