[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn644)  [Next](enn646) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. But if it is by becoming evil and inferior that the soul produces
the animal nature, the making of ox or horse was not at the outset in
its character; the reason-principle of the animal, and the animal
itself, must lie outside of the natural plan?

Inferior, yes; but outside of nature, no. The thing There \[Soul in the
Intellectual\] was in some sense horse and dog from the beginning; given
the condition, it produces the higher kind; let the condition fail,
then, since produce it must, it produces what it may: it is like a
skillful craftsman competent to create all kinds of works of art but
reduced to making what is ordered and what the aptitude of his material
indicates.

The power of the All-Soul, as Reason-Principle of the universe, may be
considered as laying down a pattern before the effective separate powers
go forth from it: this plan would be something like a tentative
illumining of Matter; the elaborating soul would give minute
articulation to these representations of itself; every separate
effective soul would become that towards which it tended, assuming that
particular form as the choral dancer adapts himself to the action set
down for him.

But this is to anticipate: our enquiry was How there can be
sense-perception in man without the implication that the Divine
addresses itself to the realm of process. We maintained, and proved,
that the Divine does not look to this realm but that things here are
dependent upon those and represent them and that man here, holding his
powers from Thence, is directed Thither, so that, while sense makes the
environment of what is of sense in him, the Intellectual in him is
linked to the Intellectual.

What we have called the perceptibles of that realm enter into cognisance
in a way of their own, since they are not material, while the sensible
sense here- so distinguished as dealing with corporeal objects- is
fainter than the perception belonging to that higher world; the man of
this sphere has sense-perception because existing in a less true degree
and taking only enfeebled images of things There- perceptions here are
Intellections of the dimmer order, and the Intellections There are vivid
perceptions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn646)
