[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn624)  [Next](enn626) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Granted, then, that there exist, apart from things, a unity absolute
and a decad absolute in other words, that the Intellectual beings,
together with their characteristic essence have also their order,
Henads, Dyads, Triads, what is the nature of these numerical entities
and how does it come into being? We cannot but think that some reason
accounts for their origin.

As a beginning, what is the origin of the Ideas in general? It is not
that the thinking principle thought of each Idea and by that act of
thought procured their several existences; not because Justice and
Movement were thus thought did they come to be; that would imply that
while the thought is later than the thing- the concept of Justice must
be later than Justice itself- yet the thought precedes what, as founded
on the thinking, owes its existence to it. Besides, if justice is only a
certain definite thought we have the absurdity that Justice is nothing
more than a definition of Justice. Thinking of Justice or Movement is
but grasping their nature; this would mean grasping the non-existent, an
impossibility.

We may be reminded that in immaterial objects the knowledge is identical
with the thing; but we must not misapply that statement; it does not say
that the knowledge is the thing known, or that the reason surveying the
thing is the thing, but that the immaterial thing, being an Intellectual
object is also a thought; this does not imply a definition or conception
of the object; the thing itself, as belonging to the Intellectual, can
be nothing else than Intellect or knowledge. This is not a case of
knowledge self-directed; it is that the thing in the Intellectual
transmutes the knowledge, which is not fixed like the knowledge of
material things; in other words it makes it true knowledge, that is to
say no image of the thing but the thing directly.

Thus it is not the conception of movement that brings movement to be;
movement absolute produces that conception; it produces itself as at
once movement and the concept of movement, for movement as it exists
There, bound up with Being, is a concept. It is movement absolute
because it is the first movement- there can be none till this exist- and
it is the authentic Movement since it is not accidental to something
else but is the activity of actual Being in motion. Thus it is a real
existent, though the notion of Being is different.

Justice therefore is not the thought of Justice but, as we may put it, a
state of the Intellectual-Principle, or rather an activity of it- an
appearance so lovely that neither evening nor dawn is so fair, nor
anything else in all the realm of sense, an Intellectual manifestation
self-rising, self-seen, or, rather, self-being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn626)
