[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn698)  [Next](enn700) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. Seeking Him, seek nothing of Him outside; within is to be sought
what follows upon Him; Himself do not attempt. He is, Himself, that
outer, He the encompassment and measure of all things; or rather He is
within, at the innermost depth; the outer, circling round Him, so to
speak, and wholly dependent upon Him, is Reason-Principle and
Intellectual-Principle-or becomes Intellectual-Principle by contact with
Him and in the degree of that contact and dependence; for from Him it
takes the being which makes it Intellectual-Principle.

A circle related in its path to a centre must be admitted to owe its
scope to that centre: it has something of the nature of that centre in
that the radial lines converging on that one central point assimilate
their impinging ends to that point of convergence and of departure, the
dominant of radii and terminals: the terminals are of one nature with
the centre, separate reproductions of it, since the centre is, in a
certain sense, the total of terminals and radii impinging at every point
upon it; these lines reveal the centre; they are the development of that
undeveloped.

In the same way we are to take Intellectual-Principle and Being. This
combined power springs from the Supreme, an outflow and as it were
development from That and remaining dependent upon that Intellective
nature, showing forth That which, in the purity of its oneness, is not
Intellectual-Principle since it is no duality. No more than in the
circle are the lines or circumference to be identified with that Centre
which is the source of both: radii and circle are images given forth by
indwelling power and, as products of a certain vigour in it, not cut off
from it.

Thus the Intellective power circles in its multiple unity around the
Supreme which stands to it as archetype to image; the image in its
movement round about its prior has produced the multiplicity by which it
is constituted Intellectual-Principle: that prior has no movement; it
generates Intellectual-Principle by its sheer wealth.

Such a power, author of Intellectual-Principle, author of being- how
does it lend itself to chance, to hazard, to any "So it happened"?

What is present in Intellectual-Principle is present, though in a far
transcendent mode, in the One: so in a light diffused afar from one
light shining within itself, the diffused is vestige, the source is the
true light; but Intellectual-Principle, the diffused and image light, is
not different in kind from its prior; and it is not a thing of chance
but at every point is reason and cause.

The Supreme is cause of the cause: it is cause preeminently, cause as
containing cause in the deepest and truest mode; for in it lie the
Intellective causes which are to be unfolded from it, author as it is
not of the chance- made but of what the divine willed: and this willing
was not apart from reason, was not in the realm of hazard and of what
happened to present itself.

Thus Plato, seeking the best account of the necessary and appropriate,
says they are far removed from hazard and that what exists is what must
exist: if thus the existence is as it must be it does not exist without
reason: if its manner of being is the fitting, it is the utterly
self-disposing in comparison with its sequents and, before that, in
regard to itself: thus it is not "as it happened to be" but as it willed
to be: all this, on the assumption that God wills what should be and
that it is impossible to separate right from realization and that this
Necessary is not to God an outside thing but is, itself, His first
Activity manifesting outwardly in the exactly representative form. Thus
we must speak of God since we cannot tell Him as we would.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](enn700)
