[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn707)  [Next](enn709) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. Those to whom existence comes about by chance and automatic action
and is held together by material forces have drifted far from God and
from the concept of unity; we are not here addressing them but only such
as accept another nature than body and have some conception of soul.

Soul must be sounded to the depths, understood as an emanation from
Intellectual-Principle and as holding its value by a Reason-Principle
thence infused. Next this Intellect must be apprehended, an Intellect
other than the reasoning faculty known as the rational principle; with
reasoning we are already in the region of separation and movement: our
sciences are Reason-Principles lodged in soul or mind, having manifestly
acquired their character by the presence in the soul of
Intellectual-Principle, source of all knowing.

Thus we come to see Intellectual-Principle almost as an object of sense:
the Intellectual Kosmos is perceptible as standing above soul, father to
soul: we know Intellectual-Principle as the motionless, not subject to
change, containing, we must think, all things; a multiple but at once
indivisible and comporting difference. It is not discriminate as are the
Reason-Principles, which can in fact be known one by one: yet its
content is not a confusion; every item stands forth distinctly, just as
in a science the entire content holds as an indivisible and yet each
item is a self-standing verity.

Now a plurality thus concentrated like the Intellectual Kosmos is close
upon The First- and reason certifies its existence as surely as that of
soul- yet, though of higher sovereignty than soul, it is not The First
since it is not a unity, not simplex as unity, principle over all
multiplicity, must be.

Before it there is That which must transcend the noblest of the things
of Being: there must be a prior to this Principle which aiming towards
unity is yet not unity but a thing in unity's likeness. From this
highest it is not sundered; it too is self-present: so close to the
unity, it cannot be articulated: and yet it is a principle which in some
measure has dared secession.

That awesome Prior, The Unity, is not a being, for so its unity would be
vested in something else: strictly no name is apt to it, but since name
it we must there is a certain rough fitness in designating it as unity
with the understanding that it is not the unity of some other thing.

Thus it eludes our knowledge, so that the nearer approach to it is
through its offspring, Being: we know it as cause of existence to
Intellectual-Principle, as fount of all that is best, as the efficacy
which, self-perduring and undiminishing, generates all beings and is not
to be counted among these its derivatives, to all of which it must be
prior.

This we can but name The Unity, indicating it to each other by a
designation that points to the concept of its partlessness while we are
in reality striving to bring our own minds to unity. We are not to think
of such unity and partlessness as belong to point or monad; the
veritable unity is the source of all such quantity which could not exist
unless first there existed Being and Being's Prior: we are not, then, to
think in the order of point and monad but to use these- in their
rejection of magnitude and partition- as symbols for the higher concept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn709)
