[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44021) 
[Next](sbe44023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2">11:4:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:1">11:4:2:1</span></span>1. Now,
then, as to the taking up of the two offering-spoons <span
id="fr_206"></span>[2](#fn_206). Now, in this respect, some people,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

thinking themselves clever, take up the (guhû) with the right, and the
upabh*ri*t with the left (hand); but let him not do so; for if, in that
case, any one were to say of him, 'Surely, this Adhvaryu has made the
Sacrificer's spiteful enemy equal to him, and able to cope with him,'
then that would indeed be likely to come to pass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:2">11:4:2:2</span></span>2. Let
him rather do it in this way;--having taken the *g*uhû with both hands,
let him lay it down on the upabh*ri*t; there is no question about this:
it is good for (securing) cattle and life. Let him take them up without
clinking them together,--were he to let them clink together, insecurity
of property would befall the Sacrificer: let him, therefore, take them
up without clinking them together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:3">11:4:2:3</span></span>3. Now
as to the stepping past (the Vedi). By a thunderbolt, indeed, one,
Adhvaryu scatters the Sacrificer's cattle, and by a thunderbolt another
drives them together for him. Now that Adhvaryu, doubtless, scatters the
Sacrificer's cattle by a thunderbolt, who steps past with his right
(foot) <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207) when he is

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

about to call (on the Âgnîdhra) for the Srausha*t*, and with his left
(foot) when he has called for the *S*rausha*t*; and that (other) one
drives them together for him who steps past with his left (foot) When he
is about to call for the *S*rausha*t*, and with his right (foot) when he
has called for the Srausha*t*; for he does indeed drive them together
for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:4">11:4:2:4</span></span>4. Now
as to the holding (of the spoons). In this respect, some people,
thinking themselves clever, hold the two spoons whilst stretching
forward both arms; but let him not do so, for if, in that case, any one
were to say of him, 'Surely, this Sacrificer has made two spears of his
arms: he will become a spear-holder,' then that would indeed be likely
to come to pass. But that (navel is the channel of the) central
breathing: let him therefore hold (the spoon) by lowering them <span
id="fr_208"></span>[1](#fn_208) to that (breathing).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:5">11:4:2:5</span></span>5. Now
as to calling for the *S*rausha*t* <span
id="fr_209"></span>[2](#fn_209): there are six (modes of) calling for
the Srausha*t*,--the descending, the level, the ascending, the feeble,
the outward-tending, and the inward-tending.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:6">11:4:2:6</span></span>6. Now
the descending mode, indeed, it is when he begins in a high tone and
concludes in a low tone: whoever should wish that any one <span
id="fr_210"></span>[3](#fn_210) should be poorer,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

let him begin for him in a high tone and conclude in a low tone; and he
will thereby become poorer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:7">11:4:2:7</span></span>7. And
the level one, indeed, it is when he concludes in the same tone in which
he has begun: whoever should wish that any one should be neither more
prosperous nor poorer, let him conclude for him in the same tone in
which he has begun; and he will thereby become neither more prosperous
nor poorer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:8">11:4:2:8</span></span>8. And
the ascending one, indeed, it is when he begins in a low tone and
concludes in a high tone: whoever should wish that any one should be
more prosperous, let him begin for him in a low tone and conclude in a
high tone; and he will thereby become more prosperous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:9">11:4:2:9</span></span>9. And
the feeble one, indeed, it is when he calls for the Srausha*t* in a
thin, long-drawn, toneless way: if, in that case, any one were to say of
him, 'Surely, this Adhvaryu has made the Sacrificer feeble, and
submissive to his spiteful enemy,' then that would indeed be likely to
cone to pass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:10">11:4:2:10</span></span>10.
And the outward-tending (bahi*h*-*s*ri) one, indeed, it is when he opens
his lips wide and utters his call at a high, toneless pitch: tone being
prosperity, he thereby puts prosperity (*s*rî) outside (bahis) himself,
and becomes hungry (poor).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:11">11:4:2:11</span></span>11.
And the inward-tending (anta*h*-*s*ri) one, indeed, it is when he closes
his lips, and utters his call at a loud, toneful pitch: tone being
prosperity, he thereby puts prosperity (*s*rî) inside (anta*h*) himself,
and becomes an eater of food (rich).

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:12">11:4:2:12</span></span>12.
Having kept back (the tone) deep in the breast, as it were, let him
(keep up the middle pitch of) the B*ri*hat (sâman) in both (words 'o*m*
*s*râvaya'), and finally leave off at a high pitch; there is no question
about this: it is good for (securing) cattle and life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:13">11:4:2:13</span></span>13.
Now as to the oblation. In this respect, some people, thinking
themselves clever, having turned down the spoon eastwards, and poured
out the oblation, turn it round and place it over the upabh*ri*t. But
let him not do this; for if, in that case, any one were to say of him,
'Surely, this Adhvaryu has made the Sacrificer dependent on, and
submissive to, his spiteful enemy,' then that would indeed be likely to
come to pass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:14">11:4:2:14</span></span>14.
And some, having turned down the spoon sideways, and poured out the
oblation, turn it round and place it over the upabh*ri*t. But let him
not do so; for if, in that case, any one were to say of him, 'Surely,
this Advaryu has stopped the oblations by (following) the wrong way, he
(the Sacrificer) will either be shattered, or become worm-eaten,' then
that would indeed be likely to come to pass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:15">11:4:2:15</span></span>15.
Let him rather do it in this way:--having turned down the spoon
eastwards, and poured out the oblation, let him carry it up in the same
way and place it over the upabh*ri*t;--there is no question about this:
it is good for (securing) cattle and life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:16">11:4:2:16</span></span>16.
One Adhvaryu, indeed, burns the oblations, and another satisfies the
oblations; and that Adhvaryu, assuredly, burns the oblations who, having
offered ghee, offers portions (of sacrificial dishes): indeed, it is
with reference to him that an invisible voice has said, 'Surely, this
Adhvaryu burns the oblations.' And he, indeed, satisfies them who

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

having offered ghee, offers sacrificial portions, and finally again
offers ghee thereon: such a one certainly satisfies them; and, these
(oblations) having been satisfied, the gods fill gold cups (for
him) <span id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:17">11:4:2:17</span></span>17.
Concerning this, Yâ*gñ*avalkya said <span
id="fr_212"></span>[2](#fn_212), 'When, after making an underlayer (of
ghee), and cutting portions (from the sacrificial dish), he bastes them
(with ghee), then, indeed, he satisfies them; and, they being satisfied,
the gods fill (for him) gold cups <span
id="fr_213"></span>[3](#fn_213).' Now *S*aulvâyana was Adhvaryu to those
who had Ayasthû*n*a <span id="fr_214"></span>[4](#fn_214) for their
G*ri*hapati <span id="fr_215"></span>[5](#fn_215).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:18">11:4:2:18</span></span>18.
He said, 'Surely, this sacrificial session is supplied with lean cattle
and scanty ghee; and yet this one, forsooth, thinks himself a
G*ri*hapati!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:19">11:4:2:19</span></span>19.
He (Ayasthû*n*a) said, 'Adhvaryu, thou hast insulted us; and there now
are those two spoons which, for a whole year, thou hast not been able to
take up (in the proper manner): if I were to instruct thee in (the use
of) them, thou wouldst become multiplied in offspring and cattle, and
wouldst lead (the Sacrificer) to heaven.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:4:2:20">11:4:2:20</span></span>20.
He said, 'Let me become thy pupil.' He answered, 'Even now, indeed, art
thou worthy (of being instructed), who hast been our Adhvaryu for a
year: I will teach thee this even without thy

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

becoming my pupil.' And so, indeed, he taught him that taking up of the
two spoons as we have here explained it: hence one ought only to make
one who knows this his Adhvaryu, and not one who does not know it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_206"></span>[56:2](sbe44022.htm#fr_206) At the time when
the sacrificial food (havis) is to be placed on the Vedi, the two
offering-spoons, *g*uhû and upabh*ri*t, are filled with ghee, and then
placed, the former on the Prastara-bunch (lying on the Vedi) with the
bowl towards the east, and the latter north of it on the grass-cover of
the Vedi; a third spoon, the dhruvâ, being again placed north of the
upabh*ri*t. The first libation of ghee (âghâra) is made from the
dipping-spoon (sruva); but when about <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> to
make the second libation, as also prior to each of the two
butter-portions, to the first of the five fore-offerings, as well as
before each of the chief offerings (when, however, portions of the
respective sacrificial dishes are added to the ghee in the *g*uhû), the
Adhvaryu takes up the two spoons in the manner mentioned, viz. holding
them together with both hands so as to be parallel to each other, the
bowl of the *g*uhû being just above that of the upabh*ri*t without
touching it. While thus holding them he goes forward to the Âhavanîya,
and, after the other necessary rites, pours the oblation from the
*g*uhû, over the spout of the upabh*ri*t, into the fire. At the fourth
fore-offering the ghee contained in the upabh*ri*t is for the first time
made use of, half of it being poured into the *g*uhû for the last two
fore-offerings, whilst the remainder is used for the after-offerings.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[57:1](sbe44022.htm#fr_207) When the Adhvaryu
betakes himself from his place behind the Vedi (on which the sacrificial
material is laid out) to the Âhavanîya <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>
in order to perform an offering, he is to proceed in such a way as
constantly to keep his left foot before the right one; whilst in
returning to his place he keeps the right foot before the left. Of the
two ways of procedure mentioned in the paragraph, the second way is thus
the right one.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[58:1](sbe44022.htm#fr_208) Whilst the Adhvaryu
is standing by the side of the Âhavanîya, ready to make the offering, he
holds the spoons to his navel till the. moment when he has to pour the
oblation into the fire.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[58:2](sbe44022.htm#fr_209) The Adhvaryu's call
is 'o*m* *s*râvaya' (make him hear!) whereupon the Âgnîdhra responds
'astu *s*rausha*t*' (yea, may he hear!).

<span id="fn_210"></span>[58:3](sbe44022.htm#fr_210) Viz. any one for
whom he (the Adhvaryu) performs a sacrifice, <span id="page_59">p.
59</span> in case he (the priest) thinks he has not been treated
liberally enough by his patron, or for some other reason.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[61:1](sbe44022.htm#fr_211) Tasâ*m*
sa*m*t*ri*ptânâm âhutînâ*m* bhoktâro devâ*h* prîtâ*h* santo hira*n*mayân
hira*n*yavikârâ*ms* *k*amasân ya*g*amânâya dâtu*m* yena pûrayante, Sây.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[61:2](sbe44022.htm#fr_212) Cf. I, 7, 2, 7-10;
and part i, p. 192, note 1, where the procedure is explained.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[61:3](sbe44022.htm#fr_213) One would expect an
'iti' here.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[61:4](sbe44022.htm#fr_214) According to
Sâya*n*a, Ayasthû*n*a is the name of a *Ri*shi.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[61:5](sbe44022.htm#fr_215) Literally,
'house-lord' or householder--the title of the Sacrificer at sacrificial
sessions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI, 4, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe44023)
