[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44061) 
[Next](sbe44063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1">12:5:1</span></span>

### FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### CEREMONIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE DEATH OF THE AGNIHOTRIN.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:1">12:5:1:1</span></span>1. They
also say, 'If that performer of a long sacrificial session--to wit, he
who (regularly) offers the Agnihotra--were to die whilst staying abroad,
are they to sacrifice for him or not?' Now, some indeed think that (his
Agnihotra) should be offered till they get home <span
id="fr_535"></span>[1](#fn_534); but let him not do so, for that (fire)
does not submit thereto that they should offer to it, as for the burning
of a dead body: it is rather to sacrifice and oblations that it submits,
and, unable to endure it, it stays by him with impatience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:2">12:5:1:2</span></span>2. And
some, indeed, say, 'They (the fires) should lie in the very same
condition, kept up (with fuel) but without offering being made on them;'
but let him not do so, for that (fire) does not submit thereto that they
should kindle it as for the burning of a dead body: it is rather to
sacrifice and oblations that it submits, and, unable to endure it, it
stays by him with impatience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:3">12:5:1:3</span></span>3. And
some, indeed, having lifted the two fires

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

on the churning-sticks, lay them down, and churn it (the new fire) out
on his being brought (home); but let him not do so, for that (fire) does
not submit thereto that they should churn it out as for the burning of a
dead body: it is rather to sacrifice and oblations that it submits, and,
unable to endure it, it stays by him with impatience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:4">12:5:1:4</span></span>4. Let
him rather proceed thus:--let him hid them seek for a cow suckling an
adopted calf, and let him make offering with milk from her; for tainted
is that milk which comes from a cow suckling an adopted calf, and
tainted is the Agnihotra of one who is dead: by thus removing the
tainted by the tainted, he becomes more glorious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:5">12:5:1:5</span></span>5.
Concerning this there also is a simile:--if two smashed cars were to (be
made to) unite there would be at least one (fit) for driving.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:6">12:5:1:6</span></span>6. The
procedure of this same Agnihotra (is as follows):--He causes her to be
milked whilst eastward invested <span id="fr_536"></span>[1](#fn_535);
for, sacrificially invested, one gets (the Agnihotra-cow) milked for the
gods, but in the case of the Fathers it is done thus.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:7">12:5:1:7</span></span>7. He
does not put (the milk) on the (burning) coals <span
id="fr_537"></span>[2](#fn_536); for were he to put it on coals he would
be doing (what is done) for the gods: having shifted some hot cinders
from the Gârhapatya towards the right (south) side, he puts it thereon,
and thus makes it to be sacred to the Fathers.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:8">12:5:1:8</span></span>8. He
does not cause the light (of a burning straw) to fall upon it, nor does
he pour water to it; for were he to make the light fall on it, and to
pour water to it, he would be doing-(what is done) for the gods. He does
not take it off thrice, setting it down each time <span
id="fr_538"></span>[1](#fn_537); for were he take it off thrice, setting
it down each time, he would be doing (what is done) for the gods: only
once he takes it off drawing it downwards <span
id="fr_539"></span>[2](#fn_538), and thus makes it to be sacred to the
Fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:9">12:5:1:9</span></span>9. He
does not say, 'I will ladle out <span id="fr_540"></span>[3](#fn_539)!'
nor does he ladle out (the milk) four times; for were he to say 'I will
ladle out!' and were he to ladle out four times, he would be doing (what
is done) for the gods: only once he silently turns it upside down (into
the spoon), and thus makes it to be sacred to the Fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:10">12:5:1:10</span></span>10.
He does not take it (to the Âhavanîya) whilst holding a kindling-stick
over (the handle of the spoon <span id="fr_541"></span>[4](#fn_540));
for were he to take it (there) whilst holding a kindling-stick over it,
he would be doing (what is done) for the gods: he takes it whilst
holding (a billet) underneath, and thus makes it to be sacred to the
Fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:11">12:5:1:11</span></span>11.
He does not pass along the north side of the Gârhapatya <span
id="fr_542"></span>[5](#fn_541), for were he to pass along the north

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

side of the Gârhapatya he would be doing (what is done) for the gods: he
passes along the south side of the Gârhapatya, and thus makes it to be
sacred to the Fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:12">12:5:1:12</span></span>12.
And that sacrificial grass which (ordinarily) is lying with its tops
towards the north he lays so as to have its tops towards the south, and
thus makes (the offering) to be sacred to the Fathers. And having put a
kindling-stick on the Âhavanîya, and bent his left knee, he silently
turns (the ladle) once upside down (pouring the milk into the fire) and
thus makes it to be sacred to the Fathers. He neither shakes (the spoon)
upwards <span id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_542), nor wipes it, nor does he
eat (the milk left in the spoon), nor does he throw it out: he thus
makes it to be sacred to the Fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:13">12:5:1:13</span></span>13.
They also say, 'If that performer of a long sacrificial session--to wit,
he who (regularly) offers the Agnihotra--were to die whilst staying
abroad, how would they supply him with his fires?' Well, some, having
burnt him, bring (the bones) home and make the fires smell him as he is
brought; but let him not do this, for this would be as if he were to
seek to cause the seed implanted in one womb to be born forth from
another womb. Having brought home the bones, let him throw them on a
black antelope skin, and arrange them in accordance with man's form, and
having covered them with wool and sprinkled with ghee, let him by
burning unite him

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

with his fires: he thus causes him to be born from his own (maternal)
womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:14">12:5:1:14</span></span>14.
And some, indeed, burn him in (ordinary) fire (procured) in the village;
but let him not do this, for such fire is a promiscuous eater, an eater
of raw flesh: it would be capable of devouring him completely, together
with his sons and his cattle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:15">12:5:1:15</span></span>15.
And some, indeed, burn him in a forest-fire; but let him not do this;
for such fire is unappeased: it would be capable of burning him up
together with his sons and his cattle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:16">12:5:1:16</span></span>16.
And some, indeed, burn him in a firebrand; but let him not do this; for
such fire belongs to Rudra: it would be capable of destroying him
together with his sons and his cattle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:5:1:17">12:5:1:17</span></span>17.
And some, indeed, build up a funeral pile in the midst of the (three)
fires, and, by burning him, unite him with his fires, thinking,
'There,--to wit, in the midst of his fires,--assuredly is the
Sacrificer's abode.' But let him not do this; for if in that case any
one were to say of him, 'Verily, this one has caused a cutting up in the
middle of the village: the cutting up of him will speedily come
about <span id="fr_544"></span>[1](#fn_543): he will weep for his
dearest;' then that would indeed be likely to come to pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_534"></span>[197:1](sbe44062.htm#fr_535) Prof. Delbrück,
Altind. Syntax, p. 430, takes 'âganto*h*' in the sense,--'(thinking) he
may still come;' but cf. Katy. XXV, 8, 9 with comm., according to which,
in case of an Agnihotrin dying away from home, his people are--if the
place of his death be somewhere near his home--to take the body there;
but if it be far from home, they are to kindle a fire by 'churning' and
burn the body, and having collected the bones and taken them home, they
are there to perform the punardâha, or second cremation; and in either
case the Agnihotra is to be performed regularly for the deceased, in the
evening and morning, 'till the body or the bones arrive at the house
(g*ri*hâgamanaparyantam).' The force of 'iti' here evidently
is,--(thinking,) 'we will do so until the home-coming.' Harisvâmin
rightly resolves 'âganto*h*' by 'â âganto*h*.'

<span id="fn_535"></span>[198:1](sbe44062.htm#fr_536) That is, wearing
the Brâhma*n*ical cord over the right shoulder, and under the left arm;
instead of over the left shoulder, and under the right arm as is done at
the sacrifice.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[198:2](sbe44062.htm#fr_537) For boiling the
milk for the Agnihotra burning coals are shifted northwards from the
Gârhapatya, and the pot placed thereon; see part i, p. 330, note.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[199:1](sbe44062.htm#fr_538) When a spoonful of
water has been added to the Agnihotra-milk, and the light of a burning
straw again thrown on it, the pot is taken up three several times and
put down each time further north on the hot ashes; see part i, p. 331,
note 1.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[199:2](sbe44062.htm#fr_539) That is, down from
the ashes--towards the south (where the Fathers, or departed ancestors,
are supposed to reside),--whilst in the case of the ordinary Agnihotra
he would be shifting the pot more and more upwards, or northwards. Cf.
Kâty. XXV, 8, 10.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[199:3](sbe44062.htm#fr_540) See [XII, 4, 2,
8](sbe44059.htm#12:4:2:8).

<span id="fn_540"></span>[199:4](sbe44062.htm#fr_541) See part i, p.
331, note 4.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[199:5](sbe44062.htm#fr_542) Possibly we ought
to translate,--he does not go to the north side of the Gârhapatya (but
to the south side)--that is, if he makes <span id="page_200">p.
200</span> two oblations, not only on the Âhavanîya, but also on the
Gârhapatya (as well as on the Dakshi*n*âgni), in which case the Adhvaryu
would be standing north (or rather north-west) of the fire. Cf. Kâty.
IV, 14, 22-25.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[200:1](sbe44062.htm#fr_543) Ordinarily, after
the second libation, the priest twice jerks the spoon upwards, and then
lays it down on a bunch of grass.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[201:1](sbe44062.htm#fr_544) The burning of the
dead body seems to be compared here with the cutting up of the victim
which is done outside the sacrificial ground. Harisvâmin, indeed, takes
'grâma' here, not in the sense of 'village,' but in that of
'agnisamûha'--in the midst of the (set of) sacrificial fires--which, if
it were possible, would certainly make the comparison even more
striking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII, 5, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe44063)
