[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44064.md) 
[Next](sbe44066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1">12:7:1</span></span>

### SEVENTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### THE SAUTRÂMA*N*Î <span id="fr_565"></span>[2](#fn_564.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:1">12:7:1:1</span></span>1.
Indra slew Tvash*tri*'s son, Vi*s*varûpa. Seeing his son slain,
Tvash*tri* exorcized him (Indra), and

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

brought Soma juice suitable for witchery <span
id="fr_566"></span>[1](#fn_565.md), and withheld from Indra. Indra by force
drank off his Soma-juice, thereby committing a desecration of the
sacrifice. He went asunder in every direction, and his energy, or vital
power <span id="fr_567"></span>[2](#fn_566.md), flowed away from every
limb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:2">12:7:1:2</span></span>2. From
his eyes his fiery spirit flowed, and became that grey (smoke-coloured)
animal, the he-goat; and what (flowed) from his eyelashes became wheat,
and what (flowed) from his tears became the kuvala-fruit <span
id="fr_568"></span>[3](#fn_567.md).

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:3">12:7:1:3</span></span>3. From
his nostrils his vital power flowed, and became that animal, the ram;
and what (flowed) from the phlegm became the Indra-grain, and what
moisture there was that became the badara-fruit <span
id="fr_569"></span>[1](#fn_568.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:4">12:7:1:4</span></span>4. From
his mouth his strength flowed, it became that animal, the bull; and what
foam there was became barley, and what moisture there was became the
karkandhu-fruit <span id="fr_570"></span>[1](#fn_568.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:5">12:7:1:5</span></span>5. From
his ear his glory flowed, and became the one-hoofed animals, the horse,
mule, and ass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:6">12:7:1:6</span></span>6. From
the breasts his bright (vital) sap flowed, and became milk, the light of
cattle; from the heart in his breast his courage flowed, and became the
talon-slaying eagle, the king of birds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:7">12:7:1:7</span></span>7. From
his navel his life-breath flowed, and became lead,--not iron, nor
silver; from his seed his form flowed, and became gold; from his
generative organ his essence flowed, and became parisrut (raw fiery
liquor); from his hips his fire flowed, and became surd (matured
liquor), the essence of food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:8">12:7:1:8</span></span>8. From
his urine his vigour flowed, and became the wolf, the impetuous rush of
wild beasts; from the contents of his intestines his fury flowed, and
became the tiger, the king of wild beasts; from his blood his might
flowed, and became the lion, the ruler of wild beasts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:9">12:7:1:9</span></span>9. From
his hair his thought flowed, and became millet; from his skin his honour
flowed, and became the a*s*vattha tree (ficus religiosa); from his flesh
his force flowed, and became the udumbara tree (ficus glomerata); from
his bones his sweet drink flowed,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and became the nyagrodha tree (ficus indica); from his marrow his drink,
the Soma juice, flowed, and became rice: in this way his energies, or
vital powers, went from him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:10">12:7:1:10</span></span>10.
Now at that time he (Indra) had to do with Namu*k*i, the Asura. Namu*k*i
bethought him, 'He has been undone once for all: I will seize upon his
energy, his vital power, his Soma-drink, his food,' By (taking) that
Surâ-liquor of his he seized upon his energy, or vital power, his
Soma-drink, his food. He lay there dissolved. The gods gathered around
him, and said, 'Verily, he was the best of us; evil has befallen him:
let us heal him!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:11">12:7:1:11</span></span>11.
They said to the two A*s*vins, 'Ye are Brahman physicians: heal ye this
one!' They replied, 'Let there be a guerdon for us!' They spake, 'That
he-goat there shall be your guerdon.' They said, 'So be it!' and hence
the smoke-coloured (he-goat) is sacred to the two A*s*vins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:12">12:7:1:12</span></span>12.
They (the gods) said to Sarasvatî, 'Verily, thou art healing medicine:
heal thou this one!' She replied, 'Let there be a guerdon for me!' They
spake, 'That ram there shall be thy guerdon!' She said, 'So be it!' and
therefore the ram is sacred to Sarasvatî.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:13">12:7:1:13</span></span>13.
They then spake, 'Verily, there is even now as much in him (Indra) as
that -bull: that one shall belong to him himself.' They said, 'So be
it!' and therefore the bull is sacred to Indra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:7:1:14">12:7:1:14</span></span>14.
The two A*s*vins and Sarasvatî, having taken the energy, or vital power,
from Namu*k*i, restored them to hire (Indra), and saved him from evil,
'Truly, we have saved him from evil so as to be well-saved (sutrâta),'
they thought, and this became

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the Sautrâma*n*î: and this is the (saving) nature of the
Sautrâma*n*î--it saves the self from death, and repels evil for
whosoever thus knows that (saving) nature of the Sautrâma*n*î. There are
(for this sacrifice) thirty-three Dakshi*n*âs (presents to priests), for
thirty-three were the gods who healed him: whence they say, 'Dakshi*n*âs
are healing medicine.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_564"></span>[213:2](sbe44065.htm#fr_565.md) The Sautrâma*n*î
is usually classed as one of the seven divisions of the Havirya*gñ*a,
though, in reality, it is much more than that; its peculiarity
consisting in a combination of the ordinary features of the
Havirya*gñ*a, or ish*t*i (cf. XII, 7, 2, 22), with those of the animal
sacrifice, whilst a third important element, viz. libations of
spirituous liquor, imparts to it a certain resemblance, and doubtless an
intended resemblance, to the Soma-sacrifice. Of this sacrifice we have
already met with a variation in connection with the Râ*g*asûya (cf. part
iii, p. 229 seq.), that form being usually called the
*K*araka-Sautrâma*n*î, as being adopted from the ritual of the
*K*araka-adhvaryus; whilst the form described in the remaining portion
of the present Kâ*nd*a is, according to Lâ*t*y. *S*raut. V, 4, 20,
called Kaukili Sautrâma*n*î. (cf. Â*s*v. *S*r. III, 9, 9 comm.; Weber,
Ind. Stud. III, p. 385). The name itself is derived from 'sutrâman,'
i.e. 'the good guardian,' as which Indra is worshipped in this sacrifice
(cf. V, 5, 4. 1 seq.). The whole performance takes four days, during the
first three of which the Surâ-liquor is prepared and matured, and
offerings of a rice-pap to Aditi, and a bull to Indra are performed;
whilst the main sacrifice takes place on the fourth day--the day of
either full moon or new moon--the chief oblations offered on that day
being three cups of milk, and as many of Surâ-liquor, to the A*s*vins,
Sarasvatî, and Indra respectively; of three animal victims to the same
deities; and of thirty-three libations of fat gravy, or liquid fat
(vasâ), obtained from the cooking of the victims, and offered by means
of bull's hoofs used as cups. At the end of the sacrifice, a third bull
is offered to Indra in his form of Vayodhas (giver of life), together
with another pap <span id="page_214">p. 214</span> (*k*aru) to Aditi and
an oblation of curds to Mitra and Varu*n*a. No mention is made of the
Agnîshomîya he-goat usually offered .on the day preceding the
Soma-pressing, the first bull offered to Indra probably taking its place
on this occasion, whilst the hull to Indra Vayodhas would seem to take
the place of the sacrifice of a barren cow (to Mitra and Varu*n*a) which
usually takes place at the end of a Soma-sacrifice. In an interesting
variation (Sautrâma*n*a-ya*gñ*a), described in *S*âṅkh. *S*r. XIV,
12-13, and performed as a real (Agnish*t*oma) Soma-sacrifice, the final
animal sacrifice indeed is that of a barren cow to Indra Sutrâman; only
two other victims--a reddish he-goat to the A*s*vins and a ewe to
Sarasvatî--being mentioned.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[214:1](sbe44065.htm#fr_566) 'Exposed (liable.md)
to witching,' Delbrück, Altindische Syntax, p. 401.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[214:2](sbe44065.htm#fr_567.md) 'Vîrya' (virile
power) is constantly used to explain 'indriya.'

<span id="fn_567"></span>[214:3](sbe44065.htm#fr_568.md) The words 'kuvala,
badara, and karkandhu' are the names of three varieties of the jujube,
or fruits of Zizyphus Jujuba, for a description of which see the comm.
on Kâty. *S*r. XIX, 17 seqq. According to Stewart and Brandis’ Forest
Flora of North-West and Central India (p. 87), 'this species varies
exceedingly, in the shape and size of the fruits, the shape and tomentum
of the leaves, and general habit;' 'the Zizyphi of North India want more
investigation on the spot.' . . . 'Lakh is produced on this tree in
Sindh, the Panjab, and Central India, The bark is used as dye-stuff; the
root is a febrifuge in native pharmacy. A gum exudes from the trunk; and
in Kangra a wild silkworm lives on the tree, the silk of which was much
employed formerly to tie the barrel to the stock of the matchlock. But
the tree is mainly cultivated for its fruit, <span id="page_215">p.
215</span> which is more or less globose on the wild and commoner sorts,
and ovoid or oblong on the cultivated and improved kinds.'

<span id="fn_568"></span>[215:1](sbe44065.htm#fr_570.md) See note
[3](#fn_567.md) on preceding page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII, 7, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe44066.md)
