[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44096) 
[Next](sbe44098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:3:4">13:3:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:3:4:1">13:3:4:1</span></span>1.
Verily, the horse is slaughtered for all the deities: were he to make it
one belonging to Pra*g*âpati (exclusively), he would deprive the deities
who are co-sharers of their share. Having made ghee (to take the part
of) portions (of the horse's body) he makes oblations <span
id="fr_859"></span>[1](#fn_855) to the deities in mentioning them one by
one with (Vâ*g*. S. XXV, 1-9), 'The Grass (I gratify) with the teeth,
the Lotus with the roots of the hair, . . . :' the deities who are
co-sharers he thus supplies with their share. When he has offered the
Ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>nû*k*ya (oblations) <span
id="fr_860"></span>[2](#fn_856), he offers the last oblation to

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heaven and Earth;
for all the gods are established in heaven and on earth: it is them he
thereby gratifies. Now the gods and the Asuras were contending together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:3:4:2">13:3:4:2</span></span>2. They
(the gods) spake, 'We are the Agnaya*h* Svish*t*ak*ri*ta*h* <span
id="fr_861"></span>[1](#fn_857) of the horse (sacrifice); let us take
out for ourselves a special share: therewith we shall overcome the
Asuras.' They took the blood for themselves in order to overcome their
rivals; when he offers the blood to the Svish*t*ak*ri*ts, it is in order
to overcome (his own) rivals; and the spiteful rival of him who knows
this is undone by himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:3:4:3">13:3:4:3</span></span>3. The
first oblation (of blood) he offers <span
id="fr_862"></span>[2](#fn_858) in the

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

throat (gullet) of the Gom*ri*ga <span id="fr_863"></span>[1](#fn_859);
for Gom*ri*gas are cattle, and the Svish*t*ak*ri*t is Rudra: he thus

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

shields the cattle from Rudra, whence Rudra does not prowl after the
cattle where this oblation is offered at the A*s*vamedha.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:3:4:4">13:3:4:4</span></span>4. The
second oblation <span id="fr_864"></span>[1](#fn_860) he offers on a
horse-hoof; for the one-hoofed (animals) are cattle, and the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t is Rudra: he thus shields the cattle from Rudra, whence
Rudra does not prowl after the cattle where this oblation is offered at
the A*s*vamedha.

<span class="margnote"><span id="13:3:4:5">13:3:4:5</span></span>5. The
third oblation he offers in an iron bowl; for the people (subjects) are
of iron <span id="fr_865"></span>[2](#fn_861), and the Svish*t*ak*ri*t
is Rudra: he thus shields the people from Rudra, whence Rudra does not
prowl after the cattle where this oblation is offered at the
A*s*vamedha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_855"></span>[336:1](sbe44097.htm#fr_859) These oblations of
ghee, apparently amounting to 132, are made, after the principal
flesh-portions have been offered, viz. in the interval between the ghee
oblation to Vanaspati (the lord of the forest, or the plant, Soma) and
the Svish*t*ak*ri*t oblation, for which see part ii, pp. 208-9; each
formula, as a rule, containing the name of some divinity, and that of
some part of the body of the horse supposed to be represented by the
ghee (by four ladlings of which the offering spoon is filled each time).
Mahîdhara, apparently in accordance with the Brâhma*n*a, supplies
'pri*n*âmi (I gratify)' with each (complete) formula which then
concludes with 'svâhâ (hail)!' According to other authorities, however,
these formulas are each to be divided into two separate dedicatory
formulas:--'To the Grass hail! To the Teeth hail!' &c.--The last of the
132 oblations (with the formula, To *G*umbaka, hail!') is, however,
withheld for the present to be offered (or perhaps the formula alone is
to be muttered) at the end of the purificatory bath (avabh*ri*tha)
towards the end of the sacrifice on the third day.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[336:2](sbe44097.htm#fr_860) The term
'ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>nû*k*ya' ('to be recited in the forest') we met
before (IX, 3, 1, 24) as applying to the last of seven cakes offered to
the Maruts immediately after the installation of Agni (the sacred fire)
on the newly-built altar The formula used for that cake is the so-called
Vimukha-verse, Vâ*g*. S. XXXIX, 7. This <span id="page_337">p.
337</span> verse is followed in the Sa*m*hitâ by a series of twenty
formulas (ib. 8-9) of a similar nature to those referred to in the
preceding note (i.e. consisting each of a deity and a part of the body
of the horse--'Agni I gratify with the heart,' &c.), and these again by
forty-two expiatory formulas ('To the hair, hail!' &c., ib. 10-13),
ending with, 'To Yama, hail! To Antaka (the Ender), hail! To Death,
hail! To (the) Brahman, hail! To Brahman-slaying, hail! To the All-gods,
hail! To Heaven and Earth, hail!' These sixty-two formulas are used with
as many ghee-oblations, which are to be performed immediately after the
131st of the previous set of oblations. Prior, however, again to the
last of the forty-two expiatory oblations, (viz. the one made with 'To
Heaven and Earth, hail!') there is another set of sixteen oblations
([XIII, 3, 6, 1](sbe44099.htm#13:3:6:1) seqq.), the so-called
'A*s*vastomîyâ âhutaya*h*' or 'oblations relating to the Stomas of the
horse (sacrifice),' each of which has a complete couplet for its
offering-formula (Vâ*g*. S. XXV, 24-39). At the end of the three sets of
oblations the term 'ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>nû*k*ya' is here extended by the
author. At the end of the third set this succession of ghee-oblations is
concluded with the last expiatory oblation, that to Heaven. and Earth;
whereupon the ordinary flesh-oblation to Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t is
performed.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[337:1](sbe44097.htm#fr_861) I.e. the (three)
fires, the makers of good offering.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[337:2](sbe44097.htm#fr_862) The formula for
each of these three special blood-oblations--<span id="page_338">p.
338</span> offered immediately after the ordinary Svish*t*ak*ri*t
oblation, and being, in fact, the special Svish*t*ak*ri*t of the
A*s*vamedha--is 'Agnibhya*h* svish*t*ak*ri*dbhya*h* svâhâ, i.e. to the
(three) Agnis, the makers of good offering, hail!'

<span id="fn_859"></span>[338:1](sbe44097.htm#fr_863) 'Gom*ri*ga' is
usually taken by the commentators, and in our dictionaries, as another
name of the 'Gavaya,' variously called Gayâl, Bos Gavaeus, Bos
frontalis, or Bos cavifrons, a species of wild cattle found in various
mountain districts of India (especially on the eastern boundaries of
Bengal, and in Malabar, as also in Ceylon), and frequently domesticated
amongst the hill-tribes, by whom it is valued for its flesh and milk
(cf. Colebrooke's paper, As. Res. VIII, p. 511 seqq.). The Gavaya itself
is, however, as Colebrooke remarks, confounded by some Sanskrit writers
with the '*Ris*ya,' which he takes to be the buck of the painted, or
white-footed (or slate-coloured) Antelope, the Portax pictus (or
Antelope picta), also called by the vernacular names of Nîlgau or
(Mahr.) Nîlgây, whilst the female is called 'rohit' in Sanskrit. All
these three animals occur amongst the wild animals to be used as
quasi-victims, but ultimately released on the second day of the
A*s*vamedha; and I am inclined to think that they are three different
animals. To show that the Ri*s*ya and the Gavaya cannot be the same
animals, Colebrooke already refers to the fact that three *Ris*yas
(consecrated to the Vasus) and three Gavayas (to B*ri*haspati) occur as
victims side by side in Vâ*g*asaneyi-sa*m*hitâ XXIV (27 and 28); and in
the same way a Gom*ri*ga, sacred to Pra*g*âpati and Vâyu, is mentioned
immediately after, ib. 30; whilst another, sacred to Pra*g*âpati, was,
as we saw, one of the two animals tied along with the horse to the
central stake (see [XIII, 2, 2, 2](sbe44084.htm#13:2:2:2)). Taitt. S.
II, 1, 10, 2, treating of the sacrifice of a Gom*ri*ga to Vâyu, remarks
that it is neither a domestic animal (or cattle, pa*s*u) nor a wild one;
and Sâya*n*a explains it as a cross between a female deer (or antelope,
m*ri*gî) and a hull that has gone with his cows to graze in the forest;
whilst, on Taitt. Br. III, 8, 20, 5, he leaves one to choose between its
being a vicious bull (dhûrto balîvarda*h*), dangerous to men, or an
animal 'of mixed breed, sprung from a cow and a male gazelle or antelope
(gohari*n*ayo*h*, or possibly, from parent beasts of the bovine and
antelope species).' In this latter passage, the editor <span
id="page_339">p. 339</span> of the Brâhma*n*a (in the list of contents,
p. 53) takes it to mean 'wild cattle (Nîlagâo gom*ri*ga, erroneously
explained as a cross between a deer and a cow),' which would be a
probable enough explanation, if the Ri*s*ya were not the Nîlgau; whilst
otherwise the animal might belong to some other species of bovine
antelopes no longer found in India.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[339:1](sbe44097.htm#fr_864) Whilst the first
of these oblations must take place immediately after the ordinary
Svish*t*ak*ri*t of the animal sacrifice, the second may be postponed
till after the 'after-offerings'; and the third till after the
'Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as.' See also [XIII, 5, 3, 8](sbe44108.htm#13:5:3:8)
seq.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[339:2](sbe44097.htm#fr_865) That is, their
value--as compared with that of the king or nobles, and the
Brâhma*n*as--is that of iron, compared with that of gold and silver; cp.
[XIII, 2, 2, 19](sbe44084.htm#13:2:2:19).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII, 3, 5. Fifth Brâhma*n*a](sbe44098)
