[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44016.md) 
[Next](sbe44018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7">11:2:7</span></span>

### SEVENTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:1">11:2:7:1</span></span>1. The
Sacrifice is the Year; and, verily, sacrifice is offered at the end of
the year of him whoso knows that the sacrifice is the year; and all that
is done in the year comes to be gained, secured, and won for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:2">11:2:7:2</span></span>2. The
officiating priests are the seasons; and, verily, sacrifice is offered
at the end of the seasons of him whoso knows that the officiating
priests are the seasons; and all that is done in the seasons comes to be
gained, secured, and won for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:3">11:2:7:3</span></span>3. The
oblations are the months; and, verily, sacrifice is offered at the end
of the months of him whoso knows that the oblations are the months;

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and all that is done in the months comes to be gained, secured, and won
for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:4">11:2:7:4</span></span>4. The
oblation-vessels are the half-months; and, verily, sacrifice is offered
at the end of the half-months of him whoso knows that the
oblation-vessels are the half-months; and all that is done in the
half-months comes to be gained, secured, and won for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:5">11:2:7:5</span></span>5. The
two attendants <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162.md) are the day and
night; and, verily, sacrifice is offered at the end of the day and night
of him whoso knows that the two attendants are the day and night; and
all that is done in the day and night comes to be gained, secured, and
won for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:6">11:2:7:6</span></span>6. The
first kindling-verse is this (earth), the second the fire, the third the
wind, the fourth the air, the fifth the sky, the sixth the sun, the
seventh the moon, the eighth the mind, the ninth speech, the tenth
fervid devotion, and the eleventh the Brahman; for it is these that
kindle all this (universe), and by them all this (universe) is kindled,
whence they are called kindling-verses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:7">11:2:7:7</span></span>7.
Thrice he recites the first (kindling-verse): by reciting it the first
time he gains the eastern region, by the second time he gains the
southern region, and by the third time he gains the upper region.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:8">11:2:7:8</span></span>8. And
thrice he recites the last (verse): by reciting it the first time he
gains the western region, by the second time he gains the northern
region, by the third time he gains this same (earth as a) resting-place;

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

and by those (kindling-verses) he thus gains these worlds, and these
regions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:9">11:2:7:9</span></span>9. The
first libation of ghee is the sacred law, and the second the truth; and,
verily, he secures for himself law and truth, and whatsoever is to be
gained by law and truth all that he now gains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:10">11:2:7:10</span></span>10.
The first fore-offering is brilliance, the second honour, the third
fame, the fourth holy lustre, the fifth food (prosperity).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:11">11:2:7:11</span></span>11.
After the first fore-offering let him utter (the anumantra*n*a <span
id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163).md), 'May I become brilliant;' after the
second, 'May I become honoured; after the third, 'May I become
glorious;' after the fourth, 'May I become endowed with holy lustre;'
after the fifth, 'May I become prosperous;'--and, verily, whosoever
knows this becomes brilliant, and honoured, and glorious, and endowed
with holy lustre, and prosperous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:12">11:2:7:12</span></span>12.
Now, *S*vetaketu Âru*n*eya <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164.md), who
knew this, said once, 'To him who will thus know that glory of the
fore-offerings, people will in days to come be flocking from all sides
as if wishing to see some great serpent.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:13">11:2:7:13</span></span>13.
The first butter-portion, doubtless, is the past, and the second the
future: verily, he secures for himself both the past and the future; and
whatever is to be gained by the past and the future, all that he now
gains.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:14">11:2:7:14</span></span>14.
The cake offered to Agni is the Brahman (priesthood); and, verily,
whosoever knows Agni's cake to be the priesthood secures for himself the
priesthood; and whatever is to be gained by the priesthood all that he
now gains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:15">11:2:7:15</span></span>15.
The low-voiced offering is the Kshatra (nobility); and, verily,
whosoever knows the low-voiced offering to be the nobility secures for
himself the nobility; and whatever is to be gained by the nobility all
that he now gains. And inasmuch as some perform the low-voiced offering,
and others do not. therefore people speak (give information) to the
noble both in a loud voice and in a low voice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:16">11:2:7:16</span></span>16.
The second cake is the Vi*s* (people); and, verily, whosoever knows the
second cake to be the people secures for himself the people; and
whatever is to be gained by the people all that he gains. And inasmuch
as Agni's cake and the low-voiced offering come first therefore the
priesthood and nobility are established upon the people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:17">11:2:7:17</span></span>17.
The Sânnâyya <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165.md) is royal dignity;
and, verily, whosoever knows the Sânnâyya to be royal dignity secures
for himself royal dignity; and whatever is to be gained by royal dignity
all that he gains. And inasmuch as some pour (sweet and sour milk)
together <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166.md), and others do not,
therefore the royal dignity both (combines) together and (keeps)
asunder <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:18">11:2:7:18</span></span>18.
The Svish*t*ak*ri*t is fervid devotion; and, verily, whosoever knows the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t to be fervid devotion

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

secures for himself fervid devotion; and whatever is to be gained by
fervid devotion all that he now gains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:19">11:2:7:19</span></span>19.
The fore-portion is the place (in heaven); and, verily, whosoever knows
the fore-portion to be the place (in heaven) secures for himself the
place (in heaven); and whatever is to be gained by the place (in heaven)
all that he now gains; and, indeed, he does not by ever so little fall
from his place, for it is by ever so little that in yonder world men
fall from their place; and whosoever knows this does not fall from his
place however much evil he may have done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:20">11:2:7:20</span></span>20.
The I*d*â is faith; and, verily, whosoever knows the I*d*â to be faith
secures for himself faith, and whatever is to be gained by faith all
that he now gains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:21">11:2:7:21</span></span>21.
The first after-offering is the thunderbolt, the second the hail-stone,
the third the (heavenly) firebrand (meteor).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:22">11:2:7:22</span></span>22.
After the first after-offering let him utter (the anumantra*n*a), 'O
thunderbolt, smite N.N.!' (naming) him whom he hates; after the second,
O hail-stone, smite N.N.!' after the third, 'O firebrand, smite N.N.!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:23">11:2:7:23</span></span>23.
And if such a one dies suddenly, then, indeed, it is that
after-offering, the thunderbolt, that smites him; and if he is, as it
were, covered with out-flowing (blood), then it is that after-offering,
the hail-stone, that smites him; and if he is, as it were, covered with
scorching, then it is that after-offering, the (heavenly) firebrand,
that smites him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:24">11:2:7:24</span></span>24.
Such is the bolt of the sacrifice: it was by that bolt, indeed, that the
gods overcame the Asuras;

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

and in like manner does the Sacrificer who knows this overcome his
wicked, spiteful enemy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:25">11:2:7:25</span></span>25.
And if the sacrifice were to end with after-offerings, then it would end
with the thunderbolt, the hail-stone, and the (heavenly) firebrand:
therefore the sacrifice of the gods ends either with the I*d*â or with
the *S*amyos.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:26">11:2:7:26</span></span>26.
By the fore-offerings, indeed, the gods reached the world of heaven. The
Asuras tried to get thither after them; and by the after-offerings they
(the gods) drove them back: thus, when the after-offerings are
performed, the Sacrificer drives back his wicked, spiteful enemy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:27">11:2:7:27</span></span>27.
The fore-offerings, indeed, are the out-breathings <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168.md), and the after-offerings the
off-breathings wherefore the fore-offerings are poured out in a forward
direction <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169.md), for that is the form of
the out-breathing; and the after-offerings (are poured out) in a
backward direction <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_170.md), for that is
the form of the off-breathing. The after-offerings, indeed, are the
Upasads <span id="fr_171"></span>[4](#fn_171.md) of the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Full and New-moon
sacrifices, whence they are performed in a backward direction after the
manner of the Upasads.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:28">11:2:7:28</span></span>28.
The Sûktavâka is the completion; and, verily, whosoever knows the
Sûktavâka to be the completion secures for himself the completion; and
whatever is to be gained by the completion all that he now gains: he
obtains the completion of his (full) lifetime.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:29">11:2:7:29</span></span>29.
The *S*amyorvâka is the resting-place; and, verily, whosoever knows the
*S*amyuvâka to be the resting-place secures for himself a resting-place;
and whatever is to be gained by a resting-place all that he now gains:
he reaches a resting-place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:30">11:2:7:30</span></span>30.
The gods fortified the Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as by a mound from behind <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md), and placed a couple thereon for the
sake of procreation: thus when the Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as are performed, he
places a couple thereon for the sake of procreation; for, indeed, after
the procreation of the gods offspring is produced, and offspring is
produced by pair after pair (of men and beasts) for him who knows this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:31">11:2:7:31</span></span>31.
The Samish*t*aya*g*us is food; and, verily, whosoever knows the
Samish*t*aya*g*us to be food secures for himself food; and whatever is
to be gained by food all that he now gains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:32">11:2:7:32</span></span>32.
The Sacrificer is the Year; and the Seasons officiate for him. The
Âgnîdhra is the Spring,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

whence forest-fires take place in spring, for that is a form of Agni.
The Adhvaryu is the Summer, for summer is, as it were, scorched; and the
Adhvaryu comes forth (from the sacrificial ground) like something
scorched <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md). The Udgât*ri* is the
Rainy season; whence, when it rains hard, a sound as that of a chant is
produced. 'The Brahman is the Autumn; whence, when the corn ripens, they
say, 'The creatures are rich in growth (brahma*n*vat).' The Hot*ri* is
the Winter, whence in winter cattle waste away, having the Vasha*t*
uttered over them. These, then, are the divinities that officiate for
him; and even if Aishâvîrâ*h* <span id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174.md) were
to officiate for him, let him think in his mind of those divinities, and
those deities, indeed, officiate for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:2:7:33">11:2:7:33</span></span>33.
Now, as to that balance, the right (south) edge of the Vedi <span
id="fr_175"></span>[3](#fn_175.md). Whatever good deed man does that is
inside the Vedi; and whatever evil deed he does that is outside the
Vedi. Let him therefore sit down, touching the right edge of the Vedi;
for, indeed, they place him on the balance in yonder world; and
whichever of the two will rise <span id="fr_176"></span>[4](#fn_176.md)
that he will follow, whether it be the good or the evil. And, verily,
whosoever knows this, mounts the balance even in this world, and escapes
being placed on the balance in yonder world; for his good deed rises,
and not his evil deed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[39:1](sbe44017.htm#fr_162.md) Sâya*n*a seems to
take the two attendants (parivesh*t*rî, preparers or servers-up of food)
to mean the pair of fire-tongs (dh*ri*sh*t*î):--ye parivesha*n*a-sâdhane
dh*ri*sh*t*î tayor ahorâtrabuddhi*m* vidhatte.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[40:1](sbe44017.htm#fr_163.md) Each of the
offering-formulas of the Prayâ*g*as has after it the anumantra*n*a
'might is speech, might is energy, in me the in-breathing and
off-breathing;' which, according to our paragraph (and Kâty. III, 3, 5),
is to be supplemented by these special prayers.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[40:2](sbe44017.htm#fr_164.md) See X, 3, 4, 1,
with note.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[41:1](sbe44017.htm#fr_165.md) For this
sacrificial dish of the New-moor sacrifice, prepared from fresh milk and
sour curds, see part i, p. 178, note 4.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[41:2](sbe44017.htm#fr_166.md) That is, they
prepare the Sânnâyya.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[41:3](sbe44017.htm#fr_167.md) That is to say,
different kings either combine or keep separate from each other.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[43:1](sbe44017.htm#fr_168.md) That is, the breath
(out and in-breathing) of the mouth (prâ*n*a), in comparing which with
the fore-offerings (prayâ*g*a) the stress is laid on the preposition
'pra.'

<span id="fn_169"></span>[43:2](sbe44017.htm#fr_169.md) According to Kâty.
III, 2, 18 seqq., the five prayâ*g*a libations are to be made either on
the part of the fire burning the brightest, or so that each subsequent
libation is poured further east of the preceding one.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[43:3](sbe44017.htm#fr_170.md) According to Kâty.
III, 5, 10, the three anuyâ*g*a libations are to be made on the
forepart, the middle, and the back (western) part of a burning log
respectively.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[43:4](sbe44017.htm#fr_171.md) For the three days’
libations, called Upasada*h* (homages or sieges), at the Soma-sacrifice,
see part ii, p. 104 seqq. I do not quite understand the reference to the
'backward direction' (pratyagapavargatva*m* vopasad-dharma*h*, Sây.) of
the Upasads, unless it be that the libations are offered to Agni, Soma
and Vish*n*u, who are compared with the point, barb and socket (?) of an
arrow <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> respectively (III, 4, 4, 14), or
that in filling the spoons with ghee, the procedure is the reverse of
that usually followed (III, 4, 4, 7. 8).

<span id="fn_172"></span>[44:1](sbe44017.htm#fr_172.md) The
Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as (by which offering is made to Soma, Tvash*tri*, and
Agni, along with the wives of the gods) are performed on the Gârhapatya
fire, and hence at the back (western) part of the sacrificial ground
where the Sacrificer's wife is seated. For the symbolical import of the
rite see I, 9, 2, 5.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[45:1](sbe44017.htm#fr_173.md) Viz. from his
constant attendance on the sacrificial fires.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[45:2](sbe44017.htm#fr_174.md) According to
Sâya*n*a, Eshavîra is the name of a Brâhma*n*ical family held in general
contempt. See Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 228.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[45:3](sbe44017.htm#fr_175.md) That is, the
altar-ground covered with sacrificial grass, serving as a seat for the
gods.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[45:4](sbe44017.htm#fr_176.md) Literally, will
force down (the other). On this ordeal see E. Schlagintweit, Die
Gottesurtheile der Indier, Nachträge; A. Weber, Ind. Streifen I, p. 21;
II, p. 363.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI, 3, 1. Third Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe44018.md)
