[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44060) 
[Next](sbe44062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4">12:4:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:1">12:4:4:1</span></span>1. And,
in the morning, having taken out the ashes, and smeared (the
fire-places) with cow-dung, he lifts the two fires on the
churning-sticks, and returns (to the offering-ground). Having then
churned out the Gârhapatya, taken out the Âhavanîya, and brought the
Anvâhârya-pa*k*ana (to the southern hearth), he should prepare a cake on
eight potsherds to Agni Pathik*ri*t (the path-maker). The course of
procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should recite those same
seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying
of V*ri*tra <span id="fr_531"></span>[3](#fn_531); the sa*m*yâ*g*yâs are
two Virâ*g* verses <span id="fr_532"></span>[3](#fn_531); and the
invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:--(the anuvâkyâ,
*Ri*g-veda VI, 16, 3), 'For thou, most wise Agni, divine disposer,
readily knowest the ways and paths at sacrifices;' and the yâ*g*yâ
(*Ri*g-veda X, 2, 3), 'We have entered upon the path of the gods to
carry on what we can do: the wise Agni shall sacrifice,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

he shall be the priest, he shall order the sacrifices and their
seasons;' for Agni is the path-maker, the guide of paths: he, verily,
guides him upon the path of sacrifice. This, then, is the rite performed
in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:2">12:4:4:2</span></span>2. They
also say, 'If any one's fires were to come in contact with each other,
what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' If this
burning (fire) were to come (to the other) from behind, he may know that
light has come to him from beyond; that the gods have helped him, and
that he will become more glorious. But if his heart should at all
misgive him, let him prepare a cake on eight potsherds for Agni Vivi*k*i
(the discerning). The course of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he
should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two
butter-portions relate to the slaying of V*ri*tra; the sa*m*yâ*g*yâs are
two Virâ*g* verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as
follows:--(the anuvâkyâ, *Ri*g-veda VI, 6, 3), 'Thy brilliant, wind-sped
flames, bright Agni, spread in every direction: the divine ninefold
destroyers overpower the woods, boldly crushing them;' and the yâ*g*yâ
(*Ri*g-veda V, 8, 3), 'The tribes of men glorify thee, Agni, the
discerning knower of offerings, and most liberal dispenser of treasures;
thee, O wealthy one, dwelling in secret, yet visible to all,
loud-sounding offerer of sacrifice, glorying in ghee!' And if any one
should desire to rid himself of his spiteful enemy, let him, with that
object in view, perform this offering, and he verily will rid himself of
him. This; then, is the rite performed in that case.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:3">12:4:4:3</span></span>3. If,
however, this burning (fire) were to come from this side, he may know
that he will overcome his spiteful enemy; that he will become more
glorious. But if his heart should at all misgive him, let him prepare a
cake on eight potsherds for Agni Sa*m*varga (the despoiler). The course
of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should recite those same
seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions relate to the slaying
of V*ri*tra, the sa*m*yâ*g*yâs are two Virâ*g* verses; and the
invitatory and offering formulas are as follows:--(*Ri*g-veda VIII, 75,
15; Vâ*g*. S. XI, 71), 'From the far region cross thou over to the near:
protect thou that wherein I am!' and the yâ*g*yâ (*Ri*g-veda VIII, 75,
12), 'Desert us not in this great strife, like as the bearer of a load:
win thou the spoil (sa*m* varga*m* *g*aya), win riches thou!' And if any
one desire to despoil his spiteful enemy, let him, with that object in
view, perform this offering, and he verily will despoil him. This, then,
is the rite performed in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:4">12:4:4:4</span></span>4. They
also say, 'If the lightning were to burn any one's (sacrificial fire),
what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' Let him know
that light has come to him from above; that the gods have helped him,
and that he will become more glorious. But if his heart should at all
misgive him, let him prepare a cake on eight pot sherds for Agni Apsumat
(abiding in the waters). The course of procedure thereof (is as
follows):he should recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two
butter-portions relate to the slaying of V*ri*tra; the sa*m*yâ*g*yâs are
two Virâ*g* verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as
follows:

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --(*Ri*g-veda
VIII, 43, 9; Vâ*g*. S. XII, 36), 'In the waters, O Agni, is thy seat; as
such thou clingest to plants: being in (their) womb, thou art born
again;' and the yâ*g*yâ (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 37), 'Thou art the child of the
herbs, the child of the trees, the. child of all that is, O Agni, thou
art the child of the waters;'--he thereby bespeaks peace on the part of
those two (fires) for the safety of the Sacrificer's family and cattle.
This, then, is the rite performed in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:5">12:4:4:5</span></span>5. They
also say, 'If any one's fires were to come in contact with impure
(profane) fires, what rite and what expiation would there be in that
case?' Let him prepare a cake on eight potsherds for Agni *S*u*k*i (the
bright),--the course of procedure thereof (is as follows):--he should
recite those same seventeen kindling-verses; the two butter-portions
relate to the slaying of V*ri*tra; the sa*m*yâ*g*yâs are two Virâ*g*
verses; and the invitatory and offering formulas are as
follows:--(*Ri*g-veda VIII, 44, 21), 'Agni of brightest work, the bright
priest, the bright sage, brightly he shineth with offering fed;' and the
yâ*g*yâ (*Ri*g-veda VIII, 44, 17), 'Up rise thy flames, the bright, the
pure, the shining, thy lights, O Agni;'--he thereby bespeaks peace to
those two (kinds of fires) for the safety of the Sacrificer's family and
cattle. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:6">12:4:4:6</span></span>6. They
also say, 'If the sun were to set on any one's Âhavanîya not yet having
been taken out, what rite and what expiation would there be in that
case?' Verily, those rays (of the sun) are the All-gods: they go from
him, and that (Agnihotra) fails

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

him, because the gods go from him; and after that failure--whether he
know it or know it not--those two (fires) say, 'He (the sun) has set on
his unlifted (fire).' In such a case let him proceed thus:--having
fastened a piece of yellow gold to a plant of darbha grass, let him
order it to be taken towards the back (west): thus it is made of the
form of him who shines yonder; and that (sun) being the day, it is made
of the form of the day. And darbha plants are a means of
purification <span id="fr_533"></span>[1](#fn_532): he thus purifies it
thereby. Having then kindled some firewood, let him order it to be taken
forward (to the Âhavanîya hearth). A Brâhma*n*a descended from a *Ri*shi
should take it out, for a Brâhma*n*a descended from a *Ri*shi represents
all the deities: it is thus with the help of all the deities that he
causes it (the fire) to succeed. Having laid it down, he returns, and
having placed ghee on the Gârhapatya, taken it off, purified it and
looked down on it <span id="fr_534"></span>[2](#fn_533), he takes ghee
by four ladlings, and, having seized a log, he hastens up to the front;
and, having put the log on the Âhavanîya, he bends his right knee, and
offers with, 'To the All-gods, hail!' Even as one would call (back) to
him a Brâhma*n*a staying at one's dwelling, when he goes away offended,
by (presenting him with) a cow longing for the bull, so he thereby calls
to him the All-gods; and they indeed acknowledge, and

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

turn to, him. This, then, is the rite performed in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:4:7">12:4:4:7</span></span>7. They
also say, 'If the sun were to rise over any one's Âhavanîya not having
been taken out, what rite and what expiation would there be in that
case?' Verily, those rays are the All-gods; and, having dwelt there,
they now go from him, and that (Agnihotra) fails him, because the gods
go from him; and after that failure--whether he know it or know it
not--those two (fires) say, 'He (the sun) has risen on his unlifted
(fire)' In such a case let him proceed thus:--having fastened a piece of
white gold (silver) to a plant of darbha grass, let him order it to be
taken towards the front: thus it is made of the form of the moon; and,
the moon being the night, it is made of the form of the night. And
darbha plants are a means of purification: he thus purifies it thereby.
Having then kindled some firewood, let him order it to be taken after
(the piece of silver). A Brâhma*n*a descended from a *Ri*shi should take
it out, for a Brâhma*n*a descended from a *Ri*shi represents all the
deities: it is thus with the help of all the deities that he causes it
(the fire) to succeed. Having laid it down, he returns, and, having
placed ghee on the Gârhapatya, taken it off, purified it and looked down
upon it, he takes ghee in the same way as it was taken before, and,
having seized a log, he hastens up to the front; and, having put the log
on the Âhavanîya, he bends his right knee and offers with, 'To the
All-gods, hail!' The import is the same as before; and, verily, no hurt
and no harm of any kind befalls where that expiation is made. This,
then, is the rite performed in that case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_531"></span>[191:3](sbe44061.htm#fr_532) See notes on
[XIII, 4, 1, 13](sbe44102.htm#13:4:1:13).

<span id="fn_532"></span>[195:1](sbe44061.htm#fr_533) Viz. inasmuch as
they are used as strainers; see I, 1, 3, 5; cf. also part i, p. 84, note
2.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[195:2](sbe44061.htm#fr_534) Whilst, on
ordinary occasions, in clarifying butter for offering, the priest would
first make the lady of the house look down on the ghee taken from the
fire, before he himself (or the Sacrificer) does so (I, 3, 1, 19; 26);
on the present occasion--as at offerings to the Fathers (Kâty. II, 7, 4
comm.)--the priest alone does so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII, 5, 1. Fifth Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe44062)
