[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40006)  [Next](cc40008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1** *But I had determined* Whoever it was
that divided the chapters, made here a foolish division. For now at
length the Apostle explains, in what manner he had *spared* them. “I had
determined,” says he, “not to come to you any more in sorrow,” or in
other words, to occasion you sorrow by my coming. For he had come once
by an Epistle, by means of which he had severely pained them. Hence, so
long as they had not repented, he was unwilling to come to them, lest he
should be constrained to grieve them again, when present with them, for
he chose rather to give them longer time for repentance.  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) The word <span
id="viii.i-p3.2"></span>ἔκρινα *(I determined)* must be rendered in the
pluperfect tense,  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) for, when
assigning a reason for the delay that had occurred, he explains what had
been his intention previously.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span><span id="viii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**2.** *For if I make you sorry* Here we
have the proof of the foregoing statement. No one willingly occasions
sorrow to himself. Now Paul says, that he has such a fellow-feeling with
the Corinthians,  <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) that he cannot
feel joyful, unless he sees them happy. Nay more, he declares that they
were the source and the authors of his joy — which they could not be, if
they were themselves sorrowful. If this disposition prevail in pastors,
it will be the best restraint, to keep them back from alarming with
terrors those minds, which they ought rather to have encouraged by means
of a cheerful affability. For from this arises an excessively morose
harshness  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) — so that we do not
rejoice in the welfare of the Church, as were becoming.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#003)<span
id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. And I wrote this same unto you,
lest, when I came, I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to
rejoice; having confidence in you all, that my joy is *the joy* of you
all.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span>**3**. Et scripseram vobis hoc, ne veniens
tristitiam super tristitiam haberem, a quibus oportebat me gaudere:
fiduciam habens de vobis omnibus, quod meum gaudium vestrum omnium sit.

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span>**4**. For out of much affliction and
anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be
grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly
unto you.

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>**4**. Ex multa enim afflictione et
angustia cordis scripsi vobis per multas lacrimas: non ut
contristaremini, sed ut caritatem cognosceretis, quam habeo abundantius
erga vos.

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>**5**. But if any have caused grief, he
hath not grieved me, but in part: that I may not overcharge you all.

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>**5**. Si quis autem contristavit, non me
contristavit, sed ex parte: ut ne vos omnes gravem.

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>**3.** *I had written to you.* As he had
said a little before, that he delayed coming to them, in order that he
*might not come a second time in sorrow* and with severity, (<span
id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>[2Co
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>,)
so now also he lets them know, that he came the first time in sadness by
an Epistle, that they might not have occasion to feel this severity when
he was present with them. Hence they have no ground to complain of that
former sadness, in which he was desirous to consult their welfare. He
goes even a step farther, by stating that, when writing, he did not wish
to occasion them grief, or to give any expression of displeasure, but,
on the contrary, to give proof of his attachment and affection towards
them. In this way, if there was any degree of keenness in the Epistle,
he does not merely soften it, but even shows amiableness and suavity.
When, however, he confesses afterwards, what he here denies, he appears
to contradict himself. I answer, that there is no inconsistency, for he
does not come afterwards to confess, that it was his ultimate object to
*grieve* the Corinthians, but that this was the means, by which he
endeavored to conduct them to true joy. Previously, however, to his
stating this, he speaks here simply as to his design. He passes over in
silence, or delays mentioning for a little the means, which were not so
agreeable.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>*Having confidence* This confidence he
exercises towards the Corinthians, that they may thus in their turn be
persuaded of his friendly disposition. For he that hates, is envious;
but where joy is felt in common, there must in that case be perfect
love.  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) If, however, the
Corinthians are not in accordance with Paul’s opinion and judgment as to
them, they shamefully disappoint him.

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span><span id="viii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>**4.** *For out of much affliction* Here
he brings forward another reason with the view of softening the
harshness which he had employed. For those who smilingly take delight in
seeing others weep, inasmuch as they discover thereby their cruelty,
cannot and ought not to be borne with. Paul, however, declares that his
feeling was very different. “Intensity of grief,” says he, “has extorted
from me every thing that I have written.” Who would not excuse, and take
in good part what springs from such a temper of mind, more especially as
it was not on his own account or through his own fault, that he suffered
grief, and farther, he does not give vent to his grief, with the view of
lightning himself by burdening them, but rather, for the purpose of
shewing his affection for them? On these accounts, it did not become the
Corinthians to be offended at this somewhat severe reproof.

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span>He adds, *tears* — which, in a man that is
brave and magnanimous are a token of intense grief. Hence we see, from
what emotions of mind pious and holy admonitions and reproofs must of
necessity proceed. For there are many noisy reprovers, who, by
declaiming, or rather, fulminating against vices, display a surprising
ardour of zeal, while in the mean time they are at ease in their mind,
 <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) so that it might seem as if
they exercised their throat and sides  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) by way of sport. It is, however, the
part of a pious pastor, to weep within himself, before he calls upon
others to weep:  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) to feel
tortured in silent musings, before he shows any token of displeasure;
and to keep within his own breast more grief, than he causes to others.
We must, also, take notice of Paul’s tears, which, by their abundance,
shew tenderness of heart, but it is of a more heroical character than
was the iron-hearted hardness of the Stoics.  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) For the more tender the affections of
love are, they are so much the more praiseworthy.

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span>The adverb *more abundantly* may be
explained in a comparative sense; and, in that case, it would be a tacit
complaint — that the Corinthians do not make an equal return in respect
of affection, inasmuch as they love but coldly one by whom they are
ardently loved. I take it, however, in a more simple way, as meaning
that Paul commends his affection towards them, in order that this
assurance may soften down every thing of harshness that might be in his
words.

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span><span id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span>**5.** *But if any one.* Here is a *third*
reason with the view of alleviating the offense — that he had grief in
common with them, and that the occasion of it came from another quarter.
“We have,” says he, “been alike grieved, and another is to blame for
it.” At the same time he speaks of that person, too, somewhat mildly,
when he says, *if any one* — not affirming the thing, but rather leaving
it in suspense. This passage, however, is understood by some, as if Paul
meant to say: “He that has given me occasion of grief, has given offense
to you also; for you ought to have felt grieved along with me, and yet I
have been left almost to grieve alone. For I do not wish to say so
absolutely — *that I may not put the blame upon you all.”* In this way
the second clause would contain a correction of the first. Chrysostom’s
exposition, however, is much more suitable; for he reads it as one
continued sentence — “*He hath not grieved me alone, but almost all of
you.* And as to my saying *in part,* I do so in order that I may not
*bear too hard upon him.”*  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) I
differ from Chrysostom merely in the clause *in part,* for I understand
it as meaning *in some measure.* I am aware, that Ambrose understands it
as meaning — part of the saints, inasmuch as the Church of the
Corinthians was divided; but that is more ingenious than solid.

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 2:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)<span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**6**. Sufficient to such a man *is* this
punishment, which *was inflicted* of many.

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span>**6**. Sufficit ei, qui talis est,
correctio, quae illi contigit a pluribus.

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span>**7.** So that contrariwise ye *ought*
rather to forgive *him*, and comfort *him*, lest perhaps such a one
should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>**7**. Ut potius e diverso debeatis
condonare, et consolari: ne forte abundantiori tristitia absorbeatur,
qui eiusmodi est.

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>**8**. Wherefore I beseech you that ye
would confirm *your* love toward him.

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>**8**. Quamobrem obsecro vos, ut
confirmetis erga eum caritatem.

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span>**9**. For to this end also did I write,
that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in all
things.

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>**9**. Nam in hoc etiam scripseram vobis,
ut probationem vestri cognoscerem: an ad omnia obedientes sitis.

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span>**10.** To whom ye forgive any thing, I
*forgive* also: for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave *it*, for
your sakes *forgave I it* in the person of Christ;

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span>**10.** Cui autem condonatis, etiam ego:
etenim cui condonavi, si quid condonavi, propter vos condonavi in
conspectu Christi.

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span>**11.** Lest Satan should get an
advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>**11.** Ut ne occupemur a Satana: non
enim cogitationes eius ignoramus.

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span><span id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span>**6.** *Sufficient.* He now extends
kindness even to the man who had sinned more grievously than the others,
and on whose account his anger had been kindled against them all,
inasmuch as they had connived at his crime. In his showing indulgence
even to one who was deserving of severer punishment, the Corinthians
have a striking instance to convince them, how much he disliked
excessive harshness. It is true, that he does not act this part merely
for the sake of the Corinthians, but because he was naturally of a
forgiving temper; but still, in this instance of mildness, the
Corinthians could not but perceive his remarkable kindness of
disposition. In addition to this, he does not merely show himself to be
indulgent, but exhorts others to receive him into favor, in the exercise
of the same mildness.

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span>Let us, however, consider these things a
little more minutely. He refers to the man who had defiled himself by an
incestuous marriage with his mother-in-law. As the iniquity was not to
be tolerated, Paul had given orders, that the man should be
excommunicated. He had, also, severely reproved the Corinthians, because
they had so long given encouragement to that enormity  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) by their dissimulation and patient
endurance. It appears from this passage, that he had been brought to
repentance, after having been admonished by the Church. Hence Paul gives
orders, that he be forgiven, and that he be also supported by
consolation.

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>This passage ought to be carefully
observed, as it shows us, with what equity and clemency the discipline
of the Church ought to be regulated, in order that there may not be
undue severity. There is need of strictness, in order that the wicked
may not be rendered more daring by impunity, which is justly pronounced
an allurement to vice. But on the other hand, as there is a danger of
the person, who is chastised, becoming dispirited, moderation must be
used as to this — so that the Church shall be prepared to extend
forgiveness, so soon as she is fully satisfied as to his penitence. In
this department, I find a lack of wisdom on the part of the ancient
bishops; and indeed they ought not to be excused, but on the contrary,
we ought rather to mark their error, that we may learn to avoid it. Paul
is satisfied with the repentance of the offender, that a reconciliation
may take place with the Church. They, on the other hand, by making no
account of his repentance, have issued out canons as to repentance
during three years, during seven years, and in some cases during life.
By these they exclude poor unhappy men from the fellowship of the
Church. And, in this way, the offender is either alienated the more from
the Church, or  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) is induced to
practice hypocrisy. But even if the enactment were more plausible in
itself, this consideration would, in my view, be enough to condemn it —
that it is at variance with the rule of the Holy Spirit, which the
Apostle here prescribes.

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span><span id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span>**7.** *Lest such an one should be
swallowed up by overmuch sorrow* The end of excommunication, so far as
concerns the power of the offender, is this: that, overpowered with a
sense of his sin, he may be humbled in the sight of God and the Church,
and may solicit pardon with sincere dislike and confession of guilt. The
man who has been brought to this, is now more in need of consolation,
than of severe reproof. Hence, if you continue to deal with him harshly,
it will be — not discipline, but cruel domineering. Hence we must
carefully guard against pressing them beyond this limit.  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) For nothing is more dangerous, than to
give Satan a handle, to tempt an offender to despair. Now we furnish
Satan with arms in every instance, in which we leave without consolation
those, who are in good earnest affected with a view of their sin.

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span><span id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span>**9.** *For I had written to you also for
this purpose.* He anticipates an objection, that they might bring
forward. “What then did you mean, when you were so very indignant,
because we had not inflicted punishment upon him? From being so stern a
judge, to become all at once a defender — is not this indicative of a
man, that wavers between conflicting dispositions?”  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) This idea might detract greatly from
Paul’s authority; but he answers, that he has obtained what he asked,
and that he was therefore satisfied, so that he must now give way to
compassion. For, their carelessness having been corrected, there was
nothing to hinder their lifting up the man by their clemency, when now
prostrate and downcast.  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324)

<span id="viii.iii-p28"></span><span id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p29"></span>**10.** *To whom ye forgive*. That he
might the more readily appease them, he added his vote in support of the
pardon extended by them.  <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) “Do
not hesitate to forgive: I promise that I shall confirm whatever you may
have done, and I already subscribe your sentence of forgiveness.”
*Secondly*, he says that he does this *for their sake;* and that too,
sincerely and cordially. He had already shown how desirous he was, that
the man’s welfare should be consulted: he now declares, that he grants
this willingly to the Corinthians.

<span id="viii.iii-p31"></span>Instead of the expression *in the sight
of Christ*, some prefer *person*,  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) because Paul in that reconciliation
was in the room of Christ,  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) and
did in a manner represent his person.  <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) I am, however, more inclined to
understand him as declaring, that he forgives sincerely and without any
pretence. For he is accustomed to employ this phrase to express pure and
undisguised rectitude. If, however, any one prefers the former
interpretation, it is to be observed that the *person of Christ* is
interposed, because there is nothing that ought to incline us more to
the exercise of mercy.

<span id="viii.iii-p35"></span><span id="viii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p36"></span>**11.** *That we may not be taken
advantage of by Satan.* This may be viewed as referring to what he had
said previously respecting excessive sorrow. For it is a most wicked
 <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) fraud of Satan, when depriving
us of all consolation, he swallows us up, as it were, in a gulf of
despair; and such is the explanation that is given of it by Chrysostom.
I prefer, however, to view it as referring to Paul and the Corinthians.
For there was a twofold danger, that beset them from the stratagems of
Satan — in the event of their being excessively harsh and rigorous, or,
on the other hand, in case of dissension arising among them. For it very
frequently happens, that, under colour of zeal for discipline, a
Pharisaical rigour creeps in, which hurries on the miserable offender to
ruin, instead of curing him. It is rather, however, in my opinion, of
the *second* danger that he speaks; for if Paul had not to some extent
favored the wishes of the Corinthians, Satan would have prevailed by
kindling strife among them.

<span id="viii.iii-p38"></span>*For we are not ignorant of his devices*
That is, “We know, from being warned of it by the Lord, that one
stratagem to which he carefully has recourse is, that when he cannot
ruin us by open means, he surprises us when off our guard by making a
secret attack.  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) As, then, we are
aware that he makes an attack upon us by indirect artifices, and that he
assails us by secret machinations, we must look well before us, and
carefully take heed that he may not, from some quarter, do us injury. He
employs the word *devices* in the sense in which the Hebrews make use of
the term <span id="viii.iii-p39.2"></span>זמה (*zimmah*,) but in a bad
sense,  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) as meaning artful
schemes and machinations, which ought not to be unknown to believers,
and will not be so, provided they give themselves up to the guidance of
God’s Spirit. In short, as God warns us, that Satan employs every means
to impose upon us, and, in addition to this, shows us by what methods he
may practice imposture upon us, it is our part to be on the alert, that
he may have not a single chink to creep through.

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 2:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012)<span
id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** Furthermore, when I came to Troas
to *preach* Christ’s gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord,

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span>**12.** Porro quum venissem Troadem in
Evangelium Christi; etiam ostio mihi aperto in Domino,

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span>**13.** I had no rest in my spirit, because
I found not Titus my brother: but taking my leave of them, I went from
thence into Macedonia.

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span>**13.** Non habui relaxationem spiritui
meo, eo quod non inveneram Titum fratrem meum; sed illis valedicens
profectus sum in Macedoniam.

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span>**14.** Now thanks *be* unto God, which
always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour
of his knowledge by us in every place.

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span>**14.** Deo autem gratia, qui semper
triumphare nos facit in Christo; et odorem cognitionis eius manifestat
per nos in omni loco.

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span>**15.** For we are unto God a sweet savour
of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish:

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span>**15.** Quia Christi suavis odor sumus Deo,
in iis qui salvi fiunt, et in iis qui pereunt.

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span>**16.** To the one *we are* the savour of
death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who
*is* sufficient for these things?

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span>**16.** Aliis quidem odor mortis in
mortem, illis vero odor vitae in vitam; et ad haec quis idoneus?

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span>**17.** For we are not as many, which
corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the
sight of God speak we in Christ.

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span>**17.** Non enim sumus quemadmodum multi,
adulterantes sermonem Dei: sed tanquam ex sinceritate, tanquam ex Deo,
in conspectu Dei in Christo loquimur.  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332)

<span id="viii.iv-p15"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p16"></span><span id="viii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p17"></span>**12.** *When I had come to Troas* By now
mentioning what he had been doing in the mean time, in what places he
had been, and what route he had pursued in his journeyings, he more and
more confirms what he had said previously as to his coming to the
Corinthians. He says that he had come to Troas from Ephesus for the sake
of the gospel, for he would not have proceeded in that direction, when
going into Achaia, had he not been desirous to pass through Macedonia.
As, however, he did not find Titus there, whom he had sent to Corinth,
and by whom he ought to have been informed respecting the state of that
Church, though he might have done much good there, and though he had an
opportunity presented to him, yet, he says, setting everything aside, he
came to Macedonia, desirous to see Titus. Here is an evidence of a
singular degree of attachment to the Corinthians, that he was so anxious
respecting them, that he *had no rest* anywhere, even when a large
prospect of usefulness presented itself, until he had learned the state
of their affairs. Hence it appears why it was that he delayed his
coming. He did not wish to come to them until he had learned the state
of their affairs. Hence it appears, why it was that he delayed his
coming. He did not wish to come to them, until he had first had a
conversation with Titus. He afterwards learned from the report brought
him by Titus, that matters were at that time not yet ripe for his coming
to them. Hence it is evident, that Paul loved the Corinthians so much,
that he accommodated all his journeyings and long circuits to their
welfare, and that he had accordingly come to them later than he had
promised — not from having, in forgetfulness of his promise, rashly
changed his plan, or from having been carried away by some degree of
*fickleness,* (<span id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>[2Co
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#017)<span id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>,)
but because delay was more profitable for them.

<span id="viii.iv-p18"></span>*A door also having been opened to me.* We
have spoken of this metaphor when commenting on the last chapter of the
First Epistle. (<span id="viii.iv-p18.1"></span>[1Co
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#009)<span id="viii.iv-p18.1"></span>.)
Its meaning is, that an opportunity of promoting the gospel had
presented itself.  <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) For as an
opportunity of entering is furnished when the *door is opened,* so the
servants of the Lord make advances when an opportunity is presented. The
*door is shut,* when no prospect of usefulness is held out. Now as, on
the door being shut, it becomes us to enter upon a new course, rather
than by farther efforts to weary ourselves to no purpose by useless
labor, so where an opportunity presents itself of edifying, let us
consider that by the hand of God a door is opened to us for introducing
Christ there, and let us not withhold compliance with so kind an
indication from God.  <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)

<span id="viii.iv-p21"></span>It may seem, however, as if Paul had erred
in this — that disregarding, or at least leaving unimproved, an
opportunity that was placed within his reach, he betook himself to
Macedonia. “Ought he not rather to have applied himself to the work that
he had in hand, than, after making little more than a commencement,
break away all on a sudden in another direction?” We have also observed
already, that the *opening of a door* is an evidence of a divine call,
and this is undoubtedly true. I answer, that, as Paul was not by any
means restricted to one Church, but was bound to many at the same time,
it was not his duty, in consequence of the present aspect of one of
them, to leave off concern as to the others. Farther, the more
connection he had with the Corinthian Church, it was his duty to be so
much the more inclined to aid it; for we must consider it to be
reasonable, that a Church, which he had founded by his ministry, should
be regarded by him with a singular affection  <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) — just as at this day it is our duty,
indeed, to promote the welfare of the whole Church, and to be concerned
for the entire body of it; and yet, every one has, nevertheless, a
closer and holier connection with his own Church, to whose interests he
is more particularly devoted. Matters were in an unhappy state at
Corinth, so that Paul was in no ordinary degree anxious as to the issue.
It is not, therefore, to be wondered, if, under the influence of this
motive, he left unimproved an opportunity that in other circumstances
was not to be neglected; as it was not in his power to occupy every post
of duty at one and the same time. It is not, however, at all likely that
he left Troas, till he had first introduced some one in his place to
improve the opening that had occurred.  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)

<span id="viii.iv-p24"></span><span id="viii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p25"></span>**14.** *But thanks be to God* Here he
again glories in the success of his ministry, and shows that he had been
far from idle in the various places he had visited; but that he may do
this in no invidious way, he sets out with a thanksgiving, which we
shall find him afterwards repeating. Now he does not, in a spirit of
ambition, extol his own actions, that his name may be held in renown,
nor does he, in mere pretense, give thanks to God in the manner of the
Pharisee, while lifted up, in the mean time, with pride and arrogance.
(<span id="viii.iv-p25.1"></span>[Lu
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span
id="viii.iv-p25.1"></span>.) Instead of this, he desires from his heart,
that whatever is worthy of praise, be recognised as the work of God
alone, that his power alone may be extolled. Farther, he recounts his
own praises with a view to the advantage of the Corinthians, that, on
hearing that he had served the Lord with so much fruit in other places,
they may not allow his labor to be unproductive among themselves, and
may learn to respect his ministry, which God everywhere rendered so
glorious and fruitful. For what God so illustriously honors, it is
criminal to despise, or lightly esteem. Nothing was more injurious to
the Corinthians, than to have an unfavorable view of Paul’s Apostleship
and doctrine: nothing, on the other hand, was more advantageous, than to
hold both in esteem. Now he had begun to be held in contempt by many,
and hence, it was not his duty to be silent. In addition to this, he
sets this holy boasting in opposition to the revilings of the wicked.

<span id="viii.iv-p26"></span>*Who causeth us to triumph* If you render
the word literally, it will be, <span id="viii.iv-p26.1"></span>*Qui nos
triumphat* — *Who triumpheth over us.*  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) Paul, however, means something
different from what this form of expression denotes among the Latins.
 <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) For captives are said to be
*triumphed over,* when, by way of disgrace, they are bound with chains
and dragged before the chariot of the conqueror. Paul’s meaning, on the
other hand, is, that he was also a sharer in the triumph enjoyed by God,
because it had been gained by his instrumentality, just as the
lieutenants accompanied on horseback the chariot of the chief general,
as sharers in the honor.  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) As,
accordingly, all the ministers of the gospel fight under God’s auspices,
so they also procure for him the victory and the honor of the *triumph*;
 <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) but, at the same time, he
honors each of them with a share of the *triumph,* according to the
station assigned him in the army, and proportioned to the exertions made
by him. Thus they enjoy, as it were, a *triumph,* but it is God’s rather
than theirs.  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341)

<span id="viii.iv-p32"></span>He adds, *in Christ,* in whose person God
himself *triumphs,* inasmuch as he has conferred upon him all the glory
of empire. Should any one prefer to render it thus: “Who triumphs by
means of us,” even in that way a sufficiently consistent meaning will be
made out.

<span id="viii.iv-p33"></span>*The odor of his knowledge.* The *triumph*
consisted in this, that God, through his instrumentality, wrought
powerfully and gloriously, perfuming the world with the health-giving
*odor* of his grace, while, by means of his doctrine, he brought some to
the knowledge of Christ. He carries out, however, the metaphor of
*odor,* by which he expresses both the delectable sweetness of the
gospel, and its power and efficacy for inspiring life. In the mean time,
Paul instructs them, that his preaching is so far from being savourless,
that it quickens souls by its very *odor.* Let us, however, learn from
this, that those alone make right proficiency in the gospel, who, by the
sweet fragrance of Christ, are stirred up to desire him, so as to bid
farewell to the allurements of the world.

<span id="viii.iv-p34"></span>He says *in every place,* intimating by
these words, that he went to no place in which he did not gain some
fruit, and that, wherever he went, there was to be seen some reward of
his labor. The Corinthians were aware, in how many places he had
previously sowed the seed of Christ’s gospel. He now says, that the last
corresponded with the first.  <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)

<span id="viii.iv-p36"></span><span id="viii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p37"></span>**15.** *A sweet odor of Christ* The
metaphor which he had applied to the knowledge of Christ, he now
transfers to the persons of the Apostles, but it is for the same reason.
For as they are called the *light of the world,* (<span
id="viii.iv-p37.1"></span>[Mt
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="viii.iv-p37.1"></span>,)
because they enlighten men by holding forth the torch of the gospel, and
not as if they shone forth upon them with their own lustre; so they have
the name of *odor,* not as if they emitted any fragrance of themselves,
but because the doctrine which they bring is odoriferous, so that it can
imbue the whole world with its delectable fragrance.  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) It is certain, however, that this
commendation is applicable to all the ministers of the gospel, because
wherever there is a pure and unvarnished proclamation of the gospel,
there will be found *there* the influence of that *odor,* of which Paul
here speaks. At the same time, there is no doubt, that he speaks
particularly of himself, and those that were like him, turning to his
own commendation what slanderers imputed to him as a fault. For his
being opposed by many, and exposed to the hatred of many, was the reason
why they despised him. He, accordingly, replies, that faithful and
upright ministers of the gospel have a sweet odor before God, not merely
when they quicken souls by a wholesome savour, but also, when they bring
destruction to unbelievers. Hence the gospel ought not to be less
esteemed on that account. “Both odors,” says he, “are grateful to God —
that by which the elect are refreshed unto salvation, and that from
which the wicked receive a deadly shock.”

<span id="viii.iv-p39"></span>Here we have a remarkable passage, by
which we are taught, that, whatever may be the issue of our preaching,
it is, notwithstanding, well-pleasing to God, if the Gospel is preached,
and our service will be acceptable to him; and also, that it does not
detract in any degree from the dignity of the Gospel, that it does not
do good to all; for God is glorified even in this, that the Gospel
becomes an occasion of ruin to the wicked, nay, it must turn out so. If,
however, this is a *sweet odor* to God, it ought to be so to us also, or
in other words, it does not become us to be offended, if the preaching
of the Gospel is not salutary to all; but on the contrary, let us
reckon, that it is quite enough, if it advance the glory of God by
bringing just condemnation upon the wicked. If, however, the heralds of
the Gospel are in bad odor in the world, because their success does not
in all respects come up to their desires, they have this choice
consolation, that they waft to God the perfume of a sweet fragrance, and
what is to the world an offensive smell, is a *sweet odor* to God and
angels.  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344)

<span id="viii.iv-p41"></span>The term *odor* is very emphatic. “Such is
the influence of the Gospel in both respects, that it either quickens or
kills, not merely by its taste, but by its very smell. Whatever it may
be, it is never preached in vain, but has invariably an effect, either
for life, or for death.”  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) But it
is asked, how this accords with the nature of the Gospel, which we shall
find him, a little afterwards, calling the *ministry* of life? (<span
id="viii.iv-p42.3"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="viii.iv-p42.3"></span>.)
The answer is easy: The Gospel is preached for salvation: this is what
properly belongs to it; but believers alone are partakers of that
salvation. In the mean time, its being an occasion of condemnation to
unbelievers — that arises from their own fault. Thus

<span id="viii.iv-p43"></span>Christ came not into the world to condemn
the world,  
(<span id="viii.iv-p43.2"></span>[Joh
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span id="viii.iv-p43.2"></span>,)

<span id="viii.iv-p44"></span>for what need was there of this, inasmuch
as without him we are all condemned? Yet he sends his apostles to
*bind,* as well as to *loose,* and to *retain* sins, as well as *remit*
them. (<span id="viii.iv-p44.1"></span>[Mt
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="viii.iv-p44.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.iv-p44.2"></span>[Joh
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span
id="viii.iv-p44.2"></span>.) He is the *light of the world,* (<span
id="viii.iv-p44.3"></span>[Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="viii.iv-p44.3"></span>,)
but he blinds unbelievers. (<span id="viii.iv-p44.4"></span>[Joh
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)<span id="viii.iv-p44.4"></span>.)
He is a Rock, for a foundation, but he is also to many a stone of
stumbling.  <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) (<span
id="viii.iv-p45.2"></span>[Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="viii.iv-p45.2"></span>.)
We must always, therefore, distinguish between the proper office of the
Gospel,  <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) and the accidental one
(so to speak) which must be imputed to the depravity of mankind, to
which it is owing, that life to them is turned into death.

<span id="viii.iv-p47"></span><span id="viii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p48"></span>**16.** *And who is sufficient for these
things?* This exclamation is thought by some  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) to be introduced by way of guarding
against arrogance, for he confesses, that to discharge the office of a
good Apostle  <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) to Christ is a
thing that exceeds all human power, and thus he ascribes the praise to
God. Others think, that he takes notice of the small number of good
ministers. I am of opinion, that there is an implied contrast that is
shortly afterwards expressed. “Profession, it is true, is common, and
many confidently boast; but to have the reality, is indicative of a rare
and distinguished excellence.  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) I
claim nothing for myself, but what will be discovered to be in me, if
trial is made.” Accordingly, as those, who hold in common the office of
instructor, claim to themselves indiscriminately the title, Paul, by
claiming to himself a peculiar excellence, separates himself from the
herd of those, who had little or no experience of the influence of the
Spirit.

<span id="viii.iv-p52"></span><span id="viii.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p53"></span>**17.** *For we are not.* He now contrasts
himself more openly with the false apostles, and that by way of
amplifying, and at the same time, with the view of excluding them from
the praise that he had claimed to himself. “It is on good grounds,” says
he, “that I speak in honorable terms of my apostleship, for I am not
afraid of being convicted of vanity, if proof is demanded. But many on
false grounds arrogate the same thing to themselves, who will be found
to have nothing in common with me. For they *adulterate the word of the
Lord,* which I dispense with the greatest faithfulness and sincerity for
the edification of the Church.” I do not think it likely, however, that
those, who are here reproved, preached openly wicked or false doctrines;
but am rather of opinion, that they corrupted the right use of doctrine,
for the sake either of gain or of ambition, so as utterly to deprive it
of energy. This he terms *adulterating.* Erasmus prefers to render *it*
— <span id="viii.iv-p53.1"></span>*cauponari* — *huckstering*  <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) The Greek word <span
id="viii.iv-p54.2"></span>καπηλεύειν*,* is taken from retailers, or
tavern-keepers, who are accustomed to adulterate their commodities, that
they may fetch a higher price. I do not know whether the word <span
id="viii.iv-p54.3"></span>*cauponari* is used in that sense among the
Latins.  <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352)

<span id="viii.iv-p56"></span>It is, indeed, certain from the
corresponding clause, that Paul intended to express here — corruption of
doctrine — not as though they had revolted from the truth, but because
they presented it under disguise, and not in its genuine purity. For the
doctrine of God is corrupted in two ways. It is corrupted in a *direct*
way, when it is mixed up with falsehood and lies, so as to be no longer
the pure and genuine doctrine of God, but is falsely commended under
that title. It is corrupted *indirectly,* when, although retaining its
purity, it is turned hither and thither to please men, and is disfigured
by unseemly disguises, by way of hunting after favor. Thus there will be
found some, in whose doctrine there will be no impiety detected, but as
they hunt after the applauses of the world by making a display of their
acuteness and eloquence, or are ambitious of some place, or gape for
*filthy lucre,* (<span id="viii.iv-p56.1"></span>[1Ti
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008)<span id="viii.iv-p56.1"></span>,)
or are desirous by some means or other to rise, they, nevertheless,
corrupt the doctrine itself by wrongfully abusing it, or making it
subservient to their depraved inclinations. I am, therefore, inclined to
retain the word *adulterate,* as it expresses better what ordinarily
happens in the case of all that play with the sacred word of God, as
with a ball, and transform it according to their own convenience.  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) For it must necessarily be, that they
degenerate from the truth, and preach a sort of artificial and spurious
Gospel.

<span id="viii.iv-p58"></span>*But as of sincerity.* The word *as* here
is superfluous, as in many other places.  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) In contrast with the corruption that
he had made mention of, he makes use, *first of all*, of the term
*sincerity,* which may be taken as referring to the manner of preaching,
as well as to the disposition of the mind. I approve rather of the
latter. *Secondly,* he places in contrast with it a faithful and
conscientious dispensation of it, inasmuch as he faithfully delivers to
the Church from hand to hand,  <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355)
as they say, the Gospel which God had committed to him, and had given
him in charge. *Thirdly,* he subjoins to this a regard to the Divine
presence. For whoever has the three following things, is in no danger of
forming the purpose of corrupting the word of God. The *first* is — that
we be actuated by a true zeal for God. The *second* is — that we bear in
mind that it is his business that we are transacting, and bring forward
nothing but what has come from him. The *third* is — that we consider,
that we do nothing of which he is not the witness and spectator, and
thus learn to refer every thing to his judgment.

<span id="viii.iv-p61"></span>*In Christ* means *according to Christ.*
For the rendering of Erasmus, *By Christ,* is foreign to Paul’s
intention.  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc40007.htm#fr_310) <span
id="viii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p3.1"></span>De se
repentir et amender;” — “For repentance and amendment.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc40007.htm#fr_311) <span
id="viii.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p4.1"></span>Et de faict
il faut necessairement traduire, *l’auoye delitere*: non pas, l’ay
deliberé;” — “And indeed we must necessarily render it — I had
determined: not *I have determined*.”

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc40007.htm#fr_312) <span
id="viii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p7.1"></span>C’est à dire
vne telle conuenance et conionction de nature et d’affections, entre luy
et les Corinthiens;” — “That is to say, such an agreement and connection
of nature and affections between him and the Corinthians.”

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc40007.htm#fr_313) <span
id="viii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p8.1"></span>La seuerite
trop grande et chagrin;” — “An excessive severity and chagrin.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc40007.htm#fr_314) <span
id="viii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p12.1"></span>Il faut
bien dire que l’amitie y est entiere;” — “We cannot but say that there
is entire friendship.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc40007.htm#fr_315) <span
id="viii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p16.1"></span>Ils ne
s’en soucient point, et n’en sont nullement touchez;” — “They feel no
concern as to it, and are in no degree affected by it.”

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc40007.htm#fr_316) <span
id="viii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>En
criant;” — “In crying.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc40007.htm#fr_317) <span
id="viii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span> There can be little doubt that our author
had here in his eye the celebrated sentiment of *Horace*, in his “<span
id="viii.ii-p18.1"></span>Ars Poetica,” 50:102 — “<span
id="viii.ii-p18.2"></span>Si vis me flere, dolendum primum ipsi tibi;” —
“If you would have me weep, weep first yourself.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc40007.htm#fr_318) <span
id="viii.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>Qui
vouloyent apparoistre comme insensibles;” — “Who wished to seem as if
they were devoid of feeling.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc40007.htm#fr_319) <span
id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span> “The words may be rendered: ‘But if any
one (meaning the incestuous person) have occasioned sorrow, he hath not
so much grieved *me*, as, in some measure (that I may not bear too hard
upon him) all of *you* <span id="viii.ii-p23.1"></span>᾿Επιβαρῶ῎῝8217;
must, with the Syr. version and Emmerling, be taken intransitively, in
the sense — ‘<span id="viii.ii-p23.2"></span>ne quid gravius dicam,’
(that I may not say anything too severe,) *i.e.*, ‘<span
id="viii.ii-p23.3"></span>ne dicam nos solos,’ (that I may not say — us
alone.) Of this sense of <span id="viii.ii-p23.4"></span>ἐπιβαρεῖν τινι,
to *bear hard upon*, two examples are adduced by Wetstein from Appian.”
— *Bloomfield*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc40007.htm#fr_320) <span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p18.1"></span>De ce
qu’ils auoyent si longuement nourri ce mal — heureux en son peche;” —
“Because they had so long encouraged that unhappy man in his sin.”

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc40007.htm#fr_321) <span
id="viii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>Ou
pour le moins;” — “Or at least.”

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc40007.htm#fr_322) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p23.1"></span>Plus
qu’il est yci demonstré;” — “Beyond what is here pointed out.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc40007.htm#fr_323) <span
id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>D’vn
homme inconstant, et qui est mené de contraires affections;” — “Of a man
that is unsteady, and is influenced by conflicting dispositions.”

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc40007.htm#fr_324) <span
id="viii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>Ce
poure homme le voyans bien confus et abbatu;” — “This poor man, on
seeing him much abashed and overcome.”

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc40007.htm#fr_325) <span
id="viii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p30"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p30.1"></span>A ce
pecheur;” — “To this offender.”

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc40007.htm#fr_326) <span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p32"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p32.1"></span>Aucuns
aiment mieux dire, En la personne de Christ;” — “Some prefer to say, In
the person of Christ.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc40007.htm#fr_327) <span
id="viii.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>Estoit
comme lieutenant de Christ;” — “Was as it were Christ’s lieutenant.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc40007.htm#fr_328) <span
id="viii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p34"></span> Raphelius, in his Semicent. Annot.,
quotes a passage from Eusebius, (Hist. Eccl. lib. in. cap. 38,) in which
he makes mention of the Epistle of Clement, <span
id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>ἣν ἐκ προσώπου τὢς’” Ρωμαίων ᾿Εκκλησίας” τὣ
Κορινθίων διετυπώσατο — “which he wrote in the name of the Church of the
Romans to that of the Corinthians.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc40007.htm#fr_329) <span
id="viii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p37"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p37.1"></span>Tres
dangereuse;” — “Very dangerous.”

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc40007.htm#fr_330) <span
id="viii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p39"></span> The reader will find the same sentiment
expressed more fully by Calvin, in the Argument on the First Epistle to
the Corinthians, vol. 1, p. 38. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc40007.htm#fr_331) <span
id="viii.iii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p40"></span> The Hebrew term, <span
id="viii.iii-p40.1"></span>זמה,(*zimmah*,) is used in a bad sense, (as
meaning a wicked device,) in <span id="viii.iii-p40.2"></span>[Pr
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027)<span
id="viii.iii-p40.2"></span>, and <span id="viii.iii-p40.3"></span>[Pr
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p40.3"></span>.
The word employed by the apostle — <span
id="viii.iii-p40.4"></span>νοήματα — is made use of by Homer, (Iliad
10:104, 18:328,) as meaning *schemes* or *devices*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc40007.htm#fr_332) <span
id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p14.1"></span>Car nous
ne sommes point comme plusieurs, corrompans la parolle de Dieu: ains
nous parlons comme en purete, et comme de par Dieu, deuant Dieu en
Christ, *ou*, Car nous ne faisons pas traffique de la parolle de Dieu,
comme *font* plusieurs, ains nous parlons touchant Christ, *ou selon*
*Christ*, comme en integrite, et comme de par Dieu, deuant Dieu;” — “For
we are not as many, corrupting the word of God; but we speak, as in
purity, and as from God, before God in Christ; *or*, For we do not make
traffic of the word of God, as many do; but we speak concerning Christ,
or *according to Christ*, as in integrity, and as from God, before God.”

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc40007.htm#fr_333) <span
id="viii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p19"></span> Elsner, when commenting on 1 Corinthains
16:9, “*a great door and effectual is opened*,” after quoting a variety
of passages from Latin and Greek authors, in which a corresponding
metaphor is employed, observes that Rabbinical writers employ in the
same sense the term <span id="viii.iv-p19.1"></span>פתח, (*phethach*,) a
gate. Thus Raschi, when speaking of the question proposed to Hagar by
the angel, (*Whence camest thou*? <span id="viii.iv-p19.2"></span>[Ge
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#008)<span id="viii.iv-p19.2"></span>,)
remarks: “<span id="viii.iv-p19.3"></span>Noverat id (angelus) sed
(interrogavit) ut <span id="viii.iv-p19.4"></span>פתח, <span
id="viii.iv-p19.5"></span>januam, ei daret colloquendi;” — “He (the
angel) knew this, but (he proposed the question) that he might afford
her an opportunity of speaking to him.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc40007.htm#fr_334) <span
id="viii.iv-p19.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p20.1"></span>Ne
refusons point de nous employer en ce que nous pourrons seruir, quand
nous voyons que Dieu nous y inuite si liberalement;” — “Let us not
refuse to employ ourselves in rendering what service we can, when we see
that God invites us so kindly.”

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc40007.htm#fr_335) <span
id="viii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p22.1"></span>Fust
aimee de luy d’vne affection singuliere et speciale;” — “Should be loved
by him with a singular and special affection.”

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc40007.htm#fr_336) <span
id="viii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p23"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p23.1"></span>L’ouuerture que Dieu auoit faite;” — “The
opening that God had made.”

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc40007.htm#fr_337) <span
id="viii.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p27.1"></span>Qui
triomphe tousiours de nous;” — “Who always triumpheth over us.”

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc40007.htm#fr_338) <span
id="viii.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p28"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p28.1"></span>Θριαμβεύειν with the accusative is used here
like the hiphil of the Hebrew in the same way as <span
id="viii.iv-p28.2"></span>μαθητεύειν (to make a disciple) (<span
id="viii.iv-p28.3"></span>[Mt
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)<span
id="viii.iv-p28.3"></span>.) <span id="viii.iv-p28.4"></span>βασιλεύειν
(to make a king) (<span id="viii.iv-p28.5"></span>[1Sa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#022)<span id="viii.iv-p28.5"></span>)
and others.” — *Billroth* on the Corinthians. — Bib. Cab. No. 23, p. 181
The meaning is — “maketh us to triumph.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc40007.htm#fr_339) <span
id="viii.iv-p28.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p29"></span> On such occasions the <span
id="viii.iv-p29.1"></span>*legati* (lieutenants) of the general, and
military tribunes, commonly rode by his side. (See Cic. Pis. 25.) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc40007.htm#fr_340) <span
id="viii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p30"></span> “A *triumph* among the Romans, to which
the Apostle here alludes, was a public and solemn honor conferred by
them on a victorious general, by allowing him a magnificent procession
through the city. This was not granted by the senate unless the general
had gained *a very signal and decisive victory*; conquered a *province*,
etc. \[...\] The people at Corinth were sufficiently acquainted with the
nature of a *triumph*: about two hundred years before this, *Lucius
Mummius*, the Roman consul, had conquered all *Achaia*, destroyed
*Corinth, Thebes,* and *Chalcis*; and, by order of the senate, had a
grand triumph, and was surnamed *Achaicus*.” — *Dr. A. Clarke*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc40007.htm#fr_341) <span
id="viii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p31.1"></span>C’est
plustot au nom de Dieu, que en leur propre nom;” — “It is in God’s name,
rather than in their own.”

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc40007.htm#fr_342) <span
id="viii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p35"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p35.1"></span>La
benediction de Dieu continue sur son ministere comme on l’y auoit
apperceue au commencement;” — “The blessing of God continues upon his
ministry, as they had seen it do at the beginning.”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc40007.htm#fr_343) <span
id="viii.iv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p38"></span> “Elsner and many other commentators
think, with sufficient reason, that there is here an allusion to the
perfumes that were usually censed during the triumphal processions of
Roman conquerors. Plutarch, on an occasion of this kind, describes the
streets and temples as being <span id="viii.iv-p38.1"></span>θυμιαματων
πληρει” — ‘full of incense,’ which might not improperly be called an
odour of death to the vanquished, and of life to the conquerors. It is
possible that in the following verses the Apostle further alludes to the
different effects of strong perfumes, to cheer some, and to throw others
into various disorders, according to the different dispositions they may
be in to receive them. There is, perhaps, not equal foundation for
another conjecture which has been offered, that the expression, causeth
us to triumph in Christ, contains an allusion to the custom of
victorious generals, who, in their triumphal processions, were wont to
carry some of their relations with them in their chariot.” —
*Illustrated Commentary*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc40007.htm#fr_344) <span
id="viii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p40"></span> “‘We are unto God a sweet *savor* (or
*odour*, rather, as the word <span id="viii.iv-p40.1"></span>ὀσμὴ more
properly signifies) of Christ in them that are saved and in them that
perish. To the one we are the odour of death unto death; to the other,
the odour of life unto life.’ And this lay with a mighty weight upon his
spirit. O that ever we should be the savor of death unto death to any!
Who is sufficient for these things! But whether of life or death, we are
a sweet odour to God in Christ, as to both; when he sees the sincerity
of our hearts, and how fain we would fetch souls out of the state of
death into this life. So grateful and pleasant to him is the work
effected of saving souls, that the attempt and desire of it is not
ungrateful.“ — *Howe’s Works*, (Lond. 1834,) p.999.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc40007.htm#fr_345) <span
id="viii.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p42"></span> “*We are the savor of death unto death*.
It is probable that the language here used is borrowed from similar
expressions which were common among the Jews. Thus in Debarim Rabba,
section. 1. fol. 248, it is said, ‘As the bee brings some honey to the
owner, but stings others; so it is with the words of the law.’ ‘They
(the words of the law) are a *savor* *of life* to Israel, but *savor of
death* to the people of this world.’ Thus in Taarieth, fol. 7:1,
‘Whoever gives attention to the law on account of the law itself, to him
it becomes an *aromatic of life*, <span id="viii.iv-p42.1"></span>סם
חיים (*sam chiim*); but to him who does not attend to the law on account
of the law itself, to him it becomes an *aromatic of death*, <span
id="viii.iv-p42.2"></span>סם מות,(*sam maveth*)’ — the idea of which is,
that as medicines skilfully applied will heal, but if unskilfully
applied will aggravate a disease, so it is with the words of the law.
Again, ‘The word of the law which proceeds out of the mouth of God is an
*odour* *of life* to the Israelites, but an odour of death to the
Gentiles.’” — *Barnes*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc40007.htm#fr_346) <span
id="viii.iv-p44.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p45"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p45.1"></span>De
scandale et achoppement;” — “Of offense and stumbling.”

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc40007.htm#fr_347) <span
id="viii.iv-p45.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p46"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p46.1"></span>Le
propre et naturel office de l’Euangile;” — “The proper and natural
office of the Gospel.”

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc40007.htm#fr_348) <span
id="viii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p49"></span> Among these is Chrysostom, who, when
commenting upon this passage, says: <span
id="viii.iv-p49.1"></span>᾿Επειδὴ μεγάλα ἐφθέγξατο, ὃτι θυσία ἐσμὲν
τοῦ῎῝8217; Χριστοῦ῎῝8217; καὶ εὐωδία, καὶ θριαμβευόμεθα πανταχοῦ πάλιν
μετριάζει τῷ῎῝8217; θεῷ῎῝8217; πάντα ἀνατίθει διὸ καὶ φησὶ, καὶ πρὸς”
ταῦτα τίς” ἱκανός; τὸ γὰρ πᾶν τοῦ῎῝8217; Χριστοῦ, φησιν, εστιν οὐδὲν
ἡμέτερον ὁρᾶς’”ἐπεναντίας” ψευδαποστόλοις” φθεγγόμενον οἱ μὲν γὰρ
καυχῶνται ὡς” παρ ᾿ ἑαυτῶν εἰσφέροντές” τι εἰς” τὸ κήρυγμα οὗτος” δὲ διὰ
τοῦτό φησι καυχᾶσθαι, ἐπειδὴ οὐδὲν αὐτοῦ῎῝8217;φησιν εἶναι. — “Having
uttered great things — that we are an offering, and a sweet savor of
Christ, and that we are made to triumph everywhere, he again qualifies
this by ascribing everything to God. Accordingly he says: *And who is
sufficient for these things?* For everything, says he, is Christ’s —
nothing is ours: you see that he expresses himself in a manner directly
opposite to that of the false apostles. For these, indeed, boast, as if
they of themselves contributed something towards their preaching, while
he, on the other hand, says, that he boasts on this ground — because
nothing, he says, is his.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc40007.htm#fr_349) <span
id="viii.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p50"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p50.1"></span>Loyale
et fidele Apostre;” — “A loyal and faithful Apostle.”

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc40007.htm#fr_350) <span
id="viii.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p51"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p51.1"></span>C’est
vne vertu excellente, et bien clair semee;” — “It is a distinguished
excellence, and very thin sown.”

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc40007.htm#fr_351) <span
id="viii.iv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p54"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p54.1"></span>Erasme
l’a traduit par vn autre mot Latin que moy, qui vient d’vn mot qui
signifie tauernier;” — “Erasmus has rendered it by a Latin word
different from what I have used — derived from a word that signifies a
tavern — keeper.”

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc40007.htm#fr_352) <span
id="viii.iv-p54.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p55"></span> *Raphelius* adduces a passage from
Herodotus, (lib. in. page 225,) in which, when speaking of Darius
Hystaspes, who first exacted tribute from the Persians, he says that the
Persians said, “<span id="viii.iv-p55.1"></span>ὠς Δαρειος μεςν ἠν
καςπηλος, ὃτι εκαπελευε παντα τὰ πραςγματα,” — “that Darius was a
huckster, for he *made gain* of everything.” Herodian (lib. 6, cap. 11)
uses the expression, “<span id="viii.iv-p55.2"></span>Εἰρήνην χρύιου
καπηλευοντες,” — “Making peace *for money*.” The phrase, <span
id="viii.iv-p55.3"></span>*Cauponari bellum*, is employed in a similar
sense by Cicero (Off 1:12) as meaning, “to make war *for money*.” In
<span id="viii.iv-p55.4"></span>[Isa
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="viii.iv-p55.4"></span>,
the Septuagint version reads as follows: “<span
id="viii.iv-p55.5"></span>Οἱ κάπηλοί σου μισγοῦσι’τον οἰνον ὕδατι;” —
“Thy vintners mix the wine with water.” *Kaphlo*, as Dr. Bloomfield
shows by two passages from Plato, properly means a *retail-dealer*, one
who deals at second hand. “The <span id="viii.iv-p55.6"></span>κάπηλοι,”
he observes, “were *petty chapmen*, (and that chiefly in eatables or
drinkables,) exactly corresponding to our hucksters.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc40007.htm#fr_353) <span
id="viii.iv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p57"></span> The reader will find this class of
persons referred to at greater length by Calvin, when commenting on
<span id="viii.iv-p57.2"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019)<span id="viii.iv-p57.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc40007.htm#fr_354) <span
id="viii.iv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p59"></span> Thus in <span
id="viii.iv-p59.1"></span>[Ac
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014)<span id="viii.iv-p59.1"></span>,
we read that the brethren sent away Paul to go (<span
id="viii.iv-p59.2"></span>ὡς” ἐπὶ την θαλασσαν) as to the sea, where
<span id="viii.iv-p59.3"></span>ὡς (*as*) is redundant, in accordance
with various instances cited by *Wetstein* from *Pausanias* and Arrian
of the very same expression. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc40007.htm#fr_355) <span
id="viii.iv-p59.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p60"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1,
pp. 150, 373, and vol. 2, p. 9.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc40007.htm#fr_356) <span
id="viii.iv-p61.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p62"></span> The expression is rendered by Dr.
Bloomfield, “In the name of Christ, as his legates.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc40008)
