[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40013)  [Next](cc40015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** For as touching the ministering to the
saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you:

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Nam de subministratione quae fit in
sanctos, supervacuum mihi est scribere vobis.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** For I know the forwardness of your
mind, for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was
ready a year ago; and your zeal hath provoked very many.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Novi enim promptitudinem animi vestri,
de qua pro vobis gloriatus sum apud Macedones: quod Achaia parata sit ab
anno superiori: et aemulatio vestri excitavit complures.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our
boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye
may be ready:

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Misi autem fratres, ut ne gloriatio
nostra de vobis inanis fiat in hac parte: ut, quemadmodum dixi, parati
sitis.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** Lest haply if they of Macedonia come
with me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should be
ashamed in this same confident boasting.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ne si forte mecum venerint Macedones,
et vos deprehenderint imparatos, nos pudore suffundamur (ne dicam vos)
in hac fiducia gloriationis.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** Therefore I thought it necessary to
exhort the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up
beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had notice before, that the same
might be ready, as *a matter of* bounty, and not as *of* covetousness.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Necessarium ergo existimavi, exhortari
fratres, ut ante venirent ad vos: ut praepararent qante promissam
benedictionem vestram, quo in promptu sit, atque ita ut benedictio,
 <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702) non tenacitas.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span><span id="xv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>This statement may seem at first view to suit
ill, or not sufficiently well, with what goes before; for he seems to
speak of a new matter, that he had not previously touched upon, while in
reality he is following out the same subject. Let the *reader,* however,
observe, that Paul treats of the very same matter that he had been
treating of before — that it was from no want of confidence that he
exhorted the Corinthians, and that his admonition is not coupled with
any reproof as to the past, but that he has particular reasons that
influence him. The meaning, then, of what he says now is this: “I do not
teach you that it is a duty to afford relief to the saints, for what
need were there of this? For that is sufficiently well known to you, and
you have given practical evidence that you are not prepared to be
wanting to them;  <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703) but as I have,
from boasting everywhere of your liberality, pledged my credit along
with yours, this consideration will not allow me to refrain from
speaking.” But for this, such anxious concern might have been somewhat
offensive to the Corinthians, because they would have thought, either
that they were reproached for their indolence, or that they were
suspected by Paul. By bringing forward, however, a most, suitable
apology, he secures for himself the liberty of not merely exhorting
them, without giving offense, but even from time to time urging them.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>Some one, however, may possibly suspect, that
Paul here pretends what he does not really think. This were exceedingly
absurd; for if he reckons them to be sufficiently prepared for doing
their duty, why does he set himself so vigorously to admonish them? and,
on the other hand, if he is in doubt as to their willingness, why does
he declare it to be unnecessary to admonish them? Love carries with it
these two things, — good hope, and anxious concern. Never would he have
borne such a testimony in favor of the Corinthians, had he not been
fully of the mind that he expresses. He had seen a happy commencement:
he had hoped, that the farther progress of the matter would be
corresponding; but as he was well aware of the unsteadiness of the human
mind, he could not provide too carefully against their turning aside
from their pious design.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**1.** *Ministering.* This term seems not
very applicable to those that give of their substance to the poor,
inasmuch as liberality is deserving of a more splendid designation.
 <span id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) Paul, however, had in view,
what believers owe to their fellowmembers.  <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705) For the members of Christ ought
mutually to minister to each other. In this way, when we relieve the
brethren, we do nothing more than discharge a ministry that is due to
them. On the other hand, to neglect the saints, when they stand in need
of our aid, is worse than inhuman, inasmuch as we defraud them of what
is their due.

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span><span id="xv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>**2.** *For which I have boasted.* He shows
the good opinion that he had of them from this, that he had, in a
manner, stood forward as their surety by asserting their readiness. But
what if he rashly asserted more than the case warranted? For there is
some appearance of this, inasmuch as he boasted, that they had been
*ready a year before* with it, while he is still urging them to have it
in readiness. I answer, that his words are not to be understood as
though Paul had declared, that what they were to give was already laid
aside in the chest, but he simply mentioned what had been resolved upon
among them. This involves no blame in respect of fickleness or mistake.
It was, then, of this promise that Paul spoke.  <span
id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706)

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span><span id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>**3.** *But I have sent the brethren.* He now
brings forward the reason — why it is that, while entertaining a
favorable opinion as to their willingness, he, nevertheless, sets
himself carefully to exhort them. “I consult,” says he, “my own good
name and yours; for while I promised in your name, we would, both of us
in common, incur disgrace, if words and deeds did not correspond. Hence
you ought to take my fears in good part.”

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span><span id="xv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>**4.** *In this confidence* The Greek term
being <span id="xv.i-p27.2"></span>ὑπόστασις the Old Interpreter has
rendered it <span id="xv.i-p27.3"></span>*substantiam,* (*substance.*)
 <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707) Erasmus renders it <span
id="xv.i-p28.1"></span>*argumentum,* (*subject-matter,*) but neither is
suitable. Budaeus, however, observes, that this term is sometimes taken
to mean *boldness,* or *confidence,* as it is used by Polybius when he
says, <span id="xv.i-p28.2"></span>ὀυχ οὑτω την δύναμιν ὡς τὴν ὑπόστασιν
καὶ τόλμαν αὐτοῦ καταπεπληγμένον τῶν εναντίων — “It was not so much his
bodily strength, as his *boldness* and intrepidity, that proved
confounding to the enemy.”  <span id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708)
Hence <span id="xv.i-p29.3"></span>ὑποτατικός sometimes means one that
is *bold* and *confident.*  <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) Now
*every* one must see, how well this meaning accords with Paul’s thread
of discourse. Hence it appears, that other interpreters have, through
inadvertency, fallen into a mistake.

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span><span id="xv.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>**5.** *As a blessing, not in the way of
niggardliness* In place of *blessing,* some render it *collection.* I
have preferred, however, to render it literally, as the Greeks employed
the term <span id="xv.i-p32.1"></span>εὐλογίας to express the Hebrew
word <span id="xv.i-p32.2"></span>ברכה, (*beracah,*) which is used in
the sense of *a blessing,* that is, an invoking of prosperity, as well
as in the sense of *beneficence.*  <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710) The reason I reckon to be this, that
it is in the first instance ascribed to God.  <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711) Now we know how God blesses us
efficiently by his simple nod.  <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712)
When it is from this transferred to men, it retains the same meaning, —
improperly, indeed, inasmuch as men have not the same efficacy in
blessing,  <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) but yet not
unsuitably by transference.  <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714)

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>To *blessing* Paul opposes <span
id="xv.i-p38.1"></span>πλεονεξίαν*,* (*grudging,*) which term the Greeks
employ to denote excessive greediness, as well as fraud and
niggardliness.  <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) I have rather
preferred the term *niggardliness* in this contrast; for Paul would have
them give, not grudgingly, but. with a liberal spirit, as will appear
still more clearly from what follows.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
9:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** But this *I say*, He which soweth
sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully
shall reap also bountifully.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Hoc autem (est): Qui sementem facit
parce, is parce messurus est: et qui sementem facit in benedictionibus,
 <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) in benedictionibus  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) etiam metet.

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Every man according as he purposeth in
his heart, *so let him give;* not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God
loveth a cheerful giver.

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Unusquisque secundum propositum
cordis, non ex molestia aut necessitate: nam hilarem datorem diligit
Deus.

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>**8.** And God *is* able to make all grace
abound toward you; that ye, always having all sufficiency in all
*things*, may abound to every good work:

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Potens est autem Deus efficere, ut
tota gratia in vos exuberet: ut in omnibus omnem sufficientiam habentes,
exuberetis in omne opus bonum.

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>**9.** (As it is written, He hath dispersed
abroad; he hath given to the poor: his righteousness remaineth for ever.

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Quemadmodum scriptum est (<span
id="xv.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ps 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009)<span
id="xv.ii-p11.1"></span>): Dispersit, dedit pauperibus, iustitia eius
manet in saeculum.

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span><span id="xv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *Now the case is this*  <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) He now commends alms-giving by a
beautiful similitude, comparing it to sowing. For in sowing, the seed is
cast forth by the hand, is scattered upon the ground on this side and on
that, is harrowed, and at length rots; and thus it seems as good as
lost. The case is similar as to alms-giving. What goes from you to some
other quarter seems as if it were, diminishing of what you have, but the
season of harvest will come, when the fruit will be gathered. For as the
Lord reckons every thing that is laid out upon the poor as given to
himself, so he afterwards requites it with large interest. (<span
id="xv.ii-p15.2"></span>[Pr 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span
id="xv.ii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.ii-p16"></span>Now for Paul’s similitude. He that *sows
sparingly* will have a poor harvest, corresponding to the sowing: he
that *sows bountifully* and with a full hand, will reap a
correspondingly bountiful harvest. Let this doctrine be deeply rooted in
our minds, that, whenever carnal reason keeps us back from doing good
through fear of loss, we may immediately defend ourselves with this
shield — “But the Lord declares that we are *sowing.*” The *harvest,*
however, should be explained as referring to the spiritual recompense of
eternal life, as well as to earthly blessings, which God confers upon
the beneficent. For God requites, not only in heaven, but also in this
world, the beneficence of believers. Hence it is as though he had said,
“The more beneficent you are to your neighbors, you will find the
blessing of God so much the more abundantly poured out upon you.” He
again contrasts here *blessing* with *sparing,* as he had previously
done with *niggardliness.* Hence it appears, that it is taken to mean —
a large and bountiful liberality.

<span id="xv.ii-p17"></span><span id="xv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p18"></span>**7** *Every one according to the purpose of
his heart.* As he had enjoined it upon them to give liberally, this,
also, required to be added — that liberality is estimated by God, not so
much from the sum, as from the disposition. He was desirous, it is true,
to induce them to give largely, in order that the brethren might be the
more abundantly aided; but he had no wish to extort any thing from them
against their will. Hence he exhorts them to give willingly, whatever
they might be prepared to give. He places *purpose of heart* in contrast
with *regret* and *constraint.* For what we do, when compelled by
necessity, is not done by us with *purpose of heart,* but with
reluctance.  <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) Now the *necessity*
meant you must understand to be what is extrinsic, as it is called —
that is, what springs from the influence of others. For we obey God,
because it is *necessary,* and yet we do it willingly. We ourselves,
accordingly, in that case impose a necessity of our own accord, and
because the flesh is reluctant, we often even constrain ourselves to
perform a duty that is necessary for us. But, when we are constrained
from the influence of others, having in the mean time an inclination to
avoid it, if by any means we could, we do nothing in that case with
alacrity — nothing with cheerfulness, but every thing with reluctance or
constraint of mind.

<span id="xv.ii-p20"></span>*For God loveth a cheerful giver* He calls
us back to God, as I said in the outset, for alms are a sacrifice. Now
no sacrifice is pleasing to God, if it is not voluntary. For when he
teaches us, that *God loveth a cheerful giver,* he intimates that, on
the other hand, the niggardly and reluctant are loathed by Him. For He
does not wish to lord it over us, in the manner of a tyrant, but, as He
acts towards us as a Father, so he requires from us the cheerful
obedience of children.  <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720)

<span id="xv.ii-p22"></span><span id="xv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p23"></span>**8.** *And God is able* Again he provides
against the base thought, which our infidelity constantly suggests to
us. “What! will you not rather have a regard to your own interest? Do
you not consider, that when this is taken away, there will be so much
the less left for yourself?” With the view of driving away this, Paul
arms us with a choice promise — that whatever we give away will turn out
to our advantage. I have said already, that we are by nature excessively
niggardly — because we are prone to distrust, which tempts every one to
retain with eager grasp what belongs to him. For correcting this fault,
we must lay hold of this promise — that those that do good to the poor
do no less provide for their own interests than if they were watering
their lands. For by alms-givings, like so many canals, they make the
blessing of God flow forth towards themselves, so as to be enriched by
it. What Paul means is this: “Such liberality will deprive you of
nothing, but God will make it return to you in much greater abundance.”
For he speaks of the power of God, not as the Poets do, but after the
manner of Scripture, which ascribes to him a power put forth in action,
the present efficacy of which we ourselves feel — not any inactive power
that we merely imagine.

<span id="xv.ii-p24"></span>*That having all sufficiency in all things*
He mentions a twofold advantage arising from that grace, which he had
promised to the Corinthians — that they should have what is enough for
themselves, and would have something over and above for doing good. By
the term *sufficiency* he points out the measure which the Lord knows to
be useful for us, for it is not always profitable for us, to be filled
to satiety. The Lord therefore, ministers to us according to the measure
of our advantage, sometimes more, sometimes less, but in such a way that
we are satisfied — which is much more, than if one had the whole world
to luxuriate upon. In this *sufficiency* we must abound, for the purpose
of doing good to others, for the reason why God does us good is — not
that every one may keep to himself what he has received, but that there
may be a mutual participation among us, according as necessity may
require.

<span id="xv.ii-p25"></span><span id="xv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p26"></span>**9.** *As it is written, He hath dispersed*
He brings forward a proof from <span id="xv.ii-p26.1"></span>[Ps
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p26.1"></span>,
where, along with other excellencies of the pious man, the Prophet
mentions this, too, — that he will not be wanting in doing good, but as
water flows forth incessantly from a perennial fountain, so the gushing
forth of his liberality will be unceasing. Paul has an eye to this —
that we be not *weary in well doing,* (<span id="xv.ii-p26.2"></span>[Ga
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p26.2"></span>,)
and this is also what the Prophet’s words mean.  <span
id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721)

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
9:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#010)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Now he that ministereth seed to the
sower both minister bread for *your* food, and multiply your seed sown,
and increase the fruits of your righteousness;)

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Pro qui suppeditat semen seminanti,
is et panem in cibum supeditet, et multiplicet sementem vestram, et
augeat proventus iustitiae vestrae.

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span>**11.** Being enriched in every thing to all
bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to God.

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Ut in omnibus locupletemini in omnem
simplicitatem, quae per vos producit gratiarum actionem Deo.

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>**12.** For the administration of this
service not only supplieth the want of the saints, but is abundant also
by many thanksgivings unto God;

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Nam ministerium huius functionis
 <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722) non solum supplet ea quae
desunt sanctis: verum etiam exuberat in hoc, quod per multos agantur
gratiae Deo:

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Whiles by the experiment of this
ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
gospel of Christ, and for *your* liberal distribution unto them, and
unto all *men*;

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>**13.** Quod per probationem ministrii
huius glorificant Deum super obedientia consensus vestri in Evangelium
Christi: et de simplicatate communicationis in ipsos, et in omnes:

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span>**14.** And by their prayer for you, which
long after you for the exceeding grace of God in you.

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span>**14.** Et precatione eorum pro vobis: qui
desiderant vos propter eminentem Dei gratiam in vobis.

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span>**15.** Thanks *be* unto God for his
unspeakable gift.

<span id="xv.iii-p14"></span>**15.** Gratia autem Deo super inenarrabili
suo munere.

<span id="xv.iii-p15"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p16"></span><span id="xv.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p17"></span>**10.** *He that supplieth.* A beautieth
circumlocution, in place of the term *God,* and full of consolation.
 <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) For the person that sows seed
in the proper season, appears when reaping to gather the fruit of his
labor and industry, and sowing appears as though it were the
fountainhead from which food flows forth to us. Paul opposes this idea,
by maintaining that the seed is afforded and the food is furnished by
the favor of God even to the husbandmen that sow, and who are looked
upon as supporting themselves and others by their efforts. There is a
similar statement in <span id="xv.iii-p18.3"></span>[Deut.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#018)<span id="xv.iii-p18.3"></span> —

<span id="xv.iii-p19"></span>God fed thee with manna — food which thy
fathers knew not: lest perhaps when thou hast come into the land which
he shall give thee, thou shouldst say, My hand and my strength have
gotten, me this wealth; for it is the Lord that giveth power to get
wealth, etc.

<span id="xv.iii-p20"></span>*Supply* Here there are two different
readings, even in the Greek versions. For some manuscripts render the
three verbs in the future — *will supply, will multiply, will increase.*
 <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724) In this way, there would be a
confirmation of the foregoing statement, for it is no rare thing with
Paul to repeat the same promise in different words, that it may be the
better impressed upon men’s minds. In other manuscripts these words
occur in the infinitive mood, and it is well known that the infinitive
is sometimes used in place of the optative. I rather prefer this
reading, both because it is the more generally received one, and because
Paul is accustomed to follow up his exhortations with prayers,
entreating from God what he had previously comprised in his doctrine;
though at the same time the former reading would not be unsuitable.

<span id="xv.iii-p22"></span>*Bread for food* He mentions a two-fold
fruit of the blessing of God upon us — *first*<span
id="xv.iii-p22.1"></span>, that we have sufficiency for ourselves for
the support of life; and, *secondly,* that we have something to lay up
for relieving the necessities of others. For as we are not born for
ourselves merely,  <span id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725) so a
Christian man ought neither to live to himself, nor lay out what he has,
merely for his own use.

<span id="xv.iii-p24"></span>Under the terms *seed,* and *fruits of
righteousness,* he refers to *alms.* The *fruits of righteousness* he
indirectly contrasts with those returns that the greater number lay up
in cellars, barns, and keeping-places, that they may, every one of them,
cram in whatever they can gather, nay, scrape together, so as to enrich
themselves. By the former term he expresses the means of doing good; by
the *latter* the work itself, or office of love;  <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) for *righteousness* is taken here, by
*synecdoche,* to mean *beneficence.* “May God not only supply you with
what may be sufficient for every one’s private use, but also to such an
extent, that the fountain of your liberality, ever flowing forth, may
never be exhausted!” If, however, it is one department of
*righteousness* — as assuredly it is not the least  <span
id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727) — to relieve the necessities of
neighbors, those must be unrighteous who neglect this department of
duty.

<span id="xv.iii-p27"></span><span id="xv.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p28"></span>**11.** *May be enriched unto all
bountifulness.* Again he makes use of the term *bountifulness,* to
express the nature of true liberality — when,

<span id="xv.iii-p29"></span>casting all our care upon God, (<span
id="xv.iii-p29.1"></span>[1Pe 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007)<span
id="xv.iii-p29.1"></span>,)

<span id="xv.iii-p30"></span>we cheerfully lay out what belongs to us
for whatever purposes He directs. He teaches us  <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728) that these are the true riches of
believers, when, relying upon the providence of God for the sufficiency
of their support, they are not by distrust kept back from doing good.
Nor is it without good reason, that he dignifies with the title of
affluence the satisfying abundance of a mind that is simple, and
contented with its moderate share; for nothing is more famished and
starved than the distrustful, who are tormented with an anxious desire
of having.

<span id="xv.iii-p32"></span>*Which produces through you.* He commends,
in consideration of another result, the alms which they were about to
bestow — that they would tend to promote the glory of God. He
afterwards, too, expresses this more distinctly, with amplification, in
this way: “Besides the ordinary advantage of love, they will also
produce thanksgiving.” Now he amplifies by saying, that *thanks will be
given to God by many,* and that, not merely for the liberality itself,
by which they have been helped, but also for the entire measure of piety
among the Corinthians.

<span id="xv.iii-p33"></span><span id="xv.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p34"></span>By the term *administration,* he means what
he had undertaken at the request of the Churches. Now what we render
<span id="xv.iii-p34.1"></span>*functionem* (*service*)*,* is in the
Greek <span id="xv.iii-p34.2"></span>λειτουργία term that sometimes
denotes a sacrifice, sometimes any office that is publicly assigned.
 <span id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729) Either of them will suit this
passage well. For on the one hand, it is no unusual thing for alms to be
termed sacrifices; and, on the other hand, as on occasion of offices
being distributed among citizens,  <span
id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730) no one grudges to undertake the duty
that has been assigned him, so in the Church, imparting to others ought
to be looked upon as a necessary duty.  <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731) The Corinthians, therefore, and
others, by assisting the brethren at Jerusalem, presented a sacrifice to
God, or they discharged a service that was proper, and one which they
were bound to fulfill. Paul was the minister of that sacrifice, but the
term *ministry,* or *service,* may also be viewed as referring to the
Corinthians. It is, however, of no particular importance.

<span id="xv.iii-p38"></span><span id="xv.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p39"></span>**13.** *By the experiment of that
administration* The term *experiment* here, as in a variety of other
places, means *proof* or *trial*  <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732) For it was a sufficient token for
bringing the love of the Corinthians to the test, — that they were so
liberal to brethren that were at a great distance from them. Paul,
however, extends it farther — to their concurrent obedience in the
gospel.  <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733) For by such proofs we
truly manifest, that we are obedient to the doctrine of the gospel. Now
their concurrence appears from this — that alms are conferred with the
common consent of all.

<span id="xv.iii-p42"></span><span id="xv.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p43"></span>**14.** *And their prayer* He omits no
advantage which may be of any use for stirring up the Corinthians.
 <span id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734) In the *first* place, he has
made mention of the comfort that believers would experience; *secondly,*
the thanksgiving, by means of which God was to be glorified. Nay more,
he has said that this would be a confession, which would manifest to all
their unanimous concurrence in faith, and in pious obedience. He now
adds the reward that the Corinthians would receive from the saints —
good-will springing from gratitude,  <span
id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735) and earnest prayers. “They will have,”
says he, “the means of requiting you in return; for they will regard you
with the love with which they ought, and they will be careful to commend
you to God in their prayers.” At length, as though he had obtained his
desire, he prepares himself  <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736) to
celebrate the praises of God, by which he was desirous to testify the
confidence felt by him, as though the matter were already accomplished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_702"></span>[703](cc40014.htm#fr_702) <span
id="xv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p12.1"></span>Comme
benediction, c’est a dire, son liberal, ou beneficence;” — “As a
blessing, that is to say, a liberal gift or kindness.”

<span id="fn_703"></span>[704](cc40014.htm#fr_703) <span
id="xv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p16.1"></span>Ou vous
espargner en leur endroit;” — “Or to spare yourselves as to what you owe
them.”

<span id="fn_704"></span>[705](cc40014.htm#fr_704) <span
id="xv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>Vn titre plus
magnifique et honorable;” — “A more magnificent and honorable
designation.”

<span id="fn_705"></span>[706](cc40014.htm#fr_705) <span
id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p20.1"></span>Ceux qui sont
membres d’vn mesme corps auec eux;” — “Those that are members of the
same body with themselves.”

<span id="fn_706"></span>[707](cc40014.htm#fr_706) <span
id="xv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p23.1"></span>Le Sainct
Apostre donc parloit de ceste promesse des Corinthiens;” — “The holy
Apostle, therefore, spoke of this promise of the Corinthians.”

<span id="fn_707"></span>[708](cc40014.htm#fr_707) <span
id="xv.i-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span> In Wiclif’s version, (1380,) the rendering
is, “in this substaunce;” Rheims (1582) has, “in this substance.”

<span id="fn_708"></span>[709](cc40014.htm#fr_708) <span
id="xv.i-p28.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span> The expression here quoted from Polybius,
(lib. 6: cap. 53, p. 691,) is made use of by the historian in relating a
heroic exploit of Publius Horatius Cocles, who, on occasion of a sudden
attempt being made upon the city of Rome by Porsena, king of Clusium,
the most powerful prince at that time in Italy, having stationed
himself, with singular intrepidity, on the Sublician bridge, along with
two others, withstood the attack of the enemy, and effectually
obstructed their progress, until the bridge was cut down from behind,
after which he leaped into the river, and swam across to his friends in
safety, amidst the darts of the enemy. In honor of this daring
adventure, a statue of Cocles, as is stated by Livy, (2:10,) was placed
in the *Comitium,* and a grant of land was made to him, as much as he
could plow round in one day. *Raphelius* adduces another instance in
which Polybius employs <span id="xv.i-p29.1"></span>ὑπόστασις in the
same sense — “When the Rhodians,” says he, “perceive <span
id="xv.i-p29.2"></span>τὴν τῶν Βυζαντιῶν ὑποστασαι — the *intrepidity*
of the Byzantians.” (Pol. lib. 6: p. 440.) — *Ed*

<span id="fn_709"></span>[710](cc40014.htm#fr_709) <span
id="xv.i-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span> The adjective <span
id="xv.i-p30.1"></span>ὑποστατικός is used in this sense by Aristotle,
Eth. End. ii. 5, 5, and the adverb derived from it, <span
id="xv.i-p30.2"></span>ὑποστατικῶς, has a corresponding signification in
Polybius, (lib. 5: cap. 16, p. 508, line 1,) <span
id="xv.i-p30.3"></span>Τοῦ δὲ βασιλέως ὑποστατικῶς φήσαντος “the king
having spoken *with firmness.*” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_710"></span>[711](cc40014.htm#fr_710) <span
id="xv.i-p32.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p33.1"></span>Qui signifie
tant benediction, c’est a dire vn souhait ou priere pour la prosperite
d’autruy, que beneficence ou liberalite;” — “Which denotes blessing —
that is to say, a desire or prayer for the prosperity of another, as
well as beneficence, or liberality.”

<span id="fn_711"></span>[712](cc40014.htm#fr_711) <span
id="xv.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p34.1"></span>Ie pense que
la raison de ceste derniere signification est, pource que ce mot est en
premier lieu et proprement attribue a Dieu;” — “I think that the reason
of this last signification is — because it is in the first place and
properly ascribed to God.”

<span id="fn_712"></span>[713](cc40014.htm#fr_712) <span
id="xv.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p35.1"></span>Par la seule
et simple volonte;” — “By a mere simple exercise of the will.”

<span id="fn_713"></span>[714](cc40014.htm#fr_713) <span
id="xv.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p36.1"></span>Que Dieu ha;”
— “That God has.”

<span id="fn_714"></span>[715](cc40014.htm#fr_714) <span
id="xv.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span> “God’s blessing of us, and our blessing of
God, differ exceedingly. For God blesseth us efficiently, by exhibiting
his mercies to us. We bless God, not by adding any good to him, but
declaratively only. God’s <span id="xv.i-p37.1"></span>*betedicere* is
<span id="xv.i-p37.2"></span>*benefacere* — *his words* are *works,* but
our blessing (as Aquinas says) is only <span
id="xv.i-p37.3"></span>*recognoscitium,* and <span
id="xv.i-p37.4"></span>*expressivum* — *an acknowledgment only and
celebration of that goodness.which God hath.*” — *Burgesse* on <span
id="xv.i-p37.5"></span>[2 Corinthians
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#000)<span id="xv.i-p37.5"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_715"></span>[716](cc40014.htm#fr_715) <span
id="xv.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>Qui signifie
tant couuoitise exccssiue, ou auarice, que chichete, et quand on rogne
quelque chose de ce qu’il faudroit donner;” — “Which denotes excessive
covetousness or avarice, as well as niggardliness, and when one pares
off something from what he should give.”

<span id="fn_716"></span>[717](cc40014.htm#fr_716) <span
id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p4.1"></span>En
benedictions, c’est a dire, a foison et abondamment, ou liberalement;” —
“In blessings, that is to say, in plenty and abundantly, or liberally.”

<span id="fn_717"></span>[718](cc40014.htm#fr_717) <span
id="xv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p5.1"></span>En
benedictions, ou liberalement;” — “In blessings, or liberally.”

<span id="fn_718"></span>[719](cc40014.htm#fr_718) <span
id="xv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p15.1"></span>Or ie di
ceci;” — “Now this I say.”

<span id="fn_719"></span>[720](cc40014.htm#fr_719) <span
id="xv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p19.1"></span>*Auec*
regret et tristesse;” — “With regret and sadness.”

<span id="fn_720"></span>[721](cc40014.htm#fr_720) <span
id="xv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p21.1"></span>Vne
obeissance filiale, qui soit prompte et franche;” — “A filial obedience,
which is prompt and cheerful.”

<span id="fn_721"></span>[722](cc40014.htm#fr_721) <span
id="xv.ii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p27"></span> “Our author, when commenting on the passage
here referred to, remarks: “This passage is quoted by Paul, (<span
id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>[2Co 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009)<span
id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>,) in which he informs us, that it is an easy
matter for God to bless us with plenty, so that we may exercise our
bounty freely, deliberately, and impartially, and this accords best with
the design of the Prophet.” — Calvin on the Psalms, vol. 4, p. 329. —
Ed.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[723](cc40014.htm#fr_722) <span
id="xv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span> “De ceste oblation;” — “Of this offering.”

<span id="fn_723"></span>[724](cc40014.htm#fr_723) <span
id="xv.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p18"></span> “The words <span
id="xv.iii-p18.1"></span>ὁ ἐπιχορηγῶν βρῶσιν are a periphrasis of God
(*i.e.,* the *Good Being*) ‘who giveth us all things richly to enjoy.’
It is formed on <span id="xv.iii-p18.2"></span>[Isa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010)<span id="xv.iii-p18.2"></span>.”
— Bloomfield. — Ed.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[725](cc40014.htm#fr_724) <span
id="xv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p21"></span> “The Vatican MS. reads with the futures —
<span id="xv.iii-p21.1"></span>χορηγήσει (*will supply,*)<span
id="xv.iii-p21.2"></span> πληθύνεῖ, (*will supply,*) and <span
id="xv.iii-p21.3"></span>αὐξήσει, (*will increase*) ” — *Penn.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_725"></span>[726](cc40014.htm#fr_725) <span
id="xv.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p23"></span> Our Author has here very probably in his
eye a celebrated passage in Horace — “<span id="xv.iii-p23.1"></span>Nos
numerus sumus, et fruges consumere nati;” — “We do but add to the
numbers of mankind, and seem born only to consume the fruits of the
earth.” (Hot. <span id="xv.iii-p23.2"></span>[Eph.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#002),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#027)<span id="xv.iii-p23.2"></span>.) —
Ed.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[727](cc40014.htm#fr_726) <span
id="xv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p25"></span> “<span
id="xv.iii-p25.1"></span>L’assistance laquelle on fait par charite;” —
“The assistance which one gives in love.”

<span id="fn_727"></span>[728](cc40014.htm#fr_727) <span
id="xv.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p26.1"></span>Comme a la
verite s’en est vne des prineipales;” — “As in truth it is one of the
chief’.”

<span id="fn_728"></span>[729](cc40014.htm#fr_728) <span
id="xv.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p31"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p31.1"></span>Or yci il
nous remonstre et donne a entendre;” — “Now here he shows us and gives
us to understand.”

<span id="fn_729"></span>[730](cc40014.htm#fr_729) <span
id="xv.iii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p35"></span> The term <span
id="xv.iii-p35.1"></span>λειτουργία is very frequently made use of in
the Septuagint, in connection with the sacrifices and other services of
the priests and Levites. (See <span id="xv.iii-p35.2"></span>[Ex
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021)<span id="xv.iii-p35.2"></span>;
<span id="xv.iii-p35.3"></span>[Nu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#024)<span id="xv.iii-p35.3"></span>,
and <span id="xv.iii-p35.4"></span>[Nu
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#022)<span id="xv.iii-p35.4"></span>.)
It is commonly employed by the Greek writers to denote a public service,
more especially at Athens, discharged by the richer citizens at their
own expense, and usually in rotation. The <span
id="xv.iii-p35.5"></span>λειτουργοὶ, says *Potter,* in his Grecian
Antiquities, (volume 1,) were “persons of considerable estates, who, by
their own tribe, or the whole people, were ordered to perform some
public duty, or supply the commonwealth with necessaries at their own
expenses. Of these there were diverse sorts, all of which were elected
out of twelve hundred of the richest citizens, who were appointed by the
people to undergo, when they should be required, all the burdensome and
chargeable offices in the commonwealth, every tribe electing an hundred
and twenty out of their own body, though this was contrary to Solon’s
constitution, by which every man, of what quality soever, was obliged to
serve the public according to his ability, with this exception only,
that two offices should not be imposed on the same person at once, as we
are informed by Demosthenes, in his oration against Leptines, where he
likewise mentions an ancient law, requiring every man to undergo some
<span id="xv.iii-p35.6"></span>λειτουργία every second year.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_730"></span>[731](cc40014.htm#fr_730) <span
id="xv.iii-p35.7"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p36"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p36.1"></span>Les
charges estans distribuees, en vne ville entre les citoyens d’icelle;” —
“Offices being distributed in a town among the citizens of it.”

<span id="fn_731"></span>[732](cc40014.htm#fr_731) <span
id="xv.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p37"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p37.1"></span>Ainsi en
l’Eglise la communication consiste en ce que chacun s’acquitte enuers
ses prochains de ce qu’il leur doit en charite;” — “So in the Church,
imparting to others consists in every one’s discharging to his
neighbours, what he owes them, in love.”

<span id="fn_732"></span>[733](cc40014.htm#fr_732) <span
id="xv.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p40"></span> “<span
id="xv.iii-p40.1"></span>Tesmoignage, enseignement, ou experience;” —
“Proof, voucher, or trial.”

<span id="fn_733"></span>[734](cc40014.htm#fr_733) <span
id="xv.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p41"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p41.1"></span>Leur
obeissance qu’ils rendoyent tons d’vn accord a l’euangile;” — “Their
obedience which they rendered, all with one accord, to the gospel.”

<span id="fn_734"></span>[735](cc40014.htm#fr_734) <span
id="xv.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p44"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p44.1"></span>Qui puisse
seruir a esmouuoir et encourager les Corinthtens.” — “That may serve to
stir up and encourage the Corinthians.”

<span id="fn_735"></span>[736](cc40014.htm#fr_735) <span
id="xv.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p45"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p45.1"></span>Procedante
de la recognoissance du benefice qu’ils auoyent receu des Corinthtens;”
— “Proceeding from an acknowledgment of the kindness that they had
received from the Corinthians.”

<span id="fn_736"></span>[737](cc40014.htm#fr_736) <span
id="xv.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p46"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p46.1"></span>D’vne
grande affection;” — “With great ardour.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc40015)
