[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc40005)  [Next](cc40007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 40: Corinthians, Part II*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>COMMENTARY ON THE  
SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.

<span id="vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by
the will of God, and Timothy *our* brother, unto the church of God which
is at Corinth, with all the saints which are in all Achaia:

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Paulus Apostolus Iesu Christi per
voluntatem Dei, et Timotheus frater, Ecclesiae Dei quae est Corinthi,
cum sanctis omnibus qui sunt in tota Achaia:

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Grace *be* to you and peace from God
our Father, and *from* the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre
nostro, et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**3**. Blessed *be* God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort;

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Benedictus Deus, et Pater Domini
nostri Iesu Christi, Pater misericordiarum, et Deus omnis consolationis,

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**4**. Who comforteth us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Qui consolatur nos in omni
tribulatione nostra, ut possimus consolari eos qui in omni tribulatione
sunt, per consolationem qua consolatur nos Deus.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**5**. For as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Quia sicuti abundant passiones
Christi in nos: ita per Christum abundat etiam consolatio nostra.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span><span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**1.** *Paul an Apostle* As to the reasons
why he designates himself an *Apostle of Christ,* and adds that he has
obtained this honor *by the will of God,* see the foregoing Epistle,
where it has been observed that none are to be listened to but those,
who have been sent by God, and speak from his mouth, and that,
consequently, to secure authority for any one, two things are required —
a call, and fidelity on the part of the person who is called, in the
execution of his office.  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) Both
of these Paul claims for himself. The false apostles, it is true, do the
same; but then, by usurping a title that does not belong to them, they
gain nothing among the sons of God, who can with the utmost ease convict
them of impertinence. Hence the mere name is not enough, if there be not
the reality along with it, so that he who gives himself out as an
Apostle must also show himself to be such by his work.

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>*To the Church of God* We must always keep
it in view, his recognising a Church to exist, where there was such a
conflux of evils. For the faults of individuals do not prevent a society
that has genuine marks of religion  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) from being recognised as a Church.
 <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) But what does he mean by the
expression — *with all saints?* Were those *saints* unconnected with the
Church? I answer, that this phrase refers to believers, who were
dispersed hither and thither, throughout various corners of the province
— it being likely, that in that greatly disturbed period, when the
enemies of Christ were everywhere venting their rage, many were
scattered abroad, who could not conveniently hold sacred assemblies.

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span><span id="vii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>**3** *Blessed be God* He begins (as has
been observed) with this thanksgiving — partly for the purpose of
extolling the goodness of God — partly, with the view of animating the
Corinthians by his example to the resolute endurance of persecutions;
and partly, that he may magnify himself in a strain of pious glorying,
in opposition to the malignant slanderings of the false apostles. For
such is the depravity of the world, that it treats with derision
martyrdoms,  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) which it ought to
have held in admiration, and endeavours to find matter of reproach in
the splendid trophies of the pious.  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) *Blessed be God,* says he. On what
account? *who comforteth* us  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) —
the relative being used instead of the causal particle.  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) He had endured his tribulations with
fortitude and alacrity: this fortitude he ascribes to God, because it
was owing to support derived from his consolation that he had not
fainted.

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>He calls him the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ*,* and not without good reason, where blessings are treated of;
for where Christ is not, *there* the beneficence of God is not. On the
other hand, where Christ intervenes,

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>by whom the whole family in heaven and earth
is named,  
(<span id="vii.i-p26.2"></span>[Eph
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span id="vii.i-p26.2"></span>,)

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>*there* are all mercies and all consolations
of God — nay, more, *there* is fatherly love, the fountain from which
everything else flows.

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span><span id="vii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>**4.** *That we may be able to comfort*
There can be no doubt, that, as he had a little before cleared his
afflictions from reproach and unfavorable reports, so now he instructs
the Corinthians, that his having come off victorious through heavenly
consolation was for their sake and with a view to their advantage, that
they may stir themselves up to fellowship in suffering, instead of
haughtily despising his conflicts. As, however, the Apostle lived not
for himself but for the Church, so he reckoned, that whatever favors God
conferred upon him, were not given for his own sake merely,  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) but in order that he might have more
in his power for helping others. And, unquestionably, when the Lord
confers upon us any favor, he in a manner invites us by his example to
be generous to our neighbours. The riches of the Spirit, therefore, are
not to be kept by us to ourselves, but every one must communicate to
others what he has received. This, it is true, must be considered as
being applicable chiefly to ministers of the Word.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) It is, however, common to all,
according to the measure of each. Thus Paul here acknowledges, that he
had been sustained by the *consolation of God, that he might be able
himself to comfort others*

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span><span id="vii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>**5.** *For as the sufferings of Christ
abound* — *This* statement may be explained in two ways — actively and
passively. If you take it *actively,* the meaning will be this: “The
more I am tried with various afflictions, so much the more resources
have I for comforting others.” I am, however, more inclined to take it
in a *passive* sense, as meaning that God multiplied his consolations
according to the measure of his tribulations. David also acknowledges
that it had been thus with him:

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>According to the multitude, says he, of my
anxieties within me,  
thy consolations have delighted my soul. (<span
id="vii.i-p34.2"></span>[Ps 94:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019)<span
id="vii.i-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>In Paul’s words, however, there is a fuller
statement of doctrine; for the afflictions of the pious he calls the
*sufferings of Christ,* as he says elsewhere,

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>that he fills up in his body what is wanting
in the  
sufferings of Christ. (<span id="vii.i-p36.2"></span>[Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="vii.i-p36.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>The miseries and vexations, it is true, of
the present life are common to good and bad alike, but when they befall
the wicked, they are tokens of the curse of God, because they arise from
sin, and nothing appears in them except the anger of God and
participation with Adam, which cannot but depress the mind. But in the
mean time believers are conformed to Christ, and

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>bear about with them in their body his
dying, that the life of Christ may one day be manifested in them. (<span
id="vii.i-p38.1"></span>[2Co 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span
id="vii.i-p38.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>I speak of the afflictions which they endure
*for the testimony of Christ,* (<span id="vii.i-p39.1"></span>[Re
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)<span id="vii.i-p39.1"></span>,)
for although the Lord’s chastisements, with which he chastises their
sins, are beneficial to them, they are, nevertheless, not partakers,
properly speaking, of Christ’s sufferings, except in those cases in
which they *suffer on his account,* as we find in <span
id="vii.i-p39.2"></span>[1Pe 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013)<span
id="vii.i-p39.2"></span>. Paul’s meaning then is, that God is always
present with him in his tribulations, and that his infirmity is
sustained by the consolations of Christ, so as to prevent him from being
overwhelmed with calamities.

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**6**. And whether we be afflicted, *it is*
for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring
of the same sufferings which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted,
*it is* for your consolation and salvation.

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>**6**. Sive autem affligimur pro vestra
consolatione et salute,  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) quae
efficitur in tolerantia ipsarum passionum, quas et nos patimur: sive
consolationem accipimus pro vestra consolatione et salute:

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>**7**. And our hope of you *is* stedfast,
knowing, that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so *shall ye be*
also of the consolation.

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span>**7**. Spes nostra firma est de vobis,
 <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) scientes, quod quemadmodum
socii estis passionum, ita et consolationis.

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span>**8**. For we would not, brethren, have you
ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed
out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life:

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span>**8**. Nolo enim vos nescire, fratres, de
tribulatione nostra, quae accidit nobis in Asia: nempe quod praeter
modum gravati fuerimus supra vires, ita ut de vita quoque anxii essemus.

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span>**9**. But we had the sentence of death in
ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which
raiseth the dead:

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span>**9**. Quin etiam  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) ipsi in nobis ipsis sententiam mortis
acceperamus: ne confideremus in nobis, sed in Deo, qui ad vitam suscitat
mortuos:

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span>**10.** Who delivered us from so great a
death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver *us;*

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span>**10.** Qui ex tanta morte eripuit nos, et
eripit, in quo spem fixam habemus, quod etiam posthaec eripiet;

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>**11.** Ye also helping together by prayer
for us, that for the gift *bestowed* upon us by the means of many
persons thanks may be given by many on our behalf.

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span>**11.** Simul adiuvantibus et vobis per
deprecationem pro nobis: ut donum, ex multis personis erga nos collatum,
gratiarum actione per multos  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225)
celebretur pro nobis.

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span><span id="vii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p20"></span>**6.** *Whether we are afflicted.* From the
circumstance that before the clause *our hope of you is steadfast,*
there is introduced the connecting particle *and,* Erasmus has conceived
the idea, that some word must be understood to correspond with those
words — *for your consolation and salvation* — in this way, *whether we
are afflicted,* IT IS *for your consolation.* I think it, however, more
probable, that the connecting particle *and* is used here as meaning:
*Thus also,* or *in both cases.* He had already stated, that he received
consolation in order that he might communicate it to others. Now he goes
a step farther, and says, that he has a *steadfast hope,* that they
*would be partakers of the consolation* Besides, some of the most
ancient Greek manuscripts introduce immediately after the first clause
this statement — *and our hope of you is steadfast.*  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) This reading removes all ambiguity.
For when it is introduced in the middle, we must necessarily refer it to
the latter clause, equally as to the former. At the same time, if any
one wishes to have a complete sentence in each clause, by supplying some
verb, there will be no great harm in this, and there will be no great
difference as to the meaning. For if you read it as one continued
statement, you must, at the same time, explain the different parts in
this manner — that the Apostle is afflicted, and is refreshed with
consolation for the advantage of the Corinthians; and that he
entertains, therefore, the hope,  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) that they will be at length partakers
of the same consolation, with what is in reserve for himself. For my own
part, I have adopted the way that I have judged the more suitable.

<span id="vii.ii-p23"></span>It is, however, to be observed, that the
word *afflicted* here refers not merely to outward misery, but also to
that of the mind, so as to correspond with the opposite term
*comforted.* (<span id="vii.ii-p23.1"></span>παρακαλεῖσθαι ) Thus the
meaning is, that the person’s mind is pressed down with anxiety from a
feeling of misery.  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) What we
render *consolation,* is in the Greek <span
id="vii.ii-p24.3"></span>παράκλησις, — a term which signifies also
*exhortation.* If, however, you understand that kind of consolation, by
which a person’s mind is lightened of grief, and is raised above it, you
will be in possession of Paul’s meaning. For example, Paul himself would
well-nigh have fallen down dead under the pressure of so many
afflictions, had not God encouraged him, by raising him up by means of
his consolation. Thus, too, the Corinthians derive strength and
fortitude of mind from his sufferings,  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) while they take comfort from his
example. Let us now sum up the whole matter briefly. As he saw that his
afflictions were made by some an occasion of holding him in contempt,
with the view of calling back the Corinthians from an error of this
nature,  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) he shows in the first
place that he ought to be in high esteem among them, in consideration of
advantage redounding to themselves; and then afterwards he associates
them with himself, that they may reckon his afflictions to be in a
manner their own. “Whether I suffer afflictions, or experience
consolation, it is all for your benefit, and I cherish an assured hope,
that you will continue to enjoy this advantage.”  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231)

<span id="vii.ii-p28"></span>For such were Paul’s afflictions, and his
consolations also, that they would have contributed to the edification
of the Corinthians, had not the Corinthians of their own accord deprived
themselves of the advantage redounding from it. He, accordingly,
declares his confidence in the Corinthians to be such, that he
entertains the assured hope that it will not be vain, that he has been
afflicted, and has received consolation for their advantage. The false
apostles made every effort to turn to Paul’s reproach everything that
befell him. Had they obtained their wish, the afflictions which he
endured for their salvation, had been vain and fruitless; they would
have derived no advantage from the consolations with which the Lord
refreshed him. To contrivances of this nature he opposes his present
confidence. His afflictions tended to promote the comfort of believers,
as furnishing them with occasion of confirmation, on their perceiving
that he suffered willingly, and endured with fortitude so many hardships
for the sake of the gospel. For however we may acknowledge that
afflictions ought to be endured by us for the sake of the gospel, we,
nevertheless, tremble through a consciousness of our weakness, and think
ourselves not prepared for it.  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)
In that case, we should call to mind the examples of the saints, which
should make us more courageous.

<span id="vii.ii-p30"></span>On the other hand, his personal consolation
flowed out to the whole Church, inasmuch as they concluded,  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) that God who had sustained and
refreshed him in his emergency, would, in like manner, not be wanting to
them. Thus their welfare was promoted in both ways, and this is what he
introduces as it were by way of parenthesis, when he says — *which is
made effectual in the endurance,* etc. For he wished to add this clause,
by way of explanation, that they might not think that they had nothing
to do with the afflictions which he alone endured. Erasmus takes the
participle <span id="vii.ii-p31.2"></span>γουμένης in an active sense,
 <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) but a passive signification is
more suitable,  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) as Paul designed
simply to explain in what respect everything that befell him was for
their *salvation.* He says, accordingly, that he suffers, indeed, alone,
but that his sufferings are of use for promoting their *salvation* — not
as though they were expiations or sacrifices for sins, but as edifying
them by confirming them. Hence he conjoins consolation and salvation,
with the view of pointing out the way in which their salvation was to be
accomplished.

<span id="vii.ii-p34"></span><span id="vii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p35"></span>**7.** *Knowing, that as* However there
might be some of the Corinthians that were drawn away for the time by
the calumnies of the false Apostles, so as to entertain less honorable
views of Paul, on seeing him shamefully handled before the world, he,
nevertheless, associates them with himself both in fellowship of
afflictions, and in hope of consolation.  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) Thus he corrects their perverse and
malignant view, without subjecting them to an open rebuke.

<span id="vii.ii-p37"></span><span id="vii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p38"></span>**8.** *For I would not have you ignorant*
He makes mention of the greatness and difficulty of his conflicts, that
the glory of victory may thereby the more abundantly appear. Since the
time of his sending them the former epistle, he had been exposed to
great dangers, and had endured violent assaults. The probability,
however, is that he refers here to the history, which Luke relates in
<span id="vii.ii-p38.1"></span>[Ac
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#023)<span id="vii.ii-p38.1"></span>,
though in that passage he does not so distinctly intimate the extent of
the danger. As, however, he states that *the whole city was in a
tumult,* (<span id="vii.ii-p38.2"></span>[Ac
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029)<span id="vii.ii-p38.2"></span>,)
it is easy from this to infer the rest. For we know what is the usual
effect of a popular tumult, when it has been once kindled. By this
persecution Paul declares he had been oppressed *beyond measure,* nay
more, *above strength,* that is, so as not to be able to endure the
burden. For it is a metaphor taken from persons who give way under the
pressure of a heavy load, or from ships that sink from being overladen —
not that he had actually fainted, but that he felt that his strength
would have failed him, if the Lord had not imparted fresh strength.
 <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237)

<span id="vii.ii-p40"></span>*So that we were in anxiety even as to life
itself* — that is, “So that I thought life was gone, or at least I had
very little hope of it remaining, as those are wont to feel who are shut
up so as to see no way of escape.” Was then so valiant a soldier of
Christ, so brave a wrestler, left without strength, so as to look for
nothing but death?  <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) For he
mentions it as the reason of what he had stated — that he *despaired of
life.* I have already observed, that Paul does not measure his strength
in connection with help from God, but according to his own personal
feeling of his ability. Now there can be no doubt, that all human
strength must give way before the fear of death. Farther, it is
necessary that even saints themselves should be in danger of an entire
failure of strength, that, being put in mind of their own weakness, they
may learn, agreeably to what follows, to place their entire dependence
on God alone. At the same time I have preferred to explain the word
<span id="vii.ii-p41.2"></span>ἐξαπορεῖσθαι, which is made use of by
Paul, as denoting a *trembling anxiety,* rather than render it, as
Erasmus has done by the word *despair;* because he simply means, that he
was hemmed in by the greatest difficulties, so that no means of
preserving life seemed to remain.  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239)

<span id="vii.ii-p43"></span><span id="vii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p44"></span>**9.** *Nay more, we had the sentence of
death* This is as though we should say — “I had already laid my account
with dying, or had regarded it as a thing fixed.” He borrows, however, a
similitude from those who are under sentence of death, and look for
nothing but the hour when they are to die. At the same time he says,
that this sentence had been pronounced by him upon himself, by which he
intimates, that it was in his own view that he had been sentenced to
death — that he might not seem to have had it from any revelation from
God. In this *sentence,*  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)
therefore, there is something more implied than in the feeling of
*anxiety* (<span id="vii.ii-p45.4"></span>ἐξαπορεῖσθαι) that he had made
mention of, because in the former case there was despair of life, but in
this case there is certain death. We must, however, take notice,
chiefly, of what he adds as to the design — that he had been reduced to
this extremity, *that he might not trust in himself* For I do not agree
with what Chrysostom says — that the Apostle did not stand in need of
such a remedy, but set himself forth to others as a pattern merely in
appearance.  <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) For he was a man
that was *subject,* in other respects, *to like passions* as other men —
(<span id="vii.ii-p46.2"></span>[Jas
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)<span id="vii.ii-p46.2"></span>) —
not merely to cold and heat, but also to misdirected confidence,
rashness, and the like. I do not say that he was addicted to these
vices, but this I say, that he was capable of being tempted to them, and
that this was the remedy that God seasonably interposed, that they might
not make their way into his mind.  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)

<span id="vii.ii-p48"></span>There are, accordingly, two things to be
observed here. In the *first* place — that the fleshly confidence with
which we are puffed up, is so obstinate, that it cannot be overthrown in
any other way than by our falling into utter despair.  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) For as the flesh is proud, it does not
willingly give way, and never ceases to be insolent until it has been
constrained; nor are we brought to true submission, until we have been
brought down by the *mighty hand of God.* (<span
id="vii.ii-p49.2"></span>[1Pe 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span
id="vii.ii-p49.2"></span>.) *Secondly,* it is to be observed, that the
saints themselves have some remains of this disease adhering to them,
and that for this reason they are often reduced to an extremity, that,
stript of all self-confidence, they may learn humility: nay more, that
this malady is so deeply rooted in the minds of men, that even the most
advanced are not thoroughly purged from it, until God sets death before
their eyes. And hence we may infer, how displeasing to God confidence in
ourselves must be, when for the purpose of correcting it, it is
necessary that we should be condemned to death.

<span id="vii.ii-p50"></span>*But in God that raiseth the dead* As we
must first die,  <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) in order that,
renouncing confidence in ourselves, and conscious of our own weakness,
we may claim no honor to ourselves, so even that were not sufficient, if
we did not proceed a step farther. Let us begin, therefore, with
despairing of ourselves, but with the view of placing our hope in God.
Let us be brought low in ourselves, but in order that we may be raised
up by his power. Paul, accordingly, having brought to nothing the pride
of the flesh, immediately substitutes in its place a confidence that
rests upon God. *Not in ourselves,* says he, *but in God*

<span id="vii.ii-p52"></span>The epithet that follows, Paul has adapted
to the connection of the subject, as he does in <span
id="vii.ii-p52.1"></span>[Ro 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span
id="vii.ii-p52.1"></span>, where he speaks of Abraham. For to

<span id="vii.ii-p53"></span>believe in God, who calleth those things
that are not, as though they were, and to hope in God who raiseth the
dead,

<span id="vii.ii-p54"></span>are equivalent to his setting before him as
an object of contemplation, the power of God in creating his elect out
of nothing, and raising up the dead. Hence Paul says, that death had
been set before his eyes, that he might, in consequence of this,
recognize the more distinctly the power of God, by which he had been
raised up from the dead. The first thing in order, it is true, is this —
that, by means of the strength with which God furnishes us, we should
acknowledge him as the Author of life; but as in consequence of our
dulness the light of life often dazzles our eyes, it is necessary that
we should be brought to God by having death presented to our view.
 <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245)

<span id="vii.ii-p56"></span><span id="vii.ii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p57"></span>**10.** *Who hath delivered us from so
great a death* Here he applies to himself personally, what he had stated
in a general way, and by way of proclaiming the grace of God, he
declares that he had not been disappointed in his expectation, inasmuch
as he had been *delivered from death,* and that too, in no common form.
As to his manner of expression, the hyperbole, which he makes use of, is
not unusual in the Scriptures, for it frequently occurs, both in the
Prophets and in the Psalms, and it is made use of even in common
conversation. What Paul acknowledges as to himself personally, let every
one now take home as applicable to himself.

<span id="vii.ii-p58"></span>*In whom we have an assured hope.* He
promises himself as to the future, also, that beneficence of God, which
he had often experienced in the past. Nor is it without good reason; for
the Lord, by accomplishing in part what he has promised, bids us hope
well as to what remains. Nay more, in proportion to the number of favors
that we receive from him, does he by so many pledges, or earnests, as it
were, confirm his promises.  <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)
Now, although Paul had no doubt that God would of his own accord be
present with him, yet he exhorts the Corinthians to commend to God in
their prayers his safety. For when he assumes it as certain, that he
will be aided by them, this declaration has the force of an exhortation,
and he means that they would not merely do it as a matter of duty, but
also with advantage.  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247)

<span id="vii.ii-p61"></span>“Your prayers, also,” he says, “will help
me.”  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) For God wills not that the
duty of mutual intercession, which he enjoins upon us, should be without
advantage. This ought to be a stimulus to us, on the one hand, to
solicit the intercession of our brethren, when we are weighed down by
any necessity, and, on the other, to render similar assistance in
return, since we are informed, that it is not only a duty that is well
pleasing to God, but also profitable to ourselves. Nor is it owing to
distrust that the Apostle implores the friendly aid of his brethren,
 <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) for, while he felt assured,
that his safety would be the object of God’s care,  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) though he were destitute of all human
help, yet he knew that it was well pleasing to God, that he should be
aided by the prayers of the saints. He had respect, also, to the
promises that were given, that assistance of this kind would not be in
vain. Hence, in order that he might not overlook any assistance that was
appointed to him by God, he desired that the brethren should pray for
his preservation.

<span id="vii.ii-p65"></span>The sum is this — that we follow the word
of God, that is, that we obey his commandments and cleave to his
promises. This is not the part of those who have recourse to the
assistance of the dead;  <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) for not
contented with the sources of help appointed by God, they call in to
their aid a new one, that has no countenance from any declaration of
Scripture. For whatever we find mentioned there as to mutual
intercession, has no reference to the dead, but is expressly restricted
to the living. Hence Papists act childishly in perverting those
passages, so as to give some colour to their superstition.  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="vii.ii-p68"></span><span id="vii.ii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p69"></span>**11.** *That the gift bestowed upon us
through means of many persons.* As there is some difficulty in Paul’s
words, interpreters differ as to the meaning. I shall not spend time in
setting aside the interpretations of others, nor indeed is there any
need for this, provided only we are satisfied as to the true and proper
meaning. He had said, that the prayers of the Corinthians would be an
assistance to him. He now adds a second advantage that would accrue from
it — a higher manifestation of God’s glory. “For whatever God will
confer upon me,” says he, “being as it were *obtained through means of
many persons,* will, also, by *many* be celebrated with praises:*”* or
in this way — “Many will give thanks to God in my behalf, because, in
affording help to me, he has favorably regarded the prayers, not merely
of one but of many.” In the first place, while it is our duty to allow
no favor from God to pass without rendering praise, it becomes us,
nevertheless, more especially when our prayers have been favorably
regarded by him, to acknowledge his mercy with thanksgiving, as he
commands us to do in <span id="vii.ii-p69.1"></span>[Ps
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span id="vii.ii-p69.1"></span>.
Nor ought this to be merely where our own personal interest is
concerned, but also where the welfare of the Church in general, or that
of any one of our brethren is involved. Hence when we mutually pray one
for another, and obtain our desire, the glory of God is so much the more
set forth, inasmuch as we all acknowledge, with thanksgiving, God’s
benefits — both those that are conferred publicly upon the whole Church,
and also those that are bestowed privately upon individuals.

<span id="vii.ii-p70"></span>In this interpretation there is nothing
forced; for as to the circumstance that in the Greek the article being
introduced between the two clauses *by many persons,* and the *gift
conferred upon me* appears to disjoin them,  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) *that* has no force, as it is
frequently found introduced between clauses that are connected with each
other. Here, however, it is with propriety introduced in place of an
adversative particle;  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) for
although it had come forth from many persons, it was nevertheless
peculiar to Paul. To take the phrase <span id="vii.ii-p72.2"></span>διὰ
πολλῶν (*by means of many*) in the neuter gender,  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) as some do, is at variance with the
connection of the passage.

<span id="vii.ii-p74"></span>It may, however, be asked, why he says
*From many persons,* rather than *From many men,* and what is the
meaning of the term *person* here? I answer, it is as though he had said
— *With respect to many.* For the favor was conferred upon Paul in such
a way, that it might be given to many. Hence, as God had respect to
many, he says on that account, that many persons were the cause of it.
Some Greek manuscripts have <span id="vii.ii-p74.1"></span>ὑπὲρ ὑμῶν —
*on your account;* and although this appears to be at variance with
Paul’s design, and the connection of the words, it may, nevertheless, be
explained with propriety in this manner: “When God shall have heard you
in behalf of my welfare, and that too for your own welfare, thanks will
be given by many on your account.”

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span
id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-ward.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Nam gloriatio nostra haec est:
testimonium conscientiae nostrae, quod in simplicitate et puritate
 <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) Dei, non in sapientia carnali,
sed in gratia Dei versati sumus in mundo; abundantius autem erga vos.

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**13.** For we write none other things unto
you, than what ye read or acknowledge; and I trust ye shall acknowledge
even to the end;

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span>**13.** Non enim alia scribimus vobis quam
quae recognoscitis vel etiam agnoscitis: spero autem, quod usque in
finem agnoscetis:

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span>**14.** As also ye have acknowledged us in
part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also *are* ours in the day
of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span>**14.** Quemadmodum et agnovistis nos ex
parte: siquidem gloriatio vestra sumus: sicuti et vos nostra in die
Domini Iesu.

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span><span id="vii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span>**12.** *For our glorying is this.* He
assigns a reason why his preservation should be a subject of interest to
all — that he had conducted himself  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) among them all in *simplicity and
sincerity* He deserved, therefore, to be dear to them, and it would have
been very unfeeling not to be concerned in reference to such a servant
of the Lord, that he might be long preserved for the benefit of the
Church. “I have conducted myself before all in such a manner, that it is
no wonder if I have the approbation and love of all good men.” He takes
occasion from this, however, for the sake of those to whom he was
writing, to make a digression for the purpose of declaring his own
integrity. As, however, it is not enough to be approved of by man’s
judgment, and as Paul himself was harassed by the unjust and malignant
judgments of some, or rather by corrupt and blind attachments,  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) he adduces his own conscience as his
witness — which is all one as though he had cited God as a witness, or
had made what he says matter of appeal to his tribunal.

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span>But how does Paul’s glorying in his
integrity comport with that statement,

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span>He that glorieth, let him glory in the
Lord?  
(<span id="vii.iii-p15.2"></span>[2Co
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)<span
id="vii.iii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span>Besides, who is so upright  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) as to dare to boast in the presence of
God? In the first place, Paul does not oppose himself to God, as though
he had anything that was his own, or that was from himself. Farther, he
does not place the foundation of his salvation in that integrity to
which he lays claim, nor does he make confidence in *that* the ground of
his dependence. Lastly, he does not glory in God’s gifts in such a way
as not at the same time to render all the glory to him as their sole
Author, and ascribe everything to him.  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) These three exceptions lay a
foundation for every godly person glorying on good grounds in all God’s
benefits; while the wicked, on the other hand, cannot glory even in God,
except on false and improper grounds. Let us therefore, first of all,
acknowledge ourselves to be indebted to God for everything good that we
possess, claiming no merit to ourselves. Secondly, let us hold fast this
foundation — that our dependence for salvation be grounded exclusively
on the mercy of God. Lastly, let us repose ourselves  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) in the sole author of every blessing.
Then in that there will be a pious  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) glorying in every kind of blessing.

<span id="vii.iii-p21"></span>*That in the simplicity*  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) *of God.* He employs the expression
*simplicity of God* here, in the same way as in <span
id="vii.iii-p22.3"></span>[Ro
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="vii.iii-p22.3"></span>,
*the glory of God;* and in <span id="vii.iii-p22.4"></span>[Joh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)<span id="vii.iii-p22.4"></span>,
*the glory of God and of men.* Those who love the *glory of men,* wish
to appear something before men, or to stand well in the opinion of men.
The *glory of God* is what a man has in the sight of God. Hence Paul
does not reckon it enough to declare that his sincerity was perceived by
men, but adds, that he was such in the sight of God. <span
id="vii.iii-p22.5"></span>Εἰλικρινείᾳ (which I have rendered *purity*)
is closely connected with *simplicity;* for it is an open and upright
way of acting, such as makes a man’s heart as it were transparent.
 <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) Both terms stand opposed to
craft, deception, and all underhand schemes.

<span id="vii.iii-p24"></span>*Not in fleshly wisdom.* There is here a
sort of anticipation; for what might be felt to be wanting in him he
readily acknowledges, nay more, he openly proclaims, that he is
destitute of, but adds, that he is endowed with what is incomparably
more excellent — the *grace of God* “I acknowledge,” says he, “that I am
destitute of *fleshly wisdom,* but I have been furnished with divine
influence, and if any one is not satisfied with *that,* he is at liberty
to depreciate my Apostleship. If, on the other hand, *fleshly wisdom* is
of no value, then I want nothing that is not fitted to secure
well-grounded praise.” He gives the name of *fleshly wisdom* to
everything apart from Christ, that procures for us the reputation of
*wisdom.* See the *first and* *second* chapters of the former epistle.
Hence, by the grace of God, which is contrasted with it, we must
understand everything that transcends man’s nature and capacity, and the
gifts of the Holy Spirit, which openly manifested the power of God in
the weakness of the flesh.

<span id="vii.iii-p25"></span>*More abundantly towards you* Not that he
had been less upright elsewhere, but that he had remained longer at
Corinth, in order that he might (not to mention other purposes) afford a
fuller and clearer proof of his integrity. He has, however, expressed
himself intentionally in such a way as to intimate that he did not
require evidences that were far-fetched, inasmuch as they were
themselves the best witnesses of all that he had said.

<span id="vii.iii-p26"></span><span id="vii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p27"></span>**13.** *For we write no other things*
Here he indirectly reproves the false apostles, who recommended
themselves by immoderate boastings, while they had little or no ground
for it; and at the same time he obviates calumnies, in order that no one
may object, that he claims for himself more than is his due. He says,
therefore, that he does not in words boast of anything that he is not
prepared to make good by deeds, and that, too, from the testimony of the
Corinthians.

<span id="vii.iii-p28"></span>The ambiguity, however, of the words, has
given occasion for this passage being misinterpreted. <span
id="vii.iii-p28.2"></span>Αναγινώσκειν, among the Greeks, signifies
sometimes *to read,* and at other times *to recognize.* <span
id="vii.iii-p28.3"></span>Επιγινώσκειν sometimes signifies *to
discover,* while at other times it means what the Latins properly
express by the verb <span id="vii.iii-p28.4"></span>*agnoscere,* to
*own,* as among lawyers the phrase is used to *own a child*,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) as Budaeus also has observed. In this
way <span id="vii.iii-p29.2"></span>ἐπιγινώσκειν means more than <span
id="vii.iii-p29.3"></span>ἀναγινώσκειν For we say that a person
*recognises* a thing, that is, that being silently convinced of it in
his judgment, he perceives it to be true, while at the same time he does
not *acknowledge* it, or, in other words, cordially intimate his assent
to it.

<span id="vii.iii-p30"></span>Let us now examine Paul’s words. Some read
thus — *We write no other things than what ye read and acknowledge,*
which it is very manifest is exceedingly lifeless, not to say senseless.
For as to Ambrose’s qualifying the statement in this way — *You not only
read, but also acknowledge,* there is no one that does not perceive that
it is quite foreign to the import of the words. And the meaning that I
have stated is plain, and hangs together naturally, and, up to this
point, there is nothing to prevent readers from understanding it, were
it not that they have had their eyes shut, from being misled by the
different meanings of the word. The sum is this — that Paul declares,
that he brings forward no other things than what were known and
perceived by the Corinthians — nay more, things as to which they would
bear him witness. The first term employed is <span
id="vii.iii-p30.1"></span>*recognoscere,* (to *recognize,)* which is
applicable, when persons are convinced from experience that matters are
so. The second is <span id="vii.iii-p30.2"></span>*agnoscere,* (to
*acknowledge,)* meaning that they give their assent to the truth.  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)

<span id="vii.iii-p32"></span>*And, I hope, will acknowledge even to the
end.* As the Corinthians had not yet perfectly returned to a sound mind,
so as to be prepared to weigh his fidelity in a just and even balance,
 <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) but at the same time had begun
to abate somewhat of their perverse and malignant judgment respecting
him, he intimates, that he hopes better as to the future. “You have
already,” says he, “to some extent acknowledged me. I hope that you will
acknowledge more and more what I have been among you, and in what manner
I have conducted myself.”  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) From
this it appears more clearly what he meant by the word <span
id="vii.iii-p34.2"></span>ἐπιγινώσκειν. (*acknowledge*  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) ) Now this relates to a season of
repentance, for they had at the beginning acknowledged him fully and
thoroughly; afterwards their right judgment had been beclouded  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) by unfair statements, but they had at
length begun to return in part to a sound mind.

<span id="vii.iii-p37"></span><span id="vii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p38"></span>**14.** *For we are your glorying.* We
have briefly adverted to the manner in which it is allowable for saints
to glory in God’s benefits — when they repose themselves in God alone,
and have no other object of aim. Thus it was a ground of pious glorying
on the part of Paul, that he had, by his ministry, brought the
Corinthians under obedience to Christ; and of the Corinthians, on the
other hand, that they had been trained up so faithfully and so
virtuously by such an Apostle — a privilege that had not been allotted
to all. This way of glorying in men does not stand in the way of our
glorying in God alone. Now he instructs the Corinthians, that it is of
the greatest importance for themselves that they should acknowledge him
to be a faithful, and not a merely pretended, servant of Christ;
because, in the event of their withdrawing from him, they would deprive
themselves of the highest glory. In these words he reproves their
fickleness, inasmuch as they voluntarily deprived themselves of the
highest glory, by listening too readily to the spiteful and envious.

<span id="vii.iii-p39"></span>*In the day of the Lord* By this I
understand the last day, which will put an end to all the fleeting
 <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) glories of this world. He
means, then, that the glorying of which he is now speaking is not
evanescent, as those things are that glitter in the eyes of men, but is
abiding and stable, inasmuch as it will remain until the day of Christ.
For *then* will Paul enjoy the triumph of the many victories that he had
obtained under Christ’s auspices, and will lead forth in splendor all
the nations that have, by means of his ministry, been brought under
Christ’s glorious yoke; and the Church of the Corinthians will glory in
having been founded and trained up by the services of so distinguished
an Apostle.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**15.** And in this confidence I was minded
to come unto you before, that ye might have a second benefit;

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Et hac fiducia volui primum ad vos
venire, ut secundam  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) gratiam
haberetis,

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span>**16.** And to pass by you into Macedonia,
and to come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on
my way toward Judaea.

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** Et per vos transire in Macedoniam:
 <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) et rursum e Macedonia venire ad
vos, et a vobis deduci in Iudaeam.

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span>**17.** When I therefore was thus minded,
did I use lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose
according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea yea, and nay
nay?

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span>**17.** Hoc igitur quum animo propositum
haberem, nuncubi levitate usus sum? aut quae cogito, secundum carnem
cogito? ut sit apud me Etiam, etiam: et Non, non.

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** But *as* God *is* true, our word
toward you was not yea and nay.

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>**18.** Fidelis Deus, quod sermo noster
apud vos non fuit Etiam et non.

<span id="vii.iv-p12"></span>**19.** For the Son of God, Jesus Christ,
who was preached among you by us, *even* by me and Silvanus and
Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea.

<span id="vii.iv-p13"></span>**19.** Dei enim Filius Iesus Christus in
vobis per nos praedicatus, per me, et Silvanum, et Timotheum, non fuit
Etiam et non: sed Etiam fuit in ipso.

<span id="vii.iv-p14"></span>**20.** For all the promises of God in him
*are* yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us.

<span id="vii.iv-p15"></span>**20.** Quaecunque enim sunt Dei
promissiones, in illo sunt Etiam: quare et per ipsum sit Amen Deo ad
gloriam per nos.

<span id="vii.iv-p16"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p17"></span><span id="vii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p18"></span>**15.** *In this confidence.* After having
given them reason to expect that he would come, he had subsequently
changed his intention. This was made an occasion of calumny against him,
as appears from the excuse that he brings forward. When he says that it
was from relying on *this confidence* that he formed the purpose of
coming to them, he indirectly throws the blame upon the Corinthians,
inasmuch as they had, by their ingratitude, hindered, to some extent,
his coming to them, by depriving him of *that confidence.*

<span id="vii.iv-p19"></span>*That ye might have a second benefit* The
first benefit had been this — that he had devoted himself for the entire
period of *a year and six months* (<span id="vii.iv-p19.1"></span>[Ac
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011)<span id="vii.iv-p19.1"></span>)
to the work of gaining them to the Lord; the *second* was their being
confirmed, by means of his coming to them, in the faith which they had
once received, and being stirred up by his sacred admonitions to make
farther progress. Of this latter benefit the Corinthians had deprived
themselves, inasmuch as they had not allowed the apostle to come to
them. They were paying, therefore, the penalty of their own fault, and
they had no ground for imputing any blame to Paul. If any one, however,
prefers, with Chrysostom, to take <span id="vii.iv-p19.2"></span>χάριν
*(benefit)* as used instead of <span id="vii.iv-p19.3"></span>καράν*,
(joy,)* I do not much object to it.  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) The former interpretation, however, is
more simple.

<span id="vii.iv-p21"></span><span id="vii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p22"></span>**17.** *Did I use fickleness?* There are
two things, more especially, that prevent the purposes of men from being
carried into effect, or their promises from being faithfully performed.
The one is that they make changes upon them almost every hour, and the
other is that they are too rash in forming their plans. It is a sign of
changeableness to purpose or promise what you almost immediately
afterwards regret. With that fault Paul declares he had not been
chargeable. “I have not,” says he, “through *fickleness* drawn back from
the promise that I made.” He declares also that he had been on his guard
against rashness and misdirected confidence; for such is the way in
which I explain the expression — *purpose according to the flesh* For it
is, as I have stated, the common practice of men, as though they were
not dependent on God’s providence, and were not subject to his will, to
determine rashly and presumptuously what they will do. Now God, with the
view of punishing this presumption, defeats their plans, so as to
prevent them from having a prosperous issue, and in many instances holds
up themselves to ridicule.

<span id="vii.iv-p23"></span>The expression, it is true, *according to
the flesh,* might be extended farther, so as to include all wicked
schemes, and such as are not directed to a right end, as for example
such as are dictated by ambition, avarice, or any other depraved
affection. Paul, however, in my opinion, did not intend here to refer to
any thing of that nature, but merely to reprove that rashness which is
but too customary on the part of man, and in daily use in the forming of
plans. To *purpose,* therefore, *according to the flesh,* is not owning
God as our ruler, but, instead of this, being impelled by a rash
presumption, which is afterwards justly derided by God, and punished.
The apostle, with the view of clearing himself from these faults,
proposes a question, as if in the person of his opponents. Hence it is
probable, as I have already said, that some unfavorable report had been
put in circulation by wicked persons.

<span id="vii.iv-p24"></span>*That with me there should be yea, yea*
Some connect this statement with what goes before, and explain it thus:
“As if it were in my power to perform whatever I purpose, as men
determine that they will do whatever comes into their mind, and *order
their ways,* as Solomon speaks, (<span id="vii.iv-p24.1"></span>[Pr
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)<span id="vii.iv-p24.1"></span>,)
while they cannot so much as govern their tongue.” And, undoubtedly, the
words seem to imply this much — that what has been once affirmed must
remain fixed, and what has been once denied must never be done. So James
in his Epistle (<span id="vii.iv-p24.2"></span>[Jas
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)<span id="vii.iv-p24.2"></span>)
says,

<span id="vii.iv-p25"></span>Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest
ye fall into dissimulation.

<span id="vii.iv-p26"></span>Farther, the context would in this way suit
exceedingly well as to what goes before. For to *purpose according to
the flesh* is this — when we wish that, without any exception, our
determinations shall be like oracles.  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) This interpretation, However, does not
accord with what immediately *follows* — *God is faithful,* etc., where
Paul makes use of the same form of expression, when he has it in view to
intimate, that he had not been unfaithful in his preaching. Now it were
absurd, if almost in the same verse he reckoned it as a fault that his
yea should be yea, and his nay nay, and yet at the same time laid claim
to it as his highest praise. I am aware of what could be said in reply,
if any one were disposed to sport himself with subtleties, but I have no
relish for anything that is not solid.

<span id="vii.iv-p28"></span>I have, therefore, no doubt, that in these
words Paul designed to reprove fickleness, although they may seem to be
susceptible of another meaning, for the purpose of clearing himself from
that calumny — that he was accustomed to promise in words what he failed
to perform in deeds.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) Thus the
reiterating of the affirmation and negation will not have the same
meaning as in <span id="vii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Mt
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)<span id="vii.iv-p29.2"></span>
and in James, but will bear this meaning — “that *yea* should with me be
in this instance *yea,* and on the other hand, when it pleases me, *nay,
nay* ” At the same time it is possible that it may have crept in through
the ignorance of transcribers, as the old translation does not redouble
the words,  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) However this may be,
we ought not to be very solicitous as to the words, provided we are in
possession of the apostle’s intention, which, as I have said, clearly
appears from what follows.  <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)

<span id="vii.iv-p32"></span><span id="vii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p33"></span>**18.** *God is faithful.* By the term
*word* he means doctrine, as is manifest from the reason that he adds,
when he says, that the *Son of God, who is preached by him, is not
variable, etc.* As to his being always consistent with himself in point
of doctrine, and not differing from himself,  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) he intends that by this they shall
form a judgment as to his integrity, and in this way he removes every
unfavorable suspicion of fickleness or unfaithfulness. It does not,
however, necessarily follow, that the man who is faithful in doctrine,
is also observant of truth in all his *words.* But as Paul did not
reckon it of much importance in what estimation he was held, provided
only the majesty of his doctrine remained safe and sound, he, on that
account, calls the attention of the Corinthians chiefly to that matter.
He intimates, it is true, that he observed in his whole life the same
course of fidelity, as the Corinthians had seen in his ministry. He
seems, however, as if intentionally, in repelling the calumny, to
transfer it from his person to his doctrine, because he was unwilling
that his apostleship should be indirectly defamed, while he was not
greatly concerned as to himself in other respects.

<span id="vii.iv-p35"></span>But observe, with what zeal he applies
himself to this. For he calls God to witness, how simple and pure his
preaching was — not ambiguous, not variable, not temporizing. In his
oath, too, he connects the truth of God with the truth of his doctrine.
“The truth of my preaching is as sure and stable as God is faithful and
true.” Nor is this to be wondered at, for the word of God, which Isaiah
says *endureth for ever,* (<span id="vii.iv-p35.1"></span>[Isa
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)<span id="vii.iv-p35.1"></span>,)
is no other than what prophets and apostles published to the world, as
Peter explains it. (<span id="vii.iv-p35.2"></span>[1Pe
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025)<span id="vii.iv-p35.2"></span>.)
Hence, too, his confidence  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) in
denouncing a curse upon angels, if they dared to bring another gospel,
one that was at variance with his. (<span id="vii.iv-p36.2"></span>[Ga
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="vii.iv-p36.2"></span>.)
Who would dare to make the angels of heaven subject to his doctrine, if
he had not God as his authority and defense? With such an assurance of a
good conscience does it become ministers  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) to be endowed, who mount the pulpit to
speak the word in Christ’s name — so as to feel assured that their
doctrine can no more be overthrown than God himself.

<span id="vii.iv-p38"></span><span id="vii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p39"></span>**19.** *For the Son of God* Here we have
the proof — because his preaching  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) contained nothing but Christ alone,
who is the eternal and immutable truth of God. The clause *preached by
us* is emphatic. For, as it may be, and often does happen, that Christ
is disfigured by the inventions  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)
of men, and is adulterated, as it were, by their disguises, he declares
that it had not been so as to himself or his associates, but that he had
sincerely and with an integrity that was befitting, held forth Christ
pure and undisguised. Why it is that he makes no mention of Apollos,
while he mentions by name Timotheus and Silvanus, does not exactly
appear; unless the reason be, as is probable, that the more that
individuals were assailed by the calumnies of the wicked,  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) he was so much the more careful to
defend them.

<span id="vii.iv-p43"></span>In these words, however, he intimates that
his whole doctrine was summed up in a simple acquaintance with Christ
alone, as in reality the whole of the gospel is included in it. Hence
those go beyond due limits, who teach anything else than Christ alone,
with whatever show of wisdom they may otherwise be puffed up. For as he
is the *end of the law,* (<span id="vii.iv-p43.1"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="vii.iv-p43.1"></span>,)
so he is the head — the sum — in fine, the consummation — of all
spiritual doctrine.

<span id="vii.iv-p44"></span>In the *second* place, he intimates that
his doctrine respecting Christ had not been variable, or ambiguous, so
as to present him from time to time in a new shape after the manner of
Proteus;  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) as some persons make
it their sport to make changes upon him,  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) just as if they were tossing a ball to
and fro with their hand, simply for the purpose of displaying their
dexterity. Others, with a view to procure the favor of men, present him
under various forms, while there is still another class, that inculcate
one day what on the next they retract through fear. Such was not Paul’s
Christ, nor can that of any true apostle  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) be such. Those, accordingly, have no
ground to boast that they are ministers of Christ, who paint him in
various colors with a view to their own advantage. For he alone is the
true Christ, in whom there appears that uniform and unvarying *yea,*
which Paul declares to be characteristic of him.

<span id="vii.iv-p48"></span><span id="vii.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p49"></span>**20.** *For all the promises of God* —
Here again he shows how firm and unvarying the preaching of Christ ought
to be, inasmuch as he is the groundwork  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) of *all the promises of God.* For it
were worse than absurd to entertain the idea that he, in whom *all the
promises of God* are established, is like one that wavers.  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) Now though the statement is general,
as we shall see ere long, it is, notwithstanding, accommodated to the
circumstances of the case in hand, with the view of confirming the
certainty of Paul’s doctrine. For it is not simply of the gospel in
general that he treats, but he honors more especially his own gospel
with this distinction. “If the promises of God are sure and
well-founded, my preaching also must of necessity be sure, inasmuch as
it contains nothing but Christ, in whom they are all established.” As,
however, in these words he means simply that he preached a gospel that
was genuine, and not adulterated by any foreign additions,  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) let us keep in view this general
doctrine, that all the promises of God rest upon Christ alone as their
support — a sentiment that is worthy of being kept in remembrance, and
is one of the main articles of our faith. It depends, however, on
another principle — that it is only in Christ that God the Father is
propitious to us. Now the promises are testimonies of his fatherly
kindness towards us. Hence it follows, that it is in him alone that they
are fulfilled.

<span id="vii.iv-p53"></span>The promises, I say, are testimonies of
Divine grace: for although God shows kindness even to the unworthy,
(<span id="vii.iv-p53.1"></span>[Lu
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035)<span id="vii.iv-p53.1"></span>,)
yet when promises are given in addition to his acts of kindness, there
is a special reason — that in them he declares himself to be a Father.
*Secondly,* we are not qualified for enjoying the promises of God,
unless we have received the remission of our sins, which we obtain
through Christ. *Thirdly,* the promise, by which God adopts us to
himself as his sons, holds the first place among them all. Now the cause
and root of adoption is Christ; because God is not a Father to any that
are not members and brethren of his only-begotten Son. Everything,
however, flows out from this source — that, while we are without Christ,
we are hated by God rather than favorably regarded, while at the same
time God promises us everything that he does promise, because he loves
us. Hence it is not to be wondered if Paul here teaches, that all the
promises of God are ratified and confirmed in Christ.

<span id="vii.iv-p54"></span>It is asked, however, whether they were
feeble or powerless, previously to Christ’s advent; for Paul seems to
speak here of Christ as *manifested in the flesh.* (<span
id="vii.iv-p54.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="vii.iv-p54.1"></span>.)
I answer, that all the promises that were given to believers from the
beginning of the world were founded upon Christ. Hence Moses and the
Prophets, in every instance in which they treat of reconciliation with
God, of the hope of salvation, or of any other favor, make mention of
him, and discourse at the same time respecting his coming and his
kingdom. I say again, that the promises under the Old Testament were
fulfilled to the pious, in so far as was advantageous for their welfare;
and yet it is not less true, that they were in a manner suspended until
the advent of Christ, through whom they obtained their true
accomplishment. And in truth, believers themselves rested upon the
promises in such a way, as at the same time to refer the true
accomplishment of them to the appearing of the Mediator, and suspended
their hope until that time. In fine, if any one considers what is the
fruit of Christ’s death and resurrection, he will easily gather from
this, in what respect the promises of God have been sealed and ratified
in him, which would otherwise have had no sure accomplishment.

<span id="vii.iv-p55"></span>*Wherefore, also, through him let there be
Amen.* Here also the Greek manuscripts do not agree, for some of them
have it in one continued statement — *As many promises of God as there
are, are in him Yea, and in him Amen to the glory of God through us.*
 <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) The different reading, however,
which I have followed, is easier, and contains a fuller meaning. For as
he had said, that, in Christ, God has confirmed the truth of all his
promises, so now he teaches us, that it is our duty to acquiesce in this
ratification. This we do, when, resting upon Christ by a sure faith, we
subscribe and *set our seal that God is true,* as we read in <span
id="vii.iv-p56.2"></span>[Joh
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)<span id="vii.iv-p56.2"></span>,
and that with a view to his glory, as this is the end to which
everything should be referred. (<span id="vii.iv-p56.3"></span>[Eph
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span id="vii.iv-p56.3"></span>,
and <span id="vii.iv-p56.4"></span>[Ro
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="vii.iv-p56.4"></span>.)

<span id="vii.iv-p57"></span>The other reading, I confess, is the more
common one, but as it is somewhat meagre, I have not hesitated to prefer
the one that contains the fuller meaning, and, besides, is much better
suited to the context. For Paul reminds the Corinthians of their duty —
to utter their *Amen* in return, after having been instructed in the
simple truth of God. If, however, any one is reluctant to depart from
the other reading, there must, in any case, be an exhortation deduced
from it  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) to a mutual agreement
in doctrine and faith.

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**21.** Now he which stablisheth us with you
in Christ, and hath anointed us, *is* God;

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>**21.** Qui autem confirmat nos vobiscum in
Christo, et qui unxit nos, Deus est:

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span>**22.** Who hath also sealed us, and given
the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span>**22.** Qui et obsignavit nos, et dedit
arrhabonem Spiritus in cordibus nostris.

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span><span id="vii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span>God, indeed, is always true and steadfast in
his promises, and has always his *Amen,* as often as he speaks. But as
for us, such is our vanity, that we do not utter our Amen in return,
except when he gives a sure testimony in our hearts by his word. This he
does by his Spirit. That is what Paul means here. He had previously
taught, that this is a befitting harmony — when, on the one hand, *the
calling of God is without repentance,* (<span id="vii.v-p8.1"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="vii.v-p8.1"></span>,)
and we, in our turn, with an unwavering faith, accept of the blessing of
adoption that is held out to us. That God remains steadfast to his
promise is not surprising; but to keep pace with God in the
steadfastness of our faith in return — *that* truly is not in man’s
power.  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) He teaches us, also,
that God cures our weakness or defect, (as they term it,) when, by
correcting our belief, he confirms us by his Spirit. Thus it comes, that
we glorify him by a firm steadfastness of faith. He associates himself,
however, with the Corinthians, expressly for the purpose of conciliating
their affections the better, with a view to the cultivation of unity.
 <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294)

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span>**21.** *Who hath anointed us.* He employs
different terms to express one and the same thing. For along with
*confirmation,* he employs the terms *anointing* and *sealing,* or, by
this twofold metaphor,  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) he
explains more distinctly what he had previously stated without a figure.
For God, by pouring down upon us the heavenly grace of the Spirit, does,
in this manner, *seal* upon our hearts the certainty of his own word. He
then introduces a *fourth* idea — that the Spirit has been given to us
as an *earnest* — a similitude which he frequently makes use of, and is
also exceedingly appropriate.  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)
For as the Spirit, in bearing witness of our adoption, is our security,
and, by confirming the faith of the promises, is the *seal* (<span
id="vii.v-p13.4"></span>σφραγὶς), so it is on good grounds that he is
called an *earnest,*  <span id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) because it
is owing to him, that the covenant of God is ratified on both sides,
which would, but for this, have hung in suspense.  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)

<span id="vii.v-p16"></span>Here we must notice, in the *first* place,
the relation  <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) which Paul
requires between the gospel of God and our faith; for as every thing
that God says is more than merely certain, so he wishes that this should
be established in our minds by a firm and sure assent. *Secondly,* we
must observe that, as an assurance of this nature is a thing that is
above the capacity of the human mind, it is the part of the Holy Spirit
to confirm within us what God promises in his word. Hence it is that he
has those titles of distinction — the *Anointing,* the *Earnest,* the
*Comforter,* and the *Seal.* In the *third* place we must observe, that
all that have not the Holy Spirit as a witness, so as to return their
*Amen* to God, when calling them to an assured hope of salvation, do on
false grounds assume the name of Christians.

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
1:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span id="vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>**23.** Moreover I call God for a record
upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth.

<span id="vii.vi-p3"></span>**23.** Ego autem testem invoco Deum in
animam meam, quod parcens vobis nondum venerim Corinthum.

<span id="vii.vi-p4"></span>**24.** Not for that we have dominion over
your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye stand.

<span id="vii.vi-p5"></span>**24.** Non quod dominemur fidei vestrae,
sed adiutores sumus  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) gaudii
vestri: fide enim statis.

<span id="vii.vi-p7"></span><span id="vii.vi-p7.1"></span>[2 Corinthians
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)<span id="vii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p8"></span>**1**. But I determined this with myself,
that I would not come again to you in heaviness.

<span id="vii.vi-p9"></span>**1**. Decreveram autem hoc in me ipso, non
amplius venire in tristitia ad vos.  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301)

<span id="vii.vi-p11"></span>**2**. For if I make you sorry, who is he
then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me?

<span id="vii.vi-p12"></span>**2**. Si enim ego contristo vos: et quis
est qui me exhilaret, nisi is qui erit tristitia affectus ex me?

<span id="vii.vi-p13"></span> 

<span id="vii.vi-p14"></span><span id="vii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p15"></span>**23.** *I call God for a witness.* He now
begins to assign a reason for his change of purpose; for hitherto he has
merely repelled calumny. When, however, he says that *he spared them,*
he indirectly throws back the blame upon them, and thus shows them that
it would be unfair if he were put to grief through their fault, but that
it would be much more unfair if they should permit this; but most of all
unfair if they should give their assent to so base a calumny, as in that
case they would be substituting in their place an innocent person, as if
he had been guilty of their sin. Now he *spared* them in this respect,
that if he had come he would have been constrained to reprove them more
severely, while he wished rather that they should of their own accord
repent previously to his arrival, that there might be no occasion for a
harsher remedy,  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) which is a
signal evidence of more than paternal lenity. For how much forbearance
there was in shunning this necessity, when he had just ground of
provocation!

<span id="vii.vi-p17"></span>He makes use, also, of an oath, that he may
not seem to have contrived something to serve a particular purpose. For
the matter in itself was of no small importance, and it was of great
consequence that he should be entirely free from all suspicion of
falsehood and pretence. Now there are two things that make an oath
lawful and pious — the occasion and the disposition. The *occasion* I
refer to is, where an oath is not employed rashly, that is, in mere
trifles, or even in matters of small importance, but only where there is
a call for it. The *disposition* I refer to is, where there is not so
much regard had to private advantage, as concern felt for the glory of
God, and the advantage of the brethren: For this end must always be kept
in view, that our oaths may promote the honor of God, and promote also
the advantage of our neighbours in a matter that is befitting.  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303)

<span id="vii.vi-p19"></span>The form of the oath must also be observed
— *first,* that he calls God to witness; and, *secondly,* that he says
*upon my soul* For in matters that are doubtful and obscure, where man’s
knowledge fails, we have recourse to God, that he, who alone is truth,
may bear testimony to the truth. But the man that appeals to God as his
witness, calls upon him at the same time to be an avenger of perjury, in
the event of his declaring what is false. This is what is meant by the
phrase *upon my soul.* “I do not object to his inflicting punishment
upon me, if I am guilty of falsehood.” Although, however, this is not
always expressed in so many words, it is, notwithstanding, to be
understood. For

<span id="vii.vi-p20"></span>if we are unfaithful, God remaineth
faithful  
and will not deny himself (<span id="vii.vi-p20.2"></span>[2Ti
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="vii.vi-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.vi-p21"></span>He will not suffer, therefore, the
profanation of his name to go unpunished.

<span id="vii.vi-p22"></span><span id="vii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p23"></span>**24.** *Not that we exercise dominion* He
anticipates an objection that might be brought forward. “What! Do you
then act so tyrannically  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) as to
be formidable in your very look? Such were not the gravity of a
Christian pastor, but the cruelty of a savage tyrant.” He answers this
objection first *indirectly,* by declaring that matters are not so; and
afterwards *directly,* by showing that the very circumstance, that he
had been constrained to treat them more harshly, was owing to his
fatherly affection. When he says that he does not *exercise dominion
over their faith,* he intimates, that such a power is unjust and
intolerable — nay more, is tyranny in the Church. For faith ought to be
altogether exempt, and to the utmost extent free, from the yoke of men.
We must, however, observe, who it is that speaks, for if ever there was
a single individual of mortals, that had authority to claim for himself
such a *dominion,* Paul assuredly was worthy of such a privilege. Yet he
acknowledges,  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) that it does not
belong to him. Hence we infer, that faith owns no subjection except to
the word of God, and that it is not at all in subjection to human
control.  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) Erasmus has observed
in his Annotations, that by supplying the Greek particle <span
id="vii.vi-p26.1"></span>ἕνεκα, it may be understood in this way — *Not
that we exercise dominion over you* — *with respect to your faith* — *a*
rendering which amounts almost to the same thing. For he intimates, that
there is no spiritual dominion, except that of God only. This always
remains a settled point — pastors have no peculiar *dominion* over men’s
consciences,  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) inasmuch as they
are ministers, *not lords.* (<span id="vii.vi-p27.2"></span>[1Pe
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)<span id="vii.vi-p27.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.vi-p28"></span>What then does he leave to himself and
others? He calls them *helpers of their joy* — by which term I
understand *happiness.* At the same time he employs the term *joy* as
opposed to the terror which tyrants awaken through means of their
cruelty, and also false prophets,  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) resembling tyrants, that *rule with
rigor and authority,* as we read in <span id="vii.vi-p29.2"></span>[Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span id="vii.vi-p29.2"></span>.
He argues from contraries, that he did by no means usurp dominion over
the Corinthians, inasmuch as he endeavored rather to maintain them in
the possession of a peace that was free, and full of joy.

<span id="vii.vi-p30"></span>*For by faith ye stand.* As to the reason
why he adds this, others either pass it over altogether in silence, or
they do not explain it with sufficient distinctness. For my part, I am
of opinion that he here again argues from contraries. For if the nature
and effect of faith be such that we lean, in order that we may *stand*,
 <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) it is absurd to speak of faith
as being subject to men. Thus he removes that unjust dominion, with
which, he had a little before declared, he was not chargeable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc40006.htm#fr_213) <span
id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, p.
48.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc40006.htm#fr_214) <span
id="vii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span> See Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, pp.
51, 52.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc40006.htm#fr_215) <span
id="vii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span> “A true child of God may have sad falls, as
we see in Peter and David, yet for all this not be quite excluded out of
the covenant of grace: they did not lose their sonship, even in those
sad transgressions, and will God be more severe to a whole Church than
to one person?” — *Burgesse* on <span id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>[2
Corinthians 1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#000)<span
id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>. (Lond. 1661) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc40006.htm#fr_216) <span
id="vii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p21.1"></span>Des martyres
et afflictions des fideles;” — “The martyrdoms and afflictions of
believers.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc40006.htm#fr_217) <span
id="vii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p22.1"></span>Cherche
matiere de mespris et diffamation aux enseignes magnifiques de victoire,
lesquelles Dieu dresse à ses enfans;” — “Seeks matter of contempt and
defamation in those splendid tokens of victory, which God furnishes to
His children.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc40006.htm#fr_218) <span
id="vii.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span> “Who is comforting (<span
id="vii.i-p23.1"></span>ὁ παρακαλῶν) — that doth never cease to do it,
that never withdraweth his consolations. It is his nature to be always
comforting — as the devil is called <span id="vii.i-p23.2"></span>ὁ
πειραζων, because he is *always tempting*.” — *Burgesse* on 2
Corinthians p. 157 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc40006.htm#fr_219) <span
id="vii.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>Ce mot, Qui,
est mis pour *Car*, ou, *Pource que*;” — “This word, *Who*, being used
instead of *For*, or, *Because*.”

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc40006.htm#fr_220) <span
id="vii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p30.1"></span>Pour son
proufit particulier;” — “For his own private advantage.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc40006.htm#fr_221) <span
id="vii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span> “It is not enough for the ministers of the
gospel to have devoured many books of learning, to be able to decide
polemical questions in divinity, to convince gainsayers, to be doctors
angelical, subtle or profound; to be <span
id="vii.i-p31.1"></span>*mallei hereticorum* — *the hammer of heretics*.
Unless also they have the experimental works of God’s Spirit upon their
own souls, they are not able to apply themselves to the hearts of
others. Paul had not been able to *comfort others*, if the Lord had not
practically acquainted him with heavenly consolations.” — *Burgesse* on
<span id="vii.i-p31.2"></span>[2 Corinthians
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#000)<span id="vii.i-p31.2"></span>, p.
178 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc40006.htm#fr_222) <span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p4.1"></span>Pour vostre
consolation et salut, ou, C’est pour vostre;” — “For your consolation
and salvation, or, It is for your,” etc.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc40006.htm#fr_223) <span
id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>Nostre
esperance est ferme de vous, ou, Et l’esperance que nous auons de vous
est ferme, scachans;” — “Our hope is firm respecting you, or, And the
hope which we have respecting you is firm. Knowing.”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc40006.htm#fr_224) <span
id="vii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p12.1"></span>Mesme, ou,
Mais;” — “Nay more, or, But.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc40006.htm#fr_225) <span
id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p17.1"></span>Pour
l’esgard de plusieurs personnes, ou, Par le moyen de plusieurs
personnes;” — “For the sake of many persons, or, By means of many
persons.”

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc40006.htm#fr_226) <span
id="vii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p21"></span> Dr. Bloomfield, who gives to this reading
of the passage his decided preference, says of it: “The evidence in its
favor is exceedingly strong; while that for the common reading is
exceedingly weak.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc40006.htm#fr_227) <span
id="vii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p22.1"></span>Qu’il ha
certain espoir;” — “That he has a sure hope.”

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc40006.htm#fr_228) <span
id="vii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p24.1"></span>θλίψις”,
says Dr. Bloomfield, in his Notes on <span id="vii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Mt
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)<span id="vii.ii-p24.2"></span>,
“properly signifies compression, and figuratively constraint,
oppression, affliction, and persecution.” — Ed.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc40006.htm#fr_229) <span
id="vii.ii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p25.1"></span>Voyans les
passions du sainct Apostre;” — “Beholding the sufferings of the holy
Apostle.”

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc40006.htm#fr_230) <span
id="vii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p26.1"></span>Afin
d’oster aux Corinthiens ceste mauuaise fantasie;” — “With the view of
ridding the Corinthians of this wicked fancy.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc40006.htm#fr_231) <span
id="vii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p27.1"></span>Iusques en
la fin;” — “Until the end.”

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc40006.htm#fr_232) <span
id="vii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p29.1"></span>Et ne
pensons point estre assez forts;” — “And do not think that we are
sufficiently strong.”

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc40006.htm#fr_233) <span
id="vii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p31.1"></span>Les
fideles recueilloyent de là, et s’asseuroyent;” — “Believers inferred
from this, and assured themselves.”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc40006.htm#fr_234) <span
id="vii.ii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p32"></span> “<span
id="vii.ii-p32.1"></span>Traduisant, Qui oeuure ou besongne;” —
“Rendering it, Which works or labors.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc40006.htm#fr_235) <span
id="vii.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p33"></span> Dr. Bloomfield, in his Notes on <span
id="vii.ii-p33.1"></span>[1Th
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)<span id="vii.ii-p33.1"></span>,
explains <span id="vii.ii-p33.2"></span>ἐνεργεῖται, to mean — “*is made
effectual*,” or “shews itself in its effects,” and adds: “This view I
find supported by the opinion of Schott, who maintains that <span
id="vii.ii-p33.3"></span>ἐνεργεῖσθαι, is never in the New Testament used
as a *middle* form, with an active sense; but always (especially in St.
Paul’s writings) as a *passive*. Indeed, Bp. Bull, Exam. p. 9, goes yet
farther, and asserts, that it is scarcely ever so used, even in the
*Classical* writers (I believe he might have said never) but always in a
passive sense.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc40006.htm#fr_236) <span
id="vii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p36"></span> The Corinthians were <span
id="vii.ii-p36.1"></span>κοινωνοί *partakers of*, or *in communion with
him in his afflictions*. What is more humble and lowly (<span
id="vii.ii-p36.2"></span>τί ταπεινοφρωνέστερον) than Paul in this
expression? saith Chrysostom — they who had not in the least measure
shared with him in sufferings, yet he maketh them copartners with him.
They are, as Salmeron expresseth it, *Copartners in the gain and in the
loss with Paul*. They venture (as it were) in the ship together.” —
*Burgesse*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc40006.htm#fr_237) <span
id="vii.ii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p39"></span> “*Pressed above measure*. (<span
id="vii.ii-p39.1"></span>καθ ᾿ ὑπερβολὴν ἐβαρήςθημεν.) The words <span
id="vii.ii-p39.2"></span>βάρος and <span
id="vii.ii-p39.3"></span>βάρουμαι, are applied sometimes to the enduring
of a burden, (<span id="vii.ii-p39.4"></span>[Mt
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012)<span id="vii.ii-p39.4"></span>;
<span id="vii.ii-p39.5"></span>[Ga
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span id="vii.ii-p39.5"></span>,)
whether it be a temporal burden or spiritual \[...\] In this place it
seemeth to be taken from porters, who have a burden imposed upon them,
more than they are able to stand under; or as Chrysostom, from ships
which are over much burdened, and so are in danger of being lost. And as
if there were not emphasis enough in the word pressed, he addeth another
to aggravate it — (<span id="vii.ii-p39.6"></span>καθ ᾿ ὑπερβολήν) —
*above measure* — *Above strength*. (<span id="vii.ii-p39.7"></span>ὑπὲρ
δύναμιν.) Chrysostom observeth this differeth from the other. For a
burden may be exceeding heavy, yet to some mighty man it may not be
above his strength. When *Samson* (<span id="vii.ii-p39.8"></span>[Jud
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#003)<span id="vii.ii-p39.8"></span>)
carried away the gates of the city Gaza, with the posts and barre upon
his shoulders, here was a burden out of measure heavy; no ordinary man
could do so; but yet to *Samson* it was not above his strength. Thus it
was with Paul, who may be called a *spiritual Samson*, for that heavenly
might and power which God had endowed him with; he is assaulted with a
trouble that was not only *hyperbolically weighty*, but also *above his
strength*. Paul had no more power to stand under it.” — Burgesse on
<span id="vii.ii-p39.9"></span>[2 Corinthians
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#000)<span id="vii.ii-p39.9"></span>, pp.
269, 270, 278. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc40006.htm#fr_238) <span
id="vii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p41"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p41.1"></span>Vn
champion si preux et magnanime, perdoit — il courage attendant la mort?”
— “Did a champion so valiant and magnanimous lose heart, looking for
nothing but death?”

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc40006.htm#fr_239) <span
id="vii.ii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p42"></span> <span
id="vii.ii-p42.1"></span>Εξαπορεῖσθαι properly signifies to be utterly
at a stand, not knowing how to proceed. — In <span
id="vii.ii-p42.2"></span>[Ps 88:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#008)<span
id="vii.ii-p42.2"></span>, where David says — *I am shut up, and I
cannot come forth*, the Hebrew words <span id="vii.ii-p42.3"></span> ולא
אצא(*velo etse*,) are rendered in the Septuagint — <span
id="vii.ii-p42.4"></span>καὶ οὐκ ἐξεπορευόμην — *and I could not come
forth*. It is worthy of notice that, in the metre version, the idea
expressed by Calvin, as implied in the verb <span
id="vii.ii-p42.5"></span>ἐξαπορεῖσθαι, is fully brought out — “find no
evasion for me.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc40006.htm#fr_240) <span
id="vii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p45"></span> “The Greek word is <span
id="vii.ii-p45.1"></span>ἀποςκριμα, used here in this place only in the
New Testament. \[...\] The most genuine translation is *sentence*; for
so Hesychius expounds the word <span id="vii.ii-p45.2"></span>κατακριςμα
— <span id="vii.ii-p45.3"></span>ψὢφο”, whom *Favorinus* followeth
*verbatim* in this, as in many other particulars. \[...\] The word then
doth signifie a *sentence* passing upon him, *that he must die*. This he
had received, but from whom? Not from God, for God delivered him; nor
from the magistrate; there was no such decree that we read of against
him. Therefore it was onely from his own feares, his own thoughts, which
maketh him say — *he had received it in himself*. \[...\] God’s thoughts
were other than Paul’s. Paul absolutely concluded he should die, but God
had purposed the contrary.” — *Burgesse*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc40006.htm#fr_241) <span
id="vii.ii-p45.5"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p46"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p46.1"></span>Il se
propose aux autres comme pour exemple, non pas qu’il en fust ainsi quant
à luy;” — “He sets himself forth, as it were by way of example — not
that it had been so as to himself.”

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc40006.htm#fr_242) <span
id="vii.ii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p47"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p47.1"></span>De peur
qu’ils ne saisissent plenement son esprit et son coeur;” — “That they
might not take full possession of his mind and his heart.”

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc40006.htm#fr_243) <span
id="vii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p49"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p49.1"></span>Sinon que
nous tombions en telle extremite que nous ne voyons aucune esperance en
nous;” — “Except by our falling into such an extremity, that we see no
hope in ourselves.”

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc40006.htm#fr_244) <span
id="vii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p51"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p51.1"></span>Comme il
nous est necessaire premierement de venir comme à mourir;” — “As we need
first to come as it were to die”

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc40006.htm#fr_245) <span
id="vii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p55"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p55.1"></span>Il nous
est necessaire pour estre amenez à Dieu, d’estre reduits â telle
extremite que nous voyons la mort presente deuant nos yeux;” — “It is
necessary, in order that we may be brought back to God, that we should
be brought to such an extremity, that we see death presented before our
eyes.”

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc40006.htm#fr_246) <span
id="vii.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p59"></span> *Granville Penn* reads the passage as
follows: “Who hath delivered us from so great a death; and will deliver
us: in whom we hope that he will deliver us.” — “The *Vat*. and *Ephrem*
MSS.” he observes, “read <span id="vii.ii-p59.1"></span>ῥύσεται, not
<span id="vii.ii-p59.2"></span>ῥύεται, as in the *rec*. text. The latter
reading seems to have been substituted, because <span
id="vii.ii-p59.3"></span>ῥύσεται, occurs again in the following
sentence; but the Apostle repeats the word, that he may qualify it by
<span id="vii.ii-p59.4"></span>ἠλπίκαμεν, (we hope.”) — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc40006.htm#fr_247) <span
id="vii.ii-p59.5"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p60"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p60.1"></span>Mais aussi
auec bonne issue, d’autant qu’ils seront exaucez;” — “But also with good
success, inasmuch as they will be heard.”

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc40006.htm#fr_248) <span
id="vii.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p62"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p62.1"></span>L’aide,
dit il, que vous me feriez par vos prieres, ne sera point sans fruit;” —
“The aid, he says, that you will afford me by your prayers, will not be
without advantage.”

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc40006.htm#fr_249) <span
id="vii.ii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p63"></span> “*You also helping together by prayer for
us,* (<span id="vii.ii-p63.1"></span>Συνυπουργούντων καὶ ὑμῶν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν
τὣ δεήσει.) The particle <span id="vii.ii-p63.2"></span>καί is
emphatical, *You also* — implying, that neither God’s promise, nor his
power, would procure this mercy alone without their prayer. Besides the
goodness of God on his part, there must be prayer on their part. The
word in the original for helping is emphatical, being twice compounded.
<span id="vii.ii-p63.3"></span>̔υπουργούντων doth denote the *service*
and *ministry* of those who are *under* us; and so it doth imply, that
the Church doth owe as a debt unto their spiritual guides earnest prayer
for them. \[...\] Then there is the preposition <span
id="vii.ii-p63.4"></span>σύν added, which doth denote not only their
effectual prayers, but their *concord* and *agreement* therein, and that
in their public and solemn assemblies. Again, the word signifying — to
*work*, and *labor*, doth denote what the nature of prayer is — that the
soul labors therein, is fervent, full of agonies; which showeth that the
customary formal prayers of most people are not worthy of the name:
there is no *labor*, or fervency of the soul therein. — They labored by
*prayer*. They did not labor by using friends to solicit the magistrate
in Paul’s behalf, for there was no hope from them, but they made their
addresses to God.” — *Burgesse*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc40006.htm#fr_250) <span
id="vii.ii-p63.5"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p64"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p64.1"></span>Que Dieu
auroit soin de son salut et proufit;” — “That God would take care of his
safety and advantage.”

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc40006.htm#fr_251) <span
id="vii.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p66"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p66.1"></span>Qui out
leurs recours aux prieres des saincts trespassez;” — “Who have recourse
to the prayers of departed saints.”

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc40006.htm#fr_252) <span
id="vii.ii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p67"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p67.1"></span>Pour
desguiser et farder leur superstition;” — “To disguise and color over
their superstition.”

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc40006.htm#fr_253) <span
id="vii.ii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p71"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p71.1"></span>Car à
suyure l’ordre du texte Grec il y auroit ainsi mot à mot, Afin que de
plusieurs personnes, à nous le don conferé, par plusieurs soit recognu
en action de graces pour nous;” — “For, following the order of the Greek
text, it would be literally thus: In order that from many persons the
gift conferred upon us, may by many be acknowledged with thanksgiving on
our account.”

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc40006.htm#fr_254) <span
id="vii.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p72"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p72.1"></span>En lieu de
quelque article aduersative qu’on appelle, comme Toutesfois ou
Neantmoins;” — “In place of some adversative particle, as it is called,
as for example, Notwithstanding or Nevertheless.”

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc40006.htm#fr_255) <span
id="vii.ii-p72.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p73"></span> “<span id="vii.ii-p73.1"></span>De
rapporter ce mot *Par plusieurs*, aux choses;” — “To take this phrase,
*By means of many*, as referring to *things*.”

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc40006.htm#fr_256) <span
id="vii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p4.1"></span>Purete,
ou, integrite;” — “Purity, or integrity.”

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc40006.htm#fr_257) <span
id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span> “*We have had our conversation* (<span
id="vii.iii-p12.1"></span>ἀνεστράφημεν.) The verb <span
id="vii.iii-p12.2"></span>ἀναστρέφω, is compounded of <span
id="vii.iii-p12.3"></span>ἀνὰ, again, and <span
id="vii.iii-p12.4"></span>στρέφω, to turn — a continual coming back
again to the point from which he set out — a circulation — beginning,
continuing, and ending everything to the glory of God; setting out with
divine views, and still maintaining them; beginning in the Spirit, and
ending in the Spirit; acting in reference to God, as the *planets* do in
reference to the *sun*, deriving all their light, heat, and motion from
him; and incessantly and regularly revolving round him. Thus acted Paul:
thus acted the primitive Christians; and thus must every Christian act
who expects to see God in his glory.” — *Dr. Adam Clarke*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc40006.htm#fr_258) <span
id="vii.iii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p13.1"></span>Par les
affections qu’ils portoyent à d’autres pour des raisons friuoles, et
quasi sans scauoir pourquoy;” — “By attachments that they cherished
towards others on trivial grounds, and in a manner without knowing why.”

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc40006.htm#fr_259) <span
id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p17.1"></span>Qui est
celuy, tant pur et entier soit il?” — “Where is the man, be he ever so
pure and perfect?”

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc40006.htm#fr_260) <span
id="vii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p18.1"></span>Et
rapporte toutes choses a sa bonte;” — “And ascribes everything to his
goodness.”

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc40006.htm#fr_261) <span
id="vii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii-p19.1"></span>Arrestons nous et reposons du tout;” — “Let us
stay ourselves, and wholly repose.”

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc40006.htm#fr_262) <span
id="vii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p20.1"></span>Bonne et
saincte;” — “Good and holy.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc40006.htm#fr_263) <span
id="vii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p22"></span> “The most ancient MSS. read <span
id="vii.iii-p22.1"></span>ἁγιοτητι, (*holiness*) — not <span
id="vii.iii-p22.2"></span>ἁπλοτητι, (*simplicity*.)” — *Penn*

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc40006.htm#fr_264) <span
id="vii.iii-p22.6"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p23"></span> “The word used here <span
id="vii.iii-p23.1"></span>εἰλικρινείᾳ and rendered *sincerity* — denotes
properly — *clearness*, such as is judged of or discerned in sunshine,
(<span id="vii.iii-p23.2"></span>εἴλη, *sunshine*, and <span
id="vii.iii-p23.3"></span>κρίνω, to *judge*,) and thence pureness,
integrity. It is most probable that the *phrase* here denotes that
sincerity which God produces and approves; and the sentiment is, that
pure religion, the religion of God, produces entire sincerity in the
heart. Its purposes and aims are open and manifest, *as if seen in the
sunshine*. The plans of the world are obscure, deceitful, and dark, *as
if in the night*.” — *Barnes*. The same term is made use of by Paul in
<span id="vii.iii-p23.4"></span>[1Co
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="vii.iii-p23.4"></span>,
and in <span id="vii.iii-p23.5"></span>[2Co
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017)<span id="vii.iii-p23.5"></span>
On comparing the various instances in which this term is employed by the
Apostle, we have occasion to observe the admirable harmony between his
exhortations and practice. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc40006.htm#fr_265) <span
id="vii.iii-p28.5"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p29.1"></span>Ce que
disons *Auouer*: comme on dira *Auouer vn enfant*;” — “What we express
by the verb to own, as when you speak of *owning a child*.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc40006.htm#fr_266) <span
id="vii.iii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p31"></span> The word <span
id="vii.iii-p31.1"></span>ἀςναγινώσκετε, “properly means to *know
accurately*, to *distinguish*. It is probably used here in the sense of
knowing accurately or surely, of *recognizing* from their former
acquaintance with him.” <span id="vii.iii-p31.2"></span>᾿Επιγινώσκειν
“here means that they would *fully recognize*, or know entirely to their
satisfaction, that the sentiments which he here expressed were such as
accorded with his general manner of life.” — *Barnes*. Dr. Bloomfield,
who approves of the view taken by Calvin of the meaning of the verb
<span id="vii.iii-p31.3"></span>ἀναγινώσκετε, remarks, that the word is
employed in the same sense by Xenophon. Anab., 5:8, 6, as well as
elsewhere in the Classical writers. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc40006.htm#fr_267) <span
id="vii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p33.1"></span>C’est à
dire, pour en iuger droitement;” — “That is to say, to judge of it
aright.”

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc40006.htm#fr_268) <span
id="vii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p34.1"></span>Que vous
cognoistrez de plus en plus comme i’ay conversé entre vous, et comme ie
m’y suis gouuerné, et ainsi auouërez ce que maintenant i’en di;” — “That
you will acknowledge more and more how I have conducted myself among
you, and how I have regulated myself, and thus you will assent to what I
now say.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc40006.htm#fr_269) <span
id="vii.iii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p35"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p35.1"></span>Que
c’est qu’il a entendu par le dernier des deux mots desquels nous auons
parler, lequel nous auons traduit *Auouer*;” — “What it was that he
meant by the last of the two words of which we have spoken, which we
have rendered — *Acknowledge*.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc40006.htm#fr_270) <span
id="vii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p36"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p36.1"></span>Obscurci
et abbastardi en eux par les propos obliques des faux — Apostres et
autres malins;” — “Obscured and corrupted by the unfair statements of
the false Apostles, and other malicious persons.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc40006.htm#fr_271) <span
id="vii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p40"></span> “<span id="vii.iii-p40.1"></span>Vaines
et caduques;” — “Empty and fading.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc40006.htm#fr_272) <span
id="vii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p4.1"></span>Seconde, *ou
double*;” — “Second, *or double*.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc40006.htm#fr_273) <span
id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span> The Latin text "et per vos transire in
Macedoniam:" in the original manuscript was at the end of verse 15, I
have moved it to match the Vulgate (possible error in the Edinburgh
edition.) — *fj.*

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc40006.htm#fr_274) <span
id="vii.iv-p19.4"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p20"></span> “Most modern Commentators explain the
<span id="vii.iv-p20.1"></span>χάριν *gift* or *benefit*; but the
ancient Commentators, and some modern ones, as Wolf and Schleus,
*gratification* for <span id="vii.iv-p20.2"></span>χαράν. It should seem
to mean *benefit* generally, every spiritual advantage, or gratification
from his society, imparted by his presence.” — *Bloomfield* *One* MS.
reads <span id="vii.iv-p20.3"></span>χαράν *Kypke*, who renders <span
id="vii.iv-p20.4"></span>χάριν, joy adduces instances in support of this
meaning of <span id="vii.iv-p20.5"></span>χάρι”, though acknowledged to
be unusual, from *Plutarch*, *Polybius*, and *Euripides*. The phrase is
rendered in Tyndale’s version, (1534,) and also in Cranmer’s, (1539,)
and Geneva, (1557,) versions — *one pleasure moare*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc40006.htm#fr_275) <span
id="vii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p27.1"></span>Que nos
deliberations et conseils soyent comme oracles et reuelations Diuines;”
— “That our purposes and plans shall be like oracles and Divine
revelations.”

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc40006.htm#fr_276) <span
id="vii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p29"></span> “He (the apostle) anticipates and repels a
reproach of <span id="vii.iv-p29.1"></span>ἰλαφρία, or ‘*lightness of
purpose*,’ in that change of mind, as if he was ‘*a yea and nay man*,’
(Shaksp.), on whose word no secure reliance could be placed. In the next
verse he calls God to witness that his word to them was not, ‘*both yea
and nay*;’ and in the beginning of the following chapter, he explains to
them, that it was for their sakes that he abstained from executing his
first intention.” — *Penn*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc40006.htm#fr_277) <span
id="vii.iv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p30"></span> The rendering of the Vulgate is as
follows: “<span id="vii.iv-p30.1"></span>Ut sit apud me *est* et non;” —
“That with me there should be *yea* and *nay*.” This reading — <span
id="vii.iv-p30.2"></span>τὸ ναὶ καὶ τὸ οὔ, (yea and nay), is found in
one Greek MS., as stated by Semler. Wiclif, (1380,) following the
Vulgate, reads — “that at me, be *it is* and *it is not*.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc40006.htm#fr_278) <span
id="vii.iv-p30.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p31"></span> “It was a proverbial manner among the Jews
(see Wet.) of characterizing a man of strict probity and good faith, by
saying, ‘his *yes* is *yes*, and his *no* is *no’* — that is, you may
depend upon his word; as he declares, so it is; and as he promises, so
he will do. Our Lord is therefore to be considered here (<span
id="vii.iv-p31.1"></span>[Mt 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)<span
id="vii.iv-p31.1"></span>) not as prescribing the precise terms wherein
we are to affirm or deny; in which case it would have suited better the
simplicity of his style to say barely <span id="vii.iv-p31.2"></span>ναὶ
καὶ οὔ (*yea and nay*,) without doubling the words; but as enjoining
such an habitual and inflexible regard to truth, as would render
swearing unnecessary. That this manner of converting these adverbs into
nouns, is in the idiom of the sacred penmen, we have another instance,
(<span id="vii.iv-p31.3"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="vii.iv-p31.3"></span>,)
‘For all the promises of God in him are *yea*, and in him *Amen*.’
(<span id="vii.iv-p31.4"></span>ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ ναὶ καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ ἀμὴν) —
that is, *certain* and *infallible* truths. It is indeed a common idiom
of the Greek tongue, to turn by means of the article any of the parts of
speech ‘into a noun.” — *Campbell on the Gospels*, volume 2. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc40006.htm#fr_279) <span
id="vii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p34"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p34.1"></span>N’a point
dit l’vn, puis l’autre;” — “Does not say one thing and then another.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc40006.htm#fr_280) <span
id="vii.iv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p36.1"></span>De là
vient aussi que S. Paul est bien si hardi;” — “Hence, too, it comes that
St. Paul is so very bold.”

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc40006.htm#fr_281) <span
id="vii.iv-p36.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p37.1"></span>Et
annonciateurs de la parolle de Dieu;” — “And heralds of the word of
God.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc40006.htm#fr_282) <span
id="vii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p40.1"></span>Il dit
donc que sa parolle n’a point este oui et non, c’est à dire variable;
pource que sa predication,” etc.; — “He says, then, that his word had
not been yea and nay, that is to say, variable; because his preaching,”
etc.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc40006.htm#fr_283) <span
id="vii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p41"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p41.1"></span>Et
mensonges;” — “And fallacies.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc40006.htm#fr_284) <span
id="vii.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p42"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p42.1"></span>Des
calomniateurs et mesdisans;” — “By calumniators and slanderers.”

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc40006.htm#fr_285) <span
id="vii.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p45"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p45.1"></span>En sorte
qu’il l’ait transfiguré, maintenant en vne sorte, tantost en vne autre,
comme les Poëtes disent que Proteus se transformoit en diuerses sortes;”
— “So as to present him in different shapes, now in one form, then in
another, as the poets say that Proteus transformed himself into
different shapes.” The following poets (among others) make mention of
the “shape — changing” Proteus: — *Virgil*, (Georg. 4:387); *Ovid*,
(Met. 8:730); *Horace*, (Sat. 2:3, 71, Ep. I. 1:90.) See Calvin on John,
vol. 2, p. 256, n. 1. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc40006.htm#fr_286) <span
id="vii.iv-p45.3"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p46"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p46.1"></span>En toutes
manieres;” — “In every way.”

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc40006.htm#fr_287) <span
id="vii.iv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p47"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p47.1"></span>Celui de
tous vrais et fideles ministres;” — “That of all true and faithful
ministers.”

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc40006.htm#fr_288) <span
id="vii.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p50"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p50.1"></span>Le
fondement et la fermete;” — “The foundation and security.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc40006.htm#fr_289) <span
id="vii.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p51"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p51.1"></span>Que celuy
en qui toutes les promesses de Dieu sont establies et ratifices, fust
comme vn homme chancelant et inconstant;” — “That he, in whom all the
promises of God are established and ratified, should be like a man that
is wavering and unsteady.”

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc40006.htm#fr_290) <span
id="vii.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p52"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p52.1"></span>Il a
presché le vray et pur Evangile, et sans y auoir lien adiousté qu’il ait
corrompu ou falsifié;” — “He preached the true and pure gospel, and
without having added to it anything that had corrupted or adulterated
it.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc40006.htm#fr_291) <span
id="vii.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p56"></span> “The most ancient MSS. and versions read
the verse thus: — <span id="vii.iv-p56.1"></span>ὃσαι γὰρ ἐπαγγελίαι
Θεοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ τὸ ναὶ διό καὶ δι ᾿ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ᾿Αμὴν, τῷ Θεῷ πρὸς” δοξαν δι
᾿ ἡμῶν;” — “For all the promises of God are in him yea; because they
are, through him, who is the Amen, to the glory of God by us.” — *Penn*

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc40006.htm#fr_292) <span
id="vii.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p58"></span> “<span id="vii.iv-p58.1"></span>Qu’il
scache tousiours qu’il en faut tirer vne exhortation;” — “Let him always
know this — that we must deduce from it an exhortation.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc40006.htm#fr_293) <span
id="vii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p9.1"></span>D’apporter de
nostre costé vne correspondance mutuelle à la vocation de Dieu en
perseuerant constamment en la foy;” — “To maintain on our part a mutual
correspondence to the call of God by persevering steadfastly in the
faith.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc40006.htm#fr_294) <span
id="vii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p10.1"></span>Expressement
afin de les gaigner et attirer a vraye vnite;” — “Expressly for the
purpose of gaining them over and drawing to a true unity.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc40006.htm#fr_295) <span
id="vii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p12.1"></span>Par les deux
mots qui sont dits par metaphore et similitude;” — “By these two words
which are employed by way of metaphor and similitude.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc40006.htm#fr_296) <span
id="vii.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p13"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p13.1"></span>Αῤρ᾿αβὡν and
the Latin <span id="vii.v-p13.2"></span>*arrhabo* are derived from the
Hebrew <span id="vii.v-p13.3"></span>ערבון (*gnarabon*) — a pledge or
earnest; *i.e.*, a part of any price agreed on, and *paid down* to
ratify the engagement; German, *Hand* — *gift*.” — *Bloomfield*. “The
word appears to have passed, probably as a commercial term, out of the
Hebrew or Phenician into the western languages.” — *Gesenius*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc40006.htm#fr_297) <span
id="vii.v-p13.5"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p14"></span> “If God having once given this *earnest*,
should not also give the rest of the inheritance, he should undergoe the
losse of his earnest, as Chrysostome most elegantly and soundly
argueth.” — *Leigh’s* Annotations. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc40006.htm#fr_298) <span
id="vii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p15"></span> “A *seal* was used for different purposes:
to mark a person’s property, to secure his treasures, or to authenticate
a deed. In the *first* sense, the Spirit distinguishes believers as the
peculiar people of God; in the *second*, he guards them as his precious
jewels; in the *third*, he confirms or ratifies their title to
salvation. \[...\] An *earnest* is a part given as a security for the
future possession of the whole. The Holy Ghost is the *earnest* of the
heavenly inheritance, because he begins that holiness in the soul which
will be perfected in heaven, and imparts those joys which are foretastes
of its blessedness.” — *Dick’s Theology*, volume 3 — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc40006.htm#fr_299) <span
id="vii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p17"></span> “<span id="vii.v-p17.1"></span>La
correspondance mutuelle;” — “The mutual correspondence.”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc40006.htm#fr_300) <span
id="vii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p6.1"></span>Nous sommes
adiuteurs de vostre ioye; ou, *nous aidons* a;” — “We are helpers of
your joy, or, *we aid*.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc40006.htm#fr_301) <span
id="vii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p10.1"></span>De ne
venir à vous derechef auec tristesse, ou, *pour vous apporter
fascherie*;” — “Not to come again to you in sorrow, or, *to cause you
distress*.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc40006.htm#fr_302) <span
id="vii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p16"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p16.1"></span>Remede
plus aspre et rigoureux;” — “A harsher and more rigorous remedy.”

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc40006.htm#fr_303) <span
id="vii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p18.1"></span>Moyennant
que ce soit en chose iuste et raisonable;” — “Provided it is in a matter
that is just and reasonable.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc40006.htm#fr_304) <span
id="vii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p24.1"></span>Es — tu si
insupportable, et si orgueilleux?” — “Are you so insufferable and so
proud?”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc40006.htm#fr_305) <span
id="vii.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p25.1"></span>Il
confesse franchement;” — “He frankly confesses.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc40006.htm#fr_306) <span
id="vii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p26"></span> The views here expressed by Calvin are
severely animadverted upon in the following terms by the Romanists, in
the Annotations appended to the Rheims version of the New Testament:
“Calvin and his seditious sectaries with other like which *despise
dominion*, as St. Jude describeth such, would by this place deliver
themselves from all yoke of spiritual Magistrates and Rulers: namely,
that they be subject to no man touching their faith, or for the
examination and trial of their doctrine, but to God and his word only.
And no marvel that the malefactors and rebels of the Church would come
to no tribunal but God’s, that so they may remain unpunished at least
during this life. For though the Scriptures plainely condemne their
heresies, yet they could writhe themselves out by false glosses,
constructions, corruptions, and denials of the bookes to be canonical,
if there were no lawes or judicial sentences of men to rule and represse
them.” To these statements Dr. Fulke in his elaborate work in refutation
of the errors of Popery, (Lond. 1601,) p. 559, appropriately replies as
follows: “This is nothing els but a lewd and senselesse slander of
Calvin and vs, that we despise lordship, because we will not be subject
to the tyranny of Antichrist, that would be Lord of our faith, and
arrogateth vnto himselfe auctoritie to make new articles of fayth, which
have no ground or warrant in the word of God. But CALVIN did willingly
acknowledge all auctoritie of the ministers of the Church, which the
Scripture doth allow unto them, and both practiced, and submitted
himselfe to the discipline of the Church, and the lawful gouernours
thereof, although he would not yield unto the tyrannicall yoke of the
Pope, who is neither soueraigne of the Church, nor any true member of
the same. Yea, Calvin and we submit ourselves, not only to the
auctoritie of the Church, but also of the Ciuile Magistrates to be
punished, if we shall be found to teach or doe any thing contrary to the
doctrine of faith, receyued and approved by the Church, whereas the
Popish clergy, in causes of religion, will not be subject to the
temporal gouernors, judgement, and correction.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc40006.htm#fr_307) <span
id="vii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p27"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p27.1"></span>Que les
Pasteurs et Evesques n’ont point de iurisdiction propre sur les
consciences;” — “That Pastors and Bishops have no peculiar jurisdiction
over consciences.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc40006.htm#fr_308) <span
id="vii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p29.1"></span>Et les
faux — apostres aussi;” — “And false Apostles also.”

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc40006.htm#fr_309) <span
id="vii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p31"></span> “<span id="vii.vi-p31.1"></span>Afin que
nous demeurions fermes;” — “In order that we may remain secure.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc40007)
