[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Next](vc01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### The Vampire Codex

The Vampire Codex is a document written by occultist and psychic vampire
Michelle Belanger for use as the instructional text of House Kheperu
([www.kheperu.org](https://www.kheperu.org).md). The prototype of this work
was first set to paper in late 1991. A specially printed version was
offered to select students in conjunction with the International Society
of Vampires beginning in 1995. Later revisions led to the Sanguinarium
edition, published by the Sanguiarium Press in October 2000. This
version is derived from the Sanguinarium edition which also came to be
circulated widely on the Internet.

The Vampire Codex has had a significant impact on the worldwide
community of psychic vampires, becoming the fundamental text used by
numerous Houses, Orders, Covens, and Clans. It has influenced the
teachings of vampire groups throughout the US, Canada, and Western
Europe. It has also come to the attention of several noteworthy occult
organizations, including the Temple of Set, the IOT and the Church of
Satan. (Peter Gilmore, current head of the Church of Satan, expressed
his disappointment at Michelle's absence at the New York City release of
"V" as he wanted her autograph on the special edition of the Codex
released with that work).

As the Kheprian Order has continued to expand and reveal deeper and more
complicated levels of its teachings, the Codex has continued to grow
since its first underground releases. A special edition written for the
Order of the Strigoi Vii was released as book two of "V" October 2003 by
vampyrealmanac.com in conjunction with Aangel Publishing. An expanded,
revised edition will be published by Weiser Books in the fall of 2004.
This will be the definitive edition, featuring 108 individual sections
broken up into divisions which address psychic vampirism, basic energy
work, and advanced metaphysical techniques. The version below has come
to be known as the Vampire Codex: Internet Edition and is freely and
widely shared with any and all interested parties. It is derived mainly
from the 2000 Sanguinarium edition, although it includes a few sections
originally left out of that published edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Kheprian Charge](vc01.md)
