[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc03.md) 
[Next](vc05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IV. Awakenings

We are neither wholly born nor wholly made what we are. The choice for
us to become was made long ago. From that time onward, we have been
reborn again and again, carrying within us in every lifetime the seed of
what we are.

Sometimes we forget ourselves, and wander our lives like sleepwalkers,
only half-aware of our true natures. Yet sleeping or awakened, we are
born with the potential for transformation.

Awakening is a process of expanded awareness. Anyone with gifts and
talents of a subtle nature undergoes an awakening in their life. This is
when they come into their own, finally accepting what has been latent
within them since birth. For us, the process can be traumatic, as the
existence we awaken to opens us up to a host of strange thoughts,
sensations, and experiences which lie outside the limits accepted even
by other Awakened.

Awakening is the alchemical forge in which we are transformed from dross
to spiritual gold. It is the recalling of a part of our Selves that has
become clouded over time. It is becoming more than the little self of
this lifetime, grasping the totality of who we were and who we are to be
-- our Essential Self.

Some of us have greater potential than others. Some are born with an
instinctive understanding of their potential and they may gradually come
to realize that potential on their own. They recall without prompting
and their power is great.

The bulk of our number are born ignorant to what they are. As they grow
and mature, there are subtle hints of the latent power, but fear and
self-doubt generally keep these from being acknowledged and accepted.
Such as these must be awakened to their true selves by another of our
number already familiar to our ways.

There are two rituals of initiation. The Lesser Initiation is an
exchange of feeding which occurs between the teacher and the initiate.
The initiate is drained deeply, often for the first time. This heightens
his awareness of his energy body and will often catalyze him into
realizing his potential in the next few days. The sensations that this
process inspires are usually too intense to ignore or explain away. If
fed from deeply enough, his instincts will overcome him and he will feed
from others in order to replenish his depleted system.

The Greater Initiation involves a ritual death and rebirth which occurs
on both the physical and spiritual levels for the initiate. It is
visionary and shamanic in nature and forces the initiate to face himself
and all that he has been within the boundaries of his own soul. Like all
deaths and rebirths, this ritual strips away old identities and
assumptions. The little self of this lifetime is subsumed into the
greater Self, and the initiate is irrevocably changed. This rite is
reserved for only the strongest minds, for any who are weak or filled
with fear may not survive the initiation. Their minds can be blown away
like dry autumn leaves in the face of the totality of who they are.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Potential](vc05.md)
