[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc04.md) 
[Next](vc06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### V. Potential

We often associate with the Awakened or with those who hover upon the
threshold of Awakening. We prefer the company of those who can interact
at least to some degree with the level of reality that is our constant
daily experience.

By our very natures we Awaken those around us. Even those not of our
kind can be affected by the transformative effects of our presence. We
draw out latent powers and provide a burden of proof for individuals who
have otherwise rejected their own natures due to self-doubt. We can use
this intentionally if we choose, though it will always occur to some
degree, whether intentional or not.

Sometimes we mistake a Potential of our own kind merely for one of the
Awakened. If such an unrecognized Potential is fed from, the effect,
though unintentional, is equivalent to the Lesser Initiation. The
Potential feels himself undergo a change and is driven to feed from
others. Such accidents cannot be abandoned. Confused as to their true
nature, ignorant of their power, they wield that power nonetheless and
can cause much damage to themselves and others if left to struggle on
their own.

Still others have Potential, but it is too weak to ever fully be
realized in this lifetime. Others are too unstable to survive the
initiation. They are best left to sleep so they will come to maturity in
their own time. If forced to awaken, they are merely shadows of us --
weak in power, unstable in mind, whose powers are likely to fade unless
constantly put to use or manipulated by their mentor.

Sometimes a feeding vessel may manifest the symptoms of vampirism, but
this is merely a sympathetic state brought about through prolonged or
obsessive contact with one of our own. Such a one's natural reserves are
depleted to a point where they cannot recover their vitality on their
own. Given time, however, and separated physically and / or emotionally
from the dominating personality, such a person will gradually recover
and return to a normal, non-vampiric state. In some cases, the afflicted
person does not wish to give up the state of sympathetic vampirism. If
the person understands even a little of what has happened to him and
wants the condition to continue, he can maintain this quasi-vampiric
state indefinitely and may even eventually come to be mistaken for one
of our number as he will accept that he is nothing else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Other Awakened](vc06.md)
