[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc11.md) 
[Next](vc13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XII. Basic Feeding

We may gain what we need through feeding, drawing in life as we would
breath.

When we are the center of attention of a whole group, we may feed upon
the emotions of those around us as they are directed toward us. Those
involved in the group are unlikely to notice the loss of energy, and
oftentimes feeding in this way only increases their focus upon you.

This is an activity many Potentials engage in, though they do not often
consciously understand what it is they do. This is one of the main
reasons many Potentials are drawn toward the stage. Many become actors,
storytellers, musicians or other performers so that they may achieve the
kind of focused attention they crave.

For those who have Become, this is a pleasing activity, but rarely
satisfies more than the most superficial of needs.

Even when a group is not focused upon us, we may feed generally upon
them. No physical contact is necessary: we simply expand our awareness
to encompass the group around us as if throwing out a net, or visualize
ourselves at the center of a whirlpool, drawing everything in. Thus our
energy extends beyond ourselves and, like embracing good friends, we
pull bits of everyone about us into ourselves, breathing them deeply.

This is less satisfying than a focused group draw but can sustain us in
a time of desperate need when no other option is available. Places with
high energy and many emotions are preferable for this activity, and thus
we are often drawn to dance halls and clubs. Once again, this manner of
feeding is subtle and easily overlooked, and those being fed from are
unlikely to notice the loss. High energy places often have enough
ambient energy floating loosely in the atmosphere that you are truly
taking little from any of the individual people there.

The two above techniques may be focused variably upon a single person
for a slightly more intense effect. The individual in question does not
have to be aware of your activities, and they do not even have to be
close for you to feed from them. With concentration and focus, you can
easily reach out across a room and draw off energy from a specific
individual. At most, this person will feel a little tired from what you
have taken, but most people are so desensitized to the subtle reality
that they will pass this off as ordinary fatigue, stress, or too much
drink.

Taking from unawakened individuals has its drawbacks, however. Certainly
there are more of them, and they are far less likely to notice what you
are doing than Awakened individuals. However, they are almost wholly
ignorant to the energy that courses through them and they do little or
nothing to cultivate this aspect of their spiritual selves, and so the
quality of their energy is very poor.

Feeding from the Awakened is far more rewarding, as they cultivate their
energy bodies, and so the quality of energy is purer and more intense.
However, feeding without permission from the Awakened runs you the risk
of getting caught. Many also perceive this as a psychic attack, and your
actions will rarely be responded to kindly.

To this end, willing partners are the most advisable as they will not
retaliate for anything which they consider an infringement on their
person.. Having a willing partner who is Awakened is more fulfilling
anyway, since the more feedback you receive from your targets, the more
satisfying the drain, especially if they have some awareness of what is
happening to them. It is like making love: the best partner is the one
who responds to your touch, whose reactions guide you in increasing
their experience of the exchange.

Single target, long-distance draws are convenient for establishing a
connection to someone in order to draw them closer to you but before it
is socially appropriate to engage in actual physical contact.

In general, energy coupled with some strong emotion is more fulfilling
than simple energy alone. One of the most intense emotions we can feed
upon is fear, but the negative repercussions associated with inspiring
this emotion make it inadvisable to pursue. The next most intense
emotion is passion or ecstasy, and this can be very fulfilling for both
you and your partner. Any emotion that is transformative in its power
and depth pleasantly satisfies our needs.

We may also feed upon energy gathered for religious purposes. This will
sustain us in a time of need when no other sources are available, though
often it is meager fare.

When people gather to worship, they generate a strong force of energy
but few, if any of them, ever know how to properly direct it. Thus it
curls up like smoke directionlessly through their place of worship or
clings around those items which served as the foci for the group's
attentions.

Whether we sit in on the actual worship or appear shortly thereafter, we
may affect a general draw using the net technique which pulls the
undirected energy into ourselves. The objects which were focused upon by
the crowd can also be drained of the energy endowed in them, either from
a distant, general draw or from the more direct drain of physical
contact.

Many find such activities scandalous and unforgivable, but in truth the
groups that can be preyed upon in this fashion have little awareness
that they have been victimized and suffer not from our predations. The
energy of their worship was undirected anyway and would dissipate
eventually on its own, having served to benefit no one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Breath and Life](vc13.md)
