[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc20.md) 
[Next](vc22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXII. Subtle Links

Each time you feed from someone, you forge a subtle link with them. This
link is like an astral tentacle or a silver cord. It connects your
subtle body to their subtle body. Every time you feed from this person
after forging the initial link, you make this link stronger and deeper.
The link can also be strengthened simply through casual contact with the
person, so whenever you come together socially the link is reinforced
bit by bit.

This link serves as a constant connection to the person. Through it, you
can sense where they are, what their emotional state is, and if they are
in any physical danger or distress. The deeper and stronger the link,
the easier it is to travel down it in order to sense the person on the
other end.

Through a strong link, you will be able to pick up stray thoughts in
addition to emotions. You will also be able to implant suggestions and
emotions. By tugging gently on the link with the person, you can make
them think of you and draw them to you.

With concentration, an especially strong link will enable you to extend
your awareness completely enough so your are able to perceive through
the other person's senses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Feeding Through Links](vc22.md)
