[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc21.md) 
[Next](vc23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXIII. Feeding Through Links

Once a link is forged with someone, you may use the link to feed from
them at a distance. The deeper and stronger the link, the more
efficiently you can draw energy through it. With most such connections,
you do not even have to concentrate to draw forth from the person. To a
certain extent, you are in constant contact with that person, and while
the energy you gain from them passively is only minimal, a number of
such connections with various people will help sustain you in times of
need as well as prolong the time you can go between more active
feedings.

If you choose to actively drain through a link, there are two good ways
of doing so.

First, you can simply concentrate on pulling some of that person's
energy to you through the link. Center yourself. Focus on your
connection to that person, then visualize the person clearly. Visualize
yourself reaching out and touching them to feed then breathe in, drawing
in energy as well as breath.

You may also extend yourself down through the link, initiating a deeper
contact with their energy body as you do so. This is a more direct way
of feeding from those you have subtle connections to, and it is also
much more obvious to the person on the other end. As before, concentrate
upon the person and get a clear image of them in your head. Then focus
on extending your subtle senses to that person, much as you would if you
chose to see through their eyes or perceive their emotional state.

When you are successfully focused on them, it will seem you are in two
places at once. Part of you will be sitting or standing wherever your
body is, and you will retain some awareness of these surroundings. Part
of you will be focused entirely upon the other person and will feel as
if it occupies the same space that they do, or is somehow enveloped
around them. Once this has occurred, you may initiate a drain, pulling
their energy in through your breath as you had done before.

The target of such a drain is likely to become aware of it at least on a
semi-conscious level. They may suddenly find themselves thinking of you
for no reason they can explain. They may smell your perfume or catch
sight of you out of the corner of their eye. If they are asleep, they
may see you enter their dreams. This is a lot like conscious
dream-walking. The technique behind it is largely the same. Sensitive
targets may actually perceive your presence, seeing you, ghost-like,
hovering somewhere nearby.

Of all the things we can do, this has historically frightened people the
most. It serves as the basis for all the myths and legends of demonic
and vampiric nightly visitations. As such, it is the most revealing of
our nature and it will quickly expose you to those it happens to. For
this reason, this skill should be exercised cautiously and with great
discretion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Manipulating Links](vc23.md)
