[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc24) 
[Next](vc26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXVI. The Caste System

All of us exist upon a threshold. This is what makes us what we are, and
what allows us the command over energy and the subtle reality that
comprises the bulk of our powers. We walk in two worlds at once, and
although the bodies we have are but mortal, the spirit within is vast
and eternal.

Each of us differs in the quality and quantity of energy we require to
sustain us. The depth of our need is influenced by the strength of the
connection between our bodies and our souls. Those of us who are more
connected to our bodies need to take in less energy from those around us
unless we are engaged in very draining spiritual work. Those who are
balanced more on the spirit side of the threshold tend to enjoy greater
powers and sensitivities, but their need for vital spirit is also
increased.

Where on the threshold one falls affects not only the quantity and
quality of energy required, but also what skills may be learned, what
talents will be inborn, and how ones nature will manifest itself. It is
crucial to understand these matters and how they affect the individual,
especially in a Potential or in one who is verging upon awakening.

The caste system is an attempt to simplify the various threshold states.
The castes are guidelines for understanding ourselves, our basic
natures, and the role we play in our community. Although loosely based
upon an ancient social system, the castes are not intended to become a
hierarchy or social structure in this day and age. That time has long
gone by. Instead, use the castes as what they are intended to be:
guidelines for personal understanding which will hopefully explain some
of the mysteries of why one person processes energy one way, and someone
else has a very different experience and approach.

Keep in mind that the caste system is very limited. There are but three
archetypes offered here, and not everyone will fit neatly into any of
them. It is far more likely that each person will find within themselves
qualities of two or more. We have been through many lifetimes, and our
souls have grown and changed. We have learned much, and most of us have
come a long way from what we once were. Discovering the caste that
describes you the best may hold the key for understanding your basic
nature and how to proceed in awakening to it, but use the caste solely
as a tool. Do not try to become something you are not, and do not allow
yourself to chafe beneath an archetype that does not suit you. In the
end, you are you, with all your complexities and contradictions, and no
simple word will ever be found to encompass all of these.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVII. Priests](vc26)
