[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc28) 
[Next](vc30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXX. Subtle Reality Basics

Our greatest power, that which sustains us and defines us as what we
are, is our ability to manipulate energy. By extending our energy beyond
ourselves, we are able to manipulate the energies of others even over
great distances.

First we must become aware of our own energies. We must know our subtle
body, its strengths and limitations. We must have a clear picture of our
subtle being in our minds so that we are better able to manipulate that
subtle body to affect the world around us.

We must remember that thought is energy, and what we imagine and
consciously visualize will have an effect upon the world around us. We
manipulate our own energy bodies through visualization, directing our
energies according to our will.

The main foci for the manipulation of energy are our mouths and our
hands. The mouth and the hands are our tools. The way we manipulate
these tools is through breath, visualization, and will. Our breath
combines our physical and subtle bodies in a unified stream of life /
air.

By inhaling in such a way as to breathe with more than just our lungs,
we take energy in. By exhaling in such a way as to utilize both our
physical and subtle bodies, we expel energy. Visualize the energy as
light which rides upon the breath. It is a softly glowing liquid that
flows around and through all things. When we breathe, we drink this in.
It gathers in our center, below the heart in our Ka.

With the touch of our hands, with the kiss of our lips, or with the
concentrated intent to touch over a distance, all coupled with breath,
we can pull energy out of others or breathe it into them in a healing
stream.

In order to more efficiently take energy out of another or to put it in,
we must extend beyond breath. Using the stream of the breath as a focus,
visualize a tendril of the subtle body moving toward and inserting
itself into the target. Once a connection is made, the sense of it is
unmistakable. Do not let doubt or worry distract you, but retain your
focus on the visualization and the breath.

It is best to think of this tendril not as something which moves through
ordinary space or ordinary physicality. It is powered by the breath and
the breath focuses and directs it, yet it cannot be found physically in
the stream of the breath. It is an extension of our wills and our
imaginations, and thus exists on a level of pure energy.

Think of the world as a double-exposure. The clearest part of the
photograph is the physical, material world. This is what the majority of
humanity mistakes for the sum total of reality. But there is a
translucent ghost-image that is layered on top of and throughout the
other. In truth, they are inextricably woven together. It is this
quasi-reality through which our subtle bodies move, and it is the other
objects and forces in this quasi-reality that our subtle bodies interact
with and influence.

Think of yourself as existing in both of these realities at once. Be
aware of the material universe around you but at the same time be aware
of the shadow reality that is woven throughout it. Know that you can
affect and be affected by both.

In the subtle reality, the physical boundaries of things and people are
not necessarily fixed. By moving parts or all of your subtle body in
this aspect of reality, you can pass over great distances as if they
were nothing, for in truth, here all points exist as one point. You can
move inside a living body, perceiving the organs and internal functions
as if they were laid open before you, down to a microscopic level.

In the subtle reality, you can see past the ordinary boundaries of
things with a sense that is more impression coupled with insight. Actual
physical sight is only an analogy here, a metaphor for perceiving on a
deeper level. However, as you are more accustomed to physical sight, you
are most likely to interpret your impressions of this aspect of reality
in terms of images and vision.

You cannot only perceive things in the subtle reality, but you can
influence them as well. You can take things out of a living body and you
can put things in, provided the objects and forces you are manipulating
have their origin in the subtle reality through which you move. These
things will not be "real" in the physical or material sense, for they
exist on the level of pure energy. However, if they are strong enough,
they can ultimately have a tangible affect on the physical reality, for
the two are merely different aspects of the same thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXI. Augmentation](vc30)
