[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc30.md) 
[Next](vc32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXXII. Subtle Perception

Sight of the subtle which lies within and throughout all physical things
comes with practice and concentration. Most of us can, to one degree or
another, perceive the energy we manipulate, the life which courses
through those around us. This is not so much something that is seen with
the eyes as it is something which gives the impression of sight. It is a
perception, an intuition, easily ignored or discounted. It may manifest
to you as light or color as that is the easiest way your mind can
interpret it. Whenever you attempt to see on this level, remember not to
take the idea of sight too literally and instead trust your instincts
and impressions.

Another sensual impression we gain is the sense of others' physical and
emotional states. This involves our ability to pick up on their energy
and latent thoughts. Though this can be done simply by focusing our
attention briefly on the person in question, the strongest sensations
are gained through physical contact. It is by gauging our impressions to
our target's energy that we can determine whether he is sick or well,
drugged, diseased, or intoxicated. We can further perceive his general
emotional state, energy level, and level of power (if any).

Again, these impressions can be very vague and it will take time and
practice to even realize that you can sense these things, let alone
learn how to differentiate sick from well, energized from drained, and
the diverse states in between. Learn through trial and error, as
everyone's impressions tend to differ, and trust your instincts at all
times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIII. Manifesting](vc32.md)
