[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc31.md) 
[Next](vc33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXXIII. Manifesting

We all possess a certain presence which hangs about us at all times.
Whether we wish this or not, it will still be present to a limited
degree, even when an effort is made to damp the effect down.

Our presence tends to be dark and intimidating, and it inspires fear and
uncertainty in most who are exposed to it. Some, however, find our
presence darkly fascinating, and for these it manifests as an
irresistible and almost sexual attraction.

Manifesting is the art of taking this presence and manipulating it to
our advantage.

Manifesting requires much the same technique as augmentation, however in
the case of manifestation, the energy gathered is not directed within
ourselves, to our physical bodies. Instead, it is extended outward so
that it spreads around us like a cloak.

Center yourself, gather your energies, then expand them out around
yourself. Visualize a nimbus of energy surrounding you, and focus on a
particular image or emotion which you desire to project with this
energy.

A great deal of manifesting relies upon the people around you. You are
extending your energy to influence their minds on a semi-conscious
level. Because you are speaking directly to their unconscious minds,
their individual perceptions of your intent will ultimately influence
what they perceive and how they react to you.

The most basic form of manifesting is manifesting the vampire. This
draws upon the archetype that has developed around our kind over the
years and can have a very potent psychological affect on those around
you. Gather to your core all that makes you what you are: all the
darkness, the alienation, the predatory need. Then shoot this
concentrated energy throughout your being, extending it a few feet in
front of you so that all those around you will be affected by this
projection. By experimenting, you can extend this inimical aura around
yourself for many feet, and what with satisfaction at it clears your way
through a pressing crowd.

Using essentially the same technique, you can project fear, respect,
intimidation, attraction, awe, and virtually anything else into the
minds of those around you. Most will react to this projection on an
unconscious level, moving toward you or hastily out of your way as you
desire. Manifesting will especially draw the attention of those who are
awakened or even semi-awake.

This effect may also be used to obscure yourself from others. The
technique is the same, but instead of projecting fear or attraction, you
should simply influence those around you to ignore you. Project
obscurity and the sense that you are unremarkable and blend into your
surroundings. When done properly, this will allow you to lose yourself
in a crowd or even help you to hide unnoticed in an empty room.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIV. Nature of the Aura](vc33.md)
