[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc38) 
[Next](vc40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XLI. Shielding Techniques

Because of what we are, we have little need for shields ourselves.
Shields are, by definition, antithetical to our nature. We are
constantly taking energy into ourselves. To close ourselves off from
this would be to close ourselves off from what sustains us. Selective
shields, or filters, which allow only certain things through, are more
useful to us by far.

Our best defense against energy intended to do us harm is simply to fall
back upon our essential nature. It is our nature to devour, and so we
merely take it all in, good energy, bad energy, tendrils, missiles, all
of it. While we rarely gain any actual benefit from taking such energies
in, neither are we harmed by them.

If you are attacked by something, grab onto it on the subtle level and
pull it into yourself. Break it down into neutral energy as you would
process anything else. Though in general the assimilation of energy is
an unconscious process, in cases of attack, you may actually have to
concentrate on the process. Just will the energy to break down. Purge it
of any specific charges or intents and make it a part of you. You may
also purge it, process it, then throw it back in the direction it came
as a response to whoever attacked you.

If such an attack is clearly being directed by another, trace the attack
to its source as you would travel down one of your own tendrils. Then
reverse the attack and drain through your enemy's connection to you. The
attacker will usually be so surprised by this response as to cut the
attack off immediately.

Most of the awakened consciously or unconsciously set up shields in
order to guard against a myriad of psychic attacks. Shields, as they are
constructed of energy, can be drained into non-existence by those of our
kind. The energy may not be something which we can process or make use
of, but it is energy nonetheless and therefore not proof against our
manipulations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIII. Creating Filters](vc40)
