[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc41.md) 
[Next](vc43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XLV. Otherside Beings

The subtle reality is immense. Because our concepts of distance and
physical boundaries do not exist there, any single space may be
populated by hundreds of subtle beings, resonances, and impressions.
Even the most desolate, empty space here in the physical world is
crawling with things on the subtle level. Some can perceive and interact
with us, but most are largely too out of phase to notice anything but
their own small sliver of the realm.

Most ordinary people are like the out of phase beings. They are too
intent on their one small aspect of reality to respond to anything else.
Yet because of our sensitive natures, we cannot help but perceive and
respond to at least some of these other things, and because we exist
more completely in both the physical and the subtle realities, many of
these things are likely to notice and respond to us. Some of our kind
find it intensely disturbing to feel and be felt by such otherworldly
things.

Rarely are subtle beings interested enough in our realm to attempt to do
malicious harm to anyone. Yet, all things which exist in the subtle
reality feed as we do, and many of them seek out humanity as their main
source of food. Just as our long-distance drains do not really harm our
targets and are rarely even felt by them, so too are these preying
entities rarely felt by anyone they seek out. Yet it can be very
inconvenient for us to become a source of energy for another being as we
do not really produce enough energy to sustain ourselves.

We should be aware of this aspect of the subtle reality, and we should
hone our perceptions so that we can sense when a subtle being is present
in our home. Since we can interact with the subtle as well as the
physical realm, we have the ability to forcibly eject such beings from
our home. Much as one would clean the house of spent energy and
emotions, simply isolate the entity, reach out on the subtle level and
gather it up. As a subtle being, it has little definitive form, so you
will have to judge by your impressions whether you have gotten hold of
it or not. Once you have hold of the thing, carry it out to the front or
back door and essentially give it the boot. Toss it out of your living
space and project the definite impression that you do not want it coming
back. Most subtle beings seem somewhat intimidated by our kind, as we
can just as easily feed upon them as they can from us, and this seems to
cause them discomfort or harm.

Many subtle entities are not harmful at all, and discretion should be
used when an invading being is punished by being thrown out. A certain
amount of subtle traffic is always to be expected in our homes. First of
all, there is the simple fact that subtle beings are all over the place.
It is the nature of the subtle reality that such things occupy all
spaces and no space at the same time. Yet there is also the fact that
many subtle entities seem attracted to our kind. They may sense our
unique energy signature, and they may be attracted out of simple
curiosity. To a certain extent, we have a good deal in common with these
beings, especially in the manner in which we interact with the subtle
reality and feed upon energy. We certainly have a more real and palpable
presence in the subtle reality than most incarnated beings.

As it is difficult to communicate with such beings except in the vaguest
terms, their reasons will probably remain known only to them. Whatever
the case, we should not be surprised or alarmed by their presence unless
they take an active role in disturbing the sanctity of our home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVI. Creating Change](vc43.md)
