[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### A Few Notes in Closing the Codex

Our culture teaches us that we cannot stand on our own. We cannot know
something just because we know it; we need authentic degrees and
certificates in order to prove our knowledge and understanding to
others. If we are to amount to anything, we need approval. And from
youth upwards, it is ingrained in us to seek this approval -- from
parents, from teachers, from friends, from our bosses at work -- from
everywhere.

  
Regardless of our own self-worth, regardless of how satisfied we are
with our own lives, unless these other people approve of us, we are
taught to feel worthless. Even the most independent and rebellious among
us feels a little twinge at being called "crazy" or "freak" or told that
we're deluded or sick or hopelessly lost in a fantasy world.

  
It's very hard not to let this universal disapproval of our ideals and
our ways make us doubt ourselves from time to time. But it is the doubt
and the fear of disapproval that keeps so many of us from discovering
ourselves and opening ourselves up to the vast lifetimes of knowledge we
already carry within.

  
Before you doubt yourself any further, ask yourself -- who is the real
authority on your life? Is it someone outside of you, who has never
experienced the things you've experienced or felt the things that you've
felt? The only authority on your life is you -- so seek approval there
first. Trust those little whispers of guidance offered by your inner
Self. If you are satisfied with what it tells you, what does it matter
what anyone else has to say?

Seek Your Own Truth
