[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cap01)  [Next](cap03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Cupid and Psyche

# Part I

THERE was sometimes a certain King, inhabiting in the west parts, who
had to wife a noble Dame, by whom he had three daughters exceeding fair:
of whom the two elder were of such comely shape and beauty, as they did
excel and pass all other women living; whereby they were thought,
worthily, to deserve the praise and commendation of every person, and
deservedly to be preferred above the residue of the common sort: yet the
singular passing beauty and maidenly majesty of the youngest daughter,
did so far surmount and excel them two, as no earthly creature could by
any means sufficiently express or set out the same. By reason whereof,
after the fame of this excellent maiden was spread abroad in every part
of the city, the citizens and strangers there, being inwardly pricked by
zealous affection to behold her famous person, came daily by thousands,
hundreds, and scores, to her father's palace; who as astonied with
admiration of her incomparable beauty, did no less worship and reverence
her, with crosses, signs and tokens, and other divine adorations,
according to the custom of the old used rites and ceremonies, than if
she were Lady Venus indeed. And shortly after the fame was spread into
the next cities and bordering regions, that the Goddess whom the deep
seas had borne and brought forth, and the froth of the spurging waves
had nourished, to the intent to show her high magnificence and divine
power on earth, to such as erst did honour and worship her, was now
conversant amongst mortal men: or else that the earth and not the seas,
by a new concourse and influence of the celestial planets, had budded
and yielded forth a new Venus, endowed with the flower of virginity. So
daily more and more increased this opinion, and now is her flying fame
dispersed into the next Island, and well-nigh into every part and
province of the whole world. Whereupon innumerable strangers resorted
from far countries, adventuring themselves by long journeys on land, and
by great perils on water, to behold this glorious Virgin. By occasion
whereof such a contempt grew towards the Goddess Venus, that no person
travelled unto the town Paphos, nor to the Isle Gindos, no, nor to
Cythera, to worship her. Her ornaments were thrown out, her temples
defaced, her pillows and quishions torn, her ceremonies neglected, her
images and statues uncrowned, and her bare altars unswept, and foul with
the ashes of old burned sacrifice. For why, every person honoured and
worshipped this maiden instead of Venus; and in the morning at her first
coming abroad, offered unto her oblations, provided banquets, called her
by the name of Venus which was not Venus indeed, and in her honour
presented flowers and garlands in most reverent fashion.

This sudden change and alteration of celestial honour did greatly
inflame and kindle the mind of very Venus, who, unable to temper herself
from indignation, shaking her head in raging sort, reasoned with herself
in this manner: "Behold the original parent of all these elements,
behold the Lady Venus renounced throughout all the world, with whom a
mortal maiden is joined now partaker of honour; my name registered in
the city of heaven, is profaned and made vile by terrene absurdities. If
I shall suffer any mortal creature to present my majesty in earth, or
that any shall hear about a false surmised shape of my person: then in
vain did Paris that shepherd, in whose just judgment and confidence the
great Jupiter had affiance, prefer me above the residue of the Goddesses
for the excellence of my beauty. But she, whatsoever she be that hath
usurped mine honour, shall shortly repent her of her unlawful estate."
And by and by she called her winged son Cupid, rash enough and hardy,
who by his evil manners, contemning all public justice and law, armed
with fire and arrows, running up and down in the nights from house to
house, and corrupting the lawful marriages of every person, doth nothing
but that which is evil; who although that he were of his own proper
nature sufficient prone to work mischief, yet she egged him forward with
words and brought him to the city, and showed him Psyche (for so the
maiden was called), and having told the cause of her anger, not without
great rage: "I pray thee (quoth she), my dear child, by motherly bond of
love, by the sweet wounds of thy piercing darts, by the pleasant heat of
thy fire, revenge the injury which is done to thy mother, by the false
and disobedient beauty of a mortal maiden, and 1 pray thee without
delay, that she may fall in love with the most miserable creature
living, the most poor, the most crooked, and the most vile, that there
may be none found in all the world of like wretchedness." When she had
spoken these words, she embraced and kissed her son, and took her voyage
towards the sea.

When she was come to the sea, she began to call the Gods and Goddesses,
who were obedient at her voice. For incontinent came the daughters of
Nereus singing with tunes melodiously; Portunus with his bristled and
rough beard; Salatia with her bosom full of fish; Palemon the driver of
the Dolphin, the trumpeters of Triton leaping hither and thither, and
blowing with heavenly noise: such was the company which followed Venus
marching towards the ocean sea.

In the mean season Psyche with all her beauty received no fruit of her
honour. She was wondered at of all, she was praised of all, but she
perceived that no king nor prince, nor any of the inferior sort did
repair to woo her. Every one marvelled at her divine beauty, as it were
at some image well painted and set out. Her other two sisters which were
nothing so greatly exalted by the people, were royally married to two
kings; but the virgin Psyche sitting at home alone lamented her solitary
life, and being disquieted both in mind and body, although she pleased
all the world, yet hated she in herself her own beauty.

Whereupon the miserable father of this unfortunate daughter, suspecting
that the Gods and powers of heaven did envy her estate, went into the
town called Miletus to receive the oracle of Apollo, where he made his
prayers and offered sacrifice, and desired a husband for his daughter:
but Apollo though he were a Grecian and of the country of lonia, because
of the foundation of Miletus, yet he gave answer in Latin yerse, the
sense whereof was this --

Let Psyche's corpse be clad in mourning weed  
And set on rock of yonder hill aloft;  
Her husband is no wight of human seed,  
But serpent dire and fierce, as may be thought,  
Who flies with wings above in starry skies,  
And doth subdue each thing with fiery flight.  
The Gods themselves and powers that seem so wise  
With mighty love be subject to his might.  
The rivers black and deadly floods of pain  
And darkness eke as thrall to him remain.

The King sometimes happy, when he heard the prophecy of Apollo returned
home sad and sorrowful, and declared to his wife the miserable and
unhappy fate of his daughter; then they began to lament, and weep, and
passed over many days in great sorrow. But now the time approached of
Psyche's marriage: preparation was made, black torches were lighted, the
pleasant songs were turned into pitiful cries, the melody of Hymen was
ended with deadly howling, the maiden that should be married did wipe
her eyes with her veil; all the family and people of the city weeped
likewise, and with great lamentation was ordained a remiss time for that
day, but necessity compelled that Psyche should be brought to her
appointed place according to the divine commandment.

And when the solemnity was ended, they went to bring this sorrowful
spouse, not to her marriage, but to her final end and burial. And while
the father and mother of Psyche did go forward, weeping and crying to do
this enterprise, Psyche spake unto them in this sort: "Why torment you
your unhappy age with continual dolour? why trouble you your spirits,
which are more rather mine than yours? why soil ye your faces with
tears, which I ought to adore and worship? why tear you my eyes in
yours? why pull you your hoary hairs? why knock you your breasts for me?
Now you see the reward of my excellent beauty: now, now, you perceive,
but too late, the plague of envy. When the people did honour me and call
me new Venus, then you should have wept, then you should have sorrowed,
as though I had been then dead: For now I see and perceive that I am
come to this misery by the only name of Venus, bring me, and as fortune
hath appointed, place me on the top of the rock; I greatly desire to end
my marriage, I greatly covet to see my husband. Why do I delay? why
should I refuse him that is appointed to destroy all the world?"

Thus ended she her words, and thrust herself amongst the people that
followed. Then they brought her to the appointed rock of the high hill,
and set her thereon and so departed. The torches and lights were put out
with the tears of the people; and every man gone home, the miserable
parents well-nigh consumed with sorrow gave themselves to everlasting
darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](cap03.md)
