[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ftmg12)  [Next](ftmg14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HWRKVG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fairy Tales of Modern Greece*, by Theodore P. Gianakoulis and Georgia
H. MacPherson, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_10100"></span> ![](img/10100.jpg)

### X

### THE WONDER OF SKOUPA

CHRISTMAS is lonely on the snow-covered peaks of the Mauroros that rise
bank upon bank, like great white drifts piled one upon another. Saint
Nikolaos Day, as it is to the Greeks, finds these hills almost deserted,
and yet strange things can happen there.

The clouds that at times hang about them at this season are like misty
fairy veils, and when the sun lies upon them, they are as resplendent as
the fairy palaces of dreams. The shepherds and goatherds with their
flocks have been driven down to shelter in the valleys. Most of the
watchmen of fields and vineyards descend to the villages to celebrate
the festival of Saint Nikolaos with friends and kinsfolk, in wine and
steaming food around a glowing hearth. Only here and there on the white
hills a lonely watchman remains.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

One cold, stormy Saint Nikolaos Day, Vasilis was keeping guard over
stretches of silent fields. Just at noon, as he lifted his eyes to the
top of the mountain, he saw what appeared at first to be snow caught up
in the wind where two mountain paths crossed at the foot of a pine tree.
Yet faint, silvery voices, like bells in the distance, seemed to come
from the same spot.

Surely no human being would be so high up there on such a day. The sweet
voices, the whirling white something and the fact that it was just noon,
made Vasilis sure that he was watching fairies dancing in a ring about
the pine tree. He started forward eagerly, wishing to see them nearer,
but at that instant they vanished and their voices died away.

Perhaps, thought Vasilis, they had left some trace of their presence, so
he pressed on through the unbroken snow as rapidly as he could. No
footprints were to be seen at the Stavrodromos, cross-road, nothing to
mark their visit. Maybe it was not fairies after all, only snow
scattered in the wind. Then he discovered a white bundle, beneath the
pine indistinguishable from the snow except that it stirred feebly.

Within the bundle Vasilis found a tiny baby, more beautiful then
anything he had ever seen, with fine hair golden as sunshine, and skin
soft and white like the snow. Its clothing was of the finest, downiest
cloth, daintily embroidered. Vasilis knew that this was a fairy child
and he marveled to think that he had actually beheld the fairies who had
left it.

The watchman hurried down the hill to the village of Skoupa, where he
stopped at each house to show the beautiful

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

child and tell his story. The villagers were amazed and at first did not
know what to do. They decided after conferring together that they would
all help, giving each year what they could of food and clothing, and
taking the child into their own homes turn and turn about.

This idea was put into effect. The child was called Nikolas because he
was found on Saint Nikolaos Day. He was loved by all the village folk
and belonged in a way to everyone. He was given the same care as the
village children, was nourished with the same food and dressed in
similar clothing. Yet from the beginning there was a difference. Not
only was Nikolas handsomer than the rest and taller than any of his age,
but he was different also in all his ways.

He was very quiet. He did not play with the children, but he would talk
to them for hours, telling them wonderful stories that had never been
told him, that had never been heard in Skoupa. Often he would wander
away and some shepherd or watchman would come upon him sitting alone in
the fields gazing at the sky. Sometimes when he was addressed he did not
even hear. Because of his mysterious origin and his strangeness he was
known through all that country as the Wonder of Skoupa.

Nikolas became a shepherd at the age of fifteen and no longer needed the
help of the villagers. He came down from the hills sometimes to spend a
holiday in Skoupa, but even then he did not join in the games or dances,
merely watched from a little distance with sad eyes. The people wondered
if he were thinking of his fairy mother and the palace he

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

had left; they wondered if he were lonely and longed to go back. But he
was a fairy child and they dared not ask him.

It was again Saint Nikolaos Day on the Mauroros. Seventeen years had
passed since the day Vasilis found the white bundle in the snow. The old
watchman was still guarding the silent hills. Never had a Saint Nikolaos
Day gone by without the memory of that strange experience. Vasilis had
lived it over each year.

Now again at noon he raised his eyes to the pine tree at the cross-road.
There, instead of the fairy ring of swirling white, he saw a man
standing in the snow reaching his arms toward the sky. His head was bare
and the sun fell upon his golden hair, bright as the sunlight. Could it
be anyone but Nikolas? Yet was he not spending the day in Skoupa?
Vasilis shaded his eyes against the sun's glare on the snow and gazed at
the strange sight.

The man stood still, like an image. The wind blew wisps of snow about
him. Thicker and whiter rose the snow till it seemed to meet and melt
into the white sky above the mountain peak. Then Vasilis saw fairies,
myriads of fairies in white, dancing in the sky and in the swirl of snow
about the motionless form. Faster and faster danced the fairies until
the cloud of them obscured the figure of the man. Silvery voices like
distant bells floated down to Vasilis. Suddenly a fierce blast wrapped
the whole mountain top in a mist of flying snow. When it had passed, the
fairies and the man were gone and there was no motion and no sound upon
the mountain.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span id="img_10500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Nikolas became a
shepherd at the age of fifteen.](tn/10500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10500.jpg)  
Nikolas became a shepherd at the age of fifteen.  
</span>

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Vasilis climbed again to the spot. This time the fairies had left no
trace. Trackless snow and the lonely pine. Vasilis made his plodding way
down to Skoupa to look for Nikolas, hoping it was not he who had
vanished from the Stavrodromos. All the villagers joined in the search.
None of them had seen Nikolas on that day and no one ever saw him again.

<span id="img_10700"></span> ![](img/10700.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The First of May](ftmg14)
