[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05071)  [Next](cc05073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#000)<span id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p2"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001)<span id="vii.xiii-p2.1"></span>,
21-23, 29, 30, 34-49

<span id="vii.xiii-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses and
unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="vii.xiii-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen et
Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="vii.xiii-p5"></span>**2.** Take the sum of the sons of Kohath
from among the sons of Levi, after their families, by the house of their
fathers,

<span id="vii.xiii-p6"></span>**2.** Tolle summam filiorum Cehath e
medio filiorum Levi, per familias suas, per domos patrum suorum.

<span id="vii.xiii-p7"></span>**3.** From thirty years old and upward,
even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do the work
in the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="vii.xiii-p8"></span>**3.** Ab eo qui natus est triginta annos
et supra, usque ad eum qui natus est quinquaginta annos, quotquot
ingrediuntur congregationem, ut faciant opus in tabernaculo
conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p9"></span>**21.** And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="vii.xiii-p10"></span>**21.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen, et
Aharon dicendo:

<span id="vii.xiii-p11"></span>**22.** Take also the sum of the sons of
Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their families:

<span id="vii.xiii-p12"></span>**22.** Tolle summam filiorum Gerson,
ipsos quoque per domos patrum suormn, et per familias suas:

<span id="vii.xiii-p13"></span>**23.** From thirty years old and upward,
until fifty years old, shalt thou number them; all that enter in to
perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="vii.xiii-p14"></span>**23.** Ab eo qui natus est triginta
annos et supra, usque ad eum qui est quinquaginta annorum, numerabis
eos: quotquot ingrediuntur congregationem, ut faciant opus in
tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p15"></span>**29.** As for the sons of Merari, thou
shalt number them after their families, by the house of their fathers:

<span id="vii.xiii-p16"></span>**29.** Filios Merari, per familias suas,
per domos patrum suorum nu merabis:

<span id="vii.xiii-p17"></span>**30.** From thirty years old and upward,
even unto fifty years old, shalt thou number them, every one that
entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="vii.xiii-p18"></span>**30.** Ab eo qui natus est triginta
annos et supra, usque ad eum qui natus est quinquaginta annos, numerabis
eos: quotquot ingrediuntur congregationem, ut faciant opus in
tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p19"></span>**34.** And Moses and Aaron, and the
chief of the congregation, numbered the sons of the Kohathites, after
their families, and after the house of their fathers,

<span id="vii.xiii-p20"></span>**34.** Numeravit ergo Moses et Aharon et
princeps congregationis filios Cehath, per familias suas, domos patrum
suorum.

<span id="vii.xiii-p21"></span>**35.** From thirty years old and upward,
even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation:

<span id="vii.xiii-p22"></span>**35.** Ab eo qui natus erat triginta
annos, et supra, usque ad eum qui natus erat quinquaginta annos:
quotquot ingrediuntur in congregationem illam ad ministerium peragendum
in tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p23"></span>**36.** And those that were numbered of
them, by their families, were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.

<span id="vii.xiii-p24"></span>**36.** Fueruntque numerati eorum per
familias, duo millia septingenti quinquaginta.

<span id="vii.xiii-p25"></span>**37.** These *were* they that were
numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all that might do service in
the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number,
according to the commandment of the Lord, by the hand of Moses.

<span id="vii.xiii-p26"></span>**37.** Isti sunt numerati familiarum
Cehath, omnes ministrantes in tabernaculo conventionis, quos numeravit
Moses et Aharon juxta imperium Jehovae per manum Mosis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p27"></span>**38.** And those that were numbered of
the sons of Gershon, throughout their families, and by the house of
their fathers,

<span id="vii.xiii-p28"></span>**38.** Numerati filiorum Gerson per
familias suas, et per domum patrum suorum.

<span id="vii.xiii-p29"></span>**39.** From thirty years old and upward,
even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation;

<span id="vii.xiii-p30"></span>**39.** Ab eo qui natus erat triginta
annos et supra, usque ad eum qui natus erat quinquaginta annos: quotquot
ingrediuntur in congregationem illam ad ministerium peragendum in
*tabernaculo* conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p31"></span>**40.** Even those that were numbered of
them, throughout their families,by the house of their fathers, were two
thousand and six hundred and thirty.

<span id="vii.xiii-p32"></span>**40.** Numerati inquam eorum per
familias suas, per domum patrum suorum, duo millia et sexcenti triginta.

<span id="vii.xiii-p33"></span>**41.** These *are* they that were
numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all that might do
service in the tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did
number, according to the commandment of the Lord.

<span id="vii.xiii-p34"></span>**41.** Isti sunt numerati familiarum
filiorum Gerson, omnes ministrantes in tabernaculo conventionis: quos
numeravit Moses et Aharon juxta sermonem Jehovae.

<span id="vii.xiii-p35"></span>**42.** And those that were numbered of
the families of the sons of Merari, throughout their fanlilies, by the
house of their fathers,

<span id="vii.xiii-p36"></span>**42.** Numerati autem familiarum
filiorum Merari per familias suas, per domos patrunt suorum.

<span id="vii.xiii-p37"></span>**43.** From thirty years old and upward,
even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation;

<span id="vii.xiii-p38"></span>**43.** Ab co qui natus erat triginta
annos et supra, usque ad eum qui natus erat quinquaginta annos: quotquot
ingrediebantur in congregationem illam ad ministerium peragendum in
tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p39"></span>**44.** Even those that were numbered of
them, after their families, were three thousand and two hundred.

<span id="vii.xiii-p40"></span>**44.** Numerati inquam eorum per
familias suas, tria millia et ducenti.

<span id="vii.xiii-p41"></span>**45.** These *be* those that were
numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron
numbered, according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

<span id="vii.xiii-p42"></span>**45.** Isti aunt numerati familiarum
filiorum Merari, quos numeravit Moses et Aharon juxta sermonem Jehovae
per manum Mosis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p43"></span>**46.** All those that were numbered of
the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron, and the chief of Israel, numbered,
after their families, and after the house of their fathers,

<span id="vii.xiii-p44"></span>**46.** Omnes numerati quos numeravit
Moses et Aharon, et principes Israel, de Levitis per familias suas, et
per domos patrunt suorum:

<span id="vii.xiii-p45"></span>**47.** From thirty years old and upward,
even unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the
ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the
congregation;

<span id="vii.xiii-p46"></span>**47.** Ab eo qui natus erat triginta
annos et supra, usque ad eum qui natus erat quinquaginta annos: quotquot
ingrediebantur ad peragendum ministerium cultus, et ad peragendum oneris
in tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="vii.xiii-p47"></span>**48.** Even those that were numbered of
them, were eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.

<span id="vii.xiii-p48"></span>**48.**: Numerati, inquam, erarum ruerunt
otto nilIlia et quingenti octoginta.

<span id="vii.xiii-p49"></span>**49.** According to the commandment of
the Lord they were numbered by the hand of Moses, every one according to
his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of
him, as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.xiii-p50"></span>**49.** Juxta sermonem Jehovae numeravit
cos per manum Mosis, singulos secundum ministerium suum, et secundum
onus suum: numerati autem ejus fuerunt hi quos ipsi praeceperat.

<span id="vii.xiii-p51"></span> 

<span id="vii.xiii-p52"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p53"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses and
unto Aaron* This *census* had a different object from the former one,
which we have just been considering, viz., that an equal distribution of
the charges should be made in proportion to the number of the
individuals. First, as regarded age, a distinction must be observed
between this tribe and the others; for we have already seen that all the
Israelites above twenty years of age were numbered, because they were
then fit to bear arms. But it was not without reason that a more mature
age was required in the case of the Levites, so that they should not
begin to discharge their ministry before their thirtieth year. For not
only is strength and rigor of body requisite for spiritual warfare, but
seriousness and gravity also. If they had been admitted in their youth,
their levity might have detracted from the reverence due to sacred
things, since the young are often led to act intemperately by their
fervor and licentiousness. Access to the sanctuary, therefore, was not
permitted them till they had grown up to be men; for by their thirtieth
year men ought to have become so staid, as that it shall be base and
inexcusable for them to give way to the wantonness of youth.

<span id="vii.xiii-p54"></span>From their fiftieth year they were
released from their duties; since sloth and inactivity generally
accompany old age. The case is different as to war, because we find many
who are vigorous after their fiftieth year. Furthermore, since religion
is more precious than all earthly affairs, diligent care was to be taken
lest it should fall into disesteem on account of the idleness and
somnolency of its ministers.

<span id="vii.xiii-p55"></span><span id="vii.xiii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p56"></span>**34.** *And Moses and Aaron and the
chief of the congregation* Another exception is subjoined, viz., that
none should be received unless they were free from all defect and
blemish; for we have seen elsewhere that those, who were blind and lame,
or defective in any part of their body, were excluded from the
tabernacle, lest their disfigurement should produce contempt; and also
that they might be admonished by this external sign, to preserve
themselves more diligently from all spiritual defilement. Therefore,
those are said to enter into the sanctuary who are fit to exercise the
priesthood; and hence the expression, “for the service,”  <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) is added.

<span id="vii.xiii-p58"></span>Inasmuch as the inequality (of their
charges) might have been the source of envy, God’s authority is asserted
at the end of the chapter, where Moses records that he was only acting
ministerially, and that he distributed the offices among them according
to God’s command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc05072.htm#fr_425) <span
id="vii.xiii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p57"></span> “For the work.” — *A.* *V.* Ver. 35.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 10:11-28](cc05073)
