[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05032)  [Next](cc05034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>The Use of the Law

<span id="iv-p2"></span>Inasmuch as in the Law the difference between
good and evil is set forth, it is given for the regulation of the life
of men, so that it may be justly called the rule of living well and
righteously. This object of the Law is known to almost all men, because
all confess without controversy that God here prescribes what is right,
lest we should wander all our lifetime in uncertainty; for since His
will is the perfect law of righteousness, it can alone direct us to the
mark. The knowledge of good and evil is indeed imprinted by nature on
men, whereby they are rendered inexcusable; nor has any amount of
barbarism ever so extinguished this light as that no form of law should
exist. But, since the main principle of righteousness is to obey God, it
was by special privilege that He deposited with His elect people the
rule of living aright as a pledge of His adoption. Hence the
declarations which so often occur in the writings of Moses: I command
thee to keep and to do, etc. But, since we are “carnal, sold under sin,”
(<span id="iv-p2.2"></span>[Ro
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span id="iv-p2.2"></span>,) we
are so far from being able to fulfill the Law, which is spiritual, that
all our imaginations are at enmity with its righteousness, as Paul
teaches elsewhere. (<span id="iv-p2.3"></span>[Ro
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="iv-p2.3"></span>.) Those,
therefore, who  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) content
themselves with using it for instruction, do wrong in confining
themselves to this one point, since no advantage can hence be derived
from it, as long as we shall remain in our corrupt nature. Nay, as soon
as the Law presents itself before us, the curse of God falls upon our
heads, as if He smote us with a thunder-bolt from heaven. I will not
heap together all the testimonies to this effect; let one peculiarly
striking passage suffice:

<span id="iv-p4"></span>“The law (says Paul) is holy, and the
commandment holy and just and good: but sin, that it might appear sin,
worketh death in me by that which is good.” (<span
id="iv-p4.1"></span>[Rom. 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="iv-p4.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv-p5"></span><span id="iv-p5.1"></span>What he elsewhere
says, that “the law worketh wrath,” (<span id="iv-p5.2"></span>[Ro
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span id="iv-p5.2"></span><span
id="iv-p5.3"></span>,) and that “it was added because of
transgressions,” (<span id="iv-p5.4"></span>[Ga
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="iv-p5.4"></span><span
id="iv-p5.5"></span>,) seems harsh indeed to profane persons, who only
judge as philosophers; yet this is the theological use of the Law, for,
by discovering our unrighteousness, it can bring nothing but death.
Here, however,  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) <span
id="iv-p6.1"></span> rebellious questions arise, what use there could be
in prescribing what we are unable to perform: why God should mock
miserable men by imposing a burden whereby they are totally overwhelmed:
how it is consistent that a law should be given for us to keep, and yet
that we should be devoid of strength to do so: if we have not liberty to
choose good or evil, why it should be brought in accusation against us
that we yield to the sin to which we are naturally addicted? The enemies
of God are very ingenious in amassing such calumnies, and eloquent in
exaggerating them; but when they have disgorged all that their rabid
dishonesty has dictated, their own conscience will always abundantly
refute them; for they will be compelled to acknowledge that the Law is
just, and that, when they transgress it by voluntary impulse, they are
deservedly condemned. Let them, then, rave against God as they like,
that He unjustly imposes upon them a heavier burden than they are able
to bear, their natural reason will retain them under the conviction,
that whatever God commands to be done for Him is His due. We must now
see where the blame lies, that they are unable to satisfy Him. Surely
their efforts to relieve themselves from it will be vain, because
conscience will again make itself felt on the opposite side, and will
hold them fast in the bond of condemnation, from which there is no
escape. But the whole of Scripture teaches that it arises from the
corruption of our nature that all our affections are repugnant to the
Law, and also that, on the other hand, the Law is against us; for Adam,
being alienated from God the fountain of all righteousness, ruined
himself and us; and hence it comes that not only our strength is
insufficient to perform the service we owe to God, but that we are
impelled by a blind and headlong impetus to shake off His yoke. From
this Paul infers that we are “under the curse,” because the Law
pronounces all transgressors to be accursed. (<span
id="iv-p6.2"></span>[Ga 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="iv-p6.2"></span><span id="iv-p6.3"></span>.) For ridiculous will be
the objection that it is in the power of every one’s free-will not to
transgress, because there is nothing to be found in us which is not
corrupt; and, in fact, the stupidity of those is most shameless who
suppose that nothing impossible is commanded, whereas in every trifle,
not merely our weakness, but our <span id="iv-p6.4"></span>ἀδυναμία<span
id="iv-p6.5"></span> (powerlessness) betrays itself. But, although Paul
says that the Law  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) <span
id="iv-p7.1"></span> is deadly to us, (<span id="iv-p7.2"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="iv-p7.2"></span><span
id="iv-p7.3"></span>,) yet he vindicates it from all objection, when he
shews that this evil is accidental, and therefore must be imputed to
ourselves. Let it therefore be established, that the Law was given not
only for instruction, so that men might follow what they had learnt from
it to be right, but also to convict them of their iniquity, that they
might acknowledge themselves to be lost; as if they saw in a mirror
their destruction through the just vengeance of God. Now this knowledge
would by itself overwhelm all with horrible despair if they did not
emerge from the deep abyss; for, since they are puffed up with vain
confidence, and arrogate to themselves the merit of living righteously,
it is necessary that they should be humbled; first of all, that, being
condemned, they may learn to fly for refuge to God’s mercy; and
secondly, that being convinced of their infirmity, they may implore the
aid of the Holy Spirit, which in their security they had before
neglected. Hence it appears that it is expedient for them to be slain by
the Law, and that the death which it inflicts is life-giving. And this
occurs in two ways; for, first, being stripped of the false opinion of
their righteousness, wherein they prided themselves, they begin to seek
in Christ what they mistakenly supposed might be found in themselves, so
as to please God by gratuitous reconciliation, whereas they had
previously sought to propitiate Him by the merit of their works;
secondly, they learn that they are not sufficient to perform a single
tittle of the Law, unless, being regenerated by God’s Spirit, they who
were the slaves of sin live unto righteousness. And hence, in fine, the
utility and fruit of the teaching of the Law proceeds; for, until we are
renewed and God has given us hearts of flesh instead of hearts of stone,
in vain are precepts dinned in our ears, since in our natural depravity
we cordially reject them; but when He has engraved His law within our
hearts, its outward instruction also profits us; for He so governs His
children by the Spirit of reconciliation, as at the same time to will
that they should be attentive and obedient to His voice. Still, because
they are always far from attaining to perfect observance of it, they not
only learn from it what is right, but also that they have need of His
gratuitous mercy, that they may please Him through indulgence and grace,
although they are still conscious of much infirmity.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>Further, because Paul seems to abrogate the Law,
as if now-a-days it did not concern believers, we must now see how far
this is the case. And, first, indeed, it is easy to perceive that he
does not treat of the Law in the abstract, but sets it forth invested
with those of its qualities, wherein it is opposed to the Gospel; for,
inasmuch as his controversy was with those who interpreted it amiss, he
could not help contrasting the Law with the Gospel, as if they were in
opposition to each other: not that they were really so, if their
respective doctrine be dexterously applied to its proper object, but
because such a conflict arose from the absurd mixture, which the false
apostles introduced. They asserted that men are justified by the works
of the Law, and, if this were admitted, the righteousness of faith was
destroyed, and the Gospel fell to the ground. They, moreover, restored
the yoke imposed on the ancient people, as if no liberty had been
obtained by the blood of Christ. In this discussion it was necessary for
Paul to advert only to that which is peculiar to Moses, and distinct
from Christ; for although Christ and Moses perfectly accord in the
substance of their doctrine, still, when they are compared with each
other, it is fitting to distinguish what is peculiar to each. In this
respect Paul calls the Law “the letter,”  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) because Moses had no other charge than
to speak in the name of God, (<span id="iv-p9.4"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="iv-p9.4"></span>;) and
this in itself is not only useless, but also deadly; for when the word
resounds in the ears only, it produces nothing but condemnation.
Besides, he considers the Law as connected with promises and
threatenings. Whence it follows, that salvation can only be procured by
it if its precepts be exactly fulfilled. Life is indeed promised in it,
but only if whatever it commands be complied with; whilst, on the other
hand, it denounces death against its transgressors, so that to have
offended in the slightest point is enough to condemn and destroy a
person; and thus it overwhelms all men with despair. Lastly, because the
ceremonies by which God prepared His ancient people as by puerile and
elementary instruction for the faith of the Gospel,  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) were annexed to the Law, Paul embraces
those also in his comparison between the Law and the Gospel. Hence it
follows that, in so far as Moses is distinguished from Christ, his
ministration has ceased, although his embassy was identical with that
which Christ afterwards discharged. As regards the ceremonies, we must
consider that an end was put upon them by Christ’s coming, in such a way
as to establish their truth more firmly than as if they still remained
in use: for we acknowledge that in them, as in a mirror, was formerly
shewn to the Fathers, what is now displayed to us in its reality. Whence
it appears that they are greatly mistaken who altogether reject as
useless that instruction which we read in the writings of Moses; and
that the squeamishness of those who despise it is also intolerable.
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) Let my readers seek in the
Second Book of my Institutes, Chapter 7., what further tends to the
explanation of this subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc05033.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iv-p3"></span> “Ceux doncques qui ne cherchent en la Loy,
sinon de savoir, comment on doit servir a Dieu, s’abusent, etc.;” those,
therefore, who only search in the law to know how we ought to serve God,
deceive themselves, etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc05033.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iv-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iv-p6"></span> “Or ici les esprits fantastiques
s’escarmouchent en demandant.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc05033.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iv-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iv-p7"></span> “The letter killeth.” — *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc05033.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p9"></span> “By the term *letter* he means outward
preaching, of such a kind as does not reach the heart; and, on the other
hand, by *spirit* he means living doctrine, of such a nature as
*worketh* *effectually* (<span id="iv-p9.1"></span>[1Th
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013)<span id="iv-p9.1"></span>) on the
minds of men, through the grace of the Spirit. By the term *letter*,
therefore, is meant *literal* preaching, that is, *dead* *and*
*ineffectual*, perceived only by the ear. By the term *spirit*, on the
other hand, is meant *spiritual* doctrine, that is, whatever is not
merely uttered with the mouth, but effectually makes its way to the
souls of men with a lively feeling.” — *C*. on <span
id="iv-p9.2"></span>[2 Corinthians
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="iv-p9.2"></span>, Cal.
Soc. edit., vol. 2, p. 172.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc05033.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iv-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iv-p10"></span> “Comme par un a, b, c, de petits enfans.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc05033.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv-p11"></span> “Et que ceux, qui le meprisent comme superflu,
sont aussi a condamner comme trop delicats;” and that those who despise
it as superfluous are to be condemned as too fastidious. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sanctions of the Law](cc05034)
