[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05053)  [Next](cc05055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
24](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#000)<span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span><span id="vi.vii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
24:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)<span id="vi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span>**1.** And he said unto Moses, Come up unto
the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of
Israel; and worship ye afar off.

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span>**1.** Et dixit ad Mosen, Ascende ad Jehovam
tu et Aharon, Nadab et Abihu, et septuaginta e senioribus Israel, et
adorabitis procul.

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span>**2.** And Moses alone shall come near the
Lord; but they shall not come nigh, neither shall the people go up with
him.

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span>**2.** Solus autem Moses perveniet ad
Jehovam: ipsi vero non pervenient, nec populus ascendet cum eo.

<span id="vi.vii-p7"></span>**3.** And Moses came and told the people
all the words of the Lord, and all the judgments: and all the people
answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath
said will we do.

<span id="vi.vii-p8"></span>**3.** Venit ergo Moses, et narravit populo
omnia verba Jehovae, omniaque judicia, Et respondit totus populus una
voce, ac dixerunt, Quaecunque verba loquutus est Jehova, faciemus.

<span id="vi.vii-p9"></span>**4.** And Moses wrote all the words of the
Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the
hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="vi.vii-p10"></span>**4.** (Seripserat autem Moses omnia verba
Jehovae): surgensque mane aedificavit altare sub monte, et duodecim
statuas secundum duodecim tribus lsrael.

<span id="vi.vii-p11"></span>**5.** And he sent young men of the
children of Israel, which offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed
peace-offerings of oxen unto the Lord.

<span id="vi.vii-p12"></span>**5.** Misitque juniores filiorum Israel,
qui immolaverunt holocausta, et sacrificaverunt sacrificia prosperitatum
ipsi Jehovae, vitulos.

<span id="vi.vii-p13"></span>**6.** And Moses took half of the blood,
and put *it* in basins; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

<span id="vi.vii-p14"></span>**6.** Accepit Moses dimidium sanguinis, et
posuit in crateribus: dimidium vero sanguinis sparsit super altare.

<span id="vi.vii-p15"></span>**7.** And he took the book of the
covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, All
that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient.

<span id="vi.vii-p16"></span>**7.** Sumpsit deinde librum foederis, et
legit in auribus populi: qui dixerunt, Quaecunque dixit Jehova,
faciemus, et obediemus.

<span id="vi.vii-p17"></span>**8.** And Moses took the blood, and
sprinkled *it* on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the
covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.

<span id="vi.vii-p18"></span>**8.** Tulit quoque Moses sanguinem, et
sparsit super populum, ac dixit, Ecce, sanguis foederis quod pepigit
Jehova vobiscum super cunctis his sermonibus.

<span id="vi.vii-p19"></span>**9.** Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel;

<span id="vi.vii-p20"></span>**9.** Ascendit autem Moses, et Aharon,
Nadab et Abihu, et septuaginta e senioribus Israel.

<span id="vi.vii-p21"></span>**10.** And they saw the God of Israel: and
*there* *was* under his feet as it were a paved work of a
sapphire-stone, and as it were the body of heaven in *his* clearness.

<span id="vi.vii-p22"></span>**10.** Et viderunt Deum Israel: et sub
pedibus ejus erat tanquam opus tabulae sapphiri, et sicut species coeli
serenitate.

<span id="vi.vii-p23"></span>**11.** And upon the nobles of the children
of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and
drink.

<span id="vi.vii-p24"></span>**11.** Et in principes filiorum Israel non
extendit manum suam: et viderunt Deum, et comederunt, et biberunt.

<span id="vi.vii-p25"></span>**12.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Come
up to me into the mount, and be there; and I will give thee tables of
stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou
mayest teach them.

<span id="vi.vii-p26"></span>**12.** Dixitque Jehova ad Mosen, Ascende
ad me in montem, et esto ibi; daboque tibi duas tabulas lapideas, et
Legem atque praeceptum, quae scripsi ad docendum eos.

<span id="vi.vii-p27"></span>**13.** And Moses rose up, and his minister
Joshua; and Moses went up into the mount of God.

<span id="vi.vii-p28"></span>**13.** Surrexit itaque Moses et Jehosua
minister ejus; et ascendit Moses in montem Dei.

<span id="vi.vii-p29"></span>**14.** And he said unto the elders, Tarry
ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur
*are* with you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto
them.

<span id="vi.vii-p30"></span>**14.** Senioribusque dixit, Manete hic
donec revertamur ad vos: et ecce, Aharon et Hur sunt vobiscum: quisquis
habuerit causas, accedet ad eos.

<span id="vi.vii-p31"></span>**15.** And Moses went up into the mount,
and a cloud covered the mount.

<span id="vi.vii-p32"></span>**15.** Tunc ascendit Moses in montem, et
operuit nubes montem.

<span id="vi.vii-p33"></span>**16.** And the glory of the Lord abode
upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day
he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.

<span id="vi.vii-p34"></span>**16.** Habitavitque gloria Jehovae; super
montem Sinai, et operuit eum nubes sex diebus: vocavitque ipsum Mosen
die septimo e medio nubis.

<span id="vi.vii-p35"></span>**17.** And the sight of the glory of the
Lord *was* like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of
the children of Israel.

<span id="vi.vii-p36"></span>**17.** Et aspectus gloriae Jehovae erat
tanquam ignis comburens in vertice montis, in oculis filiorum Israel.

<span id="vi.vii-p37"></span>**18.** And Moses went into the midst of
the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount
forty days and forty nights.

<span id="vi.vii-p38"></span>**18.** Et ingressus est Moses in medium
nubis, ascenditque in montem: et fuit Moses in monte quadraginta diebus,
et quadraginta noctibus.

<span id="vi.vii-p39"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii-p40"></span><span id="vi.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p41"></span>**1.** *Come up unto the Lord, thou, and
Aaron, Nadab and Abihu*. Before Moses erected the tabernacle and
consecrated it by a solemn ceremony, it was necessary for him to fetch
the Tables of the Covenant, which were a pledge of God’s favor;
otherwise, if the ark had nothing in it, the sanctuary would have been
in a manner empty. For this reason, he is commanded to go up into the
mount, but not without a splendid train of companions, in order that an
appropriate preparation might arouse their minds for a fit reception of
this especial blessing. He is, therefore, commanded to take with him
Aaron his brother, and Nadab and Abihu, together with seventy of the
elders of the people. This was the number of witnesses selected to
behold the glory of God. Before, however, they ascended the mount, a
sacrifice was offered by the whole people, and the Book of the Law was
read. Finally, Moses alone was received into the top of the mount, to
bring from thence the Tables written by the hand of God.

<span id="vi.vii-p42"></span>Here, however, (See this subject further
discussed on <span id="vi.vii-p42.3"></span>[Numbers
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016)<span id="vi.vii-p42.3"></span>,
*infra*.) arises a question respecting the seventy elders; for we shall
see elsewhere that the seventy were not chosen till the people had
departed from Mount Sinai; whereas mention is made of them here, before
the promulgation of the Law, which seems to be by no means consistent.
But this difficulty is removed, if we allow, what we gather from this
passage, that, even before they came to Mount Sinai, each tribe had
appointed its governors (*praefectos*), who would make up this number,
since there were six of every tribe; but that when Moses afterwards
desired to be relieved of his burdens, part of the government was
transferred  <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) to these seventy
persons, since this number was already sanctioned by custom and use.
Certainly, since it is plainly stated that there were  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) seventy from the very first, it is
probable that this number of coadjutors was given to Moses in order to
make as little change as possible. For we know that, when a custom has
obtained, men are very unwilling to depart from it. But it might have
also been that the desire and intention of the Israelites was thus to
celebrate the memory of their origin; for seventy persons had gone down
into Egypt with Jacob, and, in less than two hundred and twenty years
after they went there, their race had increased to six hundred thousand,
besides women and children. It is not, therefore, contrary to
probability that seventy persons were appointed to preside over the
whole people, in order that so marvelous a blessing of God might
continue to be testified in all ages, as if to trace the commencement of
their race up to its very source.

<span id="vi.vii-p45"></span><span id="vi.vii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p46"></span>**2.** *And Moses alone shall come near the
Lord*. Three gradations are here marked. A station is prescribed for the
people, from whence they may “worship afar off;” the elders and the
priests are appointed to be the companions of Moses, to come closer, and
thus to be witnesses to the people of all the things which we shall
afterwards see to be shewn them; whilst, as they were separated from the
multitude, so finally Moses alone was received up into the higher glory;
for he was caught up on high in the covering of the cloud. This  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) distinction is marked in the words,
“Moses alone shall come near...; but they shall not come nigh; neither
shall the people go up.” Some translators render the verbs in the past
tense; but improperly, in my opinion; for Moses is not yet relating what
was done, but only what God had commanded, as is plain from the next
verse, wherein also the modesty and humility of the people is commended,
because they received with reverence a command which was not in itself
very agreeable or likely to be approved. For, such is the ambition of
men, that it might have appeared insulting that they should be set afar
off and prohibited from approaching the mountain, like strangers and
heathens. It is, therefore, an evidence of their pious reverence, that
they should submit to be placed at a distance, and should be contented
with a position apparently less honorable. And Moses more clearly
expresses their promptitude to obey, when he reports their words, that
they would do all that he had declared to them from the mouth of God.

<span id="vi.vii-p48"></span><span id="vi.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p49"></span>**4.** *And Moses*  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) *wrote all the words of the Lord*.
This parenthesis is opportunely inserted; for we shall see a little
further on that the book was read before the people; but, in order to
awaken greater attention, before the reading he built an altar and
offered victims in the sight of all the people. Moreover, it must be
observed that statues  <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) were
erected near the altar according to the number of the tribes, that they
might know that they were not kept afar off in token of rejection, but
only that, conscious of their own unworthiness, they might humble
themselves before God in fear and trembling; for, though they were
removed to a considerable distance, still they were remembered before
God, and thus He embraced them all, as it were, by means of these
statues. What Moses, however, calls by this name, were not images
bearing the shape of a man, but heaps of stones, which might be as
monuments representing the twelve tribes; that they might know that they
were by no means excluded from the sanctity of the altar.

<span id="vi.vii-p52"></span><span id="vi.vii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p53"></span>**5.** *And he sent young men of the
children of Israel*. He either means that they were the sacrificial
attendants (*victimarios*,) by whose hands the victims were killed, or
that some were chosen who might be active and strong to drag the oxen to
the altar. The tribe of Levi was not yet consecrated; whereas the word
used for “offering,”  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) is only
applied to the priests, where a distinction is marked between the
Levites and the rest of the people. The first meaning is, therefore, the
most suitable.

<span id="vi.vii-p55"></span><span id="vi.vii-p55.1"></span>We have
stated elsewhere that the  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) <span
id="vi.vii-p56.3"></span> sacrifices of prosperities were designed as
acts of thanksgiving; and yet that they were not only expressions of
gratitude, but also that prayers were mixed with them in supplication of
good success. This offering, however, comprised in it a ratification of
the Covenant, as appears immediately afterwards; for, in order to
increase the sanctity and security of covenants, they have in all ages,
and even  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) <span
id="vi.vii-p57.6"></span> amongst heathen nations, been accompanied with
sacrifices. To this end Moses, the victims being slain, pours half the
blood upon the altar, and keeps half in basins to sprinkle the people,
that by this  <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) <span
id="vi.vii-p58.1"></span> symbol the Covenant might be ratified, whereof
he was the mediator and surety. Paul, in allusion to this custom, says,
that he should rejoice, if he were “offered upon the sacrifice and
service of *their*<span id="vi.vii-p58.2"></span> faith” whom he had
gained for Christ, (<span id="vi.vii-p58.3"></span>[Php
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span
id="vi.vii-p58.3"></span><span id="vi.vii-p58.4"></span>;) and he uses
the word <span id="vi.vii-p58.5"></span>σπένδεσθαι<span
id="vi.vii-p58.6"></span>, which  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) <span id="vi.vii-p59.5"></span> is
primarily applied to covenants. But the case of this sacrifice was
peculiar; for God desired the Jews to be reminded of the one solid
confirmation of the Covenant, which He made with them; as if He had
openly shown that it would then only be ratified and effectual, when it
should be sealed with blood. And this the Apostle (<span
id="vi.vii-p59.6"></span>[Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019)<span
id="vi.vii-p59.6"></span><span id="vi.vii-p59.7"></span>) carefully
takes into consideration, when he says, that after the Law had been
declared, Moses “sprinkled both the book and all the people” with blood;
for, although there is no express mention here made of the book, the
Apostle does not unreasonably comprise it under the word “altar.” He
also alludes to another kind of sacrifice, treated of in <span
id="vi.vii-p59.8"></span>[Nu 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#005)<span
id="vi.vii-p59.8"></span><span id="vi.vii-p59.9"></span>, and therefore
mentions “the scarlet-wool and hyssop.” The sum is, that the blood was,
as it were, the medium whereby the covenant was confirmed and
established, since the altar, as the sacred seat of God, was bathed with
half of it, and then the residue was sprinkled over the people. Hence we
gather that the covenant of gratuitous adoption was made with the
ancient people unto eternal salvation, since it was sealed with the
blood of Christ in type and shadow. Now, if this doctrine hold good
under the Law, much more must it occupy a place with us now; and hence,
in order that God’s promises may always maintain their power and
certainty, let this sealing be constantly kept before us; and let us
remember that the blood of Christ has therefore once been shed, that it
might engrave upon our hearts the covenant whereby we are called to the
hope of the kingdom of heaven. For this reason Christ in the Holy Supper
commends His blood as the seal of the New Covenant; nay, whenever we
take the sacred books into our hands, the blood of Christ, ought to
occur to our minds, as if the whole  <span
id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) <span id="vi.vii-p60.1"></span> of its
sacred instruction were written therewith; for it is obvious that Christ
compares with the figure the truth which was manifested in Himself; to
which also the admonition of the Apostle, which I have just quoted,
refers.

<span id="vi.vii-p61"></span>We must now carefully observe the course of
the proceeding. First, Moses states that he read the book before the
people; and then adds that the people themselves embraced the covenant
proposed to them. Finally, he relates that when the people had professed
their obedience, he sprinkled the blood, not without adding his
testimony, and that in a loud voice. The context here shews us the true
and genuine nature of the Sacraments, together with their correct and
proper use; for unless doctrine precede them to be a connecting link
between God and man, they will be empty and delusive signs, however
honorable may be the encomiums passed on them. But inasmuch as mutual
consent is required in all compacts, so, when God invites His people to
receive grace, He stipulates that they should give Him the obedience of
faith, so as to answer, Amen. Thus nothing can be more preposterous than
the invention of dumb sacraments: such as those childish charms which
the Papists hawk about as sacraments, without the word of God; whilst,
at the same time, it must be added that the word, which gives life to
the Sacraments, is not an obscure whisper, like that magical incantation
of the Papists, when they blow on the bread and the cup, and which they
call the consecration; but it is a clear and distinct voice which is
addressed to men, and avails to beget faith in them. Thus Moses here
speaks aloud to the people, and reminds them that God enters into
covenant with him.

<span id="vi.vii-p62"></span>Now, although the profession here recorded
might seem to be derived from too great confidence, when the people
declare that they will do whatsoever God commands, still it contains
nothing amiss or reprehensible; inasmuch as the faithful among them
promised nothing, except in reliance on the help of God: and gratuitous
reconciliation, if they should sin, was included in it. This was not
indeed the proper office of the Law, to incline men’s hearts to the
obedience of righteousness; as also under the Law there was no true and
real expiation to wash away the guilt of sins; but the office of the Law
was to lead men step by step to Christ, that they might seek of Him
pardon and the Spirit of regeneration. It is, therefore, unquestionable
that the elect of God embraced by faith the substance and truth of the
shadows when they voluntarily offered themselves to keep the covenant of
God.

<span id="vi.vii-p63"></span>**9.** *Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu*. Thus it is that I connect the history: Moses, having
finished reading the Law, and having sprinkled the blood, took with him
the companions pointed out to him by God, and having left the people,
went with these some way up the mountain. I have thought it well
slightly to touch upon this, because some translators render the verb
improperly in the pluperfect tense, as if he and the elders had already
before  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) been separated from the
people; but this is very absurd, for it was necessary for him to remain
in the plain, in order to address the people.

<span id="vi.vii-p65"></span><span id="vi.vii-p65.1"></span>There the
glory of God was beheld more closely by the elders, that they might
afterwards relate to the people what they had seen, and that thus the
thing, being proved by competent witnesses, might obtain undoubted
credit. For this reason he says, that “they saw the God of Israel,” not
in all His reality and greatness, but in accordance with the
dispensation which He thought best, and which he accommodated to the
capacity of man. The form of God is indeed nowhere described, but the
pediment (*basis*<span id="vi.vii-p65.2"></span>) on which He stood was
like a work of sapphire.  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) <span
id="vi.vii-p67.1"></span> The word <span
id="vi.vii-p67.2"></span>לבנת<span id="vi.vii-p67.3"></span>,
*libnath*<span id="vi.vii-p67.4"></span>, some translate *stone*<span
id="vi.vii-p67.5"></span>, others *whiteness*<span
id="vi.vii-p67.6"></span>, others *brick*<span
id="vi.vii-p67.7"></span>. Whichever sense it is preferred to take it
in, but little affects the main point in the matter; for the color of a
sapphire was presented to them, to elevate their minds by its brightness
above the world; and therefore it is immediately added, that its
appearance was as of the clear and serene sky. By this symbol they were
reminded that the glory of God is above all heavens; and since in His
very footstool there is such exquisite and surpassing beauty, something
still more sublime must be thought of Himself, and such as would ravish
all our senses with admiration. Thus the throne of God was shewn to
Ezekiel “as the appearance of a sapphire-stone.” (<span
id="vi.vii-p67.8"></span>[Ezek. 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026),
[Ezek. 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001)<span
id="vi.vii-p67.8"></span><span id="vi.vii-p67.9"></span>.)

<span id="vi.vii-p68"></span>Finally, on the footstool Infinite Majesty
appeared, such as to strike the elders with astonishment, so that they
might humble themselves with greater reverence before the
incomprehensible glory of God.

<span id="vi.vii-p69"></span><span id="vi.vii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p70"></span>**11.** *And upon the nobles of the
children of Israel*. These words, as it seems to me, are violently
distorted by those  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) who expound
them, that the elders were not made participators of the prophetic gift,
or that the virtue of God did not extend to them; for these clauses are
to be taken connectedly thus: although they saw God, His hand was not
laid upon them but they ate and drank. Hence we may gather that God’s
paternal favor towards them is pointed out in that He spared them; for
we must bear in mind what is said elsewhere, “There shall no man see my
face and live.” (<span id="vi.vii-p71.6"></span>[Ex
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span id="vi.vii-p71.6"></span>.)
Thus, amongst the ancients, this was a kind of proverbial expression: We
shall die, because we have seen God. So Jacob, in commendation of God’s
grace, says, “I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.”
(<span id="vi.vii-p71.7"></span>[Ge
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span id="vi.vii-p71.7"></span>.)
For if the mountains melt at the sight of Him, what must needs happen to
a mortal man, than whom there is nothing more frail or feeble? Herein,
then, does God’s incomparable lenity betray itself, when, in manifesting
Himself to His elect, He does not altogether absorb and reduce them to
nothing; especially when some special vision is presented to them. In
sum, therefore, Moses shews us that it was a miracle that the rulers of
Israel remained safe and sound, although the terrible majesty of God had
appeared to them. Now, this was the case, because they had not rashly
thrust themselves forward, but had come near at the call of God. Hence
we learn that our boldness never exceeds its due bounds, nor can be
condemned as presumption, when it is founded on the command of God;
whilst worse than any pride or self-confidence is timidity, which, under
pretense of modesty, leads us to distrust the word of God. If any one of
the people had attempted to do the same as the rulers, he would have
experienced in his destruction what it is to advance beyond bounds. But
the reason why their free and bold access turned out successfully to the
elders, was because they obeyed the command of God.

<span id="vi.vii-p72"></span>What follows, as to their eating, I
interpret to mean a solemn banquet, which was a part or appendage of a
sacrifice, as we have seen on <span id="vi.vii-p72.1"></span>[Exodus
18](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#000)<span id="vi.vii-p72.1"></span>
 <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) and in many other places.

<span id="vi.vii-p74"></span><span id="vi.vii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p75"></span>**12.** *And the Lord said unto Moses, Come
up to me*. Moses himself is now taken up higher; because it was
sufficient that the elders should be admitted to that intermediate
vision, from whence they might certainly know that he would not proceed
further, except by God’s command, in order that he might be received to
familiar colloquy. Although, however, Joshua began to go on with him, it
is plain that he was only his companion for six days, until Moses left
him behind, and was gathered into the cloud. When God declares that He
will give him “a law and commandment,” this must not be understood of
any new instruction, but of the authentic writing (*consignatione*) of
the Law: for, after having spoken of the two tables, He immediately
mentions, in apposition, the Law and Commandment, by way of explanation;
as if He had said that He would give the tables, which were to be a
divine monument  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) of His
covenant; so that a summary of doctrine should exist among the people,
not written with ink, and by the hand of man, but by the secret power of
the Spirit. I am afraid the speculation of Augustine is more subtle than
correct, that the Law was written by the finger of God,  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) because only the Spirit of God
engraves it on our hearts; for, to pass over the fact that the hardness
of the stones was not changed, what will their breaking mean, which will
be spoken of hereafter? Surely it does not accord that, whereas the
grace of regeneration endures unto the end, the Law should be only
engraven efficaciously by the Spirit upon men’s hearts for a moment.
What I have advanced, however, is beyond controversy, that the Law was
inscribed upon these polished stones, that the perpetuity of the
covenant might be testified in all ages.

<span id="vi.vii-p78"></span><span id="vi.vii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p79"></span>**14.** *Tarry ye here for us, until we
come again*. I do not take the words so precisely as to suppose that he
commanded them to stand still in the same place; but since he was just
about to be separated from intercourse with men, I suppose, that our
earthly dwelling-place is indicated by the adverb,  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) since it immediately follows, that if
anything should occur, Aaron and Hur were to be his substitutes for
ruling the people and settling quarrels. For, since care and anxiety
might beset their minds, as being deprived of their only guide in
counsel, and minister of safety, he offers this consolation to relieve
their despondency. Hence it follows that they were sent back to occupy
their charge, which could not be the case, unless they were in
communication with the people. We are not aware whether Moses was
pre-informed as to the time (of his absence,  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) ) although it is more probable that he
was in doubt and suspense, until he penetrated into the secret counsel
of God. From the last verse but one, we learn, that though the majesty
of God was more clearly revealed to the elders, still it was conspicuous
to all, from the least to the greatest, lest any excuse for ignorance
should remain; for when the fire was seen burning for six continuous
days, as if it would consume the mountain, how could they afterwards
pretend that it was not fully understood from what Author the Law
proceeded?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc05054.htm#fr_304) <span
id="vi.vii-p42.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p43"></span> “A ceux, qui desia estoyent en degre
d’honneur;” to those who were already honourably distinguished. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc05054.htm#fr_305) <span
id="vi.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p44"></span> “Septante et deux;” seventy-two. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc05054.htm#fr_306) <span
id="vi.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p47"></span> “Ces trois estats;” these three estates. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc05054.htm#fr_307) <span
id="vi.vii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p50"></span> “Had written.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc05054.htm#fr_308) <span
id="vi.vii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p51"></span><span id="vi.vii-p51.1"></span> “Pillars.”
— *A* *V*<span id="vi.vii-p51.2"></span>. “Some think that this altar
was set upon twelve stones, such as Elias built, <span
id="vi.vii-p51.3"></span>[1Ki
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031)<span
id="vi.vii-p51.3"></span><span id="vi.vii-p51.4"></span>; and <span
id="vi.vii-p51.5"></span>[Jos
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020)<span
id="vi.vii-p51.5"></span><span id="vi.vii-p51.6"></span>; in which
places, however, the word used is <span
id="vi.vii-p51.7"></span>אבנים<span id="vi.vii-p51.8"></span>,
(*abanim*<span id="vi.vii-p51.9"></span>,) which signifieth stones,
which were gathered together to make one altar or heap; but here the
word is <span id="vi.vii-p51.10"></span>מצבה<span
id="vi.vii-p51.11"></span>, (*matsebah*<span
id="vi.vii-p51.12"></span>,) *which*<span id="vi.vii-p51.13"></span> is
a pillar, so called *a* *stando*<span id="vi.vii-p51.14"></span>,
because it standeth alone, and is erected and set up as a monument.” —
Abridged from Willet *in* *loco*<span id="vi.vii-p51.15"></span>. See
*ante*<span id="vi.vii-p51.16"></span>, vol. 2, p. 117<span
id="vi.vii-p51.18"></span>, and note

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc05054.htm#fr_309) <span
id="vi.vii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p54"></span> “Ce qui n’est attribuE qu’a ceux qui ont
la charge speciale de sacrifier;” which is only applied to those who
have the special charge of sacrificing. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc05054.htm#fr_310) <span
id="vi.vii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p56"></span> “Peace-offerings.” — *A*.*V*. Vide *ante*,
vol. 2, pp. 139 and 333.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc05054.htm#fr_311) <span
id="vi.vii-p56.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p57"></span><span id="vi.vii-p57.1"></span> “In all
solemn leagues and covenants, they sacrificed to the gods by whom they
swore, offering for the most part either a boar, ram, or goat; sometimes
all three; sometimes bulls or lambs instead of any of them. Hence comes
the phrase, <span id="vi.vii-p57.2"></span>ὄρκια τέμνειν<span
id="vi.vii-p57.3"></span>; in Latin, *ferire* *foedus*<span
id="vi.vii-p57.4"></span>, *i* *e*<span id="vi.vii-p57.5"></span>., to
make a covenant.” — Potter’s Arch. Graeca., Book 2. ch. 6. For the same
custom, as existing among the Romans, see Liv. 1. 24. Virg. Aen. 8. 641.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc05054.htm#fr_312) <span
id="vi.vii-p57.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p58"></span> “Par tel sacrement.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc05054.htm#fr_313) <span
id="vi.vii-p58.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p59"></span><span id="vi.vii-p59.1"></span> See *C*
*in* *loco*<span id="vi.vii-p59.2"></span>. Calvin Soc. edit., p. 74,
where, however, I question whether his statement on the word <span
id="vi.vii-p59.3"></span>σπουδὰς<span id="vi.vii-p59.4"></span> is
correct.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc05054.htm#fr_314) <span
id="vi.vii-p59.10"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p60"></span> “Comme si le Loy, et les Prophetes, et
l’Evangile en estoyent escrits;” as if the Law and the Prophets, and the
Gospel were written with it. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc05054.htm#fr_315) <span
id="vi.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p64"></span> “Devant que sacrifier;” before
sacrificing. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc05054.htm#fr_316) <span
id="vi.vii-p65.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p66"></span> Ainsworth, “A work of sapphire-brick.
*Heb*., brick of sapphire: whereby is meant sapphire-stone, hewed like
brick, wherewith the place under Him was paved. So also the Greek
translateth it. Or, it may be Englished, *of* *whiteness* *of*
*sapphire*, *i*.*e*., of white sapphire-stone: for *brick* hath the name
in Hebrew of whiteness. The Chaldee translateth, *under* *the* *throne*
*of* *his* *glory* was, *as* *it* *were*, *a* *work* *of* *precious*,
*stone*.”

<span id="vi.vii-p67"></span>“The Hebrews, (says Willet, *in* *loco*,)
whom Lyranus and Lippoman follow, — in that the pavement or brick-work
was like sapphire, — understand the happy change which was now made for
Israel: their servitude in making of brick was turned into glorious
liberty, as if a floor should be paved with sapphire instead of brick!”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc05054.htm#fr_317) <span
id="vi.vii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p71"></span> So Aben-Ezra, in Willet; and Faigius and
S. Munster in Poole. Boothroyal says, “This phrase evidently means, ‘He
slew them not;’ compare <span id="vi.vii-p71.1"></span>[Ge
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012)<span id="vi.vii-p71.1"></span>;
and <span id="vi.vii-p71.2"></span>[Ps
37:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#022)<span id="vi.vii-p71.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.vii-p71.3"></span>[Ne
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#021)<span id="vi.vii-p71.3"></span>;
<span id="vi.vii-p71.4"></span>[Es
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021)<span id="vi.vii-p71.4"></span>;
<span id="vi.vii-p71.5"></span>[Ps
55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020)<span id="vi.vii-p71.5"></span>.”

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc05054.htm#fr_318) <span
id="vi.vii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p73"></span> See *ante*, vol. 1, pp. 300, 301.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc05054.htm#fr_319) <span
id="vi.vii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p76"></span> “Un document celeste et infallible;” a
celestial and infallible document. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc05054.htm#fr_320) <span
id="vi.vii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p77"></span> See Augustine, Serm. 155: De verbo Apost.
sect. 3, tom. 5, pp. 742, 743, (*Edit*. *Bened*.) See also Serm. 8.
*sect*. 14, *ibid*., p. 48. See also Quaest. in <span
id="vi.vii-p77.1"></span>[Exodus
25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#000)<span id="vi.vii-p77.1"></span>,
tom. 3., p. 429; and Quaest. 166., *ibid*., pp. 471, 472. “Proinde magna
oritur quaestio, quomodo illae tabulae, quas erat Moyses Deo utique
praesciente fractures, non hominis opus esse dicantur, sed Dei, nec ab
homine scriptae, sed digito Dei: posteriores vero tabulae tamdiu
mansurae, ac in tabernaculo et templo Dei futurae, jubente quidem Deo,
tamen ab homine excisae sint, ab homine scriptae. An forte in illis
prioribus gratia Dei significabatur, non hominis opus, qua gratia
indigni facti sunt revertentes corde in Aegyptum, et facientes idolum;
unde illo beneficio privati sunt, et propterea Moyses tabulas fregit:
istis vero tabulis posterioribus significati sunt qui de suis operibus
gloriantur; unde dicit Apostolus (<span id="vi.vii-p77.2"></span>[Ro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="vi.vii-p77.2"></span>)
Ignorantes Dei justitiam, et suam volentes constituere, justitiae Dei
non sunt subjecti; et ideo tabulae humano opere exsculptae et humano
opere conscriptae datae sunt, quae cum ipsis manerent, ad eos
significandos de suis operibus gloriaturos, non de digito Dei hoc est de
Spiritu Dei.”

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc05054.htm#fr_321) <span
id="vi.vii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p80"></span> “Le mot *d*’*ici*;” the word *here*. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc05054.htm#fr_322) <span
id="vi.vii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p81"></span> Added from *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 31:18](cc05055)
