[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05037)  [Next](cc05039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#000)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span><span id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
26:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#003)<span id="v.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>**3.** If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my
commandments, and do them;

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span>**3.** Si in decretis meis ambulaveritis, et
praecepta mea servaveritis, et feceritis ea:

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>**4.** Then I will give you rain in due
season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the
field shall yield their fruit.

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>**4.** Dabo pluvias vestras tempore suo,
dabitque terra fructum suum, et arbores agrorum dabunt fructum suum.

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>**5.** And your thrashing shall reach unto the
vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing-time; and ye shall
eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span>**5.** Apprehendetque vobis tritura vindemiam,
et vindemia apprehendet sementem: comedetisque panem vestrum ad
saturitatem, et habitabitis confidenter in terra vestra.

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span>**6.** And I will give peace in the land, and
ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid; and I will rid evil
beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land.

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span>**6.** Dabo namque pacem in terra, et
dormietis, neque erit exterrens: auferamque bestias malas e terra, et
gladius non transibit per terram vestram.

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span>**7.** And ye shall chase your enemies, and
they shall fall before you by the sword.

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span>**7.** Et persequemini inimicos vestros,
cadentque coram vobis gladio.

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>**8.** And five of you shall chase an
hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: and
your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span>**8.** Persequentur quinque ex vobis centum,
et centum ex vobis decem millia persequentur: et corruent inimici vestri
coram vobis gladio.

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span>**9.** For I will have respect unto you, and
make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span>**9.** Vertam enim me ad vos, et crescere
faciam vos, atque multiplicabo vos, stabiliamque pactum meum vobiscum.

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span>**10.** And ye shall eat old store, and bring
forth the old because of the new.

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span>**10.** Et comedetis vetus inveteratum, et
vetus propter novum educetis.

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span>**11.** And I will set my tabernacle among
you, and my soul shall not abhor you.

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span>**11.** Et ponam tabernaculum in medio
vestri, neque abominabitur vos anima mea.

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span>**12.** And I will walk among you, and will
be your God, and ye shall be my people.

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span>**12.** Ambulabo autem in medio vestri,
eroque vobis in Deum, et vos eritis mihi in populum.

<span id="v.iv-p23"></span>**13.** I *am* the Lord your God, which
brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their
bond-men; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go
upright.

<span id="v.iv-p24"></span>**13.** Ego Jehova Deus vester qui eduxi vos
de terra Aegypti, ne essetis illis servi: et confregi lora jugi vestri,
et incedere feci vos erecta facie.

<span id="v.iv-p25"></span> 

<span id="v.iv-p26"></span><span id="v.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p27"></span>ITS REPETITION

<span id="v.iv-p28"></span>**3.** *If ye walk in my statutes*. We have
now to deal with two remarkable passages, in which he professedly treats
of the rewards which the servants of God may expect, and of the
punishments which await the transgressors. I have indeed already
observed, that whatever God promises us on the condition of our walking
in His commandments would be ineffectual if He should be extreme in
examining our works. Hence it arises that we must renounce all the
compacts of the Law, if we desire to obtain favor with God. But since,
however defective the works of believers may be, they are nevertheless
pleasing to God through the intervention of pardon, hence also the
efficacy of the promises depends, viz., when the strict condition of the
law is moderated. Whilst, therefore, they reach forward and strive,
reward is given to their efforts although imperfect, exactly as if they
had fully discharged their duty; for, since their deficiencies are put
out of sight by faith, God honors with the title of reward what He
gratuitously bestows upon them. Consequently, “to walk in the
commandments of God,” is not precisely equivalent to performing whatever
the Law demands; but in this expression is included the indulgence with
which God regards His children and pardons their faults. The promise,
therefore, is not without fruit as respects believers, whilst they
endeavor to consecrate themselves to God, although they are still far
from perfection; according to the teaching of the Prophet, “I will spare
them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him,” (<span
id="v.iv-p28.1"></span>[Mal 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv-p28.1"></span>;) as much as to say, that their obedience would
not be acceptable to Him because it was deserving, but because He visits
it with His paternal favor. Whence it appears how foolish is the pride
of those who imagine that they make God their debtor, as if according to
His agreement.

<span id="v.iv-p29"></span>The restriction of the recompense, which is
here mentioned, to this earthly and transitory life, is a part of the
elementary instruction of the Law; for, just as the spiritual grace of
God was represented to the ancient people by shadows and images, so also
the same principle applied also both to rewards and punishments.
Reconciliation with God was represented to them by the blood of cattle;
there were various forms of expiation, but all outward and visible,
because their substance had not yet appeared in Christ. For the same
reason, therefore, because so clear and familiar an acquaintance with
eternal life, and the final resurrection, had not yet been attained by
the Fathers, as now shines forth in the Gospel, God for the most part
shewed forth by external proofs that He was favorably disposed to His
people or offended with them. Because now-a-days God does not openly
take vengeance on sins as of old, fanatics infer that He has almost
changed His nature; nay, on this pretense, the Manicheans  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) imagined that the God of Israel was
different from ours. But this error springs from gross and disgraceful
ignorance; for, by not distinguishing His different modes of dealing,
they do not hesitate impiously to cut God Himself in two. The earth does
not now cleave asunder to swallow up the rebellious:  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) God does not now thunder from heaven
as against Sodom: He does not now send fire upon wicked cities as He did
in the Israelitish camp: fiery serpents are not sent forth to inflict
deadly bites: in a word, such manifest instances of punishment are not
daily presented before our eyes to make God terrible to us; and for this
reason, because the voice of the Gospel sounds much more clearly in our
ears, like the sound of a trumpet, whereby we are summoned to the
heavenly tribunal of Christ. Let us then learn to tremble at that
sentence, which banishes all the wicked from the kingdom of God. So, on
the other hand, God does not appear, as of old, as the rewarder of His
people by earthly blessings; and this because we “are dead, and our life
is hid with Christ in God;” because it becomes us to be conformed to our
Head, and through many tribulations to enter the kingdom of heaven.
Thus, the greater are the adversities that oppress us, the more
cheerfully it behooves us to lift up our heads, until Christ shall
gather us into the fellowship of His glory, and to pursue the course of
our calling for the hope which is set before us in heaven; in a word,

<span id="v.iv-p32"></span>“denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ.” (<span id="v.iv-p32.1"></span>Titus 2:12, 13.)

<span id="v.iv-p33"></span>I admit, indeed, the truth of what Paul
teaches, that “godliness” even now has “the promise of the life that now
is, as well as of that which is to come,” (<span
id="v.iv-p33.1"></span>[1Ti 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv-p33.1"></span>;) and assuredly believers already taste on earth
of that blessedness which they shall hereafter enjoy in its fullness.
God also inflicts His judgments on the ungodly in order to remind us of
the last judgment; but still the distinction to which I have adverted is
obvious, that since God has opened to us the heavenly life in the
Gospel, He now calls us directly to it, whereas He led the Fathers to it
as it were by steps. For this reason Paul elsewhere teaches, that
believers are afflicted in this world as

<span id="v.iv-p34"></span>“a manifest token of the righteous judgment
of God, that they may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God for which
they also suffer, seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense,” etc. (<span id="v.iv-p34.1"></span>[2 Thess.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span id="v.iv-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv-p35"></span>In short, let us no more wonder that the
Israelites were only attracted and alarmed by temporal rewards and
punishments, than that the land of Canaan was to them a symbol of their
eternal inheritance, in which, nevertheless, they confessed themselves
strangers and pilgrims; from whence the Apostle correctly concludes,
that they desired a better country. (<span id="v.iv-p35.1"></span>[Ge
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009)<span id="v.iv-p35.1"></span>;
<span id="v.iv-p35.2"></span>[Ps
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)<span id="v.iv-p35.2"></span>;
<span id="v.iv-p35.3"></span>[Heb
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016)<span id="v.iv-p35.3"></span>.)
And thus the wild absurdity of those is refuted, who suppose that the
Fathers were contented with perishable felicity, as if God merely gorged
them in a tavern.  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) Still the
distinction which I have noted remains, that God manifested Himself more
fully as a Father and Judge by temporal blessings and punishments than
since the promulgation of the Gospel.

<span id="v.iv-p37"></span><span id="v.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p38"></span>**4.** *Then I will give you rain in due
season*. He might in one word have promised great abundance of food,
but, that His grace may be more illustrious, the instruments are
mentioned which He employs for its supply. He might give us bread as He
formerly rained down manna from heaven; but in order that the signs of
His paternal solicitude may be constantly before us, after the seed is
sown, the earth requires rain from heaven; and thus the order of the
seasons is so regulated that every day may renew the memory of God’s
bounty. For this reason rain is mentioned, and the increase of the
fruits of the earth; and the continued succession of thrashing, the
vintage, and sowing-time, indicates a very abundant supply of corn and
wine. For, if the harvest be small, there will not be much work to
occupy the husbandman; and, if the vintage be light, hence also will
arise an unsatisfactory period of leisure. But when God declares that
from harvest to sowing-time they shall have constant employment, He bids
them expect a fruitful year, as immediately follows, “ye shall eat your
bread to the full.” And since no prosperity can be gratifying without
peace, He says that they shall be quiet and free from all disturbance.
And this must be carefully observed that, so unpalatable are all God’s
blessings without the seasoning of tranquillity, nothing is more
wretched than inquietude. The sum is, that for the true servants of God
not only is there food laid up with Him, but also its peaceful and
pleasant enjoyment, since it is in His power and will to drive far from
them all annoyances. Still these two things do not seem altogether
consistent with each other, that there shall be none to make them
afraid, and that they shall subdue their enemies, so that  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) ten shall suffice to chase a hundred;
for of what use would their military strength be if there were no
enemies to trouble them? But if we may take the latter sentence
disjunctively, there will be no absurdity, viz., if it should happen
that war be brought against them, they should fight successfully. Still
the easiest solution of this difficulty is, that it soon afterwards was
necessary for them to contend with a great multitude of enemies, in
order to obtain possession of the land. We gather from the accommodation
by the Prophets of this peculiar blessing of a secure and tranquil life
to the kingdom of Christ, that the promises, which from the nature of
the Law were of none effect, are still useful for believers; for, when
God has reconciled them to Himself, He also liberally bestows upon them
what they have not deserved; and yet their obedience, such as it is, is
also rewarded.

<span id="v.iv-p40"></span><span id="v.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p41"></span>**9.** *For I will have respect unto you*
 <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) God is said to “turn Himself”
to the people, whom He undertakes to cherish and preserve; just as also
when He forsakes those who have alienated themselves from Him, He is
said to be turned away from them. Hence the common exhortation in the
Prophets, “Be ye turned to me, and I will be turned to you;” whereby God
reminds us that He has not promised in vain what we here read. Therefore
the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, to confirm His covenant
towards them by watching for their safety. Hence, too, we are also
taught, that when we depart from God, His covenant is made void by our
own fault; wherewith Jeremiah reproaches the Israelites. (<span
id="v.iv-p42.1"></span>[Jer 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)<span
id="v.iv-p42.1"></span>.) In order, therefore, that God’s covenant
should remain firm and effectual, it is not only necessary that the Law
should be engraven on our hearts, but also that He should add another
grace, and not remember our iniquities. When He says, “Ye shall eat old
store,” He again magnifies their abundance; for, whereas scarcity
compels us to make immediate use of the new fruits, so it is a great
sign of abundance to bring forth old wheat from the granary, and old
wine from the cellar. The continuance of His bounty is represented in
the end of the verse, where He says that there shall be no place for the
new fruits, unless they empty their store-houses; because  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) it might happen that, after a year of
scarcity, all their storehouses should be empty, and there would be no
new corn to succeed in place of the old.

<span id="v.iv-p44"></span><span id="v.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p45"></span>**11.** *And I will set my tabernacle among
you*. He alludes, indeed, to the visible sanctuary in which He was
worshipped; still He would shew them that it should be effectually
manifested, that He had not chosen His home amongst them in vain,
inasmuch as He would exert His power by sure proofs to aid and preserve
them. In a word, He signifies that the sanctuary would not be an empty
sign of His presence, but that the reality should correspond with the
sign; and this He further confirms in the next verse, where He says that
He would “walk among” them. For as yet they had not arrived at their
place of rest, and therefore had need of Him as their Leader, in order
that their journey might be prosperous. Although He does not say in
express terms that they should be spiritually blessed, still there is no
doubt but that He lifts their thoughts above the world when He promises
that He would be their God; for this expression, “I will be your God,”
contains, as Christ interprets it, the hope of eternal immortality;
because He is the fountain of life, and “not the God of the dead.”
(<span id="v.iv-p45.1"></span>[Mt
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span id="v.iv-p45.1"></span>.)
The true and solid felicity, then, is now promised, which was typically
represented. For this reason David, although he greatly magnifies the
earthly blessings of God, yet, by the conclusion which he adds,
demonstrates that he did not stop short with them;

<span id="v.iv-p46"></span>“God’s mercy (he says) shall follow me all
the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord, to
length of days.”  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) (<span
id="v.iv-p47.1"></span>[Ps 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)<span
id="v.iv-p47.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv-p48"></span>And elsewhere, when he had said that they are
happy, to whom God abundantly supplies all things (needful,  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) ) presently adds, as if in
explanation,

<span id="v.iv-p50"></span>“Happy is that people, whose God is the
Lord.”  
(<span id="v.iv-p50.2"></span>[Ps
144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)<span id="v.iv-p50.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iv-p51"></span>Finally, He recalls to their recollection
that He had been their Deliverer, that they may assuredly gather from
what was past, that the flow of His grace would be continuous, if only
they themselves do run the course unto which He had called them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc05038.htm#fr_206) <span
id="v.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p30"></span> “Through him (Manes) Christianity was to be
set free from all connection with Judaism.” — Neander’s Church Hist.,
(Rose’s Transl.,) vol. 2, p. 145. “The theological error which naturally
and immediately flowed from these principles, (*i*.*e*., the principles
of Dualism,) was the entire rejection of the authority of the Old
Testament. In respect to this question, Manes was compelled by his
adoption of the oriental philosophy to reject the theosophy of the
Jews.” — Waddington’s Hist. of the Church, vol. 1 p. 154.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc05038.htm#fr_207) <span
id="v.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p31"></span> “Comme Core, Dathan, et Abiram.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc05038.htm#fr_208) <span
id="v.iv-p35.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p36"></span> “This discussion, which would have been most
useful at any rate, has been rendered necessary by that monstrous
miscreant *Servetus*, and some madmen of the sect of the *Anabaptists*,
who think of the people of Israel as they would do of some herd of
swine, absurdly imagining that the Lord gorged them with temporal
blessings here, and gave them no hope of a blessed immortality.” —
Institutes, B. 2. ch. 10. sect. 1. Cal. Soc. Trans., vol. 1, p. 501.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc05038.htm#fr_209) <span
id="v.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p39"></span> The oversight of *ten* for *five* here is
scarcely worth noticing.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc05038.htm#fr_210) <span
id="v.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p42"></span> Literally, “I will turn myself to you.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc05038.htm#fr_211) <span
id="v.iv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p43"></span> This last sentence omitted in *Fr*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc05038.htm#fr_212) <span
id="v.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p47"></span> See Margin *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc05038.htm#fr_213) <span
id="v.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p49"></span> Added from *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 28:1-14](cc05039)
