[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05028)  [Next](cc05030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#000)<span id="ii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.vi.i-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span id="ii.vi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p3"></span>**17.** Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife, nor his man-servant,
nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that *is*
thy neighbor’s.

<span id="ii.vi.i-p4"></span>**17.** Non concupisces domum proximi tui,
non concupisces uxorem proximi tui, neque servum ejus, neque ancillam
ejus, neque bovem ejus, neque asinum ejus, neque quicquam eorum quae
sunt proximi tui.

<span id="ii.vi.i-p5"></span>ITS REPETITION

<span id="ii.vi.i-p6"></span><span id="ii.vi.i-p6.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#000)<span id="ii.vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p7"></span><span id="ii.vi.i-p7.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021)<span id="ii.vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p8"></span>**21.** Neither shalt thou desire thy
neighbor’s wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbor’s house, his
field, or his man-servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his ass, or
any *thing* that *is* thy neighbor’s.

<span id="ii.vi.i-p9"></span>**21.** Neque concupisces uxorem proximi
tui, neque concupisces domum proximi tui, agrum ejus, aut servum ejus,
aut ancillam ejus, bovem ejus, aut asinum ejus: neque quicquam eorum
quae sunt proximo tuo.

<span id="ii.vi.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi.i-p11"></span><span id="ii.vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p12"></span>**<span id="ii.vi.i-p12.1"></span>[Exodus
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017)<span
id="ii.vi.i-p12.1"></span>.** *Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s
wife*. There is no question but that this Commandment extends also to
those that have preceded it. God had already sufficiently forbidden us
to set our hearts on the property of others, to attempt the seduction of
their wives, or to seek for gain at another’s loss and inconvenience.
Now whilst He enumerates oxen and asses, and all other things as well as
their wives and servants, it is very clear that His precept is directed
to the same things, but in a different way, viz., in order to restrain
all ungodly desires either of fornication or theft. The question,
however, occurs, — since it has been said before that, agreeably to the
nature of the Lawgiver, the inward purity of the heart is everywhere
required, and therefore, that under the head of adultery, not only are
all filthy acts prohibited, but secret unchastity also; and under the
head of theft, all unlawful appetite for gain, — why does God now forbid
in His people the lust for theft and fornication? For it seems to be a
superfluous repetition which would be very absurd in ten short precepts,
wherein God has embraced the whole rule of life, so that their very
brevity might render it, easy, and the better attract their readers to
learn them. Still, on the other hand, it must be remembered that,
although it was God’s design, by the whole Law, to arouse men’s feelings
to sincere obedience of it, yet such is their hypocrisy and
indifference, that it was necessary to stimulate them more sharply, and
to press them more closely, lest they should seek for subterfuges under
pretense of the obscurity of the doctrine. For if they had only heard,
Thou shalt not kill, nor commit fornication, nor steal, they might have
supposed that their duty would have been fully performed by mere outward
observance. It was not then in vain that God, after having treated of
piety and justice, should give a separate admonition, that they were not
only to abstain from evil doing, but also, that what He had previously
commanded should be performed with the sincere affection of the heart.
Hence Paul gathers from this Commandment, that the whole “Law is
spiritual,” (<span id="ii.vi.i-p12.2"></span>[Ro
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="ii.vi.i-p12.2"></span>
and 14,) because God, by His condemnation of lust, sufficiently shewed
that He not only imposed obedience on our hands and feet, but also put
restraint upon our minds, lest they should desire to do what is
unlawful. Paul confesses, too, that whereas he before slept in easy
self-deceit, he was awakened by this single word; for since he was
blameless in the eyes of men, he was persuaded that he was righteous
before God: He says that he was once alive, as if the Law were absent or
dead, because, being puffed up with confidence in his righteousness, he
expected salvation by his works; but, when he perceived what the
Commandment, Thou shalt not covet, meant, the dead Law was raised as it
were to life, and he died, *i* *e*., he was convinced he was a
transgressor, and saw the sure curse overhanging him. Nor did he
perceive himself to be guilty of one or two sins, but then, at length,
he was shaken out of his torpor, when he recognized that all the evil
desires, of which he was conscious, must be accounted for before God,
whereas he had before been satisfied with the mere outward appearance of
virtue. We now perceive, therefore, that there is nothing inappropriate
in the general condemnation of concupiscence by a distinct commandment;
for after God has broadly and popularly laid down rules for moral
integrity, at length He ascends to the fountain itself, and at the same
time points out with His finger, as it were, the root from which all
evil and corrupt fruits spring forth. It must here be added that
something more is expressed by the words coveting and wishing for, or
desiring, than a *desiderium* *formatum*, as it is commonly called; for
the flesh often tempts us to wish for this or that, so that the evil
concupiscence betrays itself, although consent may not yet be added.
Since, therefore, the sin  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) of
the will had been already condemned, God now proceeds further, and puts
a restraint upon evil desires before they prevail.  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) James points out these progressive
steps, where he says that lust conceives before it begets sin; and then
“sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death,” (<span
id="ii.vi.i-p14.1"></span>[Jas
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015)<span id="ii.vi.i-p14.1"></span>,)
for the begetting of which he speaks, is not only in the external act
but in the will itself, before it has assented to the temptation. I
admit, indeed, that the corrupt thoughts which arise spontaneously, and
so also vanish before they affect the mind, do not come into account
before God; yet, although we do not actually acquiesce in the evil
desire, still, if it affects us pleasantly, it is sufficient to render
us guilty. In order that this may be understood better, all temptations
are, as it were, so many fans; if they hurry us on into consent, the
fire is lighted; but, if they only awaken the heart to corrupt desires,
concupiscence betrays itself in these sparks, although it neither
acquires its full warmth nor breaks forth into a flame. Concupiscence,
therefore, is never without desire (*affectu*,) although the will may
not altogether yield. Hence it appears what entire perfection of
righteousness we must bring in order to satisfy the Law, since not only
are we commanded not to will anything, except what is right and pleasing
to God, but also that no impure desire should affect our hearts. Nor
would Paul have laid such great stress upon this precept if the Law
condemned no concupiscence except that which takes such hold on the mind
of man as to exercise dominion over it; for the sin of the will must
ever be condemned even by heathen philosophers, nay, and by earthly
legislators also; but he says that the Law, by resisting concupiscence,
makes sin to “become exceeding sinful.” (<span
id="ii.vi.i-p14.2"></span>[Ro
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="ii.vi.i-p14.2"></span>.)
Now, it is not credible that, at the time in which he confesses that he
knew not what concupiscence was, he was so senseless and stupid as to
think no harm of wishing to kill a man, or of being inclined through
lust to commit adultery with his brother’s wife; but, if he was not
unaware that the will to sin was vicious, it follows that the
concupiscence in which he saw no harm was some more hidden disease.
Hence, too, it is manifest under what delusion Satan must have held all
the Popish schools  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) through
which echoes this axiom, that concupiscence is no sin in the baptized,
because it is a stimulus to the exercise of virtue; as if Paul did not
openly condemn c*oncupiscence*, which entraps us in its snares, although
we do not altogether assent to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc05029.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.vi.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p13"></span> “Mala voluntas.” — *Lat*. “Toutes
mauvaises affections.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc05029.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p14"></span> “Derant qu’ils ayent gagne pour venir en
propos delibere;” before they have gone so far as to arrive at a
deliberate purpose. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc05029.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.vi.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i-p15"></span> See the first decree of the Fifth Session
of the Council of Trent, together with *C*.’*s* remarks amongst his
Tracts. — Calvin Society edition, vol. 3, pp. 78-88.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Law: A Summary](cc05030)
