[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05063)  [Next](cc05065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span>A fuller Explication of the same thing

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span><span id="vii.v-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#000)<span id="vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span><span id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>[Leviticus
8:4-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#004)<span id="vii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span>**4.** And Moses did as the Lord commanded
him; and the assembly was gathered together unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span>**4.** Et fecit Moses quemadmodum praecperat
ei Jehova. Et congregatus est coetus ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span>**5.** And Moses said unto the congregation,
This *is* the thing which the Lord commanded to be done.

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span>**5.** Tunc dixit Moses ad congregaionem, Hoc
est verbum quod praecepit Jehova facere.

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span>**6.** And Moses brought Aaron and his sons,
and washed them with water.

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>**6.** Et accedere fecit Moses Aharon et
filios ejus, quos lavit aqua.

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span>**7.** And he put upon him the coat, and
girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the
ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod,
and bound *it* unto him therewith.

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span>**7.** Postea induit eum tunica, et cinxit
baltheo, et pallio induit eum, et superimposuit ephod, et cinxit eum
cingulo ephod: cinxit inquam illo.

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span>**8.** And he put the breastplate upon him:
also he put in the breastplate the Urim and the Thummim.

<span id="vii.v-p13"></span>**8.** Et superimposuit ei pectorale, et
reposuit in pectorali Urim et Thummim.

<span id="vii.v-p14"></span>**9.** And he put the mitre upon his head;
also upon the mitre, *even* upon his fore-front, did he put the golden
plate, the holy crown; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.v-p15"></span>**9.** Deinde cidarim imposuit capiti ejus,
ponens super cidarim ante faciem ejus laminam auream, coronam sanetam,
sicut praceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="vii.v-p16"></span>**10.** And Moses took the anointing oil,
and anointed the tabernacle, and all that *was* therein, and sanctified
them.

<span id="vii.v-p17"></span>**10.** Accepit quoque Moses oleum
unctionis, et unxit tabernaculum, et quaecunque erant in eo: et
consecravit ilia.

<span id="vii.v-p18"></span>**11.** And he sprinkled thereof upon the
altar seven times, and anointed the altar, and all his vessels, both the
laver and his foot, to sanctify them.

<span id="vii.v-p19"></span>**11.** Et aspersit ex eo super altare
septera vicibus, unxitque altare atque omnis vasa ejus, et concham et
basim ejus, ut consecraret ea.

<span id="vii.v-p20"></span>**12.** And he poured of the anoint oil upon
Aaron’s head, and anointed him, to sanctify him.

<span id="vii.v-p21"></span>**12.** Fudit etiam ex oleo unctionis super
caput Aharon, unxitque eum ut consecraret eum.

<span id="vii.v-p22"></span>**13.** And Moses brought Aaron’s sons, and
put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon
them; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.v-p23"></span>**13.** Fecit praeterea Moses accedere
filios Aharon, induitque filius tunicis, et cinxit filius baltheo, atque
alligavit eis mitras, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.v-p24"></span>**14.** And he brought the bullock for the
sin-offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of
the bullock for the sin-offering.

<span id="vii.v-p25"></span>**14.** Adduxit quoque juvencum in hostium
pro peccato, imposuitque Aharon et filii ejus manus suas super caput
juvenci hostiae pro peccato.

<span id="vii.v-p26"></span>**15.** And he slew *it;* and Moses took the
blood, and put *it* upon the horns of the altar round about with his
finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of
the altar, and sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it.

<span id="vii.v-p27"></span>**15.** Et mactavit, tulitque Moses
sanguinem, posuitque super cornua altaris per circuitum digito suo, et
expiavit altare: reliquum vero sanguinem fudit ad basim altaris, et
sanctificavit illud ad expiandum illud.

<span id="vii.v-p28"></span>**16.** And he took all the fat that *was*
upon the inwards, and the caul *above* the liver, and the two kidneys,
and their fat, and Moses burned *it* upon the altar.

<span id="vii.v-p29"></span>**16.** Tulit praeterea totum adipem qui
erat super intestina, et fibram jecoris et duos renes, adipemque eorum,
adolevitque ea Moses super altare.

<span id="vii.v-p30"></span>**17.** But the bullock and his hide, his
flesh and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp; as the Lord
commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.v-p31"></span>**17.** Juvencum vero et pellem ejus, et
carnero ejus, et fimum ejus combussit igni extra castra, quemadmodum
praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vii.v-p32"></span>**18.** And he brought the ram for the
burnt-offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of
the ram.

<span id="vii.v-p33"></span>**18.** Post haec adduxit arietem
holocausti, et admoverunt Aharon et filii ejus marius suas super caput
arietis.

<span id="vii.v-p34"></span>**19.** And he killed *it;* and Moses
sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="vii.v-p35"></span>**19.** Et mactavit, sparsitque Moses
sanguinem super altare per circuitum.

<span id="vii.v-p36"></span>**20.** And he cut the ram into pieces; and
Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat.

<span id="vii.v-p37"></span>**20.** Arietem quoque concidit in frusta
sua, adolevitque Moses caput, et frusta et adipem.

<span id="vii.v-p38"></span>**21.** And he washed the inwards and the
legs in water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it *was* a
burnt sacrifice for a sweet savor, *and* an offering made by fire unto
the Lord; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.v-p39"></span>**21.** Intestina vero et crura lavit aqua,
et adolevit Moses totum arietem super altare: holocaustum est in odorem
quietis: oblatio est ignita Jehova, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="vii.v-p40"></span>**22.** And he brought the other ram, the
ram of consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the
head of the ram.

<span id="vii.v-p41"></span>**22.** Accedere fecit et arietem secundum,
arietem consecrationum: posueruntque Ahaxon et filii ejus marius super
caput arietis.

<span id="vii.v-p42"></span>**23.** And he slew *it;* and Moses took of
the blood of it, and put *it* upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, and
upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right
foot.

<span id="vii.v-p43"></span>**23.** Et mactavit, tulitque Moses de
sanguine ejus, et posuit super tenerum auris Aharon dextrae, et super
pollicem manus ejus dextrae et super pollicem petits ejus dextri.

<span id="vii.v-p44"></span>**24.** And he brought Aaron’s sons, and
Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the
thumbs of their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right
feet; and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="vii.v-p45"></span>**24.** Adduxit et filius Aharon, posuitque
Moses de sanguine super tenerum auris eorum dextrae, et super pollicem
marius eorum dextrae, et super pollicem pedis eorum dextri: sparsitque
Moses sanguinem super altare per circuitum.

<span id="vii.v-p46"></span>**25.** And he took the fat, and the rump,
and all the fat that *was* upon the inwards, and the caul *above* the
liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder:

<span id="vii.v-p47"></span>**25.** Tulit deinde adipem, et caudam:
totumque adipem qui erat super intestina, et fibram jecoris, duosque
renes, et adipem eorum, et armum dextrum.

<span id="vii.v-p48"></span>**26.** And out of the basket of unleavened
bread that *was* before the Lord he took one unleavened cake, and a cake
of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put *them* on the fat, and upon the
right shoulder:

<span id="vii.v-p49"></span>**26.** De canistro quoque infermentatorum
quae erant coram Jehova, tulit tortam infermentatam unam, et tortam
panis oleati unam, et laganum unum, posuitque cum adipe et cum armo
dextro.

<span id="vii.v-p50"></span><span id="vii.v-p50.1"></span>27. And he put
all upon Aaron’s hands, and upon his sons’ hands, and waved them. *for*
a wave-offering before the Lord.

<span id="vii.v-p51"></span>**27.** Et posuit omnia haec in manibus
Aharon, et in manibus filiorum ejus, et ea agitate fecit agitatione
coram Jehova.

<span id="vii.v-p52"></span>**28.** And Moses took them from off their
hands, and burnt *them* *on* the altar upon the burnt-offering: they
*were* consecrations for a sweet savor; it *is* an offering made by fire
unto the Lord.

<span id="vii.v-p53"></span>**28.** Dein accepit Moses ilia ex manibus
eorum, adolevitque super altare in holocaustum, consecrationes enim sunt
in odorem quietis, oblatio ignita est Jehovae.

<span id="vii.v-p54"></span>**29.** And Moses took the breast, and waved
it *for* a wave-offering before the *Lord: for* of the ram of
consecration it was Moses’ part; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.v-p55"></span>**29.** Tulitque Moses pectus, et agitavit
illud agitatione coram Jehova: et ex ariete consecrationum ipsi Most
fuit in partera, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Most.

<span id="vii.v-p56"></span>**30.** And Moses took of the anointing oil,
and of the blood which *was* upon the altar, and sprinkled *it* upon
Aaron, *and* upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons’
garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, *and* his garments, and his
sons, and his sons’ garments with him.

<span id="vii.v-p57"></span>**30.** Tulit etiam Moses ex oleo unctionis,
et de sanguine qui erat super altare, aspersitque super Aharon, super
vestes ejus, et super filios ejus, et super vestes filiorum ejus cum eo:
consecravitque Aharonem, et vestes ejus, et filios ejus, et vestes
filiorum ejus cum eo.

<span id="vii.v-p58"></span>**31.** And Moses said unto Aaron and to his
sons, Boil the flesh *at* the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation; and there eat it with the bread that *is* in the basket of
consecrations, as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.

<span id="vii.v-p59"></span>**31.** Et dixit Moses ad Aharon et ad
filios ejus, Coquite carnes ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, ibi
deniqne comedite eam, et panem qui est in canistro consecrationum,
quemadmodum praecepi, dicendo, Aharon et filii ejus comedent eam.

<span id="vii.v-p60"></span>**32.** And that which remaineth of the
flesh and of the bread shall ye burn with fire.

<span id="vii.v-p61"></span>**32.** Quod vero superfuerit de carne et
pane, igni comburetis.

<span id="vii.v-p62"></span>**33.** And ye shall not go out of the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation *in* seven days, until the days of
your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

<span id="vii.v-p63"></span>**33.** Et ex ostio tabernaculi conventionis
non egrediemini septem diebus, usque ad diem qua completi fuerint dies
consecrationum vestrarum: septem enim diebus consecrabit manum vestram.

<span id="vii.v-p64"></span>**34.** As he hath done this day, *so* the
Lord hath commanded to do, to make an atonement for you.

<span id="vii.v-p65"></span>**34.** quemadmodum fecit in die hac,
praecepit Jehova facere ad expiandum vos.

<span id="vii.v-p66"></span>**35.** Therefore shall ye abide *at* the
door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and
keep the charge of the Lord, that ye die not: for so I am commanded.

<span id="vii.v-p67"></span>**35.** Et ad ostium tabernaculi
conventionis manebitis die et nocte, septem diebus, observabitisque
observationem eoram Jehova, et non moriemini: sic enim jussus sum.

<span id="vii.v-p68"></span>**36.** So Aaron and his sons did all things
which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="vii.v-p69"></span>**36.** Fecit itaque Aharon et filii eius
omnia verba quae praeceperat Jehova per manum Mosis.

<span id="vii.v-p70"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p71"></span><span id="vii.v-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p72"></span>**4.** *And Moses did as the Lord commanded
him* Although these things relate to the priesthood, the authority and
nature of which I expounded under the Second Commandment, yet, inasmuch
as they are historical, it is not without reason that I have thought fit
to defer them till this place: for, if I had referred to them in
connection with the Commandment, unpractised readers would not have
easily taken notice of their time. This distinction, however, will be of
great assistance to them, that after the doctrine which was properly
contained in the Decalogue has been set forth, they will now see how
faithfully Moses fulfilled whatever he was commanded, and will be able
to compare his obedience with the injunction, as they have done in the
whole of the making and dedication of the tabernacle. Besides, there is
no question but that the narrative must be thus connected; for it may be
readily inferred from many passages, that the priests were anointed on
the same day that the tabernacle was consecrated. I will now hastily run
through the words. Moses says that he brought near Aaron and his sons,
*i.e.,* to set them before God and the people; and then that he “washed
them with water,” to make it manifest that they did not bring from their
homes the purity which befitted the sanctity of their office, and,
inasmuch as they were men, that they could not be clean before God,
unless their impurity was washed off. A description of their apparel
afterwards follows, which I pass over, lest I should weary my readers by
twice repeating the same thing.

<span id="vii.v-p73"></span><span id="vii.v-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p74"></span>**10.** *And Moses took the anointing oil* I
have stated why God commanded that the priest himself, as well as all
the vessels, should be consecrated with oil, viz., because, without the
influence of the Spirit, all the sacrifices would be unsavory. And it is
by the operation of the same Spirit that Christ was made the peace-maker
between God and men; because this dignity would not otherwise belong to
flesh and human nature. Aaron was therefore anointed, together with his
sons, before he was admitted to the priestly office; for it is
afterwards added, that “the bullock for sin”  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) was brought, upon which Aaron laid his
hands. Now, although even then he began to discharge his office, yet
Moses still occupied the first place, and performed, as it were, the
final act. Hence it was that he sprinkled the horns of the altar with
the blood; poured the residue at its base for expiation; and burned the
sacrifice upon the altar. Now, the imposition of hands in the sacrifices
was not only a symbol of presentation, but also a testimony of guilt
transferred to the victim. Since, however, this last statement may be
obscure on account of its brevity, I will explain it a little more
clearly. If any private person offered a victim, the imposition of hands
signified that he cast the guilt of his sin upon the victim. Hence the
name of *piaculum*;  <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) because it
sustained the curse of God, and was substituted in the sinner’s stead,
who disburdens himself upon it of whatever exposed him to the judgment
of God. But, inasmuch as common hands were unworthy to consecrate a
victim to God, the sacerdotal office interposed. This is the reason why
Aaron and his sons put their hands on each of the sacrifices, in order
that this kind of atonement *(piaculi)* might be the beginning of their
consecration, which was completed in the second ram, with the blood of
which Moses stained their right ears, the thumbs of their right hands,
and the great toes of their right feet. A multitude of questions here
arises: Why only one side of the priests was consecrated, as if their
left side remained polluted? Why consecration was not also imparted to
their eyes, and especially to their mouth, which was to be the organ of
the Holy Spirit? But this warning must be always borne in mind, that we
should be soberly wise in those points, the certain knowledge of which
cannot be elicited from Scripture; for our curiosity is not only
frivolous, but also perverse and injurious, when we desire to know more
than God has revealed. The conjecture, however, is probable, that the
whole body was consecrated in the right side. We have already seen
elsewhere,  <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) that by the hands
and feet the whole life and actions of men are designated. In which view
the cleanness of the heart and the purity of the hands comprehend all
that is internal and external in man, as the root and the fruit. As to
the feet, the metaphor of *walking* is notorious; and the feet are said
to run to evil, and to be swift to shed blood, when the wicked and the
despisers of God betake themselves to evil deeds. Besides, since this
consecration was not to the office of teaching, but to that of
intercession, the ear rather than the tongue is stained with blood;
because the chief virtue, which obtains grace in the sacrifices, is
obedience. To this the passage in <span id="vii.v-p78.2"></span>[Ps
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span id="vii.v-p78.2"></span>,
refers, “Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast
thou bored:”  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) to which the words
of Jeremiah correspond,

<span id="vii.v-p80"></span>“Did I command anything respecting
sacrifices, and not rather that your fathers should obey my voice?”
 <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408)  
(<span id="vii.v-p81.4"></span>[Jer.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023)<span id="vii.v-p81.4"></span>.)

<span id="vii.v-p82"></span>And hence Moses commenced the consecration
at the ear, in order to devote the priest to God unto obedience. Paul
shews how this was fulfilled in Christ, where he celebrates His
obedience in the sacrifice of His death, in order to reconcile His
Father to us. (<span id="vii.v-p82.1"></span>[Ro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="vii.v-p82.1"></span>.) I
have spoken elsewhere of the kind of wave-offering which they called
*tnupha.*  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409)

<span id="vii.v-p84"></span><span id="vii.v-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p85"></span>**31.** *And Moses said unto Aaron and his
sons, Boil the flesh* This is the universal rule, as we have seen
elsewhere.  <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) One thing only is
special, that God kept them in the tabernacle seven days, that they
might learn to subordinate all their domestic cares and worldly business
to their sacred duties. It has been elsewhere said, also,  <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) that perfection is denoted by the
number seven, which this passage confirms, for by the seven days they
were reminded that they were no longer their own masters for the rest of
their life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc05064.htm#fr_404) <span
id="vii.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p75"></span> “For the sin-offering.” — *A.* *V.*

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc05064.htm#fr_405) <span
id="vii.v-p75.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p76"></span> “Et voyla pourquoy les bestes ont porte le
nom d’offense;” and behold wherefore the beasts bore the name of
*offence.* — *Fr.* “*Piaculum*; sacrum piaculare, et quicquid ad piandum
et purgandum pertinet. *Metonymice,* ipsa res, qum piaculi causa
adhibetur; sic *A*En. 6:153.

<span id="vii.v-p77"></span>Duc nigos pecudes: ea prima piacula sunto.”
— Facciolati.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc05064.htm#fr_406) <span
id="vii.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p78"></span> See *ante,* vol. 2, p. 211.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc05064.htm#fr_407) <span
id="vii.v-p78.3"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p79"></span> *A.* *V.,* “Mine ears hast thou opened.”
Margin, “Heb., digged.” See *C.’s* translation and note. Cal. Soc.
edit., vol. 2, p. 99.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc05064.htm#fr_408) <span
id="vii.v-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p81"></span> This quotation is much abbreviated. *C.’s*
exposition of the passage, (Cal. Soc. edit., vol. 1, p. 393,) and Mr.
Owen’s note, are worthy of consultation.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc05064.htm#fr_409) <span
id="vii.v-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p83"></span> *Heb.,* <span
id="vii.v-p83.1"></span>תנופה*,* *thenuphah.* <span
id="vii.v-p83.2"></span>See *ante,* vol. 2, p. 132<span
id="vii.v-p83.4"></span>, and note

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc05064.htm#fr_410) <span
id="vii.v-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p86"></span> See *ante,* vol. 2, p. 133.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc05064.htm#fr_411) <span
id="vii.v-p86.2"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p87"></span> *Ibid.,* p.26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 9:1-24](cc05065)
