[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05057)  [Next](cc05059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p1"></span><span id="vi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#000)<span id="vi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p2"></span><span id="vi.xi-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
34:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001)<span id="vi.xi-p2.1"></span>,
27-35

<span id="vi.xi-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee
two tables of stone like unto the first; and I will write upon *these*
tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.

<span id="vi.xi-p4"></span>**1.** Et ait Jehova ad Mosen, Dola tibi duas
tabulas instar priorum: et scribam in his tabulis verba quae fuerunt in
tabulis prioribus quas fregisti.

<span id="vi.xi-p5"></span>**2.** And be ready in the morning, and come
up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in
the top of the mount.

<span id="vi.xi-p6"></span>**2.** Esto ergo paratus mane, et ascende
mane montem Sinai: stesque mihi illic super verticem ipsius montis.

<span id="vi.xi-p7"></span>**3.** And no man shall come up with thee,
neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the
flocks nor herds feed before that mount.

<span id="vi.xi-p8"></span>**3.** Nullus ascendat tecum, nec ullus
videatur in toro monte, etiam oves ant boves non pascantur in prospectu
montis hujus.

<span id="vi.xi-p9"></span>**4.** And he hewed two tables of stone, like
unto the first: and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto
mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two
tables of stone.

<span id="vi.xi-p10"></span>**4.** Dolavit ergo duas tabulas lapideas
instar priorum: consurgens Moses mane ascendit in montem Sinai, sicut
praeceperat ei Jehova, et accepit in manu sua duas tabulas lapideas.

<span id="vi.xi-p11"></span>**5.** And the Lord descended in the cloud,
and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord.

<span id="vi.xi-p12"></span>**5.** Tunc descendit Jehova in nube, et
stetit coram eo illic, et clamavit in nomine Jehova.

<span id="vi.xi-p13"></span>**6.** And the Lord passed by before him,
and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,

<span id="vi.xi-p14"></span>**6.** Transiens, inquam, Jehova ante eum,
clamavit, Jehova, Jehova, Deus misericors et clemens, tardus ad iram, et
multus misericordia et veritate:

<span id="vi.xi-p15"></span>**7.** Keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and that will by no
means clear *theguilty;* visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the
fourth *generation.*

<span id="vi.xi-p16"></span>**7.** Servans misericordiam millibus,
auferens iniquitatem, et transgressionem, et peccatum, et innocentem non
faciens, visitaris iniquitatem patrum super filios filiorum in tertios
et quartos.

<span id="vi.xi-p17"></span>**8.** And Moses made haste, and bowed his
head toward the earth, and worshipped.

<span id="vi.xi-p18"></span>**8.** Festinans autem Moses inclinavit se
ad terram, et adoravit,

<span id="vi.xi-p19"></span>**9.** And he said, If now I have found
grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us, (for
it *is* a stiff-necked people,) and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and
take us for thine inheritance.

<span id="vi.xi-p20"></span>**9.** Dixitque, Si nunc inveni gratiam in
oculis tuis, Domine mi, proficiscatur agedum Dominus meus in medio
nostri: et quia populus durae cervicis est, propitius sis iniquitati
nostrae et peccato nostro, ut possideas nos in hereditatem.

<span id="vi.xi-p21"></span>**10.** And he said, Behold, I make a
covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been
done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which
thou *art* shall see the work of the Lord: for it *is* a terrible thing
that I will do with thee.

<span id="vi.xi-p22"></span>**10.** Et dixit, Ecce, ego pereutiam foedus
eoram toro populo tuo, et edam miracula quae non sunt creata in universa
terra, et in cunctis nationibus: et videbit totus populus in eujus medio
es, quod terribile sit opus Jehovae quod facio tecum.

<span id="vi.xi-p23"></span>**27.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Write
thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a
covenant with thee and with Israel.

<span id="vi.xi-p24"></span>**27.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Scribe
tibi verba haec: quia secundum verba haec pepigi foedus tecum, et cum
Israele.

<span id="vi.xi-p25"></span>**28.** And he was there with the Lord forty
days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water: and He
wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

<span id="vi.xi-p26"></span>**28.** Fuit autem ibi cum Jehova
quadraginta dies, et quadraginta noctes: panem non edit et aquam non
bibit: et scripsit in tabulis verba foederis, decem verba.

<span id="vi.xi-p27"></span>**29.** And it came to pass, when Moses came
down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses’ hand,
(when he came down from the mount,) that Moses wist not that the skin of
his face shone while he talked with Him.

<span id="vi.xi-p28"></span>**29.** Factum est autem quum descenderet
Moses e monte Sinai, habens duas tabulas testimonii in manu sun: quum
ergo descenderet e monte, nesciebat quod resplenduisset cutis faciei
suae quando loquutus erat cum eo.

<span id="vi.xi-p29"></span>**30.** And when Aaron and all the children
of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone: and they were
afraid to come nigh him.

<span id="vi.xi-p30"></span>**30.** Viditque Aharon et omnes filii
Israel ipsum Mosen, et ecce, splendebat cutis faciei ejus: timueruntque
accedere ad eum.

<span id="vi.xi-p31"></span>**31.** And Moses called unto them: and
Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and
Moses talked with them.

<span id="vi.xi-p32"></span>**31.** Et vocavit filius Moses: reversique
sunt ad eum Aharon et omnes principes coetus. Tunc loquutus est Moses ad
cos.

<span id="vi.xi-p33"></span>**32.** And afterward all the children of
Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord had
spoken with him in mount Sinai.

<span id="vi.xi-p34"></span>**32.** Deinde appropinquarunt omnes filii
Israel, et praecepit eis cuncta quae loquutus fuerat Jehova cum eo in
monte Sinai.

<span id="vi.xi-p35"></span>**33.** And *till* Moses had done speaking
with them, he put a vail on his face.

<span id="vi.xi-p36"></span>**33.** Porro quum finem fecisset loquendi
Moses cum eis, posuit velamen super faciem suam.

<span id="vi.xi-p37"></span>**34.** But when Moses went in before the
Lord, to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he
came out, and spake unto the children of Israel *that* which he was
commanded.

<span id="vi.xi-p38"></span>**34.** Quum vero ingrederetur Moses in
conspectum Jehovae ad loquendum cum illo, auferebat velamen, donec
egrederetur: egressus autem alloquebatur filios Israel quod jussus erat.

<span id="vi.xi-p39"></span>**35.** And the children of Israel saw the
face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone: and Moses put the
vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with Him.

<span id="vi.xi-p40"></span>**35.** Videbunt igitur filii Israel faciem
Mosis, quod resplenderet curts faciei Mosis, et reducebat Moses velamen
super factem suam, donec ingrederetur ad loquendum cum co.

<span id="vi.xi-p41"></span> 

<span id="vi.xi-p42"></span><span id="vi.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p43"></span>**1.** *And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew
thee two tables of stone* Although the renewal of the broken covenant
was ratified by this pledge or visible symbol, still, lest His readiness
to pardon should produce indifference, God would have some trace of
their punishment remain, like a scar that continues after the wound is
healed. In the first tables there had been no intervention of man’s
workmanship; for God had delivered them to Moses engraven by His own
secret power. A part of this great dignity is now withdrawn, when Moses
is commanded to bring tables polished by the hand of man, on which God
might write the Ten Commandments. Thus the ignominy of their crime was
not altogether effaced, whilst nothing was withheld which might be
necessary or profitable for their salvation. For nothing was wanting
which might be a testimony of God’s grace, or a recommendation of the
Law, so that they should receive it with reverence; they were only
humbled by this mark, that the stones to which God entrusted His
covenant were not fashioned by His hand, nor the produce of the sacred
mount. The conceit by which some expound it, — that the Jews were
instructed by this sign that the Law was of no effect, unless they
should offer their stony hearts to God for Him to inscribe it upon them,
— is frivolous; for the authority of Paul rather leads us the other way,
where he fitly and faithfully interprets this passage, and compares the
Law to a dead and deadly letter, because it was only engraven on tables
of stone, whereas the doctrine of salvation requires “the fleshy tables
of the heart.” (<span id="vi.xi-p43.1"></span>[2Co
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="vi.xi-p43.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.xi-p44"></span><span id="vi.xi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p45"></span>**3.** *And no man shall come up with thee*
Again men as well as beasts are prohibited from access to the mount, as
had been the case at the first promulgation of the Law, in order that
the people might obediently receive the Law as if come down from heaven.
Why God admitted no witness, is a question the answer to which must
remain with God Himself. The miracle indeed would have been illustrious
if the writing had appeared in a moment on the empty tables; but God
would leave some room for faith, when He employed the intermediate
agency of man. But still He amply provided what was sufficient to
establish the dignity of the Law, when Moses brought the Ten
Commandments written upon two tables which the people had lately seen
taken up void and empty, whereas He could not have found in the mount a
chisel or graving-tool. For  <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) God
so administers the dispensation of His heavenly doctrine as to prove the
obedience and teachableness of believers, whilst He leaves no room for
doubting.

<span id="vi.xi-p47"></span><span id="vi.xi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p48"></span>**5.** *And the Lord descended in the cloud*
It is by no means to be doubted but that the cloud received Moses into
it in the sight of the people, so that, after having been separated from
the common life of men for forty days, he should again come forth like a
new man. Thus did this visible demonstration of God’s glory avail to
awaken faith in the commandments.

<span id="vi.xi-p49"></span>The descent of God, which is here recorded,
indicates no change of place, as if God, who fills heaven and earth, and
whose immensity is universally diffused, altered His position, but it
has reference to the perceptions of men, because under the appearance of
the cloud God testified that He met Moses. Therefore, according to the
usual phrase of Scripture, the sacred name of God is applied to the
visible symbol; not that the empty cloud was a figure of the absent
Deity, but because it testified His presence according to the
comprehension of men.

<span id="vi.xi-p50"></span><span id="vi.xi-p50.1"></span>At the end of
the verse, “to call in the name of the Lord,” is equivalent to
proclaiming His name, or promulgating what God would make known to His
servant. This expression, indeed, frequently occurs with reference to
prayers. Some,  <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) <span
id="vi.xi-p51.1"></span> therefore, understand it of Moses, that he
called on the name of the Lord. In this opinion there is no absurdity;
let us be at liberty, then, to take it as applying either to Moses or to
God Himself, *i.e.,*<span id="vi.xi-p51.2"></span> either that God
Himself proclaimed in a loud voice His power, and righteousness, and
goodness, or that Moses himself professed his piety before God. But what
immediately follows must necessarily be referred to God, when He passed
by, to cry out and to dignify Himself with His true titles. First of
all, the name of Jehovah is uttered twice by way of emphasis, in order
that Moses might be rendered more attentive. The name <span
id="vi.xi-p51.3"></span>אל *el*<span id="vi.xi-p51.4"></span>, is added,
which, originally derived from *strength,*<span id="vi.xi-p51.5"></span>
is often used for God, and is one of His names. By these words,
therefore, His eternity and boundless power are expressed. <span
id="vi.xi-p51.7"></span>Next, He proclaims His clemency and mercy; nor
is He contented with a single word, but, after having called Himself
“merciful,” He claims the praise of clemency, inasmuch as He has no more
peculiar attribute than His goodness and gratuitous beneficence. The
nature also of His goodness and clemency is specified, viz., that He is
not only placable, and ready, and disposed, to pardon, but that He
patiently waits for those who have sinned, and invites them to
repentance by His long-suffering. For this reason He is called “slow
 <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) <span id="vi.xi-p52.10"></span>
to anger,” as if He would abstain from severity did not man’s wickedness
compel Him to execute punishment on his sins. Afterwards He proclaims
the greatness of His mercy and truth, and on these two supports the
confidence of the pious is based, whilst they embrace the mercy offered
to them, and securely repose on the faithfulness and certainty of the
promises. Everywhere, therefore, in the Psalms, where mention is made of
God’s goodness, His truth is connected with it as its inseparable
companion. Another reason also is because God’s mercy cannot be
comprehended, except upon the testimony of His word, the certainty of
which must needs be well assured lest our salvation should be wavering
and insecure. What follows, that God keeps mercy to a thousand
generations, we have expounded in chapter 20; whilst, on the other hand,
the punishments which He requires for men’s sins are only extended to
the third and fourth generation, because His clemency surpasses His
judgment, as is said in <span id="vi.xi-p52.11"></span>[Ps
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span
id="vi.xi-p52.11"></span><span id="vi.xi-p52.12"></span>,  <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) <span id="vi.xi-p53.2"></span>“There
is only a moment in his anger, but life in his favor;” and although this
only relates properly to believers, yet it flows from a general
principle. To the same effect is the next clause, “forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin;” for thus the greatness of His clemency is set
forth, inasmuch as He not only pardons light offenses, but the very
grossest sins; and again, remits not only sin in one case, but is
propitious to sinners by whom He has been a hundred times offended.
Hence, therefore, appears the extent of His goodness, since He blots out
an infinite mass of iniquities. Lest, however, this indulgence should be
perverted into a license for sin, it is afterwards added, by way of
correction, “with  <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) <span
id="vi.xi-p55.1"></span> cleansing He will not cleanse,” which, with the
Chaldee interpreter and others, I understand as applying to His severe
judgment against the reprobate and obstinate; for I do not like their
opinion who say that, although God indeed pardons sins, yet He still
moderately chastises those who have sinned; since this is a poor
conjecture, that punishment is required though the guilt is remitted;
and besides, it is altogether untrue, inasmuch as it is manifest, from
experience that God passes over many sins without punishment. But what I
have stated is very suitable, that, lest impunity should beget
audaciousness, after God has spoken of His mercy, He adds an exception,
viz., that the iniquity is by no means pardoned, which is accompanied by
obstinacy. And hence the Prophets seem to have quoted from this passage,
 <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) <span
id="vi.xi-p56.1"></span>“Clearing should ye be cleared?” (<span
id="vi.xi-p56.2"></span>[Jer. 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029),
[Jer. 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012)<span
id="vi.xi-p56.2"></span><span id="vi.xi-p56.3"></span>,) when they
address the reprobate, to whom pardon is denied. The words, therefore,
may be properly paraphrased thus: Although God is pitiful and even ready
to pardon, yet He does not therefore spare the despisers, but is a
severe avenger of their impiety. Nevertheless, the opposite meaning
would not be inappropriate here, “With cutting off He will not cut off;”
for this is sometimes the sense of the verb <span
id="vi.xi-p56.4"></span>נקה<span id="vi.xi-p56.5"></span>, *nakah;*<span
id="vi.xi-p56.6"></span> and it would thus be read conneetedly, that God
pardons iniquities because He does not wish entirely to cut off the
human race; for who shall escape if God should choose to call to
judgment the sins even of believers? And perhaps Jeremiah alluded to
this passage, where  <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) <span
id="vi.xi-p57.4"></span> he mitigates the severity of the vengeance of
which he had been speaking by this same expression, for there it can
only be translated, “With cutting off I will not cut thee off.” If this
be preferred, it will be the assignment of the reason why God pardons
sins, viz., because He is unwilling to cut off men, which would be the
case if He insisted on the utmost rigor of the Law. Some  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) <span id="vi.xi-p58.1"></span> thus
explain it, That God pardons sins, because no one is innocent in His
sight; as if it were said, that all are destitute of the glory of
righteousness, and thence their only refuge is in the mercy of God. This
is true indeed, but not so nmch an exposition as a plausible conceit.

<span id="vi.xi-p59"></span><span id="vi.xi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p60"></span>**8.** *And Moses made haste, and bowed his
head* This haste shews that Moses was astounded when he first beheld the
brightness; for thus does God, when He reveals Himself, immediately
ravish the godly into such admiration of Him, that there is no time for
delay.  <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) This prayer follows,
that God would journey with His people, and bear with their frowardness;
for, since God had said that He could not possibly dwell with so
stiff-necked and intractable a people, Moses proposes the remedy, viz.,
after he has confessed that the people are of a hardened and stubborn
spirit, he still expresses a hope of their safety, if God will be
pitiful in sparing them. What follows is worthy of observation, “that
thou mayest possess us;”  <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) for
the *copula* has the force of the causal particle, as if he had said,
That God could not enjoy the inheritance He had chosen, unless by
pardoning their sins. And surely so it is; for such is man’s frailty,
that they would straightway fall from grace were they not reconciled to
God. Nor was this spoken only of this ancient people, but refers also to
us; for, in order that God should *possess* us too, it is needful that
our sins should be constantly pardoned, as this embassy, according to
Paul, daily resounds in the Church. (<span id="vi.xi-p62.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="vi.xi-p62.1"></span>.)
Consequently, not only does the origin of our salvation flow from
gratuitous adoption, but its continual progress even to the end can only
be accomplished by God’s freely reconciling us to Himself.

<span id="vi.xi-p63"></span><span id="vi.xi-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p64"></span>**10.** *And he said, Behold, I make a
covenant* It is not specified with whom God would make the covenant.
Some interpreters,  <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) therefore,
supply the name of Moses, and this they seem to do on probable grounds,
especially since it is added at the end of the verse “the work  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) that I will do with thee.” But,
inasmuch as Moses stipulated in the name of all, the meaning comes to
the same thing, if we read, I will make a covenant openly with the whole
people. By this promise, then, God, as it were, entirely restored the
Israelites, for He declares that He will deal so marvellously in the
discomfiture of the nations, as to prove that He is the peculiar God of
that people; and this was to distinguish them from other nations,
according to the prayer of Moses. he says that they shall all be
eye-witnesses of this, that, being thus at length convinced by their own
senses, they might sincerely and faithfully submit themselves to his
dominion.

<span id="vi.xi-p67"></span><span id="vi.xi-p67.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p68"></span>**28.** *And he was there with the Lord
forty days* The number of forty days is repeated, in order that the
second Tables might have no less credit than the first; for we have
stated that Moses was withdrawn from the common life of men, that he
might bring the Law, as it were, from heaven. If he had only been kept a
few days in the mount, his authority would not have been ratified by so
conspicuous a miracle; but the forty days obtained full credit for his
mission, so that the people might know that he was sent by God; inasmuch
as the endurance of a fast for so long a period exceeded the capacity of
human nature. Wherefore, in order that the majesty of the Law might be
indubitable, its minister was invested with angelic glory; and hence he
expressly records that “he did neither eat bread, nor drink watch” since
it was requisite that he should be distinguished from other mortals, in
order that his official character might be unquestionable. Now, it must
be borne in mind, that this was not a mere fast of temperance or
sobriety, but of special privilege, whereby exemption from the infirmity
of the flesh was vouchsafed to Moses for a time, in order that his
condition might be different from the rest of the human race. For
neither did he feel any hunger, nor did he struggle with any longing for
food, nor desire meat and drink any more than one of the angels.
Therefore this instance of abstinence was never alleged as an example by
the Prophets, nor did any one attempt to imitate what they all knew to
be by no means accorded to them. I except Elijah, who, being sent to
revive the Law, when it was almost lost, like a second Moses, abstained
also from eating and drinking for forty days. The reason for the fast of
Christ was similar, (<span id="vi.xi-p68.1"></span>[Mt
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)<span id="vi.xi-p68.1"></span>;)
for, in order to acquire full credit for tits Gospel, He desired to make
it manifest that He was by no means inferior to Moses in this
particular. Wherefore,  <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) the less
excusable is that error, which sprang from gross ignorance, when all,
without exception, endeavored to rival the Son of God in their annual
fast, as if a new promulgation of the Gospel was entrusted to them. For
neither did Christ fast forty day’s more than once in His life; nor
during the whole of that time, as it is clearly specified, did he
experience hunger; and His heavenly Father separated Him from communion
with men, when He was preparing Himself to undertake the office of
teacher.

<span id="vi.xi-p70"></span><span id="vi.xi-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p71"></span>**29.** *And it came to pass when Moses came
down* <span id="vi.xi-p71.1"></span> Another remarkable honor given to
the Law is here narrated, viz., that the brightness of the heavenly
glory appeared in the face of Moses; for it is said that his face gave
forth rays, or was irradiated. The word is derived from <span
id="vi.xi-p71.2"></span>קרן *keren,*<span id="vi.xi-p71.3"></span> a
*horn;*<span id="vi.xi-p71.4"></span> and therefore it is probable that
rays shone forth from his face, which rendered it luminous; and this
effulgence God shed upon him, whilst He was speaking to him in the
mount. It is not certain what was the reason why Moses himself was
ignorant that he was thus illumined by God, except that it seems
probable that it was concealed from him for a short time, in order that
he might approach the people with more freedom, and thus that the
miracle might be more evident from close inspection. When it is said
afterwards, that Aaron and the children of Israel were so alarmed at the
brightness, that “they were afraid to come nigh him,” I do not
understand it, as if they fled from him immediately; for, since they
were recalled by his voice, undoubtedly they had not seen the rays from
a distance, but when they were in the act of receiving him, and he, on
his part, delivering to them the commands of God. Therefore, what
follows soon afterwards, that, when he had done speaking, he covered his
face with a vail,  <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) <span
id="vi.xi-p72.1"></span> I refer to his first address, which He was
obliged to break off on account of the departure or flight of the
people, so that the meaning is, when He knew the cause of their alarm,
He left off speaking, and covered his face with a vail; for he could not
have known the reason of their flying except by inquiry. Some, in order
to avoid the difficulty, separate the second clause from the first, and
transpose their order; but this exposition appears to me to be forced.
It seems, however, in my opinion, to be perfectly consistent that Moses,
after he saw them departing in consternation, ceased from speaking,
because they did not listen to him, and, when he discovered the reason,
put on the vail. Hence arises a question, viz., How Moses could have
borne the brightness of God’s glory, whilst the people could not bear
the rays which shone from his face? But this is easily answered: that
they were branded with this mark of disgrace, in order that they might
confess how far by their ingratitude they had departed from God, since
they were terrified at the sight of this servant. They were, therefore,
humbled by this difference between them, that, whilst Moses securely
advanced to them from his conference with God, although he bore upon him
the indications of God’s terrible power, they, in fear and astonishment,
recoiled from the sight of a mortal man.

<span id="vi.xi-p73"></span>After Paul has shewn the genuine object of
this brightness, viz., that the Law should be glorious, he proceeds
further, and shews that it was a presage of the future blindness which
awaited the Jews. (<span id="vi.xi-p73.1"></span>[2Co
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)<span id="vi.xi-p73.1"></span>.)
He begins, therefore, by saying, that although the Law was only a dead
*letter,* and *the* *ministration* *of* *death,* yet it was graced with
its own peculiar glory; and then adds what is accidental, that there was
a vail before the face of Moses, because it would be the case that the
Jews would not be able to see what is the main thing in the Law, nor to
pay attention to its true end; and so it actually is, that since the
coming of Christ, their senses have been blinded, and the vail is upon
them, until Moses shall be  <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389)
turned by them to Christ, who is the soul of the Law. But, since now in
the Gospel God presents Himself with open face, we must take care that
the prince of this world does not darken our minds, but rather that we
may be transformed *from* *glory* *to* *glory.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc05058.htm#fr_375) <span
id="vi.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p46"></span> “Voyla comment Dieu dispense par bon moyen
le cognoissance de sa Parole;” Behold how God dispenses in a good way
the knowledge of His Word. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc05058.htm#fr_376) <span
id="vi.xi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p51"></span> So the *V.* “Stetit Moyses eum eo, invocans
nomen Domini.”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc05058.htm#fr_377) <span
id="vi.xi-p51.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p52"></span> *A.V.*<span id="vi.xi-p52.1"></span>
“Long-suffering;” as also in <span id="vi.xi-p52.2"></span>[Nu
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span
id="vi.xi-p52.2"></span><span id="vi.xi-p52.3"></span>, and <span
id="vi.xi-p52.4"></span>[Ps 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xi-p52.4"></span><span id="vi.xi-p52.5"></span>. In <span
id="vi.xi-p52.6"></span>[Ne 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xi-p52.6"></span><span id="vi.xi-p52.7"></span>, and elsewhere,
“slow to anger.” *Heb.,* <span id="vi.xi-p52.8"></span>אר5 אפים<span
id="vi.xi-p52.9"></span> long of nostrils, or anger.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc05058.htm#fr_378) <span
id="vi.xi-p52.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p53"></span> See *C.’s* own translation. Calvin Soc.
edit., vol. 5, p. 346.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc05058.htm#fr_379) <span
id="vi.xi-p53.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p54"></span> <span id="vi.xi-p54.1"></span>נקה לא ינקה
*A.V.,* <span id="vi.xi-p54.2"></span>“Will by no means clear;” *S.*
*M*<span id="vi.xi-p54.3"></span>. and *C.,*<span
id="vi.xi-p54.4"></span> “Not making (the guilty) innocent;” or, in
*C.’s*<span id="vi.xi-p54.5"></span> own comment, “He will not with
cleansing cleanse;” but *C.*<span id="vi.xi-p54.6"></span> presently
acknowledges that it might be taken to mean, “He will not utterly cut
off,” inasmuch as the verb <span id="vi.xi-p54.7"></span>נקה<span
id="vi.xi-p54.8"></span> is sometimes used for *to* *blot* *out,* *to*
*destroy,* *to* *exterminate;*<span id="vi.xi-p54.9"></span> to which
class of meanings more than one lexicographer has assigned its use in
this text. — *W.*

<span id="vi.xi-p55"></span>Bush gives a very careful note on this
clause, which he says is “of exceedingly difficult interpretation,” and
declares himself satisfied that the sense which *C.* condemns is the
true one, viz., “‘who will not wholly, entirely, altogether clear,’
*i.e.,* who, although merciful and gracious in his dispositions,
strongly inclined to forgive, and actually forgiving in countless cases
and abundant measure, is yet not unmindful of the claims of justice. He
will not always suffer even the pardoned sinner to escape with entire
impunity. He will mingle so much of the penal in his dealings as to
evince that his clemency is not to be presumed upon.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc05058.htm#fr_380) <span
id="vi.xi-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p56"></span> “Should ye be utterly unpunished?” “Art
thou he, that shall altogether go unpunished?” — *A. V.*

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc05058.htm#fr_381) <span
id="vi.xi-p56.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p57"></span> Poole on <span id="vi.xi-p57.1"></span>[Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012)<span id="vi.xi-p57.1"></span>,
after quoting *C.’s* translation, “impune feres?” adds, “Since, however,
this phrase is explained very differently by others, both <span
id="vi.xi-p57.2"></span>[Ex 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span
id="vi.xi-p57.2"></span>, and <span id="vi.xi-p57.3"></span>[Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029)<span id="vi.xi-p57.3"></span>,
as well as these words, may be thus rendered: *Thou* *therefore*
*thyself* *shalt* *be* *utterly* *cut* *off.”*

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc05058.htm#fr_382) <span
id="vi.xi-p57.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p58"></span> “The translation of *V.* is, “Nullusque
apud to per se innocens est.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc05058.htm#fr_383) <span
id="vi.xi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p61"></span> “Qu’ils n’ont point loisir de deliberer de
ce qu’ils ont a faire, mais sont du premier coup abatus;” that they have
no time to deliberate as to what they should do, but are abashed at
once. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc05058.htm#fr_384) <span
id="vi.xi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p62"></span> “And take us for thine inheritance.” — *A.*
*V.* “Inherit, or possess thou us.” — *Heb.*

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc05058.htm#fr_385) <span
id="vi.xi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p65"></span><span id="vi.xi-p65.1"></span> Thus the
*LXX.;* <span id="vi.xi-p65.2"></span>Καὶ εἶπε Κύριος πρὸς Μωυσὢν, ἰδοὺ
ἐγὼ τίθημί σοι διαθήκην

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc05058.htm#fr_386) <span
id="vi.xi-p65.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p66"></span> “The thing.” — *A.V.*

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc05058.htm#fr_387) <span
id="vi.xi-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p69"></span> For a fuller development of this argument,
see Institutes, Book 4, chap. 12, sec. 20, 21; and Harm. of the
Evangelists, vol. 1, p. 208. Calvin Soc. edit.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc05058.htm#fr_388) <span
id="vi.xi-p71.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p72"></span> “Till Moses had done speaking with them, he
put,” etc. — *A.* *V.* Rosenmuller translates it with *C.* and the
*LXX.,* “and, *when,”* etc. “We need not (says Willet) with *Oleaster*
to transpose the words, ‘he put a vail upon his face, and so finished to
speak unto the people;’ but either we may read with *Junius,*’ While he
had finished to speak unto the people, he put a vail:’ or rather to read
it in the praeter-pluperfect tense, with the *Genevan* version, ‘So
Moses made an end of communing with them, and he *had* put a covering
upon his face.’”

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc05058.htm#fr_389) <span
id="vi.xi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p74"></span><span id="vi.xi-p74.1"></span> So *C.*<span
id="vi.xi-p74.2"></span> translates the words in his Comment. on <span
id="vi.xi-p74.3"></span>[2 Corinthians
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)<span id="vi.xi-p74.3"></span>,
”and when he *(i.e.,*<span id="vi.xi-p74.4"></span> Moses,) shall have
turned to the Lord,” and thus defends it: “This passage has hitherto
been badly rendered, for both Greek and Latin writers have thought that
the word *Israel*<span id="vi.xi-p74.5"></span> was to be understoon,
whereas Paul is speaking of Moses. he had said *that* *a* *vial* *is*
*upon* *the* *hearts*<span id="vi.xi-p74.6"></span> of the Jews
*when*<span id="vi.xi-p74.7"></span> *Moses* *is* *read*<span
id="vi.xi-p74.8"></span>. He immediately adds, *As* *soon* *as* *he*
*will* *have* *turned* *to* *the* *Lord,* *the* *vial* *will* *be*
*taken* *away.*<span id="vi.xi-p74.9"></span> Who does not that this is
said of *Moses*<span id="vi.xi-p74.10"></span>, that is, of the Law? For
as Christ is *the* *end*<span id="vi.xi-p74.11"></span> of it, (<span
id="vi.xi-p74.12"></span>[Ro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="vi.xi-p74.12"></span><span id="vi.xi-p74.13"></span>,) to which it
ought to be referred, it was turned away in another direction, when the
Jews shut out Christ from it.” Calvin Society edition, vol. 2, p.
183<span id="vi.xi-p74.15"></span>. Camerarius, in Poole, remarks on the
difficulty of the passage, arising from the fact that the verb <span
id="vi.xi-p74.16"></span>ἐπιστρέψὟ<span id="vi.xi-p74.17"></span> may
either be the third person singular subjunctive active, or the second
person singular of the first future middle; but he concludes, that “it
seems somewhat harsh to apply it to Moses.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Repetition of the Same History](cc05059)
