[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05041)  [Next](cc05043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#000)<span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span><span id="v.viii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
26:14-45](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014)<span id="v.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>**14.** But if ye will not hearken unto me,
and will not do all these commandments;

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span>**14.** Si autem non audieritis me, neque
feceritis omnia praecepta ista.

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span>**15.** And if ye shall despise my statutes,
or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my
commandments, *but* that ye break my covenant:

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span>**15.** Et, si decreta mea spreveritis, et
judicia mea abominata fuerit anima vestra, ita ut non faciatis omnia
praecepta mea, et irritum faciatis pactum meum:

<span id="v.viii-p7"></span>**16.** I also will do this unto you; I will
even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that
shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your
seed in vain; for your enemies shall eat it.

<span id="v.viii-p8"></span>**16.** Etiam ego faciam hoc vobis:
constituam super vos terrorem, tabem, et febrem, consumentia oculos, et
dolore afficientia animam, seretisque frustra semen vestrum: nam
comedent illud inimici vestri.

<span id="v.viii-p9"></span>**17.** And I will set my face against you,
and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall
reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.

<span id="v.viii-p10"></span>**17.** Dabo praeterea iram meam in vos, et
trademini coram inimicis vestris, dominabunturque vobis qui odio habent
vos: fugietisque, nec erit persequens vos.

<span id="v.viii-p11"></span>**18.** And if ye will not yet for all this
hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.

<span id="v.viii-p12"></span>**18.** Quod si usque ad haec non
audieritis me, addam corripere vos septuplo propter peccata vestra.

<span id="v.viii-p13"></span>**19.** And I will break the pride of your
power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass.

<span id="v.viii-p14"></span>**19.** Conteramque superbiam fortitudinis
vestrae, ac dabo coelum vestrum sicut ferrum, et terram vestram sicut
aes.

<span id="v.viii-p15"></span>**20.** And your strength shall be spent in
vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither shall the
trees of the land yield their fruits.

<span id="v.viii-p16"></span>**20.** Et consumetur frustra fortitudo
vestra, neque dabit terra vestra fructum suum, et arbores regionis non
dabnut fructum suum.

<span id="v.viii-p17"></span>**21.** And if ye walk contrary unto me,
and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon
you, according to your sins.

<span id="v.viii-p18"></span>**21.** Si autem ambulaveritis mecum
fortuito, et nolueritis audire me, addam super vos plagam septuplo
secundum peccata vestra.

<span id="v.viii-p19"></span>**22.** I will also send wild beasts among
you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and
make you few in number; and your *high-*ways shall be desolate.

<span id="v.viii-p20"></span>**22.** Immittamque in vos bestiam agri, et
orbabit vos, et succidet jumentum vestrum, ac diminuet vos, et
desolabuntur viae vestrae.

<span id="v.viii-p21"></span>**23.** And if ye will not be reformed by
me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me;

<span id="v.viii-p22"></span>**23.** Quod si per haec non recipiatis
doctrinam meam, sed ambulaveritis mecum fortuito:

<span id="v.viii-p23"></span>**24.** Then will I also walk contrary unto
you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.

<span id="v.viii-p24"></span>**24.** Ambulabo etiam ego vobiscum
fortuito, et percutiam vos quoque septuplo propter peccata vestra:

<span id="v.viii-p25"></span>**25.** And I will bring a sword upon you,
that shall avenge the quarrel of *my* covenant: and when ye are gathered
together within your cities, I will send the pestilence among you; and
ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.

<span id="v.viii-p26"></span>**25.** Atque inducam super vos gladium
ultorem ultionis foederis: ubi congregati eritis ad urbes vestras, tunc
mittam pestilentiam in medium vestri, ac trademini in manum inimici.

<span id="v.viii-p27"></span>**26.** *And* when I have broken the staff
of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they
shall deliver *you* your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and
not be satisfied.

<span id="v.viii-p28"></span>**26.** Dum confregero vobis baculum panis,
coquent decem mulieres panem vestrum in clibano uno, reddentque panem
vestrum in pondere: comedetis autem, et non saturabimini.

<span id="v.viii-p29"></span>**27.** And if ye will not for all this
hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me;

<span id="v.viii-p30"></span>**27.** Quod si in hoc non audieritis me,
sed ambulaveritis mecum fortuito:

<span id="v.viii-p31"></span>**28.** Then I will walk contrary unto you
also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your
sins.

<span id="v.viii-p32"></span>**28.** Incedam vobiscum in ira fortuito,
et corripiam vos etiam ego septuplo propter peccata vestra.

<span id="v.viii-p33"></span>**29.** And ye shall eat the flesh of your
sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.

<span id="v.viii-p34"></span>**29.** Comedetisque carnem filiorum
vestrorum, et carnem filiarum vestrarum comedetis.

<span id="v.viii-p35"></span>**30.** And I will destroy your high
places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases upon the
carcases of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.

<span id="v.viii-p36"></span>**30.** Atque dissipabo excelsa vestra, et
succidam imagines vestras: ponamque cadavera vestra super cadavera
idolorum vestrorum, et abominabitur vos anima mea.

<span id="v.viii-p37"></span>**31.** And I will make your cities waste,
and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the
savour of your sweet odorous.

<span id="v.viii-p38"></span>**31.** Daboque urbes vestras in
desolationem, ac desolabo sanetuaria vestra, neque odorabor odorem
quietis vestrae.

<span id="v.viii-p39"></span>**32.** And I will bring the land into
desolation; and your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at
it.

<span id="v.viii-p40"></span>**32.** Desolabo, inquam, ego terram, ita
ut obstupescant super eam inimici vestri qui habitabunt in ea.

<span id="v.viii-p41"></span>**33.** And I will scatter you among the
heathen, and will draw out a sword after you; and your land shall be
desolate, and your cities waste.

<span id="v.viii-p42"></span>**33.** Vos autem dispergam in gentes, et
evaginabo post vos gladium: eritque terra vestra desolata, et urbes
vestrae erunt destructae.

<span id="v.viii-p43"></span>**34.** Then shall the land enjoy her
sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye *be* in your enemies’
land; *even* then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.

<span id="v.viii-p44"></span>**34.** Tunc perficiet (*vel*,
oblectabitur) terra sabbatha sua cunctis diebus quibus desdata fuerit:
vos autem eritis in terra inimicorum vestrorum: tunc, inquam, requiescet
terra, et perficiet sabbatha sua.

<span id="v.viii-p45"></span>**35.** As long as it lieth desolate it
shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon
it.

<span id="v.viii-p46"></span>**35.** Omnibus diebus quibus desolata
fuerit, requiescet: quia non requievit in sabbathis vestris, dum
habitaretis in ea.

<span id="v.viii-p47"></span>**36.** And upon them that are left *alive*
of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their
enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall
flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.

<span id="v.viii-p48"></span>**36.** Qui autem remanserint ex vobis,
inducam teneritudinem in cor eorum in terris inimicorum suorum, et
persequetur eos sonus folii impulsi, et fugient fuga gladii, cadentque
nemine persequente.

<span id="v.viii-p49"></span>**37.** And they shall fall one upon
another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and ye shall
have no power to stand before your enemies.

<span id="v.viii-p50"></span>**37.** Impingent autem alter in alterum
tanquam a facie gladii, nullo persequente: neque erit vobis resistentia
coram inimicis vestris.

<span id="v.viii-p51"></span>**38.** And ye shall perish among the
heathen, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.

<span id="v.viii-p52"></span>**38.** Et peribitis inter Gentes, et
absumet vos terra inimicorum vestrorum.

<span id="v.viii-p53"></span>**39.** And they that are left of you shall
pine away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands; and also in the
iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.

<span id="v.viii-p54"></span>**39.** Et qui remanserint ex vobis,
dissolventur propter iniquitatem suam in terris inimicorum vestrorum,
atque etiam propter iniquitates patrum suorum, cum eis dissolventur.

<span id="v.viii-p55"></span>**40.** If they shall confess their
iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which
they trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto
me;

<span id="v.viii-p56"></span>**40.** Donec confiteantur iniquitatem
suam, et iniquitatem patrum suorum, juxta praevaricationem suam qua
praevaricati sunt in me: et etiam quod ambulaverint mecum fortuito:

<span id="v.viii-p57"></span>**41.** And *that* I also have walked
contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their
enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then
accept of the punishment of their iniquity:

<span id="v.viii-p58"></span>**41.** Quod etiam ego ambulaverim cum
illis fortuito, et induxerim eos in terram inimicorum suorum: tuncque
humilietur cor eorum incircuncisum, ac propitient pro iniquitate sua.

<span id="v.viii-p59"></span>**42.** Then will I remember my covenant
with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with
Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.

<span id="v.viii-p60"></span>**42.** Tunc recordabor pacti mei cum
Jacob, et etiam pacti mei cum Isaac, et insuper pacti mei cum Abraham
recordabor, terrae quoque memor ero.

<span id="v.viii-p61"></span>**43.** The land also shall be left of
them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without
them: and they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity;
because, even because they despised my judgments, and because their soul
abhorred my statutes.

<span id="v.viii-p62"></span>**43.** Terra interim deseretur ab eis, et
perficiet sabbatha sua quae desolata est ab illis, et ipsi exsolvent
mulctam suam, eo quod, inquam, judicia mea spreverint, et decreta mea
abominata sit anima eorum.

<span id="v.viii-p63"></span>**44.** And yet for all that, when they be
in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I
abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them:
for I *am* the Lord their God.

<span id="v.viii-p64"></span>**44.** Et tamen etiam hoc modo quum ipsi
fuerint in terra inimicorum suorum, non reprobavi eos, neque abominatus
sum eos, ut consumerem eos, irritum faciendo pactum meum cum eis: ego
enim Jehova Deus eorum.

<span id="v.viii-p65"></span>**45.** But I will for their sakes remember
the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of
Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I *am* the
Lord.

<span id="v.viii-p66"></span>**45.** Sed recordabor propter eos pacti
priorum, ego qui eduxi eos e terra Aegypti in oculis Gentium, ut essem
illis in Deum: ego Jehova.

<span id="v.viii-p67"></span> 

<span id="v.viii-p68"></span><span id="v.viii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p69"></span>**14.** *But if ye will not hearken unto
me*. Thus far a kind invitation has been set before the people in the
shape of promises, in order that the observance of the Law might be
rendered pleasant and agreeable; since, as we have already seen, our
obedience is then only approved by God when we obey willingly. But,
inasmuch as the sluggishness of our flesh has need of spurring,
threatenings are also added to inspire terror, and at any rate to extort
what ought to have been spontaneously performed. It may seem indeed that
it may thus be inferred that threats are absurdly misplaced when applied
to produce obedience to the Law, which ought to be voluntary; for he who
is compelled by fear will never love God; and this is the main point in
the Law. But what I have already shewn, will in some measure avail to
solve this difficulty, viz., that the Law is deadly to transgressors,
because it holds them tight under that condemnation from which they
would wish to be released by vain presumptions; whilst threats are also
useful to the children of God for a different purpose, both that they
may be prepared to fear God heartily before they are regenerate, and
also that, after their regeneration, their corrupt affections may be
daily subdued. For although they sincerely desire to devote themselves
altogether to God, still they have to contend continually with the
remainders of their flesh. Thus, then, although the direct object of
threats is to alarm the reprobate, still they likewise apply to
believers, for the purpose of stimulating their sluggishness, inasmuch
as they are not yet thoroughly regenerate, but still burdened with the
remainders of sin.

<span id="v.viii-p70"></span><span id="v.viii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p71"></span>**15.** *And if ye shall despise my
statutes*. This seems only to apply to ungodly and depraved apostates,
who deliberately revolt from the service and worship of God: for if a
person falls through infirmity, and offends from levity and
inconsideration, he will not be said to have despised God’s Law, or to
have made void His covenant. And certainly it is probable that God
designedly spoke of gross rebellion, which could not be extenuated under
the pretense of error. Still it must be borne in mind that all
transgressors, whether they have violated the Law in whole or in part,
are brought under the curse. But God would remind His people betimes to
what lengths those at last proceed who assume the liberty of sinning;
and also from what source all transgressions arise. For, although every
one who turns out of the right path into sin does not altogether
repudiate or abominate the Law, yet all sins betray contempt of the Law,
and tend to break the covenant of God. He justly, therefore, denounces
them as covenant-breakers, and proud despisers, unless they obey His
commandments: and, first, He threatens that He will destroy them with
“terror, consumption,” and other diseases; and then adds external
calamities, such as scarcity of corn, violent invasions of enemies, and
the plunder of their goods; of which it will be more convenient to speak
more fully in expounding the passage in Deuteronomy.

<span id="v.viii-p72"></span><span id="v.viii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p73"></span>**18.** *And if ye will not yet for all
this hearken*<span id="v.viii-p73.1"></span>. The gradation of
punishments, which is here mentioned, shews that they are so tempered by
God’s kindness, that He only lightly chastises those whose stupidity or
hardness of heart he has not yet proved; but when obstinacy in sin is
superadded, the severity of the punishments is likewise increased; and
justly so, because those who, being admonished, care not to repent, wage
open war with God. Hence the more moderately He deals with us, the more
attentive we ought to be to His corrections, in order that even the
gentle strokes, which He in His kindness softens and tempers, may be
enough. Paul says that hypocrites heap up to themselves a treasure of
greater vengeance, if they take occasion from His forbearance to
continue unmoved, (<span id="v.viii-p73.2"></span>[Rom.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="v.viii-p73.2"></span><span
id="v.viii-p73.3"></span>;) for those who do not repent, when admonished
by light chastisements, are the less excusable. Wherefore let us give
heed to that exhortation of David, that we “be not as the horse, or as
the mule, which have no understanding, whose mouth must be held in with
bit and bridle;” because “many sorrows shall be to the wicked.” (<span
id="v.viii-p73.4"></span>[Ps. 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010)<span
id="v.viii-p73.4"></span><span id="v.viii-p73.5"></span>.) In sum, as
soon as God has begun to put forth His hand to smite us, there is one
remedy whereby He may be appeased, *i* *e*<span
id="v.viii-p73.6"></span>., teachableness. It would be more prudent of
us to anticipate Him, and to return to Him of our own accord, though He
should withhold punishment; but when we are smitten without profit, it
is a sin of obstinate wickedness. He threatens, therefore, that unless
they repent when smitten with the ferule, He will use the rod to correct
them. When He says, “I will punish you seven times more,” He does not
mean to define the number, but, according to the common phrase of
Scripture, uses the number seven, by way of amplification. In the next
verse He shews that there is a just cause for His becoming more severe,
because they cannot be subdued except by violent means; for although the
word <span id="v.viii-p73.7"></span>גאון<span id="v.viii-p73.8"></span>,
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) *geon*<span
id="v.viii-p74.5"></span>, is not always used in a bad sense, still, in
this passage, it signifies that they are disobedient, being puffed up to
be proud by their power; for, as Moses says elsewhere, Israel “waxed
fat, and kicked” against God, just as horses grow restive by being
overfed. He therefore calls their obstinacy, wherein they became more
hardened, although God spared them, “the pride of their power;” for
prosperity begets security, in which stubborn men try their strength
against the scourges of God.

<span id="v.viii-p75"></span><span id="v.viii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p76"></span>**21.** *And if ye walk*<span
id="v.viii-p76.1"></span>. Translators give various renderings of the
word <span id="v.viii-p76.2"></span>קרי<span id="v.viii-p76.3"></span>,
 <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) *keri*<span
id="v.viii-p77.10"></span>. The Chaldee takes it to mean *with*
*hardness*<span id="v.viii-p77.11"></span>, as if it were their purpose
to contend against God. Jerome renders it *ex* *adverso* *mihi*<span
id="v.viii-p77.12"></span>, (in opposition to me;) but, since the word
signifies an accidental occurrence, or contingency, this sense has
seemed to me much the most appropriate. <span
id="v.viii-p77.14"></span>To “walk at adventures” (*fortuito*<span
id="v.viii-p77.15"></span>) with God, therefore, is equivalent to
passing by His judgments with their eyes shut; and even so to stupify
themselves as to ascribe their adversities to fortune, and thus not to
be humbled beneath His mighty hand; for hence arises unconquerable
obstinacy, when the sinner imagines that whatever he suffers happens by
chance. Therefore Jeremiah inveighs against the Jews in a severe
reproof, because they supposed that evil and good did not proceed from
the ordinance and decree of God, (<span id="v.viii-p77.16"></span>[La
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038)<span
id="v.viii-p77.16"></span><span id="v.viii-p77.17"></span>;) for hence
is engendered brutal madness, so that wretched men rush with all their
might to their own destruction. It will accord very well, then, that if
men do not take heed to God’s judgments, but rush onwards like furious
beasts, His meeting with them will be, as it were, fortuitous, when He
shall smite them indiscriminately, from right to left, high and low, as
we say in French *aller* *a* *tors* *et* *travers*<span
id="v.viii-p77.18"></span>. This, therefore, the sinner at length
obtains by his stupid obstinacy, that, overwhelmed by his manifold
punishments, he sees no end to his troubles. Meanwhile there is no doubt
but that Moses rebukes the iron obstinacy of the people, as David
declares, that with the gentle God will be gentle, but that He will be
stubborn, as it were, with the perverse. (<span
id="v.viii-p77.19"></span>[Ps. 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span
id="v.viii-p77.19"></span><span id="v.viii-p77.20"></span>.) He finally
points out the source of obstinacy, when the sinner is intoxicated by
his stupidity into contempt for God, whilst he turns away from himself,
as much as possible, the sense of His wrath. Let us learn, then, to
withdraw our thoughts from vague speculations to the consideration of
God’s hand in all the punishments which He inflicts; because hence will
arise acknowledgment of our guilt, which may lead to repentance. Else
that will occur which Isaiah seems to have taken from this passage, that
God’s *anger*<span id="v.viii-p77.21"></span> will never be *turned*
*away*<span id="v.viii-p77.22"></span>; but that, when we think that we
are acquitted, *His* *hand*<span id="v.viii-p77.23"></span> will be
*stretched* *out* *still*<span id="v.viii-p77.24"></span>. (<span
id="v.viii-p77.25"></span>[Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012)<span
id="v.viii-p77.25"></span><span id="v.viii-p77.26"></span>.)

<span id="v.viii-p78"></span><span id="v.viii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p79"></span>**25.** *And I will bring a sword upon
you*. There is no doubt but that He means the hostile swords of all the
nations, whereby the Israelites were sorely afflicted; and teaches that
whosoever should bring trouble and perplexity upon them were the just
executioners of His vengeance; just as He constantly declares by the
prophets that He was the Leader of the people’s enemies, and that the
Assyrians and Chaldeans both fought under Him. He calls the Assyrian His
axe, and the rod of His anger which He wields in His hand, (<span
id="v.viii-p79.1"></span>[Isa
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015)<span id="v.viii-p79.1"></span>,
and 5;) and Nebuchadnezzar His *hired* soldier. He says that He will
call the Egyptians with a *hiss*, and will arouse the Chaldeans by the
sound of his trumpet. (<span id="v.viii-p79.2"></span>[Isa.
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)<span id="v.viii-p79.2"></span>,
*and* *elsewhere*.) But since this point is sufficiently well known,
there will be no occasion of further proofs. The sum is, that all wars
are stirred by His command, and that the soldiers are armed at His will,
and are strong in His strength. Hence it follows that He has innumerable
forces by whose hand He may execute His vengeance whensoever He pleases.
Afterwards, therefore, when the Israelites were harassed, and even
cruelly oppressed by their enemies, God’s truth was manifested in all
those continual defeats; whilst, from His great severity, we may gather
how gross was the perversity of their conduct.

<span id="v.viii-p80"></span><span id="v.viii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p81"></span>**26.** *And when I have broken the staff
of your bread*. By these words God implies, that although He should not
punish them by the sterility of the land, still He was prepared with
other means for destroying them by famine. We shall indeed see hereafter
that, when God was wroth, the earth in a manner shut up her bowels so as
to produce no food; and that the heaven also grew hard so as not to
fertilize it with dew or rain. In a word, all unseasonableness of
weather and infertility of soil is a sign of the curse of God; but now
He goes further, viz., that although there should be no scarcity of
food, still they should suffer from hunger, when He had taken away its
nourishing qualities from their bread. This curse confirms the
instruction which we have seen elsewhere, that man does not live by
bread, but by  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) the command of
God, just as if the efficacy contained in the bread proceeded out of His
mouth. (<span id="v.viii-p82.1"></span>[De
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="v.viii-p82.1"></span>.)
And assuredly an inanimate thing could not give rigor to our senses
except by the secret ordinance of God. He employs a very appropriate
comparison, calling the support of bread, whereby man’s strength is
refreshed, “the staff;” as we see the old and weak leaning on their
sticks as they walk, when otherwise they would totter and fall. God
says, then, that it is in His power to break this staff, so that their
bread should only fill their stomachs without refreshing their strength.
Ezekiel has borrowed from Moses this figure, which he makes use of in
several places, (<span id="v.viii-p82.2"></span>[Ezek.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016), [Ezek.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016), [Ezek.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013)<span id="v.viii-p82.2"></span>,)
although he there adverts to two sorts of punishment, like another
Prophet, when He says, “Ye have sown much and bring in little; ye eat,
but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye
clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that; earneth wages, earneth
wages to put it into a bag with holes;” and again,

<span id="v.viii-p83"></span>“Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came to
little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it;” (<span
id="v.viii-p83.1"></span>[Hag. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009)<span id="v.viii-p83.1"></span>;)

<span id="v.viii-p84"></span>for he points out scarcity of food as one
of God’s scourges, and the inability to profit by their abundance, as
another; and with this Micah also accords, for after he has said, “Thou
shalt eat, but not be satisfied,” he adds,

<span id="v.viii-p85"></span>“Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap;
thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil;
and sweet wine, but shalt not drink wine.” (<span
id="v.viii-p85.1"></span>[Mic. 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#015)<span id="v.viii-p85.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.viii-p86"></span>But Moses, in order that the curse may be
more apparent, says that there shall be abundance of bread; and also
that there shall be no deception practiced in kneading and baking it;
for that two  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) women shall come
to one oven together, who may mutually observe whether weight is duly
given. He implies, therefore, that there shall be abundance in their
hands, and yet, when they are filled, they shall not be satisfied.

<span id="v.viii-p88"></span><span id="v.viii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p89"></span>**29.** *And ye shall eat the flesh of your
sons*. This scourge is still more severe and terrible (than the others;)
 <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) yet we know that the Israelites
were smitten with it more than once. This savage act would be
incredible; but we gather from it how terrible it is to fall into the
hands of God, when men, by adding crime to crime, cease not to provoke
His wrath. Jeremiah  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) mentions
this monstrous case among others: “The hands of the pitiful women have
sodden their own children,” and prepared them for food, (<span
id="v.viii-p91.1"></span>[La 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010)<span
id="v.viii-p91.1"></span>;) and hence, not without cause, he mourns that
this had not been done elsewhere, that women should devour the offspring
which they themselves had brought up. (<span
id="v.viii-p91.2"></span>[La 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020)<span
id="v.viii-p91.2"></span>.) And  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)
the last siege of Jerusalem, which in the fullness of their crimes was,
as it were, the final act of God’s vengeance, reduced the wretched
people who were then alive to such straits, that they commonly partook
of this unholy food.

<span id="v.viii-p93"></span>When He again declares that He “will cast
their carcases upon those of their idols,” He shews by the very nature
of the punishment that their impiety would be manifest; for apostates
take marvelous delight in their superstitions, until God openly appears
as the avenger of His service. But that their idols should be cast into
a common heap with the bones of the dead, was as if the finger of God
pointed out His abomination of their false worship. And then, because
their last resource was in sacrifices, He declares that they should be
of no avail for atonement; for, in the expression, “savour of peace,”
 <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) He embraces all the expiatory
rites, by their confidence in which they were the more obstinate.
Afterwards He threatens banishment as well as the desolation of the
land; by which punishment He made it apparent that they were utterly
renounced, as we shall again see a little further on.

<span id="v.viii-p95"></span><span id="v.viii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p96"></span>**34.** *Then shall the land enjoy her
Sabbaths*. In order that the observance of the Sabbath should be the
more honored, God in a manner associated the land in it together with
man; for whereas the land had rest every seventh year from sowing, and
harvest, and all cultivation, He thus desired to stir up men more
effectually to a greater reverence for the Sabbath. God now bitterly
reproves the Israelites because they not only profane the Sabbath
themselves, but do not even allow the land to enjoy its prescribed rest;
for this repose of the seventh year did not hinder the land from
continually groaning under a heavy burden as long as it nourished such
ungodly inhabitants. He says, therefore, that the land was disturbed by
ceaseless inquietude, and thus was deprived of its lawful Sabbaths,
since it bore on its shoulders, as it were, and not without great
distress, such impious despisers of God. Moreover, because the whole
worship of God is sometimes included by *synecdoche* in the word
Sabbath, (<span id="v.viii-p96.1"></span>[Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021)<span id="v.viii-p96.1"></span>;
<span id="v.viii-p96.2"></span>[Eze
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span id="v.viii-p96.2"></span>,)
He indirectly administers a sharp reproof to His people, because not
only is He defrauded of His right by their impiety, but He cannot be
duly honored in the Holy Land unless He expels them all from hence; as
if He had said, that this was the only means that remained for the
assertion of the honor due to His name, viz., that the land should be
cleared of its inhabitants, and reduced to desolation; inasmuch as this
extorted rest should be substituted in the room of the voluntary
Sabbath.

<span id="v.viii-p97"></span><span id="v.viii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p98"></span>**39.** *And they that are left of you*.
This is another form of vengeance, that, although they may survive for a
time, still they shall gradually pine away; and this may be referred
both to those who go into captivity, and to those who shall remain in
the land. He had before threatened that they should be destroyed either
by famine or sword; but now lest they should boast that they had
escaped, if they had not perished by a violent death, He pronounces that
they also should die a lingering death; and He also declares the manner
of it, viz., that He will fill their hearts with trembling, so that they
should fly when none pursued them, (as Solomon also says, <span
id="v.viii-p98.1"></span>[Pr 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)<span
id="v.viii-p98.1"></span>,) and fear at the sound of a falling leaf.
Thus He signifies that the ungodly shall be no better off, although free
from external troubles, because they are afflicted internally by hidden
torments; for although their audacity may proceed even to madness, still
it cannot be but that their evil conscience should smite them
continually. Their forgetfulness of God may sometimes stupify them; nay,
they may seek to shake off all feeling; but, after God has suffered them
thus to become brutalized, He presently interrupts their lethargy, and
hurries them on so that they are their own executioners. This passage
shews us that, the more strait-hearted the wicked are in their contempt
of God, the weaker they become, so as to tremble at their own shadow;
and this condition is far more wretched than to be cut off at a single
blow.

<span id="v.viii-p99"></span><span id="v.viii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p100"></span>**40.** *If they shall confess their
iniquity*. Although Moses has been discoursing of very severe and cruel
punishments, still he declares that even in the midst of this awful
severity God is to be appeased if only the people should repent,
notwithstanding that they may have stripped themselves of all hope of
pardon by their long-continued sins. For he does not address sinners in
general, but those who by their obstinacy and brutal impetuosity have
come nearer and nearer to the vengeance of God; and even these he
encourages to a good hope, if only they be converted from their hearts.
Let us be assured, then, that God’s mercy is offered to the worst of
men, who have been plunged by their guilt in the depths of despair, as
though it reached even to hell itself. Whence, too, it follows, that all
punishments are like spurs to rouse the inert and hesitating to
repentance, whilst the sorer plagues are intended to break their hard
hearts. Yet at the same time it must be observed that this favor is
vouchsafed by special privilege to the Church of God; for Moses soon
afterwards expressly assigns its cause, *i* *e*., that God will remember
His covenant. Whence it is plain that God, out of regard to His
gratuitous adoption, will be gracious to the unworthy whom He has
elected; and whence also it comes to pass, that, provided we do not
close the gate of hope against ourselves, God will still voluntarily
come forward to reconcile us to Himself, if only we lay hold of the
covenant from which we have fallen by our own guilt, like ship-wrecked
sailors seizing a plank to carry them safe into port. But it will be
well for us earnestly to examine the fruits of repentance which Moses
here enumerates. In the first place stands confession, not such as is
exacted under the Papacy, that wretched men should unburden themselves
in the ear of a priest (*sacrifici*,) as if secretly disgorging their
sins, but whereby they acknowledge themselves to be guilty before God.
This confession stands contrasted both with the noisy complaints, and
the subterfuges and evasions of the wicked. A memorable instance of it
occurs in the case of David, who, when overwhelmed by the reproof of the
Prophet Nathan, ingenuously confesses that he has sinned against God.
(<span id="v.viii-p100.1"></span>[2Sa
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)<span
id="v.viii-p100.1"></span>.) By the word “fathers” He magnifies the
greatness of their sins, because for a long space of time they had not
ceased to add sin to sin, as if the fathers had conspired with their
children, and the children with their own descendants; and, since God is
a just avenger even to the third and fourth generation, it is not
without reason that posterity is commanded humbly to pray that God would
pardon the guilt contracted long ago. Hence also it is plainly seen how
little the imitation of their fathers will avail to extenuate the faults
of the children, since we perceive that it renders them less excusable,
so far is God from admitting this silly plea. It is further added, that
their confession should correspond with the greatness of their
transgressions, and that it should not be trifling and perfunctory; for
although hypocrites, when convicted, do not deny that they have sinned,
still in confessing they extenuate their guilt, as if they were only
guilty of venial offenses. God, therefore, would have the circumstances
of their sins taken into account, and this also He prescribes with
respect to their obstinacy, lest they should pretend that their
punishments were not deservedly redoubled, because they had walked
 <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) at adventures with God.

<span id="v.viii-p102"></span>Finally, in order to prove the reality of
their conversion, all dissembling is excluded by the *humbling* of their
*hearts*; for it is as if God would reject their prayers, until in
sincere and heart-felt humility they should seek for pardon. This
humiliation is contrasted with security as well as with contumacy and
pride; and it is also compared with circumcision, where the heart is
called *uncircumcised* before it is subdued and reduced to obedience.
For, whereas circumcision was a mark of distinction between the people
of God and heathen nations, it must needs have been also a sign of
regeneration.  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) But since the
Jews neglected the truth, and foolishly and improperly gloried only in
the outward symbol, Moses, by reproving the uncircumcision of their
hearts, refutes that empty boast. Thus, as Paul testifies, unless the
Law be obeyed, literal circumcision is useless, and is made into
uncircumcision. (<span id="v.viii-p103.1"></span>[Ro
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)<span id="v.viii-p103.1"></span>.)
So Moses accuses the Israelites of unfaithfulness, because they profess
to be God’s holy people, whilst they cherish filthiness and uncleanness
in their heart. The Prophets also often reproach them with being
uncircumcised in heart, or in ears; and in this Stephen followed them.
(<span id="v.viii-p103.2"></span>[Jer
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#010)<span id="v.viii-p103.2"></span>;
<span id="v.viii-p103.3"></span>[Eze
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007)<span id="v.viii-p103.3"></span>;
<span id="v.viii-p103.4"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span id="v.viii-p103.4"></span>.)

<span id="v.viii-p104"></span><span id="v.viii-p104.1"></span>Others
elicit a very different meaning from the words  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) <span id="v.viii-p105.2"></span> which
we have translated, “let them atone (*propitient*<span
id="v.viii-p105.3"></span>) for their iniquity.” The noun used is <span
id="v.viii-p105.4"></span>עון<span id="v.viii-p105.5"></span>,
*gnevon*<span id="v.viii-p105.6"></span>, which means both iniquity and
punishment; and the verb <span id="v.viii-p105.7"></span>רצה<span
id="v.viii-p105.8"></span>, *ratzah*<span id="v.viii-p105.9"></span>,
which is to expiate, or to esteem grateful, or to appease. Some,
therefore, explain it, they shall bear their punishment patiently, or
esteem it pleasant; but it appears to me that Moses connects with
repentance the desire of appeasing God, without which men are never
really dissatisfied with themselves, or renounce their sins; and his
allusion is to the sacrifices and legal ablutions, whereby they
reconciled themselves to God. The sum is, that when they shall seriously
endeavor to return to God’s favor, He will be propitiated towards them
on account of His covenant.

<span id="v.viii-p106"></span><span id="v.viii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p107"></span>**43.** *The land also shall be left of
them*. He again refers to the punishment of banishment, which is
equivalent to their being disinherited; and at the same time repeats
that the worship of God could not be restored in the Holy Land, until it
should be purified from their defilements; yet immediately afterwards He
moderates this severity, inasmuch as, when He seemed to deal with them
most rigorously, He still will not utterly cast them off. The verbs He
uses  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) are in the past tense,
though they have reference to the future; as much as to say, even then
“they shall feel that they are not rejected.” He therefore stretches out
His hand to them, as it were, in their miserable estate, to uplift them
to confidence, and commands them, although afflicted with the extremity
of trouble, nevertheless to put their trust in His Covenant. Herein His
marvelous and inestimable goodness is displayed, in still retaining as
His own those who are alienated from Him: thus, it is said in Hosea,
(<span id="v.viii-p108.2"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="v.viii-p108.2"></span>,)
“I will say to *them* *that* *are* not my people, Thou *art* my people.”

<span id="v.viii-p109"></span>When He promises that He will remember His
covenant “for their sakes,” He does not mean for their merit, or because
they have acquired such a favor for themselves; but for their profit or
salvation, in that the recollection of the Covenant shall extend even to
them. Their deliverance (from Egypt) is also added in confirmation of
the Covenant, as though He had said that He would be the more disposed
to forgive them, not only because He always perseveres in His
faithfulness to His promises, but because He would maintain His goodness
towards them, and carry it on even to the end. Thus we see He refers the
cause of His mercy only to Himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc05042.htm#fr_224) <span
id="v.viii-p73.9"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p74"></span><span id="v.viii-p74.1"></span> “Applied to
*men*<span id="v.viii-p74.2"></span>, it signifies superior honor,
virtue; excellency, lustre; or pride, arrogance, haughtiness.” Taylor’s
Concordance, *in* *voce*<span id="v.viii-p74.3"></span>, <span
id="v.viii-p74.4"></span>גאה

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc05042.htm#fr_225) <span
id="v.viii-p76.4"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p77"></span><span id="v.viii-p77.1"></span> “Fortuito.”
— *Lat*<span id="v.viii-p77.2"></span>. A noun from <span
id="v.viii-p77.3"></span>קרה<span id="v.viii-p77.4"></span>, to meet, to
run against, to occur. It is not from *S* *M*<span
id="v.viii-p77.5"></span>. that *C*<span id="v.viii-p77.6"></span>. has
learnt what he here correctly states, viz., that the Chaldee Paraphrast,
or Onkelos in his Targum on the Pentateuch gives <span
id="v.viii-p77.7"></span>קשיו<span id="v.viii-p77.8"></span>,
*hardness*<span id="v.viii-p77.9"></span>, as his interpretation of the
word. — *W*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc05042.htm#fr_226) <span
id="v.viii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p82"></span> “Mais de la parole sortant de la bouche de
Dieu, comme s’il inspiroit au pain la faculte de nous sustenter;” but by
the word proceeding out of the mouth of God, as if He inspired the bread
with the power of supporting us. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc05042.htm#fr_227) <span
id="v.viii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p87"></span> *C*. is here at issue with the
commentators in general. The usual view is that stated by Bush: “There
shall be such a scarcity of bread that one ordinary oven shall answer
for the baking of ten, that is a great many families; whereas in common
circumstances one oven would serve (or rather be required) for one
family.” Dr. Kitto supposes that “ten families, represented by their
females, clubbed their dough together, and the produce being no more
than an ordinary supply for *one* family, it was baked in one oven
instead of each family, as usual, making a separate baking. Afterwards
the cakes thus baked were proportioned by weight to the respective
contributors, so precious was the bread. This is implied in the words,
‘shall deliver you *your* bread *again* by weight;’ which shews that the
bread was previously theirs, and had been baked for them, not that it
was *sold* to them by weight.”

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc05042.htm#fr_228) <span
id="v.viii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p90"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc05042.htm#fr_229) <span
id="v.viii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p91"></span> “Jeremie recite que cest acte monstreux
est advenu de son temps;” Jeremiah relates that this monstrous act
occurred in his own times. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc05042.htm#fr_230) <span
id="v.viii-p91.3"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p92"></span> See Josephus’ Jewish War, B. 7. c. 2.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc05042.htm#fr_231) <span
id="v.viii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p94"></span> “Savour of your sweet odours.” — *A*.*V*.
“Odoris pacifici.” — *Lat*. “D’odeur paisible, ou de repos.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc05042.htm#fr_232) <span
id="v.viii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p101"></span> “Fortuito.” — *Lat*. See *ante* on verse
21, p. 234.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc05042.htm#fr_233) <span
id="v.viii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p103"></span> “Un Sacrament de regeneration.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc05042.htm#fr_234) <span
id="v.viii-p104.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p105"></span> “And they then accept the punishment of
their iniqulty,” <span id="v.viii-p105.1"></span>[Le
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041)<span
id="v.viii-p105.1"></span>,. — *A*.*V*. Dathe appears to take *C*.’*s*
view; “tunc luent peccatorum suorum culpam.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc05042.htm#fr_235) <span
id="v.viii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p108"></span> *i*.*e*., in <span
id="v.viii-p108.1"></span>[Le
26:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#044)<span id="v.viii-p108.1"></span>,
and are so translated in *LXX*., *V*., Chald., and Syriac, and also by
Pagninus. See Poole’s Synopsis, *in* *loco*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 28:15-68](cc05043)
