[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05021)  [Next](cc05023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p1"></span>The Exposition of the Commandment

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**11.** Ye shall not steal, neither deal
falsely, neither lie one to another.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p4"></span>**11.** Non furabimini et non negabiris,
neque mentiemini quisque proximo suo.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p5"></span>**13.** Thou shalt not defraud thy
neighbor, neither rob *him*: the of him that is hired shall not abide
with thee all night until the morning.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p6"></span>**13.** Non opprimes proximum tuum,
neque rapies: nec morabitur opus mercenarii apud to usque mane.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p9"></span>God here explains somewhat more clearly
His mind and design, for He enumerates as thefts eases in which either
deceit or violence is employed. The two words, which we have translated
to *deny*, and to *lie*, signify also to *deceive*; as also to *lie*, or
to *frustrate* *hope*.  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) There is no
question, then, but that God would restrain His people from all craft,
or deceit, that they may deal sincerely and honestly with each other;
even as Paul wisely explains the meaning of the Holy Spirit, when he
exhorts believers to

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p11"></span>“put away lying, and to speak every man
truth with his neighbor; for we are members one of another.” (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p11.1"></span>[Eph
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p12"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p12.1"></span>In
the second passage, God commands men to demean themselves meekly and
temperately with their neighbors, so as to abstain from all unjust
oppression. The meaning which Jerome  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) <span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.2"></span> and
others after him, have given to the word <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.3"></span>עשק *gnashak*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.4"></span>, to *calumniate*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.5"></span>, is incorrect altogether; for it is
everywhere used for to *oppress*<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.6"></span>,
*despoil*<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.7"></span>, *rob*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.8"></span>, or *lay* *hands* *on* *the* *goods* *of*
*another*<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.9"></span>. It is clear, therefore,
that as Moses had previously provided against frauds, he now prohibits
the iniquity of extorting from our neighbor what we have no right to.
Still, violence, or open rapine, is better expressed by the other word
<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.10"></span>גזל *gezal*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.11"></span>; and these  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) <span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p14.1"></span> two
words are, ill my opinion, as it were, *genus*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p14.2"></span> and *species*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p14.3"></span>. After he had forbidden, therefore, that
they should in any way oppress their brethren and possess themselves of
their goods, he at the same time adds, that they should not use violence
in despoiling them unjustly. Finally, he points out one mode of unjust
oppression, when a person, who has hired himself as a laborer, is
defrauded of his wages, and not only if he be sent away without payment,
his wages being denied him, but if payment be deferred to the morrow.
For we know that hirelings generally live from hand to mouth, and
therefore, if there be ever so little delay, they must go without food.
Consequently, if a rich man keeps a poor and wretched individual, whose
labor he has abused, in suspense, he deprives him as it were of life, in
depriving him of his daily food. The sum is, that humanity is so to be
cultivated that none should be oppressed, or suffer loss from default of
payment.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**14.** Thou shalt not oppress an hired
servant *that* *is* poor and needy, *whether* *he* *be* of thy brethren,
or of thy strangers that *are* in thy land within thy gates:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p4"></span>**14.** Non opprimes mercenarium
pauperem et egenum e fratribus tuis, et ex peregrinis tuis qui sunt in
terra tua, intra portas tuas.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>**15.** At his day thou shalt give
*him* his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he ‘*is*
poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the
Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>**15.** Die suo reddes mercedem ejus,
neque occumbet super eam sol: quia pauper est, et ea sustentat animam
suam: ne clamet contra te ad Jehovam, et sit in te peccatum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p9"></span>**14.** *Thou shalt not oppress an
hired servant*. This precept is akin to the foregoing. Moses pronounces
that he who has hired a poor person for wages oppresses him unless he
gives him immediate recompense for his labor; since the two admonitions,
“thou shalt; not; oppress,” and “*thou* shalt give him his hire,” are to
be read in connection with each other. Hence it follows, that if a
hireling suffers from want because we do not pay him what he has earned,
we are by our *very* delay alone convicted of unrighteousness. The
reason is now more clearly expressed, viz., because he sustains his life
by his daily labors.  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) Although,
however, this provision only refers to the poor, lest they should suffer
hunger from the negligence or pride of the rich, still humanity in
general is enforced, lest, whilst the poor labor for our profit, we
should arrogantly abuse them as if they were our slaves, or should be
too illiberal and stingy towards them, since nothing can be more
disgraceful than that, when they are in our service, they should not at
least have enough to live upon frugally. Finally, Moses admonishes us
that this tyranny on the part of the rich shall not be unpunished, if
they do not supply their workmen with the means of subsistence, even
although no account shall be rendered of it before the tribunals of men.
Hence we infer that this law is not political, but altogether spiritual,
and binding on our consciences before the judgment-seat of God; for
although the poor man may not sue us at law, Moses teaches us that it is
sufficient for him to appeal to the faithfulness of God. Wherefore,
although the earthly judge may absolve us a hundred times over, let us
not therefore think that we have escaped; since God will always require
of us from heaven, whatever may have been unjustly excused us on earth.
The question, however, here arises, whether, if he who has been
oppressed should not cry out, the criminality will cease in consequence
of his silence; for the words of Moses seem to imply this, when he says,
that the rich will be guilty, *if* the poor cry unto God and make
complaint of their wrongs. The reply’ is easy, that Moses had no other
intention than to over-. throw the vain confidence of the despisers,
whereby they arc, stimulated to greater audacity in sin, and are
hardened in iniquity. He says, therefore, that although, as far as men
are concerned, they may allow us to pillage and rob, still a more awful
judgment is to be dreaded; for God hears the complaints of the poor, who
find no protector or avenger on earth. And surely, the more patiently he
who is despoiled shall bear his wrong, the more ready will God be to
undertake his cause; nor is there any louder cry to Him than patient
endurance. If, however, any should object that the cry here spoken of is
at variance with Christ’s command, that we should pray for our enemies,
we answer at once, that God does not always approve of the prayers which
He nevertheless answers. The imprecation of Jotham, the son of Gideon,
took effect upon the Shechemites, (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10.3"></span>[Jud
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10.3"></span>,) although it was plainly the offspring
of immoderate anger. Besides, it sometimes happens that the miserable,
although they endure their injuries with pious meekness, still cease not
to lay their sorrows and their groans in the bosom of God. Nor is this a
slight consolation for the poor, that if no one on earth relieves them
because their condition is low and abject, still God will hereafter take
cognizance of their cause.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
25](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Thou shalt not muzzle the ox
when he treadeth out *the* *corn*

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**4.** Non obligabis os bovi
trituranti.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p6"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**4.** *Thou shalt not muzzle the ox*.
This passage, indeed, properly belongs to the Supplements of the
Commandment, but, since it is a confirmation of the foregoing decree, it
seemed fit to connect them; especially because its faithful expositor,
Paul, declares, that God had no other design in delivering it than that
the laborer should not be defrauded of his just hire, (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>;) for, when he is speaking of the
maintenance to be afforded to the ministers of the Gospel, he adduces
it. in proof of his case. And, lest any should object that there is a
difference between oxen and men, he adds, that God does not care for
oxen, but that it was said for the sake of those that labor. Meanwhile,
we must bear in mind, that men are so instructed in equity, that they
are bound to exercise it even towards the brute animals; for well does
Solomon magnify the injustice, whereby our neighbor is injured, by the
comparison; “A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast.” (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p7.2"></span>[Pr
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iii-p7.2"></span>.) The sum is, that we should freely and
voluntarily pay what is right, and that every one should be strict with
himself as to the performance of his duty; for, if we are bound to
supply subsistence to brute animals, much less must we wait for men to
be importunate with us, in order that they may obtain their due.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
22:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**21.** Thou shalt neither vex a
stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>**21.** Peregrinum non opprimes, neque
spoliabis: quia peregrini fuistis in terra AEgypti.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**22.** Ye shalt not afflict any widow,
or fatherless child.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**22.** Nullam viduam nec pupillum
affligetis.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**23.** If thou afflict them in any
wise, and the, and cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>**23.** Si affligendo afflixeritis eum,
certe si clamando clamaverit ad me, audiendo audiam clamorem ejus:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>**24.** And my wrath shall wax hot, and
I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>**24.** Irasceturque furor meus, et
occidam vos gladio, eruntque uxores vestrae viduae, et filii vestri
pupilli.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p11"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p12"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Lev.
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#034)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>**33.** And if a stranger sojourn with
thee in your land, ye shall not vex him.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>**33.** Si peregrinatus tecum fuerit
peregrinus in terra vestra, non opprimetis illum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p15"></span>**34.** *But* the stranger that
dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one horn among you, and thou
shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I
*am* the Lord your God.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p16"></span>**34.** Tanquam indigena ex vobis,
erit vobis peregrinus qui peregrinatur apud vos, et diliges eum sicut
teipsum: quia peregrini fuistis in terra: ego Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p18"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p19"></span>**<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>.** *And if a stranger sojourn with thee
in your land*. Before I pass on to the other iniquities, I have thought
fit to introduce this precept, wherein the people are commanded to
cultivate equity towards all without exception. Fob if no mention had
been made of strangers, the Israelites would have thought that, provided
they had not injured any one of their own nation, they had fully
discharged their duty; but, when God recommends guests and sojourners to
them, just as if they had been their own kindred, they thence understand
that equity is to be cultivated constantly and towards all men. Nor is
it without cause that God interposes Himself and His protection, lest
injury should be done to strangers; for since they have no one who would
submit to ill-will in their defense, they are more exposed to the
violence and various oppressions of the ungodly, than as if they were
under the shelter of domestic securities. The same rule is to be
observed towards widows and orphans; a woman, on account of the weakness
of her sex, is exposed to many evils, unless she dwells under the shadow
of a husband; and many plot against orphans, as if they were their prey,
because they have none to advise them. Since, then, they are thus
destitute of human aid, God interposes to assist them; and, if they are
unjustly oppressed, He declares that He will be their avenger. In the
first passage He includes widows and orphans together with strangers; in
the latter He enumerates strangers only; yet the substance is the same,
viz., that all those who are destitute and deprived of earthly succor,
are under the guardianship and protection of God, and preserved by His
hand; and thus the audacity of those is restrained, who trust that they
may commit any wickedness with impunity, provided no earthly being
resists them. No iniquity, indeed, will be left unavenged by God, but
there is a special reason why He declares that strangers, widows, and
orphans are taken under His care; inasmuch as the more flagrant the evil
is, the greater need there is of an effectual remedy. He recommends
strangers to them on this ground, that the people, who had themselves
been sojourners in Egypt, being mindful of their ancient condition,
ought to deal more kindly to strangers; for although they were at last
oppressed by cruel tyranny, still they were bound to consider their
entrance there, viz., that poverty and hunger had driven their
forefathers thither, and that *they* had been received hospitably, when
they were in need of aid from others. When He threatens, that if the
afflicted widows and orphans *cry* unto Him, their cry shall be heard,
He does not mean that He will not interfere, if they endure their wrongs
in silence; but He speaks in *accordance* with the ordinary practice,
that those who find no consolation elsewhere, are wont to appeal to Him.
Meanwhile, let us be sure that although those who are injured abstain
from complaining, yet God does not by any means forget His office, so as
to overlook their wrongs. Nay, there is nothing which incites Him more
to inflict punishment on the ungodly, than the endurance of His
servants.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>The nature of the punishment is also
expressed; those who have afflicted widows and orphans shall perish by
the sword, so that their own widows and orphans may be exposed to the
audacity, violence, and knavery of the ungodly. Moreover, it must be
observed that, in the second passage, they are commanded to love
strangers and foreigners as themselves. Hence it appears that the name
of neighbor is not confined to our kindred, or such other persons with
whom we are nearly connected, but extends to the whole human race; as
Christ shows in the person of the Samaritan, who had compassion on an
unknown man, and performed towards him the duties of humanity neglected
by a Jew, and even a Levite. (<span id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>[Lu
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
10:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p3"></span>**17.** ...God,...regardeth not persons,
nor taketh reward.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p4"></span>**17.** Deus non accipit personam, neque
recipit munus.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p5"></span>**18.** He doth execute the judgment of
the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food
and raiment.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p6"></span>**18.** Faciens judicium pupillo et
viduae, diligens peregrinum, dando et panem et vestimentum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p7"></span>**19.** Love ye therefore the stranger;
for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p8"></span>**19.** Diligite igitur peregrinum, quia
peregrini fuistis in terra, AEgypti.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p10"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p11"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p11.1"></span>He
confirms the foregoing decree by a reference to the nature of God
Himself; for the vile and abject condition of those with whom we have to
do, causes us to injure them the more wantonly, because they seem to be
altogether deserted. But God declares that their unhappy lot is no
 <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.1"></span>obstacle to His administering succor to
them; inasmuch as He has no regard to persons. By the word person is
meant either splendor, or obscurity, and outward appearance, as it is
commonly called, as we gather from many passages. In short, God
distinguishes Himself from men, who are carried away by outward
appearance, to hold the rich in honor, and the poor in contempt; to
favor the beautiful or the eloquent, and to despise the unseemly. <span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.2"></span>Προσωποληψία<span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.3"></span> is, therefore, an unjust judgment, which
diverts us from the cause itself, when our minds are prejudiced by what
ought not to be taken into account. Therefore Christ teaches us that a
judgement is righteous, which is not founded upon the appearance, (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.4"></span>[Joh
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.4"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.5"></span>;) since
truth and justice never prevail, except when we attend to the case
itself. It follows that the contemptible are not afflicted with
impunity, for although they may be destitute of human aid, God, who
sitteth on high, “hath respect unto the lowly.” (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.6"></span>[Ps
138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.6"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12.7"></span>.) As
regards strangers, God proves that he cares for them, because He is
gracious in preserving them and clothing them; and then a special reason
is again adduced, that the Israelites, when they were formerly
sojourners in Egypt, had need of the compassion of others.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036)<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>**35.** Ye shall do no unrighteousness
in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight, or in measure.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p4"></span>**35.** Non facietis iniquitatem in
judicio, in dimensione, in pondere et mensura.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p5"></span>**36.** Just balances, just weights, a
just ephah, and a just bin, shall ye have: I *am* the Lord your God,
which brought you out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p6"></span>**36.** Statera justa, pondera justa,
epha justum, et hin justum erit vobis.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p7"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
25](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p8"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p9"></span>**13.** Thou shalt not have in thy bag
divers weights, a great and a small.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p10"></span>**13.** Non erit tibi in sacculo tuo
pondus et pondus, majus et minus:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p11"></span>**14.** Thou shalt not have in thine
house divers measures, a great and a small.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p12"></span>**14.** Non erit tibi in domo tua
modius et modius, major et minor.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p13"></span>**15.** *But* thou shalt have a
perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have:
that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God
giveth thee.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p14"></span>**15.** Pondus perfectum et justum
erit tibi, modius perfectus et justus erit tibi, ut proroges dies tuos
super terram quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p15"></span>**16.** For all that do such things,
*and* all that do unrighteously, *are* an abomination unto the Lord thy
God.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p16"></span>**16.** Quia abominatio Jehovae Dei
tui est quicunque facit haec, omnis faciens iniquitatem.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p18"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19"></span>**<span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>** *Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment*<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.2"></span>. If you take the word
judgment in its strict sense, this will be a special precept, that
judges should faithfully do justice to all, and not subvert just causes
from favor or ill-will. But since the word <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.3"></span>משפט<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.4"></span>,
*mishpat*<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.5"></span>, often means rectitude, it
will not be unsuitable to suppose that all iniquities contrary to
integrity are generally condemned; and that he afterwards proceeds to
particular cases, which he adverts to elsewhere, where he enumerates the
most injurious thefts of all, and such as involve the grossest violation
of public justice. For the corruption which tends to the subversion of
judgments, or, by undermining rectitude, vitiates all contracts, leaves
nothing in security; whilst deception in weights and measures destroys
and sweeps away all legitimate modes of dealing. Now, if the laws of
buying and selling are corrupted, human society is in a manner
dissolved; so that he who cheats by false weights and measures, differs
little from him who utters false coin: and consequently one, who,
whether as a buyer or seller, has falsified the standard measures of
wine or corn, or anything else, is accounted criminal.  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) <span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p20.1"></span>
By the laws of Rome,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p21.1"></span> he is condemned to a fine of double the
amount; and by a decree of Adrian, he is to be banished to an island. It
is not, therefore, without reason that Solomon reiterates this decree,
that he may fix it the deeper in the hearts of all. (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p21.2"></span>[Prov.
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#010),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p21.2"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p21.3"></span>.) But
although this pestilent sin is by no means to be endured, but to be
severely punished, still God, even if legal punishments be not
inflicted, summons men’s consciences before His tribunal, and this he
does both by promises and threats. A just weight (He says) and a just
measure shall prolong a man’s life; but he who has been guilty of
deception in them, is an abomination before me. Length of life, indeed,
has only a figurative connection with just weights and measures: but,
because the avaricious, in their pursuit of dishonest gain, are too
devoted to this transitory life, God, in order to withhold His people
from this blind and impetuous covetousness, promises them long life, if
they keep themselves from fraud and all knavish dealings. We perceive
from the conclusion, that, not in this respect only, but in all our
affairs, those trickeries are condemned, by which our neighbors are
defrauded. For, after God has said that He abominates “all that do such
things,” He adds immediately by way of explanation, “all that do
unrighteously.” We see, then, that He sets Himself against all evil and
illicit arts of gain.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>**14.** Thou shalt not remove thy
neighbor’s land-mark, which they of old time have set in thine
inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land that the Lord thy God
giveth thee to possess it.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p4"></span>**14.** Non transferes terminum
proximi tui quem finierint majores in haereditate tua, quam haereditate
accipies in terra quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi ut possideas eam.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p6"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p7"></span>A kind of theft is here condemned
which is severely punished by the laws of Rome;  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) for that every one’s property may be
secure, it is necessary that the land-marks set up for the division of
fields should remain untouched, as if they were sacred. He who
fraudulently removes a landmark is already convicted by this very act,
because he disturbs the lawful owner in his quiet possession of the
land;  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) whilst he who advances
further the boundaries of his own land to his neighbor’s loss, doubles
the crime by the deceptive concealment of his theft. Whence also we
gather that not only are those thieves, who actually carry away their
neighbor’s property, who take his money out of his chest, or who pillage
his cellars and granaries, but also those who unjustly possess
themselves of his land.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>**26.** If thou at all take thy
neighbor’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the
sun goeth down:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p4"></span>**26.** Si in pignus acceperis
vestimentum proximi tui, antequam occubuerit sol restitues illud ei.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>**27.** For that is his covering
only; it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it
shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I am
gracious.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p6"></span>**27.** Quia ipsum solum est
operimentum ejus, illud vestimentum ejus est cuti suae in quo dormiat,
et erit quum clamaverit ad me, tunc exaudiam: sum enim misericors.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p7"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>[Deut.
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>-13, 17, 18

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p9"></span>**6.** No man shall take the nether
or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh *a* *man*’*s* life to
pledge.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p10"></span>**6.** Non accipiet quisquam pro
pignore metam et catillum, quia animam ipse acciperet pro pignore.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p11"></span>**10.** When thou dost lend thy
brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p12"></span>**10.** Quum mutuabis proximo tuo
aliquid mutuum, non ingredieris domum ejus ut capias pignus ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p13"></span>**11.** Thou shalt stand abroad, and
the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad unto
thee.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p14"></span>**11.** Foris subsistes, et vir cui
mutuabis afferet ad te pignus foras.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p15"></span>**12.** And if the man *be* poor,
thou shalt not sleep with his pledge.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p16"></span>**12.** Quod si vir pauper fuerit,
non dormies cum pignore ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p17"></span>**13.** In any case thou shalt
deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep
in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto
thee before the Lord thy God.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p18"></span>**13.** Restituendo ei restitues
pignus dum sol occumbit: ut dormiat in vestimento suo, et benedicat
tibi: eritque tibi in justitiam coram Jehova Deo tuo.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p19"></span>**17.** Thou shalt not pervert the
judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless, nor take a widow’s
raiment to pledge:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p20"></span>**17.** Non pervertes judicium
pupilli et peregrini, non capies in pignus vestimentum viduae.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p21"></span>**18.** But thou shalt remember that
thou wast a bond-man in Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee
thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p22"></span>**18.** Recordare quod servus fueris
in AEgypto, et redemerit te Jehova Deus tuus inde: idcirco praecipio
tibi ut hoc facias.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p23"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p24"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p25"></span>**<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p25.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p25.1"></span>** *No man shall take the nether*. God
now enforces another principle of equity in relation to loans, (not to
be too strict  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) ) in requiring
pledges, whereby the poor are often exceedingly distressed. In the first
place, He prohibits the taking of anything in pledge which is necessary
to the poor for the support of existence; for by the words which I have
translated *meta* and *catillus*, *i* *e*., the upper and nether
millstone, He designates by *synecdoche* all other instruments, which
workmen cannot do without in earning their daily bread. As if any one
should forcibly deprive a husbandman of his plough, or his spade, or
harrow, or other tools, or should empty a shoemaker’s, or potter’s, or
other person’s shop, who could not exercise his trade when deprived of
its implements; and this is sufficiently clear from the context, where
it is said, “He taketh a man’s life to pledge,” together with his
millstones. He, then, is as cruel, whosoever takes in pledge what
supports a poor man’s life, as if he should take away bread from a
starving man, and thus his life itself, which, as it is sustained by
labor, so, when its means of subsistence are cut off, is, as it were,
itself destroyed.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p27"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p28"></span>**10.** *When thou dost lend thy
brother anything* He provides against another iniquity in reclaiming a
pledge, viz., that the creditor should ransack the house and furniture
of his brother, in order to pick out the pledge at his pleasure. For, if
this option were given to the avaricious rich, they would be satisfied
with no moderation, but would seize upon all that was best, as if making
an assault on the very entrails of the poor: in a word, they would
ransack men’s houses, or at any rate, whilst they contemptuously refused
this or that, they would fill the wretched with rebuke and shame. God,
therefore, will have no pledge reclaimed, except what the debtor of his
own accord, and at his own convenience, shall bring out of his house,
lie even proceeds further, that the creditor shall not take back any
pledge which he knows to be necessary for the poor: for example, if he
should pledge the bed on which he sleeps, or his counterpane, or cloak,
or mantle. For it is not just that lie should be stripped, so as to
suffer from cold, or to be deprived of other aids, the use of which he
could not forego without loss or inconvenience. A promise, therefore, is
added, that this act of humanity will be pleasing to God, when the poor
shall sleep in the garment which is restored to him. He speaks even more
distinctly, and says: The poor will bless thee, and it shall be
accounted to thee for righteousness. For God indicates that He hears the
prayers of the poor and needy, lest the rich man should think the bounty
thrown away which lie confers upon a lowly individual. We must, indeed,
be more than iron-hearted, unless we are disposed to such liberality as
this, when we understand that, although the poor have not the means of
repaying us in this world, still they have the power of recompensing us
before God, *i* *e*., by obtaining grace for us through their prayers.
An implied threat is also conveyed, that if the poor man should sleep
inconveniently, or catch cold through our fault, God. will hear his
groans, so that our cruelty will not *be* unpunished. But if the poor
man, upon whom we have had compassion, should be ungrateful, yet, even
though he is silent, our kindness will cry out to God; whilst, on the
other hand, our tyrannical harshness will *suffice* to provoke God’s
vengeance, although he who has been treated unkindly should patiently
swallow his wrong. *To be unto righteousness*  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) is equivalent to being approved by
God, or being an acceptable act; for since the keeping of the Law is
true righteousness, this praise is extended to particular acts of
obedience. Although it must be observed that this righteousness fails
and vanishes, unless we universally fulfill whatever God enjoins. It is,
indeed, a part of righteousness to restore a poor man’s pledge; but if a
mall be only beneficent in this respect., whilst in other matters he
robs his brethren; or if, whilst free from avarice, he exercises
violence, is given to lust or gluttony, the particular righteousness,
although pleasing in itself to God, will not come into account. In fact,
we must hold fast the axiom, that no work is accounted righteous before
God, unless il, proceeds from a man of purity and integrity; whereas
there is none such to be found. Consequently, no works are imputed unto
righteousness, except because God deigns to bestow His gratuitous favor
on believers. In itself, indeed, it would be true, that whatever act of
obedience to God we perform, it is accounted for righteousness, *i*
*e*., if the whole course of our life corresponded to it, whereas no
work proceeds from us which is not corrupted by some defect. Thus, we
must fly to God’s mercy, in order that, being reconciled to us, He may
also accept our work.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p30"></span>What he had previously prescribed
respecting the poor, lie afterwards applies to widows alone, yet so as
to recommend all poor persons to us under their name; and this we gather
both from the beginning of the verse (17,) in which lie instructs them
to deal fairly and justly with strangers and orphans, and also from the
reason which is added, viz., that they should reflect that they were
bondmen in the land of Egypt; for their condition there did not suffer
them proudly to insult the miserable; and it is natural that he should
be the more affected with the ills of others who has experienced the
same. Since, then, this reason is a general one, it is evident also that
the precept is general, that we should be humane towards all that are in
want.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
25:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p3"></span>**35.** And if thy brother be waxen
poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shalt relieve him; *yea*,
*though* *he* *be* a stranger, or a sojourner: that he may live with
thee.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p4"></span>**35.** Si attenuatus fuerit frater
tuus, et vacillaverit manus ejus apud te, fulcies illum (*vel*,
apprehendes ut sustineas): peregrinum et advenam: et vivet tecum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>**36.** Take thou no usury of him, or
increase: but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p6"></span>**36.** Non accipies usuram ab eo et
augmentum: sed timebis Deum tuum: vivetque frater apud te.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p7"></span>**37.** Thou shalt not give him thy
money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p8"></span>**37.** Pecuniam tuam non dabis ei ad
usuram, nec cum augmento dabis escam tuam.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p9"></span>**38.** I *am* the Lord your God, which
brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of
Canaan, *and* to be your God.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p10"></span>**38.** Ego Jehova Deus vester qui
eduxi vos de terra AEgypti, ut darem vobis terram Chanann, ac essem
vobis in Deum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p11"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p12"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Deut.
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p13"></span>**19.** Thou shalt not lend upon usury
to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing
that is lent upon usury.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p14"></span>**19.** Non foenerabis fratri tuo
foenus pecuniae, foenus cibi, foenus cujuscunque rei in qua foenus
exercetur.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p15"></span>**20.** Unto a stranger thou mayest
lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend. upon usury;
that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand
to in the land whither thou goest to possess it.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p16"></span>**20.** Extraneo foenerabis, ac fratri
tuo non foenerabis: ut benedicat tibi Jehova Deus tuus in omni
applicatione manus tuae super terram ad quam ingrederis, ut possideas
eam.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p18"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p19"></span>From these passages we learn that it
is not enough to refrain from taking the goods of another, unless we
also constantly exercise humanity and mercy in the relief of the poor.
Heathen authors also saw this, although not with sufficient clearness,
(when they declared  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) ) that,
since all men are born for the sake of each other, human society is not
properly maintained, except by an interchange of good offices.
Wherefore, that we may not defraud our neighbors, and so be accounted
thieves in God’s sight, let us learn, according to our several means, to
be kind to those who need our help; for liberality is a part of
righteousness, so that he must be deservedly held to be unrighteous who
does not relieve the necessities of his brethren when he can. This is
the tendency of Solomon’s exhortation, that

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p21"></span>“we should drink waters out of our own
cistern,  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) and that our fountains
should be dispersed abroad amongst our neighbors,” (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>[Prov.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>;)

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p23"></span>for, after he has enjoined us each to
be contented with what is our own, without seeking to enrich ourselves
by the loss of others, he adds that those who have abundance do not
enjoy their possessions as they ought, unless they communicate them to
the poor for the relief of their poverty. For this is the reason, as
Solomon tells us elsewhere, why “the rich and the poor meet together;
and the Lord is the maker of them all.” (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p23.1"></span>[Pr
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#002)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p3"></span>**25.** If thou lend money to *any* *of*
my people *that* *is* poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an
usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p4"></span>**25.** Si pecuniam mutuam dederis
populo, meo pauperi qui est tecum, non eris ei sicut usurarius: non
imponetis ei usuram.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p6"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p7"></span>**25.** *If thou lend money to any of my
people* Humanity ought to be very greatly regarded in the matter of
loans, especially when a person, being reduced to extremities, implores
a rich man’s compassion; for this is, in. point of fact, the genuine
trial of our charity, when, in accordance with Christ’s precept, we lend
to those of whom we expect no return. (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p7.1"></span>[Lu
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p7.1"></span>.) The question here is not as to usury, as
some have falsely thought,  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) as
if he commanded us to lend gratuitously, and without any hope of gain;
but, since in lending, private advantage is most generally sought, and
therefore we neglect the poor; and only lend our money to the rich, from
whom we expect some compensation, Christ reminds us that, if we seek to
acquire the favor of the rich, we afford in this way no proof of our
charity or mercy; and hence lie proposes another sort of liberality,
which is plainly gratuitous, in giving assistance to the poor, not only
because our loan is a perilous one, but because they cannot make a
return in kind.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p9"></span>Before descending to speak of loans, God
here adverts to poverty and distress, (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p9.1"></span>[Le
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p9.1"></span>,) whereby men’s minds may be disposed to
compassion. If any one be afflicted with poverty, he commands us to
relieve his necessity. He makes use, however, of a metaphor,  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) that he who is tottering should be
strengthened, as if by catching hold of his hand. What follows about the
stranger and sojourner extends and amplifies, in my opinion, the
previous sentence; as if it were said that, since humanity is not to be
denied even to strangers, much more is assistance to be given to their
brethren. For, when it pleased God that strangers should be permitted to
inhabit the land, they were to be kindly treated  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) according to the rights of
hospitality; for to allow them to *live* is to make their condition just
and tolerable. And thus God indirectly implies, that such unhappy
persons are expelled and driven away, so as not to *live*, if they are
oppressed by unjust burdens. This, then, is the sum of the first
sentence, that the rich, who has the ability, should uplift the poor man
who is failing, by his assistance, or should strengthen the tottering.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p12"></span>A precept is added as to lending
without interest, which, although it is a political law, still depends
on the rule of charity; inasmuch as it can scarcely happen but that the
poor should be entirely drained by the exaction of interest, and that
their blood should be almost sucked away. Nor had God any other object
in view, except that mutual and brotherly affection should prevail
amongst the Israelites. It is plain that this was a part of the Jewish
polity, because it was lawful to lend at interest to the Gentiles, which
distinction the spiritual law does not admit. The judicial law, however,
which God prescribed to His ancient people, is only so far abrogated as
that what charity dictates should remain, *i*.*e*., that our brethren,
who need our assistance, are not to be treated harshly. Moreover, since
the wall of partition, which formerly separated Jew and Gentile, is now
broken down, our condition is now different; and consequently we must
spare all without exception, both as regards taking interest, and any
other mode of extortion; and equity is to be observed even towards
strangers. “The household of faith.” indeed, holds the first rank, since
Paul commands us specially to do good to them, (<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p12.1"></span>[Ga
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p12.1"></span>;) still the common society of the human
race demands that we should not seek to grow rich by the loss of others.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p13"></span>As touching the political law, no
wonder that God should have permitted His people to receive interest,
from the Gentiles, since otherwise a just reciprocity would not have
been preserved, without which one party must needs be injured. God
commands His people not to practice usury, and still lays the Jews
alone, and not foreign nations, under the obligation of this law. In
order, therefore, that equality (*ratio* *analogica*) might be
preserved, He accords  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) the same
liberty to His people which the Gentiles would assume for themselves;
for this is the only intercourse that can be endured, when the condition
of both parties is similar and equal. For when Plato  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) asserts that usurers are not to be
tolerated in a well-ordered republic, lie does not go further than to
enjoin, that its citizens should abstain from that base and. dishonest
traffic between each other.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p16"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p16.1"></span>The
question now is, whether usury is evil in itself; and surely that which
heathens even have detested appears to be by no means lawful to the
children of God. We know that the name of usurer has everywhere and
always been infamous and detested. Thus Cato,  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.1"></span>
desiring to commend agriculture, says that thieves were formerly
condemned to a fine of double, and usurers quadruple; from which he
infers, that the latter were deemed the worst. And when asked what he
thought of usury, he replied, “What do I think of killing a man?”
whereby he wished to show, that it was as improper to make money by
usury as to commit murder. This was the swing of one private individual,
yet it is derived from the opinions of almost all nations and persons.
And assuredly from this cause great tumults often arose at Rome, and
fatal contentions were awakened between the common people and the rich;
since it can hardly be but that usurers suck men’s blood like leeches.
But if we come to an accurate decision as to the thing itself, our
determination must be derived from nowhere else than the universal rule
of justice, and especially from the declaration of Christ, on which hang
the law and the prophets, — Do not unto others what ye would not have
done to thyself. (<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.2"></span>[Mt
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.2"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.3"></span>.) For
crafty men are for ever inventing some little subterfuge or other to
deceive God. Thus, when all men detested the word *foenus*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.4"></span>, another was substituted, which might
avoid unpopularity under an honest pretext; for they called it
*usury*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.5"></span>, as being a compensation for
the loss a man had incurred by losing the *use*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.6"></span> of his money. But  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p18.2"></span>
there is no description of *foenus*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p18.3"></span>
to which this specious name may not be extended; for whosoever has any
ready money, and is about to lend it, he will allege that it would be
profitable to himself if he were to purchase  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p19.1"></span>
something with it, and that at every moment opportunities of gain are
presenting themselves. Thus there will be always ground for his seeking
compensation, since no creditor could ever lend money without loss to
himself. Thus usury,  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.1"></span> since the word is equivalent to
*foenus*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.2"></span>, is but a covering for an
odious practice, as if such glosses would deliver us in God’s judgment,
where nothing but absolute integrity can avail for our *defense*<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.3"></span>. There was almost a similar mode of
subterfuge among the Israelites. The name <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.4"></span>נש5<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.5"></span>,
*neschec*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.6"></span>, which is derived from
*biting*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.7"></span>, sounded badly; since then
no one chose to be likened to a hungry dog, who fed himself by biting
others, some escape from the reproach was sought; and they called
whatever gain they received beyond the capital, <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.8"></span>תרבית<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.9"></span>,
*therbith*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.10"></span>, as being an increase.
But God, in order to prevent such deception, unites the two words,
(<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.11"></span>[Le
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.11"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.12"></span>,) and
condemns the increase as well as the biting. For, where He complains of
their unjust modes of spoiling and thieving in Ezekiel,<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.13"></span>  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119)
<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.4"></span> and uses both words as He does here
by Moses, there is no doubt but that He designedly cuts off their empty
excuses. (<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.5"></span>[Eze
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.5"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.6"></span>.) Lest
any, therefore, should reply, that although he derived advantage from
his money, he was not on that account guilty of usury, God at once
removes this pretense, and condemns in general any addition to the
principal. Assuredly both passages clearly show that those who invent
new words in excuse of evil, do nothing but vainly trifle. I have, then,
admonished men that the fact itself is simply to be considered, that all
unjust gains are ever displeasing to God, whatever color we endeavor to
give to it. But if we would form an equitable judgment, reason does not
suffer us to admit that all usury is to be condemned without exception.
If the debtor have protracted the time by false pretences to the loss
and inconvenience of his creditor, will it be consistent that he should
reap advantage from his bad faith and broken promises? Certainly no one,
I think, will deny that usury ought to be paid to the creditor in
addition to the principal, to compensate his loss.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p22.1"></span> If
any rich and monied man, wishing to buy a piece of land, should borrow
some part of the sum required of another, may not he who lends the money
receive some part of the revenues of the farm until the principal shall
be repaid? Many such cases daily occur in which, as far as equity is
concerned, usury is no worse than purchase. Nor will that subtle
argument  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.1"></span> of Aristotle avail, that usury is
unnatural, *because*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.2"></span> money is barren
and does not beget money; for such a cheat as I have spoken of, might
make much profit by trading with another man’s money, and the purchaser
of the farm might in the meantime reap and gather his vintage. But those
who think differently, may object, that we must abide by God’s judgment,
when He generally prohibits all usury to His people. I reply, that the
question is only as to the poor, and consequently, if we have to do with
the rich, that usury is freely permitted; because the Lawgiver, in
alluding to one thing, seems not to condemn another, concerning which He
is silent. If again they object that usurers are absolutely condemned by
David and Ezekiel, (<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.3"></span>[Ps
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.3"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.4"></span>; <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.5"></span>[Eze
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.5"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23.6"></span>,) I
think that their declarations ought to be judged of by the rule of
charity; and therefore that only those unjust exactions are condemned
whereby the creditor, losing’ sight of equity, burdens and oppresses his
debtor. I should, indeed, be unwilling to take usury under my patronage,
and I wish the name itself were banished from the world; but I do not
dare to pronounce upon so important a point more than God’s words
convey. It is abundantly clear that the ancient people were prohibited
from usury, but we must needs confess that this was a part of their
political constitution. Hence it follows, that usury is not now
unlawful, except in so far as it contravenes equity and brotherly union.
Let each one, then, place himself before God’s judgment-seat, and not do
to his neighbor what he would not have done to himself, from whence a
sure and infallible decision may be come to. To exercise the trade of
usury, since heathen writers accounted it amongst disgraceful and base
modes of gain, is much less tolerable among the children of God; but in
what cases, and how far it may be lawful to receive usury upon loans,
the law of equity will better prescribe than any lengthened discussions.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p24"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p24.1"></span>Let
us now examine the words. In the first place, where we have translated
the words, “Thou shalt not be to him as a usurer,”  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.1"></span>
there is some ambiguity in the Hebrew word <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.2"></span>נש5<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.3"></span>,
*nashac*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.4"></span>, for it is sometimes used
generally for to *lend*<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.5"></span>, without any
ill meaning; but here it is undoubtedly applied to a usurer, who bites
the poor; as also in <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.6"></span>[Ps
109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.6"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.7"></span>, “Let
the usurer catch all that he hath.”  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p26.1"></span>
The sum is, that the poor are to be liberally aided, and not to be
oppressed by harsh exactions: and therefore immediately afterwards it is
added, “neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.” When again He repeats,
“And if thy brother be waxen poor,” etc., we see that reference is
everywhere made to the poor; because, although sometimes those who
possess large properties are ruined by usury, (as Cicero says that
certain luxurious and prodigal persons ill his days contended against
usury with the fruits of their farms, because their creditors swallowed
up the whole produce;  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p27.1"></span>) still the poor alone, who had been
compelled to borrow by want, and not by luxury, were worthy of
compassion.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p28"></span>The third passage, however, admirably
explains the meaning of God, since it extends usury to corn and wine,
and all other articles. For many contracts were invented by artful men,
whereby they pillaged the needy without ignominy or disgrace: and
now-a-days no rapacity is more cruel than that which imposes a payment
upon debtors, without any mention of usury; for instance, if a poor man
should ask the loan of six measures of wheat, the creditor will require
seven to be repaid; or if the same thing should happen as regards wine.
This profit will not be called usury, because no money will pass; but
God, indirectly casting ridicule upon their craftiness, shows that this
plague of usury  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) extends itself
to various things, and to almost all sorts of traffic; whence it clearly
appears that nothing else is prescribed to the Israelites, but that they
should humanely assist each other. But, since cupidity blinds men, and
carries them, aside to dishonest dealings, God sets His blessing in
opposition to all such iniquitous arts, whereby they hawk, as it were,
for gain; and commands them to look for riches rather to Him the author
of all good things, than to hunt for them by rapine and fraud.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
22:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p3"></span>**1.** Thou shalt not see thy brother’s
ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any
case bring them again unto thy brother.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p4"></span>**1.** Non videbis bovem fratris tui
aut pecudem errantes, et abscondes te ab eis: reducendo reduces ad
fratrem tuum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p5"></span>**2.** And if thy brother *be* not nigh
unto thee, or if thou know him not; then thou shalt bring it unto thine
own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it,
and thou shalt restore it to him again.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p6"></span>**2.** Etiam si non fuerit frater tuus
propinquus tibi, neque noveris eum, colliges tamen illos in domum tuam,
et erunt tecum donec requirat frater tuus ut restituas ei.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p7"></span>**3.** In like manner shalt thou do
with his ass, and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with all lost
thing of thy brother’s, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt
thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p8"></span>**3.** Sic facies de asino ejus, sic
facies de vestimento ejus, sic facies de omni re amissa fratris tui quae
perierit ab ipso: si inveneris eam, non occultabis te.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p10"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p11"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>[Exodus
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p12"></span>**4.** If thou meet thine enemy’s ox
or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p13"></span>**4.** Si occurreris bovi inimici tui,
et asino ejus erranti, reducendo reduces ad illum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p15"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p16"></span>**<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p16.1"></span>[Exodus
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p16.1"></span>.** *If thou meet thine enemy’s ox*. From
these two passages it is very clear that he who abstains from evil
doing, is not therefore guiltless before God, unless he also studies to
do good. For our brethren’s advantage ought to be so far our care, that
we should be disposed mutually to aid each other as far as our means and
opportunities permit. This instruction is greatly needed; because,
whilst everybody is more attentive to his own advantage than he ought to
be, he is willing to hold back from the assistance of others. But God
brings him in guilty of theft who has injured his neighbors by his
negligence; and justly, because it depended only upon him that the thing
should be safe, which he knowingly and willfully suffered to perish.
This duty, too, is extended even to enemies; wherefore our inhumanity is
the more inexcusable, if we have not helped our friends. The sum
therefore is, that believers should be kind,  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) that they may imitate their heavenly
Father; and should not only bestow their labor upon the good, who are
worthy of it, but should treat the unworthy also with kindness: and
since many might invent means of subterfuge, God anticipates them, and
commands that the beast of a person unknown should be kept until
reclaimed by its owner; and lays down the same rule as to all things
that may be lost.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
5](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
5:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p3"></span>**5.** And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p4"></span>**5.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p5"></span>**6.** Speak unto the children of
Israel, when a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to do
a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty;

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p6"></span>**6.** Alloquere filios Israel, Vir
sive mulier quum fecerint ex omnibus peccatis hominum, transgrediendo
transgressione in Jehovam, et deliquerit anima illa:

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p7"></span>**7.** Then they shall confess their
sin which they have done: and he shall recompense his trespass with the
principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth *part* thereof, and give
*it* unto *him* against whom he hath trespassed.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p8"></span>**7.** Fatebuntur peccatum suum quod
fecerunt: et restituet delictum suum in solidum, et quintam ejus partem
superaddet, dabitque ei in quem peccaverit.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p10"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p11"></span>**5.** *And the Lord spoke unto
Moses*. Although at the outset He seems to include all trespasses, yet
we gather from the context that the precept only refers to things stolen
or fraudulently withheld, that he, who is conscious of his guilt, should
make reparation. It must be observed, however, that the law relates to
more secret thefts, which are not usually brought to justice: and on
this account it is said, “If they have committed any sin after the
manner of men, they must not seek for subterfuge from ordinary use and
custom.” Although, therefore, they may have many companions, God
declares that this will not avail for their excuse; and consequently
commands them voluntarily to restore what they have fraudulently or
wrongfully appropriated. He will treat hereafter of the punishment of
theft; He now only prescribes that, although no one shall bring the
guilty parties to justice, and their crime may not be discovered, still
they should diligently examine their consciences, and themselves
ingenuously declare the secret transgression; and also make compensation
for the loss conferred, since, without restitution, their confession
would be but illusory. I now pass over what Moses adds, that, if no heir
exists to whom the stolen goods may be restored, they should offer it to
the priest, because I have already expounded it: except that we gather
frost thence, that a contamination is contracted by fraud and rapine,
which is never purged unless the house is well cleared of the ill-gotten
gain. But this offering was treated of amongst the laws of the priests:
 <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) now, with respect to the
restitution, we must consider that the fifth part was superadded, not so
much in order that he, who had suffered the loss, should be enriched, as
that all should diligently beware of every offense, which they hear not
only to be useless to themselves, but also to be productive of loss.
Besides, when a man has been robbed, it is often of more consequence
than this additional fifth part, that he should have been deprived of
the use of his property.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**8.** And thou shalt take no gift:
for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the
righteous.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p4"></span>**8.** Ne accipias munus: quia munus
excaecat videntes, et pervertit verba justorum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p6"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p7"></span>**15.** Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment; thou shalt not respect the person of the
poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt
thou judge thy neighbor.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p8"></span>**15.** Non facies iniquitatem in
judicio, non suscipies faciem pauperis, neque honorabis causam magni: in
justitia judicabis proximum tuum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p10"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p11"></span>**<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>[Exodus
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>** *And thou shalt take no gift*. This
kind of theft is the worst of all, when judges are corrupted either by
bribes, or by affection, and thus ruin the fortunes which they ought to
protect: for, since their tribunal is as it were sacred asylum, to which
those who are unjustly oppressed may fly, nothing can be more unseemly
than that they should there fall amongst robbers.  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) Judges are appointed to repress all
wrongs and offenses; if therefore they show favor to the wicked, they
are harborers of thieves; than which there is no more deadly pest. And
besides, since their authority excludes every other remedy, they are
themselves like rob-hers with arms in their hands. The greater,
therefore, their power of injury is, and the greater the damage
committed by their unjust sentences, the more diligently are they to be
warned to beware of iniquity; and thus it was necessary to keep them in
the path of duty by special instructions, lest they should conceal and
encourage thievery by their patronage. Now, as avarice is the root of
all evils, when it thus lays hold of the minds of judges, no integrity
can continue to exist. But, since all utterly condemn this vice, even
though they may be entirely under its influence, God speaks of it the
more plainly and popularly, enjoining that judges should withhold their
hands from every gift: for there is no more fatal poison for the
extinction of all uprightness, than when a judge suffers himself to be
cajoled by gifts. Let those who accept gifts allege as much as they
please that they still maintain their integrity, the fact itself clearly
shows that they are venal, and seek their own pecuniary advantage when
they are thus attracted by gain. Formerly it was enough to render judges
infamous that they were called *nummarii*, (moneyers.)  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) But it is superfluous to treat any
further of this matter, since God cuts off all handles for subterfuge in
a single sentence: “for gifts (He says) blind the eyes of him that
seeth, and pervert the judgment of the righteous.” If, then, we
acquiesce in His decision, there is no light of intelligence so bright
but that gifts extinguish it, nor any probity so great but that they
undermine it; in fact, gifts infect a sound mind before they soil the
hand; I mean those which a person receives in reference to the judgment
of a cause; for there is no question here as to those gifts of mutual
kindness which men reciprocate with each other. Thus, in the passage
from <span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>, before God speaks of gifts, He forbids
that justice should be wrested., or men’s persons respected: whence we
gather, that only those snares are condemned which are set to curry
favor. It must be observed on the passage from Leviticus, that to
*judge* *in* *righteousness* is contrasted with *respecting* *the*
*person*: and consequently, as soon as the judge turns away his eyes
ever so little from the cause itself, he forgets equity. Moreover, to
wrest judgment is equivalent to doing iniquity in judgment; but since
injustice is not always openly manifested, but rather disguised by
various artifices, after God in Leviticus has condemned corrupt and
unjust judgments, He uses this word to wrest (*inclinandi*), in
Deuteronomy, in order to dissipate all vain pretexts.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p3"></span>**19.** Thou shalt not wrest judgment;
thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth
blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p4"></span>**19.** Non inflectes judicium, non
agnosces personam, neque capies munus: quia munus excaecat oculos
sapientum, et pervertit verba justorum.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p5"></span>**20.** That which is altogether just
shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the
Lord thy God giveth thee.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p6"></span>**20.** Justitiam, justitiam sequeris,
ut vivas, et possideas terram quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p9"></span>**20.** *That which is altogether
just*  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) By an emphatic repetition
God inculcates that judges should study equity with inflexible
constancy; nor is this done without cause, for nothing is more likely to
happen than that men’s minds should be clouded by favor or hatred.
Besides there are so many quibbles whereby justice is perverted, that,
unless judges are very cautious in watching against deception, they will
often find themselves ensnared.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#003),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p3"></span>**3.** Neither shalt thou countenance a
poor man in his cause.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p4"></span>**3.** Pauperem non honorabis ex sua
causa.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p5"></span>**6.** Thou shalt not wrest the
judgment of thy poor in his cause.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p6"></span>**6.** Non inflectes judicium pauperis
tui in lite ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xv-p9"></span>**6.** *Thou shalt not wrest the
judgment of thy poor*. Since laws are enacted to repress the vices which
are of frequent occurrence, no wonder that God should put forward the
case of the poor, to whom it often happens that they fail though their
causes are good, both because they are without interest and are exposed
to injury through the contempt in which they are held, and also because
they cannot contend with the rich in incurring expense. Justly, then, is
provision made for their inferiority, lest the iniquity of judges should
rob them of the little they possess. But the other point here referred
to might appear superfluous, viz., that judges should not favor the
poor, which very rarely takes place. It would also be incongruous that
what God elsewhere prescribes and praises should here be reprehended. I
reply, that rectitude is so greatly pleasing to God, that the judge
would in no wise be excusable, under whatever pretext he might decline
from it ever so little, and that this is the intention of this precept.
For, although the poor is for the most part tyrannically oppressed,
still ambition will sometimes impel a judge to misplaced compassion, so
that he is liberal at another’s expense. And this temptation is all the
more dangerous, because injustice is done under the cloak of virtue.
For, if a judge only directs his attention to the poverty of the
litigant, a foolish fear will at the same time insinuate itself lest his
sentence should ruin the man whom he would wish to save; thus he will
award to the one what belongs to the other. Sometimes the temerity,
audacity, and obstinacy of the poor in commencing and prosecuting suits
is greater than that of the rich; and when they despair of their cause,
they are sure to have recourse to tears and lamentations, by which they
deceive incautious judges, who, forgetful of the cause itself, only
consider how their misery and want is to be relieved. Besides, too,
whilst they think little of the rich man’s loss, because he can easily
bear it, they make no scruple of declining from equity in favor of the
poor. But hence it better appears how greatly God is offended by the
oppression of the poor, when He will not have even *them* befriended to
the injury of the rich.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc05022.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p10"></span> *A*. *V*., “deal falsely, neither
lie.” Ainsworth, “neither falsely deny, nor deal falsely.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc05022.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13"></span> *A.* *V*., “Non facies calumniam
proximo tuo, nec vi opprimes eum.” “The first of these terms signifies
to *oppress* *by* *fraud*; the second to *oppress* *by* *violence*.
Against both these offenses, John the Baptist warned the soldiers who
came to him; <span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.1"></span>[Lu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.1"></span>.” — Bush from Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc05022.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p13.12"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p14"></span> “Et a mon avis que le premier est
comme genre, et le second comme espece;” and, in my opinion, that the
first is, as it were, *genus*, and the second *species*. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc05022.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10"></span> The expression on which *C.* founds
this statement is translated by himself “ea (*i*.*e*., mercede)
sustentat animam suam;” in our *A*. *V*., “setteth his heart upon it;“
margin, “*Heb*., lifteth his soul unto it.” Dathe has, “eam anhelat;”
Ainsworth, “and unto it he lifteth up his soul,” and his note is, “that
is, hopeth for and desireth it for the maintenance of his life. So the
Greek here translateth, *he* *hath* *hope*; and in. <span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Jer
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#027)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>, and <span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>[Jer
44:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>, the lifting up of the soul signifieth a
desire; and the *soul* is often put for the *life*. Hereupon the Hebrews
say, Whosoever with-holdeth the hireling’s wage, is as if he took away
his soul (or life) from him” etc.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc05022.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p12"></span> The *Fr*. gives a different turn to
this: “Or Dieu declare que leur pourete et misere n’empechera point de
les secourir: d’autant qu’ils ne amusent point a la personne;” Now, God
declares, that their poverty and misery shall not prevent their being
succored; so that they should not be interested by their *person*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc05022.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p19.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p20"></span> “Inter falsarios.” — *Lat*. “Pour
faussaire.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc05022.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vi-p21"></span> Modest. 1. penult, ad legem Corn. de
fals. — *C.* This law is to be found in Digest. 48, tit. 11, *De*
*falsis*, 32, “Si venditor mensuras *publice* probatas vini, frumenti,
vel cujuslibet rei, aut emptor corruperit, dolove malo fraudem fecerit,
quanti ea res est, ejus dupli condemnatur. Decretoque Divi Hadriani
praeceptum est in insulam eos relegari, qui pondera, aut mensuras
falsassent.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc05022.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p8"></span> “In the digests there is a vague law,
*de* *termino* *moto*, *Digestor*. Lib. 47. tit. 21, on which Calmer
remarks, that, though the Romans had no determined punishment for those
who removed the ancient land-marks, yet, if *slaves* were found to have
done it with an evil design, they were put to death; that persons of
quality were sometimes exiled when found, guilty; and that others were
sentenced to primary fines, or corporal punishment. — Adam Clarke, *in*
*loco*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc05022.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.vii-p9"></span> “Est desia assez convaincu par ce
seul acte d’avoir voulu debouter le possesseur de son champ;” is already
sufficiently convicted by this act alone of having wished to deprive the
possessor of his land. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc05022.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p26"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc05022.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p29"></span><span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p29.1"></span> “It shall be righteousness unto thee,”
*A* *V*<span id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p29.2"></span>., and rightly, as it would
appear, for, as Piscator (in Poole’s Syn.) remarks, “ante <span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p29.3"></span>צצץ<span
id="ii.iv.ii.viii-p29.4"></span> deficit praepositio.”

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc05022.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p20"></span> Added from *Fr*. “Atque ita placet
Stoicis, quae in terris gignuntur ad usum hominum omnia creari, homines
autem hominum causa esse generatos, ut ipsi inter se aliis alii prodesse
possent.” — Cic. de Off. 1:7.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc05022.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ix-p22"></span> It will be seen that these verses are
abbreviated, and slightly paraphrased by *C*. His exposition of them,
which is not the ordinary one, agrees with that of Junins in Poole’s
Syn.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc05022.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p8"></span> See *C.* on <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p8.1"></span>[Luke
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p8.1"></span>. Harmony of the Evang., vol. 1 p. 302. —
(Calvin Soc. edit.,) together with the Editor’s note.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc05022.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p10"></span> Margin. *A*. *V*., “If his hand
faileth, then thou shalt strengthen him.” “When a man is so impoverished
that he hath no means, they are commanded to strengthen him, as taking
him by the hand; so the Lord is said to strengthen the right hand of
Cyrus, when he assisted him against his enemies, <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p10.1"></span>[Isa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p10.1"></span>, etc.” — Willet, *in* *loco*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc05022.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p11"></span> “Il a entendu qu’on les traittast
humainement;” He implied that they should be treated with humanity. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc05022.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p14"></span> “Il permet aux Juifs pareille liberte
envers les nations estranges, que les Payens se donnoyent envers les
Juifs; “He permits the Jews to have equal liberty with respect to
foreign nations, with that which the heathen gave themselves with
respect to the Jews. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc05022.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p15"></span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p15.1"></span>Πολιτεία Γ.<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p15.2"></span> in fin.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc05022.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17"></span> “Furem dupli condenmari, foeneratorem
quadrupli.” Cato de R. Rust. in procem. “Ex quo genere comparationis
illud est Catonis senis; a quo quum quaereretur, quid maxime in re
familiari expediret, respondit, *Bene* *pascere*. Quid secundum? *Satis*
*bene* *pascere*. Quid tertium? *Male* *pascere*. Quid quartum? *orare*.
Et, cum ille, qui quaesierat, dixisset, Quid foenerari? Tum Cato, *Quid*
*hominem*, inquit, *occidere?*” Cic. de Off. 2:24.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc05022.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p17.7"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p18"></span> In *Fr*. the following sentence is
here inserted: — “Ce titre la doncques a este favorable: comme en nostre
langage Francois le mot d’Usure sera assez en horreur, mais les
interests ont la vogue sous nulle difficulte ni scrupule:” This title
then was an euphemism, as in our French language, the word Usury will be
sufficiently dreaded, whilst Interest is current without difficulty or
scruple. Say. Econ. Polit. B. <span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p18.1"></span>[2 Ch.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p18.1"></span>
Section 1., tells us that, “L’interet...s’appelait, auparavant *usure*,
et c’etait le mot propre, puisque l’interet est un prix, un loyer qu’on
paie pour avoir la jouissance d’une valeur. Mais ce mot est devenu
odieux; il ne reveille plus que l’idee d’un interet illegal, exorbitant,
et on lui en a substitue un autre plus honnete et moins expressif selon
la coutume.”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc05022.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p19"></span> “Terre ou marchandise.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc05022.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20"></span> “Ainsi, combien que ce nom d’Usure ait
este favorable de soy du commencement, en la fin il a este diffame;”
Thus, although this word Usury was of no ill meaning in its origin, in
the end it has been abused. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc05022.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p20.14"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21"></span> See *C*. on <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.1"></span>[Ezekiel
18:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.1"></span>, where the subject is more fully
discussed. *C.* Soc. Edit. vol. 2 p. 225, *et* *seq*. See also Mr.
Myers’s Dissertation, *ibid*., p. 469.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc05022.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p21.7"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p22"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “Je say qu’on nomme
cela Interest, mais ce m’est tout un:” I know that they call this
interest, but this is all the same to me.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc05022.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p23"></span> *Polit*., *lib*. *1.* *cap*. 10. “The
enemies to interest in general, (says Blackstone,) make no distinction
between that and usury, holding any m-crease of money to be indefensibly
usurious. And this they ground, as well on the prohibition of it by the
Law of Moses among the Jews, as also upon what is said to be laid down
by Aristotle, that money is naturally barren, and to make it breed money
is preposterous, and a perversion of the end of its institution, which
was only to serve the purposes of exchange, and not of increase.” The
hypothetical form in which he attributes this *dictum* to Aristotle, he
explains in a note to be, because “this passage hath been suspected to
be spurious.” — Comment, on the Laws of England, b. 2. ch. 30 sec. 454.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc05022.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25"></span> *C*. here uses the word *foenerator*;
whereas his translation is, it will be seen, *usurarius*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc05022.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p25.8"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p26"></span> *A.* *V*., “The extortioner.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc05022.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p27"></span> “Neque id (quod stultissimum est)
certare cum usuris fructibus praediorurn.” Cic. Or. in Cat. 2da. 8,
*i*.*e*., says Facciolati in voce *certo*, “tot usuris se onerare, ut
praediorum fructus exaequent: qua ratione fructus cum usuris
committuntur, et certant, et plerumque superantur, quia usurae quotannis
certae sunt, fructus autem incerti.” *Fr*., “Car combien que ceux qui
possedent beaucoup soyent aucunefois epuisez, pource qu’ils ne sont que
receveurs de ceux auxquels ils doyvent;” for, although those who possess
much are often ruined, because they are only the receivers of their
creditors, etc.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc05022.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.x-p29"></span> Foenebre malum.” — *Lat*. “Ceste
vermine d’usure.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc05022.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xi-p17"></span> “Soyent pitoyables, et humains pour
faire plaisir a chacun;” should be pitiful and humane, to show kindness
to all. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc05022.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p12"></span> See vol. 2, p. 273, on <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p12.2"></span>[Numbers
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008)<span
id="ii.iv.ii.xii-p12.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc05022.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p12"></span> “Il n’y a rien plus enorme, que
d’en faire une caverne de brigans;” there is nothing more enormous than
to make a den of robbers of it. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc05022.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p13"></span> *Fr*. “Et de faict, ce titre la
suffit entre les payens pour diffamer les juges, de les appeler
*argentiers*;” and, in fact, this title sufficed among the heathen to
bring their judges into disrepute, to call them *argentiers*. See Cic.
Ep. in Att. 1:16, “Insectandis vero, exagitandisque *nummariis*
judicibus.” *Item*, Verr. 5:57, et pro Cluent., 36.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc05022.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p10"></span> “Justitiam, justitiam.” — *Lat*. See
Margin *A.* *V*., “*Heb*., Justice, justice.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Political Supplements](cc05023)
